 The Impact of Short Sale Bans on Option Trading Activity: Evidence from
             the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009 and its Aftermath

                               D niel ndersson nd Erik ellstedt

                                      B chelor’s Thesis in Fin nce
                                Stockholm School of Economics

                                          Abstract

In the second half of 2008, the financial turmoil reached its peak. The situation was characterized by
declining markets and intense speculations on the default of financial institutions. Financial regulators
around the world responded by banning short sales of stocks. In most cases, however, the bans did not
restrict trading in options. In this study, we use an international panel of options and stocks from 10
countries that adopted bans on short sales at some point in time from January 1, 2008 through February
28, 2011 to examine whether short sellers attempted to circumvent the bans by migrating to the option
markets. More specifically, we do so by studying the impact of the bans on option trading activity. We
find evidence that the short sale bans were associated with (i) an increase in option trading volume and
open interest for both put options and call options, especially for options with high trading volume, and
(ii) a decrease of the fraction of overall option trading volume that originates from put options, especially
for options on U.S. stocks. Furthermore, the results indicate that bans on naked short sales were
accompanied by an increase in option trading activity, whereas the estimated impact of bans on all short
sales (both naked and covered short sales) is more ambiguous, especially for put options. Finally, our
findings suggest that the bans increased the demand for call options more than the demand for put
options. However, various subsample analyses and robustness tests indicate that the adoption of the bans
is endogenous, and hence it is hard to assign the observed effects to an attempt by short sellers to
circumvent the bans.

Tutor: Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal
Discussants: Clarissa Dackberg and Victoria Segerfors
Presentation: May 31, 2011

 21551 student hhs se 21549 student hhs se

Keywords: Short sale ban, option market, market maker, financial crisis, fixed effects

Acknowledgements: We thank our tutor Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal for valuable support and input
throughout the process.
2
Table of Contents

1. Introduction.............................................................................................................................................................. 4
   1.2 Contribution ...................................................................................................................................................... 6
2. Adoption of Short Sale Bans around the World ................................................................................................ 8
3. Previous Literature – Theory and Evidence ..................................................................................................... 11
   3.1 Impact on the Stock Market ......................................................................................................................... 12
      3.1.1 Stock Prices .............................................................................................................................................. 12
      3.1.2 Market Liquidity ...................................................................................................................................... 13
       3.1.3 Price Discovery........................................................................................................................................ 14
   3.2 Impact on the Option Markets ..................................................................................................................... 14
      3.2.1 Testable Hypotheses ............................................................................................................................... 14
      3.2.1 Direct Evidence ....................................................................................................................................... 17
      3.2.2 Indirect Evidence .................................................................................................................................... 18
4. Data and Methodology ......................................................................................................................................... 19
   4.1 Data ................................................................................................................................................................... 19
   4.2 Methodology .................................................................................................................................................... 21
5. Results ..................................................................................................................................................................... 25
   5.1 Descriptive Results ......................................................................................................................................... 25
   5.2 Regression Analysis ........................................................................................................................................ 27
      5.2.1 Option Trading Volume ........................................................................................................................ 27
      5.2.2 Open Interest ........................................................................................................................................... 28
      5.2.3 Composition of Option Trading Volume ........................................................................................... 29
      5.1.3 Introduction of Control Variables ........................................................................................................ 29
      5.1.4 Subsample Analyses ................................................................................................................................ 31
6. Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................................. 35
7. References ............................................................................................................................................................... 36
8. Appendix ................................................................................................................................................................. 38

                                           3
1. Introduction

In the second half of 2008, the financial turmoil reached its peak. Stock prices of banks, insurance
companies and other financial institutions experienced sharp declines and financial regulators around the
world feared a loss of confidence for the financial markets and situations where short sellers pushed
down prices well below the price level that would have resulted from a normal price discovery process.
Many financial regulators responded by banning short sales of stocks. In most cases, however, the bans
did not restrict trading in options. This means that it was still possible for speculators and market
manipulators to profit from stock price declines by turning to the option markets.

In this study, we examine whether short sellers used the option markets as a substitute for direct short
selling during the ban periods, and whether they did so primarily by trading put options or by trading call
options. More specifically, we do so by studying the impact of the bans on option trading activity and its
composition. As the bans had different introduction and lifting dates in different countries and featured
different degrees of stringency, the effect of the bans are preferably examined through fixed effect panel
data techniques. For this purpose, we put together a sample consisting of daily option and stock data
from 10 countries that adopted bans on short sales at some point in time from January 1, 2008 through
February 28, 2011, as well as data on various features of the bans adopted by these countries.

We address two principal questions. First, we examine whether the short sale bans affected option trading
volume. To the extent short sellers tried to circumvent the short sale bans by taking corresponding
positions on the option markets, we would expect option trading volume to increase during periods with
restrictions on short selling. However, bans on short selling may also deteriorate the supply of liquidity on
the option markets, making the net effect ambiguous. Market makers are major liquidity providers on the
option markets, and even though they generally were exempted from the bans they were certainly not
unaffected. The bans are likely to have reduced the informativeness of stock prices, slowed down the
adjustment speed of prices to negative information, increased borrowing costs of banned stocks and
imposed stricter delivery requirements also for market makers (Diamond and Verrecchia, 1987;
Bai, Chang and Wang, 2006; and Kolasinksi, Reed and Thornock, 2009). As a result, it is likely that the
bans reduced option market makers’ ability to hedge, increased their hedging costs and made it more
expensive for them to carry inventory and trade with informed investors. This, in turn, is likely to have
suppressed option m rket m kers’ willingness to provide liquidity and hence increased the cost of trading
in options on banned stocks. Increased cost of trading in options on stocks that are subject to short sale
bans is indeed confirmed by empirical studies such as Battalio and Schultz (2009) and Grundy, Lim and
Verwijmeren (2010). By also examining the impact on open interest of options, we are able to check
whether a potential increase in option trading volume during periods with short sale bans can be assigned

                                           4
to an increase in the number of outstanding option contracts (potentially due to an increase in short

exposure) or whether it is simply a reflection of existing contracts being traded more frequently.1

Secondly, we examine the impact of the bans on the composition of option trading volume. There are
several ways by which investors can use the option markets to profit from declining stock prices,
including buying a put option, writing a call option or taking a synthetic short position in the underlying
stock consisting of a short call, a long put and a short bond. By examining the impact on the composition
of option trading volume, we seek to identify the most commonly used substitute for direct short selling.

We find evidence that the short sale bans are associated with an increase in the daily number of traded
option contracts for both put and call options. More specifically, the bans are associated with an increase
in the number of traded puts by 1,117 contracts and an increase in the number of traded calls by 1,788
contracts. When measuring option trading activity as the number of option contracts outstanding (open
interest), we find similar results: the bans are associated with an increase in open interest of puts by
39,827 contracts and an increase in open interest of calls by 64,151 contracts. Re-estimations for a
subsample where the ten largest option classes in terms of average daily number of traded contracts are
excluded indicate that these results can primarily be assigned to options with high trading volume.

In much of the analysis, we differentiate between two types of short sales; covered short sales and naked
(uncovered) short sales. We define covered short selling as the practice of selling short a stock that has
been borrowed (or arranged to be borrowed) from a third party in time to deliver it to the buyer within
the settlement period, and naked short selling as the practice of selling short a stock that has not been
borrowed (or arranged to be borrowed) in time to deliver it to the buyer within the settlement period.

When we allow for different impacts of naked bans (bans on naked short sales) and covered bans (bans
on all short sales – both naked and covered), we find that naked bans generally are associated with a

statistically and economically significant increase in option trading activity.2 For covered bans, we obtain

more ambiguous results: covered bans are generally associated with a statistically and economically
significant increase in both trading volume and open interest of call options (even though the statistical
significance generally is lower than for naked bans), but we find no evidence that covered bans had any
impact on trading activity in put options. Theoretical models and results of previous empirical work
suggest that stricter short sale restrictions have a more detrimental effect on the liquidity and market
quality on the stock market (see, for example, Diamond and Verrecchia, 1987;
and Beber and Pagano, 2010). Thus, a potential explanation to the observed difference between the

1 Open interest is equivalent with the number of option contracts outstanding.

2 Our definition of bans on naked short sales includes bans on selling short a stock that has not been borrowed (or arranged to
be borrowed) in time to deliver it to the buyer within the settlement period and regulations imposing increased penalties on
failure to deliver (that is, failure to deliver the stock to the buyer within the settlement period). The reason why we classify
increased penalties on failure to deliver as a ban on naked short sales is that the adoption of stricter penalties was a commonly
used way to limit abusive naked short selling.

                                           5
impact of naked and covered bans is that covered bans may have resulted in higher inventory holding
costs and adverse selection costs for option market makers than did naked bans. The results suggest that
the short sale bans (both naked and covered bans) were accompanied by an increase in the demand for
options on banned stocks, and that covered bans reduced the supply of liquidity in options on banned
stocks more than did naked bans.

Furthermore, we find that the bans generally had a greater impact on the trading volume of calls than on
the trading volume of puts. The bans are associated with a decrease of the fraction of overall option
trading volume that originates from put options by 4.5 percentage points. This finding suggests that
investors (i) speculated on declining stock prices by writing calls rather than buying puts, or (ii) viewed the
low price levels prevailing during the ban periods as an opportunity to enter long positions at favorable
prices (and hence demanded more long positions in call options). Re-estimations for a subsample where
all option classes of U.S. stocks are excluded indicate that the estimated effect on the composition of
option trading volume can primarily be assigned to options on U.S. stocks.

All results are robust to the introduction of variables reflecting time varying characteristics of the
underlying stock. However, graphical results and various subsample re-estimations indicate that the
adoption of the bans is endogenous. Hence, it is hard to assign the observed effects to an attempt by
short sellers to circumvent the bans.

1.2 Contribution
There are at least two other recent studies that investigate the impact of the bans on short sales of stocks
that were adopted in connection with the recent financial crisis on the option markets. Grundy et al.
(2010) examine how the ban on short sales in specified U.S. financial stocks from September 19 through
October 8, 2008 affected option trading volume, option bid-ask spreads and the relationship between
option prices and stock prices. Studying the same event, Battalio and Schultz (2009) focus on a potential
migration of short sellers to the option markets and examine how the confusion and regulatory
uncertainty about option market makers’ ability to hedge that arose in connection with the ban affected
the cost of trading in options. Our study has many similarities with the papers by Grundy et al. and
Battalio and Schultz. There are, however, several important differences, one being that it finds somewhat
conflicting results.

Grundy et al. (2010) and Battalio and Schultz (2009) focus on the U.S. event exclusively. This study, on
the other hand, uses an international panel of option and stock data from 10 countries, as well as data on
various features of the short sale bans adopted by these countries. As pointed out by both Boehmer,
Jones and Zhang (2009) and Beber and Pagano (2010), the 2008 U.S. ban on short sales in specified
financial stocks coincided with the announcement of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (or simply

                                           6
“T RP”), which makes it difficult to assign observed effects to the ban.3 Our dataset allows us to run

regressions for subsamples of countries and it reduces the potential endogeneity problem caused by the
concomitant announcement of the program providing support to U.S. financial institutions. In a way
then, by using an international panel of options and stocks, this study tests the robustness of the results
reported in previous empirical work.

Moreover, we exploit cross-country differences in the inception and lifting of the bans by using fixed
effect panel data regressions where we allow for stock-level fixed effects as well as time fixed effects. In
contrast, Grundy et al. (2010) use an OLS difference-in-difference specification where they do not allow
for stock-level fixed effects, while Battalio and Schultz (2009) run cross-sectional OLS regressions for
each day from August 1, 2008 through October 21, 2008 for a number of different measures of liquidity
and short exposure as left hand side variables.

Another important difference is that our dataset allows us to exploit differences in the stringency of the
bans across countries and across stocks. Some countries prohibited all short sales (e.g. Canada and the
U.K.), while others only prohibited naked short sales (e.g. Germany and France). Thus, we have the
opportunity to take into account that bans on all short sales and bans only on naked short sales may have
had different impact on option trading activity. Last but not le st, we rely on Thomson’s D t stream as
our primary data source, while Battalio and Schultz (2009) examine a proprietary database of intraday
option prices and quotes and Grundy et al. (2010) use data from OptionMetrics.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some background to the shorting
bans adopted around the world and describes the cross-country differences in the features of the bans.
Section 3 reviews related literature and develops testable hypotheses. In section 4 we describe the dataset
and methodology. In section 5 we examine the impact of the bans on option trading activity and
investigate whether short sellers migrated to the option markets in an attempt to circumvent the bans. We
also test the robustness of the results by controlling for time varying characteristics of the underlying
stock, as well as by running regressions for different subsamples of options, countries and time periods.
Section 7 concludes.

3 The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) is a program of the U.S. government to purchase assets and equity from financial
institutions to stabilize and restore the confidence for the financial sector. The program went into effect on October 3, 2008.
Beber and Pagano (2010) find that bans on short sales in financial stocks adopted around the world in connection with the 2007-
2009 financial crisis were associated with better return performance in banned stocks only for the U.S., not for other countries.
This finding supports the idea that it was the announcement of the TARP, rather than the ban, that caused the observed effects.
However, when it comes to liquidity and market quality Beber and Pagano obtain significant results for most of the countries
included in their sample.

                                           7
2. Adoption of Short Sale Bans around the World

Stock prices of banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions experienced sharp declines
during the early autumn of 2008. Financial regulators around the world feared a loss of confidence for the
financial markets and situations where short sellers, by speculating and spreading unfounded rumors
regarding the financial health of financial institutions, would push down prices well below the price level
that would have resulted from a normal price discovery process, resulting in panic selling and withdrawals
of funds from banks, which in turn would push down prices even further and attract even more
speculators. By the issuance of an emergency order on July 15, 2008 prohibiting naked short sales in 19
financial stocks, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC) took a first step to prevent

short sellers from manipulating prices and restore the confidence for the financial markets.4 The

emergency order remained in effect until August 12, 2008. After continued price declines, the SEC issued
a new order on September 17, 2008 banning naked short sales in all stocks listed on U.S. stock

exchanges.5 The ban came into effect on September 18. In the announcement, the SEC states that it has

“become concerned bout sudden nd unexpl ined declines in the prices of securities” nd th t “such
price declines can give rise to questions about the underlying financial condition of an issuer, which in
turn can create a crisis of confidence without a fundamental underlying basis” (SEC, 2008b, p. 1-2).

The same day, on September 18, the U.K. financial regulator (the FSA) announced a temporary ban on all
short sales (both naked and covered short sales) in specified financial stocks. The SEC followed suit the

following morning by prohibiting all short sales in 797 financial stocks.6 In the announcement, the SEC

motivates the adoption of the stricter and more extensive ban in the following way: ”Recent m rket
conditions have made us concerned that short selling in the securities of a wider range of financial
institutions may be causing sudden and excessive fluctuations of the prices of such securities in such a
manner so as to threaten fair and orderly markets” (SEC, 2008c, p. 1). In addition, the SEC issued
another order requiring institutional investors to file and report information concerning daily short sale

activities.7 The temporary ban prohibiting all short sales in 797 financials stock was lifted on the evening

of October 8. However, the ban on naked short sales remained in place.

During the weeks that followed, in particular between September 19 and September 23, most major stock
exchanges around the world adopted restrictions on short sales. However, the features of the bans

4 See SEC Release no. 58166 (SEC, 2008a). In the release, the SEC states that it is forbidden to sell short a stock unless the
investor (or its gent) h s “borrowed or rr nged to borrow the security or otherwise h s the security v il ble to borrow in its
inventory prior to effecting such short s le nd delivers the security on settlement d te” (SEC, 2008a, p. 3-4). As a result of the
rule, short sellers had to borrow the stock they wanted to sell short three days earlier than before. Prior to the adoption of the
rule, short sellers did not have to borrow the stock until the end of the three day settlement period. If short sellers closed their
positions within the settlement period they did not have to borrow the stock at all (Kolasinksi et al., 2009).

5 See SEC Release no. 34-58572 (SEC, 2008b)

6 See SEC Release no. 34-58592 (SEC, 2008c)

7 See SEC Release no. 58591 (SEC, 2008d)

                                           8
differed across countries. Some countries only prohibited naked short sales (e.g. Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal and Spain), other countries banned all
short sales (e.g. Australia, Canada, Ireland, Norway, South Korea and the U.K.), and a third category of
countries adopted some combination of bans on naked short sales and bans on all short sales (e.g. Italy,

the Netherlands, Switzerland and the U.S).8 Moreover, some countries adopted rules requiring short

sellers to disclose their trades (e.g. Belgium, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the U.K and
the U.S.), while others did not. Also, the scope of the ban regimes differed across countries. Most
countries restricted the ban to financial stocks only (e.g. Canada, the U.S. and most of the European
countries), while others included short sales of all stocks (e.g. Italy, Japan, South Korea and Spain). In
addition, the introduction and removal dates, as well as the length of the ban periods, differed across
countries (for example, Austria, Denmark, Italy and Spain adopted their bans later than the U.K. and the
U.S., and the length of the ban periods in France, Italy, Spain and Switzerland by far exceeded that of the
ban periods in Canada and the U.K.). In some countries (e.g. Austria, Denmark, Germany, Spain,

Switzerland and the U.S.) the short sale bans are still in effect.9 Introduction and removal dates, as well as

cross-country differences in the stringency of the bans that were adopted by the countries included in our
dataset are shown in Figure 2 and Table 1 (see section “4 1 D t ” for further description of the dataset).

With few exceptions, the bans only prohibited short sales of stocks and not trading in options.10 This

means that in most countries it was still possible for speculators and market manipulators to profit from
stock price declines by simply turning to the option markets. For example, investors could gain short
exposure by buying a put, writing a call or creating a synthetic short position in the underlying stock
consisting of a short call, a long put and a short bond.

Also potentially important for the impact of the bans on short sales of stocks on the option markets is
whether and to what extent option market makers were exempted from the bans. Market makers are
major liquidity providers on the option markets and the ability to sell stocks short is critical for their
ability to hedge their positions (for example, if would-be short sellers attempted to circumvent the bans

8 In the Netherlands, the financial regulator initially imposed a ban on naked short sales in financial stocks, which was later
replaced by a ban on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales). In Italy, the financial regulator initially banned naked
short sales. This ban was later replaced by a ban on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales). When the ban on all
short sales expired, it was still prohibited to perform naked short sales for some time. In Switzerland, the regulator adopted a ban
on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) in specified financial stocks and a ban on naked short sales in all other
stocks. The course of events in the U.S. is described in the text. (See Table 1 for a more detailed account of the cross-country
differences in the scope and stringency of the bans).

9 We know that the short sale ban adopted in Spain was still in effect in May 2010. We have found no information suggesting that
the ban has expired since then, and hence we have assumed that it was in effect throughout the sample period. It is only
Switzerl nd’s b n on n ked short s les th t is still in effect The b n on ll short s les (both n ked nd covered short s les) in
specified financial stocks expired on January 16, 2009. Germany initially banned naked short sales in specified financial stocks
between September 20, 2008 and May 31, 2009. The German regulator issued a new ban on naked short sales in specified
financial stocks on May 19, 2010 and it is this ban that is still in effect.

10 Due to vague formulations in the announcements of the bans we find it difficult to be sure whether some of the bans also
prohibited synthetic short selling of the underlying stock through the option and/or other derivatives markets. In Ireland, for
example, the financial regulator prohibited investors from making profits on falling Irish bank stocks. In France, the ban applied
to uncovered short sales of listed securities, including spot, forward, and option transactions involving the listed equities.

                                           9
by migrating to the option markets we would expect them to demand long positions in puts and short
positions in calls, and market makers usually hedge written puts and long positions in calls by shorting the

underlying stock).11 When the ability to hedge is reduced, the risk and cost of supplying liquidity increases.

In as far the short sale bans reduced market makers’ ability to sell short, the bans are likely to have had a
negative impact on option market makers’ willingness to supply liquidity, and hence a negative impact on
the supply of liquidity in options on banned stocks.

Option market makers were generally exempted from the bans being examined in this study.12 However,

even in countries in which the restrictions did not apply to option market makers (or in which the rules
provided at least some exemption for option market makers), there may still have been initial confusion
whether and to what extent they were exempted. For example, Battalio and Schultz (2009) describe the
initial confusion about option market makers’ ability to hedge in connection with the 2008 U.S. ban. The
emergency order issued on September 19, 2008 banning all short sales in 797 financial stocks provided a
general exception for “registered m rket m kers, block positioners, or other m rket m kers oblig ted to
quote in the over-the-counter m rket” conducting short s les s p rt of bon fide m rket making activity

(SEC, 2008c, p. 3).13 Moreover, the SEC provided a more specific exception for m rket m kers “when

selling short as part of bona fide market making and hedging activities related directly to bona fide market
m king in deriv tives” until midnight on September 19, 2008 (SEC, 2008c, p. 4). The exemption was a
way to facilitate expiration of options on September 20 (which was a monthly option expiration date).
According to Battalio and Schultz, the latter exemption suggested that option market makers would be
unable to sell stocks short throughout the remainder of the short sale ban. They also mention that by
midday on September 19, several options market makers threatened to stop supplying liquidity if they
were not allowed to hedge by shorting the underlying stock. This further supports that option market
makers were confused whether and to what extent they were exempted from the ban.

On the morning of September 22, the SEC issued an amendment release confirming the exception for

option market makers and that the exception would continue for the duration of the order.14 The SEC

11 The role of market makers is to take on the role of counterparty when an investor wants to buy or sell a financial instrument,
and hence to supply liquidity in situations where no other counterparty wishes to sell or buy the same amount. The market maker
quote a bid price at which it is obligated to buy and an ask price at which it is obligated to sell, and its main source of income is
the spread between the higher ask price and the lower bid price.

12 In some countries, however, the exemption for market makers was not as distinct as in others, and in a limited number of
countries, market makers do not seem to have been exempted at all: In, Switzerland the prohibitions applied to all market
participants. In Australia, transactions by all market participants were covered by the prohibition, with “limited exception for
covered short selling by m rket m kers” In C n d , the order did not distinguish between different types of m rket p rticip nts.
In Greece, m rket m kers were exempted from the b n for “m rket m king tr ns ctions under specific circumst nces” In the
U.S., the emergency order of September 17, 2008 imposed stricter delivery requirements on sales of all U.S. stocks, and no
exceptions were provided for market makers.

13 According to the U.S. SEC, factors that indicate that a market maker is engaged in bona-fide market making activities may
include whether the market maker is putting their own capital at risk to provide continuous two-sided quotes in markets, taking
the other side of trades when there are short-term buy-side and sell-side imbalances, or attempting to prevent excess volatility
(SEC, 2008f).

14 See SEC Release no. 58611 (SEC, 2008e)

                                           10
st tes th t the purpose of the ccommod tion w s “to permit market makers to continue to provide
liquidity to the m rkets” (SEC, 2008e, p. 3). However, in an attempt to prevent investors from
circumventing the ban by trading options, the SEC added a regulation that market makers were not
allowed to sell short if the m rket m ker knew th t the customer or counterp rty’s tr ns ction would
result in the customer or counterp rty est blishing or incre sing n “economic net short position (i e ,
through ctu l positions, deriv tives or otherwise)” in stocks subject to the ban (SEC, 2008e, p. 4). This
means that, even when the exception for option market makers had been clarified, there were still special
circumstances preventing them from engaging in normal hedging activities.

In some cases, the bans imposed stricter requirements on option market makers also in other dimensions.
For example, the emergency order issued by the SEC on September 17, 2008 included a temporary rule

(Rule 204T), effective immediately, imposing stricter delivery requirements on sales of all U.S. stocks.15

The tempor ry rule imposed “ pen lty on ny p rticip nt of registered cle ring gency, nd ny broker-
dealer from which it receives trades for clearance and settlement, for having a fail to deliver position at a
registered clearing agency in ny equity security” (SEC, 2008b, p. 2). No exceptions were provided for
market makers. Historically, the U.S. regulator had not been as strict in penalizing failures to deliver.
Confusion about option market makers ability to hedge and stricter requirements imposed on option
market makers are probably not unique for the U.S. event, but rather the situation is likely to have looked

about the same in most of the countries that adopted bans on short sales.16

To summarize, even though trading in options and earning profits from declining prices in banned stocks
through the option markets generally were allowed, there is reason to believe that confusion about option
m rket m kers’ ability to hedge and stricter requirements imposed on option market makers may have
suppressed a potential migration of would-be short sellers to the option markets. In the next section we
will look at factors that may have affected option market makers and the supply of liquidity in options on
banned stocks in more detail. Which of the two effects – the wish of investors to sell banned stocks short
(and hence their attempt to find alternative ways to profit from declining prices) and the reduced
willingness of option market makers to supply liquidity – that were the stronger remains to be seen.

3. Previous Literature – Theory and Evidence

At present, there are many studies on the impact of short sale restrictions on liquidity, overpricing and
price discovery on the stock market. The effect of short sale restrictions on the equity option markets has,
however, not obtained the same level of attention. The limited work that has been done concentrates
mainly on the effect on option trading volume and migration of short sellers from the stock market to the

15 See SEC Release no. 34-58572 (SEC, 2008b). Rule 204T was later adopted permanently by the SEC in July 2009 and is known
as SEC Rule 204.

16 Ide lly, we would h ve conducted simil r rese rch bout how the b ns ffected option m rket m kers’ hedging ctivities for
each country included in our dataset. However, this would be far too time consuming to fit in the scope of this thesis.

                                           11
option markets, liquidity on the option markets, as well as the relationship between stock prices and
option prices. In this thesis we address the two former effects: the effect on option trading volume and
the migration to the option markets. In the remainder of this section we give a brief description of the
effects as predicted by theory and the evidence that has been found so far. However, we think it is well
motivated to start off by giving an account of theory and evidence related to the effects of short sale bans
on the underlying market, the stock market.

3.1 Impact on the Stock Market

3.1.1 Stock Prices
Theoretical models that deal with the impact of short sale bans on stock prices can be divided into two
main categories. In models such as Miller (1977), investors have differences in beliefs. In this world, short
sale restrictions prevent pessimists’ views to be impounded in stock prices, and optimists do not take any
notice of the absence of the views of pessimists. Hence, under a short sale ban, stocks subject to the ban
end up overvalued.

Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) show that if all investors have rational expectations, short sale
restrictions do not cause stock prices to be overpriced on average. As short sellers are not likely to
perform short sales for liquidity reasons, they are more likely to be informed than the average investor.
Under a short sale ban, investors take into account that well informed would-be short sellers are shut out
of the market and adjust the price they are willing to pay accordingly. However, even if stock prices are
unbiased, short sale restrictions reduce the adjustment speed of stock prices to negative news and result in
less accurate pricing. Empirical evidence such as Desai, Krishnamurthy and Venkataraman (2006) and
Boehmer, Jones and Zhang (2008) support that short sellers are well informed and manage to earn
abnormal returns.

Bai et al. (2006) add another assumption to the rational investor setting and show that when rational
investors are also risk-averse, they require higher expected return which put downward pressure on stock
prices. The idea is that the slower price adjustments amplifies the risk perceived by uninformed investors,
which in turn results in higher required return and lower prices. Thus, in the setting proposed by Bai et al.
bans on short sales may amplify price declines rather than support stock prices (the latter being one of the
most frequently used arguments used by politicians to motivate short sale bans). Hence, the impact of
short sale restrictions on stock prices, as predicted by theory, is ambiguous.

In general, there is more evidence in support for the assumption that investors have differences in beliefs
than the assumption that all investors have rational expectations. Jones and Lamont (2002) use data from
the NYSE from the 1920’s nd 1930’s nd find evidence th t stocks which re expensive to short show
relatively high valuations and low future returns compared to stocks which can be shorted more cheaply.
Using data from the Hong Kong stock market, Chang, Cheng, and Yu (2007) find that short sale

                                           12
constraints tend to cause overvaluation by analyzing price impacts when stocks are added to a list with
stocks designated as eligible for shorting.

Recent studies use panel data techniques to examine price impacts of the short sale bans that were
adopted around the world in connection with the 2007-2009 financial crisis. Boehmer et al. (2009) focus
on the U.S. stock market and find that the announcement of a temporary ban on all short sales in
specified financial stocks on September 19, 2008 was followed by a sharp increase in the prices of stocks
subject to the ban (however, they admit that it is hard to assign this effect to the ban because of the
concomitant announcement of the Troubled Asset Relief Program). Beber and Pagano (2010) use an
international panel of stocks from 30 countries, of which 20 adopted bans on short sales at some point in
time between January 1, 2008 and June 23, 2009. They find that neither bans on naked short sales nor
disclosure requirements were associated with excess returns relative to a group of unbanned control
stocks. Bans on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales), on the other hand, were associated
with significant return underperformance. When narrowing the sample to U.S. stocks only, Beber and
Pagano find that the U.S. ban was associated with a cumulative excess return for banned stocks exceeding
that of a control group of non-banned stocks. In terms of impact on stock prices then, the U.S. stock

market behaved quite differently compared to the rest of the world.17 Another recent study by Harris,

Namvar and Philips (2009) examines the price impacts of the U.S. ban using a factor approach.
Consistent with the findings of Boehmer et al. (2009), they find that the ban led to a substantial increase
in the prices of banned stocks. Interestingly, they also find results suggesting that the TARP legislation is
not a significant factor in explaining the inflation in stock prices.

3.1.2 Market Liquidity
Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) suggest that by preventing investors from trading on bad news, short
sale bans result in slower price adjustments and lower informational efficiency, which in turn widens the
bid-ask spreads. In addition, by replacing informative short sale transaction with less informative no-trade
outcomes, the information revelation becomes slower, which also tend to widen the spreads.

Overall, the empirical evidence supports the idea that short sale restrictions worsen market liquidity.
Boehmer et al. (2009) provide evidence that liquidity, as measured in terms of bid-ask spreads and price
impacts, for stocks subject to the 2008 U.S. short sale ban was significantly damaged compared to non-
banned control stocks. These results are supported by Beber and Pagano (2010) who find that the short
sale bans adopted around the world in connection with the 2007-2009 financial crisis were detrimental for
liquidity, as measured by bid-ask spreads and the Amihud (2002) illiquidity indicator.

Other studies, such as Jones (2008) and Charoenrook and Daouk (2005) do, however, find more
ambiguous results. When investigating the altered strictness of short sale restrictions in the U.S. in the

17 This finding supports Boehmer et l ’s (2009) worries that the positive effect found for the U.S. may result from the
concomitant announcements of the TARP.

                                           13
1920’s nd 1930’s, Jones finds that the introduction of stricter requirements for brokers when lending
shares of customers worsened liquidity, while a rule only allowing short sale transactions to be performed

on an uptick had the opposite effect.18 Using stock data and information on the history of short sale

regulation and put option trading from 111 countries, Charoenrook and Daouk find that short sale
restrictions are associated with higher dollar trading volume.

3.1.3 Price Discovery
As pointed out in the previous section, the model presented by Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) suggests
that by preventing agents from trading on bad news, short sale restrictions lead to slower price discovery.
Most empirical evidence supports this prediction. With data from 46 stock markets, Bris, Goetzmann and
Zhu (2007) find that new information is impounded in stock prices more quickly in countries where there
are no restrictions on short sales. Saffi and Sigurdsson (2008) use lending transaction data for 17,015
stocks from 26 stock markets and find that stocks in which short selling is less constrained, as measured
by lending supply and borrowing fees, have shorter price delays. Using an international panel of stocks
and fixed effect panel data techniques, Beber and Pagano (2010) find that bans on short sales adopted in
connection with the financial crisis of 2007-2009 reduced the adjustment speed of prices, especially in
declining markets.

3.2 Impact on the Option Markets
The availability of theoretical models predicting the impact of restrictions on short sales of stocks on the
options markets is rather limited. In some cases, we are therefore left with intuition. Fortunately, the
empirical research is somewhat more extensive. Much of the evidence comes in indirect form by showing
that the short sale bans adopted around the world in connection with the 2007-2009 financial crisis had
different impact on stocks with listed options and stocks without listed options. Interestingly, the limited
number of studies that focus directly on the impact on the option markets report contrasting results.

3.2.1 Testable Hypotheses
Intuitively, if the short sale restrictions induced short sellers to switch to the option markets, we would
expect to see an increase in the demand for options (for long put positions and short call positions) and

hence an increase in both option trading volume and open interest of options.19 Boehmer et al. (2009),

who study the 2008 U.S. ban, report that for stocks on the EC’s origin l b n list (published on
September 19, 2008), short sales account for a cross-sectional average of 21.78 percent of total trading

volume before the ban and that this figure drops to 7.71 percent during the ban period.20 A proportionate

18 Under the uptick rule, short selling was only allowed if the order was placed at a price above the last traded price of the
security, or at the last traded price if that price was higher than the price in the previous trade. The rule went into effect in 1938
and was removed in 2007.

19 Open interest is equivalent with the number of option contracts outstanding.

20 According to Comerton and Putnins (2009), the fraction of total trading volume that involved a short sale is even higher. They
report that 26 percent of the total trading volume on the NYSE in 2006 involved a short sale. For 2008, the corresponding share

                                           14
move of short sale activity in banned stocks to the option markets would hence have resulted in a quite
substantial increase in both option trading volume and open interest. For stocks that were never subject
to the ban, the proportion of short sales of total trading volume only drops from 19.48 percent to 18.23
percent.

As pointed out earlier, the short sale bans are also likely to have affected the supply side of the option
markets, mainly by increasing the inventory holding costs and adverse selection costs of option market

makers.21 Market makers are major liquidity providers on the option markets and the ability to sell stocks

short is critical for their ability to hedge their positions. When the ability to hedge is reduced, the risk and
cost of supplying liquidity increases. More specifically, the inventory holding costs increase as the value of
the m rket m kers’ inventory becomes more exposed to unf vor ble price movements of the underlying
stock. Furthermore, when naked short selling is prohibited and covered short selling is allowed, the
demand for equity loans of banned stocks should increase. This in turn, should drive up the price of
borrowing banned stocks and hence increase the inventory holding costs of market makers by increasing
the cost of hedging (at least as long as market makers are not fully exempted from the ban). Kolasinksi et
al. (2009) do indeed report that the emergency order of July 15, which imposed stricter delivery
requirements on the sales of all U.S. stocks, led to a substantial increase in the fees charged by lenders.

Short sale bans are also likely to increase the adverse selection costs of option market makers. Models
such as Diamond and Verrecchia (1987) and Bai et al. (2006), which assume that investors have rational
expectations, suggest that by preventing investors from trading on bad news, short sale restrictions lead to
slower price discovery and less informative prices. These predictions are empirically confirmed by Beber
and Pagano (2010), Bris et al. (2007) and Saffi and Sigurdsson (2008). By reducing the adjustment speed
of stock prices to negative news and reducing the informative content of prices, short sale bans create a
greater information asymmetry between informed and uninformed market participants. Hence, in as far
market makers are uninformed, short sale bans are likely to increase the information asymmetry between
informed investors and market makers, and hence the adverse selection costs of market makers.

Bai et al. (2006) show that when rational investors are also risk-averse, the slower adjustments of stock
prices to negative news and reduced informative content of prices caused by short sale bans will increase
the risk perceived by uninformed market participants. Beber and Pagano (2010) argue that to the extent
market makers are uninformed, this will increase market makers’ inventory holding costs.

is 38 percent. Boehmer et al. (2009) suggest that the short sales in banned stocks observed during the ban period probably were
performed by market makers, who were still able to sell short as part of their market making and hedging activities.

21 Inventory holding costs are costs associated with the carrying of positions acquired by market makers when supplying liquidity.
The inventory holding cost has two main components: the opportunity cost of capital tied up in the market makers’ inventory
and the risk that the value of the inventory declines as a result of unfavorable price movements. Adverse selection costs arise
because market makers, in guaranteeing to buy and sell securities at the quoted bid and ask prices, may trade with investors that
are better informed (Bollen, Smith and Whaley, 2004).

                                           15
According to models such as Stoll (1978) and Bollen, Smith and Whaley (2004), the inventory holding
costs of market makers increases with the volatility of stock prices. This is very intuitive: increased
volatility increases the uncertainty about the future value of the positions held in inventory. The impact of
short sale bans on stock price volatility is, however, ambiguous. Bai et al. (2006) show that if investors
have rational expectations and are risk-averse, and in the absence of information asymmetry, short sale
constraints reduce stock price volatility by limiting the fluctuation in demand of stocks due to negative
news. Under information asymmetry, however, short sale constraints can cause the volatility to increase,
the intuition once again being that short sale restrictions reduce the informativeness of stock prices and
increase the uncertainty of uninformed investors. Reduced informational efficiency of market prices, they
argue, causes trades to have greater impact on prices and increases the variance. Boemer et al. (2009)
report that the 2008 U.S. ban was associated with a large increase in price volatility and that the volatility

increased more for banned stocks than for matched control stocks that were never subject to the ban.22

Even though these results may suffer from reverse causality (that is, short sale bans were adopted due to
increasing volatility and they were particularly imposed on stocks for which the variance increased the
most), inventory holding costs of option market makers may have increased during the ban periods as a
result of increased volatility of stock prices of banned stocks.

According to Stoll (1978) and Bollen et al. (2004), market makers require compensation for bearing
inventory risk and adverse selection costs. Hence, increased inventory holding costs and adverse selection
costs of market makers should result in market makers increasing their bid-ask spreads for options on
banned stocks. This corresponds to a decrease in the supply of liquidity in options on banned stocks.
Furthermore, bid-ask spreads of options are also likely to be affected by the competition among suppliers
of liquidity. If market makers are the only market participants being exempted from a short sale ban, the
ban should reduce the competition from other providers of liquidity and hence allow market makers to
lower their bid prices and increase their ask prices (Bollen et al., 2004).

The two effects of short sale bans on option trading activity – the increased demand for options on
banned stocks and the reduced willingness of option market makers to supply liquidity in options on
banned stocks – are summarized in Figure 1. For simplicity, let’s use option tr ding volume s me sure
for option trading activity. The quantity of options is on the x-axis and the price of option liquidity is on
the y-axis. The incre se in dem nd is illustr ted by shift of the blue solid dem nd curve denoted “Pre
b n dem nd” to the right The b n is lso likely to increase the adverse selection costs and inventory
holding costs of option market makers, which reduces their willingness to provide liquidity. This is
illustr ted by shift of the red solid supply curve denoted “Pre b n supply” to the left s we c n see, the
net effect of the ban on option trading volume is ambiguous. If the demand increases more than the
corresponding decrease of the supply, we would expect option trading volume to increase from Q1 to
Q2. On the other hand, if the supply decreases more than the corresponding increase in the demand, we

22 Boehmer et al. (2009) measure volatility as the difference between the highest and the lowest transaction price recorded for a
given stock on a given day, divided by the volume-weighted average trade price for that day.

                                           16
would expect option trading volume to decrease from Q1 to Q2*. In both scenarios, the equilibrium price
paid by the party demanding liquidity to the party supplying liquidity (mainly option market makers)
increases (shown by the increase of the price from P1 to P2=P2*). On the option markets, this increase
would be reflected by an increase in the bid-ask spreads of options on banned stocks.

3.2.1 Direct Evidence
In a memorandum produced in January 2009, the EC’s Office of Economic n lysis investigates the
imp ct of the EC’s emergency order of July 15, 2008, which restricted naked short selling in stocks of 19
financial entities, on option market activity (OEA 2009). By analyzing open interest and option trading
volume, the OEA finds no evidence that the emergency order had a significant impact on option activity,
and hence it finds no evidence that short sellers switched from the stock market to the option markets.

Grundy et al. (2010) examine how the ban on all short sales in 797 U.S. financial stocks from September
19 through October 8, 2008 affected option trading volume, option bid-ask spreads and the relationship
between prices of options and stocks. They find that the ban was associated with a decline in the trading
volume of put options and that the decline was significantly larger for banned stocks than for non-banned
stocks. When controlling for changes in stock trading volume, stock return and the level of the VIX, they
find that the average daily trading volume of put options on banned stocks declines by 3,194 contracts
during the ban, while the corresponding decrease for unbanned stocks amounts to 490 contracts. As a
result, they conclude that the ban was not circumvented by a migration of short sellers to the option
markets. Grundy at al. also report that bid-ask spreads increased for options on both banned and non-
banned stocks during the ban. In line with theory, the increase in bid-ask spreads is found to be
significantly larger for options on banned stocks. In a two-stage simultaneous equation estimation, they
find that the increase in bid-ask spreads explains some, but not all, of the decline in option trading
volume observed during the ban. Hence, they argue that one reason that they do not observe the
expected increase in option trading volume is that the cost associated with trading in options was higher
during the ban period.

In another recent paper studying the 2008 U.S. ban, Battalio and Schultz (2009) examine how the
confusion and regulatory uncertainty about option market makers ability to hedge that arose in
connection with the ban affected the option markets. More specifically, they examine whether short
sellers used the option markets to circumvent the ban, whether the cost of trading in options increased
during the ban period and whether the ban resulted in divergences in the relative prices of options and
stocks. Battalio and Schultz examine the potential migration of short sellers to the option markets by
studying option-to-stock trading volume and changes in short exposure taken through the option
markets. They find that the ratio of option-to-stock trading volume for banned stocks is similar to that of

a control group of non-banned stocks during the entire sample period.23 Furthermore, using data on

23 Battalio and Schultz (2009) multiply the trading volume of put and call contracts by 100 (since each contract covers 100 shares)
and divide the product by the number of shares traded of the underlying stock on that day.

                                           17
individual option transactions from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) and International
Securities Exchange (ISE) they compute the change in short exposure in the underlying stock taken

through the option markets.24 They find that aggregated short exposure is comparable for options on

banned and non-banned stocks throughout the sample period. Hence, they find little evidence that short
sellers migrated to the option market in an attempt to circumvent the ban.

When it comes to trading costs, Battalio and Schultz (2009) find that the ban had a substantial impact on
option bid-ask spreads. From September 22 through the lifting of the ban on October 8, they find that
the quoted bid-ask spreads are on average 10 percentage points higher for options on stocks that were
subject to the ban than for options on non-banned control stocks. The effect on the bid-ask spreads is
comparable for put and call options. In line with the thoughts of Grundy et al. (2010), Battalio and
Schultz mean that the inflated cost of gaining short exposure in banned stocks through the option
markets is one of the main reasons why short sellers do not seem to have switched to the option markets.

3.2.2 Indirect Evidence
Harris et al. (2009) examine the price impacts of the 2008 U.S. short sale ban using a factor approach and
find evidence that stock prices increased the most for stocks without listed options. They argue that this
finding points towards that the option markets enabled investors to form synthetic short positions and
hence served as an effective substitute for regular short selling on the stock market. Supporting results are
presented by Beber and Pagano (2010), who report that the short sale bans adopted around the world in
connection with the 2007-2009 financial crisis deteriorated liquidity, as measured by bid-ask spreads and
the Amihud (2002) illiquidity indicator, particularly for stocks with no listed options, small market
capitalization and high volatility.

Kolasinksi et al. (2009) suggest that informed traders are more likely to use options as a substitute for
direct short selling (as the substitute provided by the option markets is only available to investors
sophisticated enough to perform synthetic short selling). Hence, for stocks with traded options, bans are
likely to increase the fraction of informed short sellers, and thus increase the informative content of short
sales. When testing this implication, they find that the 2008 U.S. short sale ban increased the
informativeness of short sales, as measured by the relation between short selling volume and returns, in
banned stocks and that the increase was particularly large for stocks with listed options. Moreover, in
contrast to the findings of Beber and Pagano (2010), Kolasinksi et al. find that the ban’s deteriorating
effect on liquidity, s me sured by mihud’s (2002) illiquidity indicator and share turnover, was especially
strong for stocks with listed options.

24 Battalio and Schultz (2009) cl ssify option tr des s being “open-buys” (tr des th t re initi ted by buyers to open position),
“open-sells” (tr des th t re initi ted by sellers to open position), “close-buys” (tr des th t re initi ted by buyers to close
position) or “close-sells” (tr des th t re initi ted by sellers to close position) Then they compute the ch nge in short exposure
as follows: .

                                           18
4. Data and Methodology

4.1 Data
Most of the analysis is based on an international panel of options and stocks from 10 countries that
adopted restrictions on short sales at some point in time during our sample period – January 1, 2008
through February 28, 2011. The data consists of option trading volume and the number of option
contracts outstanding (open interest) for put and call options respectively, bid and ask prices of the

underlying stocks, stock trading volume, and country of listing.25 All option and stock data is from

Thomson’s D t stream and measured with daily frequency. In order to arrive at a dataset of manageable

size, we only include financial stocks and options on financial stocks in our sample.26

Information regarding which stocks that were subject to bans on short sales at some point in time during
the sample period, as well as information on which time periods the bans were in force, is obtained from
the webpage of the government agency responsible for financial regulation in each country respectively,
as well as from Beber and Pagano (2010) and Strömqvist (2009). From above mentioned sources, we also
obtain information on various features of the bans, including whether the bans prohibited naked short
sales or all short sales (both naked and covered short sales), whether and to what extent the bans also
prohibited investors from taking corresponding short positions on the option markets, and whether and
to what extent option market makers were exempted from the bans. Inception and removal dates, as well
as cross-country differences in the stringency of the bans are illustrated in Figure 2. A somewhat more
detailed description of the features and scopes of the bans, and the overall structure of our dataset is
presented in Table 1.

Figure 3 illustrates the diffusion of short sale bans by showing the fraction of stocks in our sample that is
subject to a ban over time. The fraction of stocks subject to a ban increases sharply from 0 percent in
June 2008 to about 35 percent in September. In October it jumps further to 95 percent. Subsequently, the
fraction of banned stocks gradually decreases back to about 80 percent of the sample throughout the
remaining part of the sample period. Naked bans represent a majority of the bans in all months but
September 2008, the reason for the exception being the announcement by the U.S. SEC on September 19
of a ban prohibiting all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) in 797 financial stocks. The
fraction of stocks subject to a covered ban reaches its peak of about 35 percent in October 2008. As from
June 2009, all bans in our sample are represented by bans on naked short sales.

25 Option trading volume is measured in number of traded contracts and stock trading volume is measured in thousands of
shares. All prices are measured at closing. Each option contract covers 100 shares.

26 Even with a sample of financial stocks only, the generation of some variables is very time consuming. For example, one of our
control variables, a rolling standard deviation of the return of the underlying stock based on the previous 10 observations, took
some 20 hours to generate.

                                           19
Beber and Pagano (2010) identify 20 countries around the world that adopted restrictions on short sales
in connection with the financial crisis of 2007-2009 (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, South
Korea, Spain, Switzerland, the U.K. and the U.S.). Datastream only has option data for 13 of these
countries (for all countries except Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal and South
Korea). In addition, we exclude countries for which Datastream only has option data for one of the
following time periods: (i) before the ban, (ii) during the ban or (iii) after the ban. This means that options
on stocks that are listed in Australia, Belgium and Norway, for which Datastream only provides option
data for the post-ban period (Australia and Norway) and the ban period (Belgium), are left out of the
dataset.

For countries where short sale restrictions were imposed on financial stocks only, but where the financial
regulator did not issue a list on which financial stocks that were to be subject to the ban, we determine
which stocks to categorize as banned ourselves. For this purpose, we use a function in Datastream that
allows the user to search for equities by industry and country of listing. We identify 5 industry categories

that we consider belong to the financial sector.27 Thereafter, we make the assumption that all companies

in these industry categories were subject to the ban in question. For countries where short sale restrictions
were imposed on all stocks, we use the same function and the same 5 industry categories to determine
which stocks are to be considered as financial stocks. After these adjustments, we arrive at a sample of
1,278 financial stocks from 10 countries.

Subsequently, we manually search for listed options for each of the 1,278 financial stocks in Datastream.
As we do not aim to identify different impacts of short sale bans on options with certain strike prices or
expiry dates, all option data is based on a data category in Datastream called “Option Cl ss” An option
class includes all put or call options on an underlying stock listed on a marketplace, irrespective of the

exercise prices and expiry dates of the individual options.28 Hence, in an ideal world each stock has two

option classes: one for puts and one for calls. Occasionally, stocks have options listed on more than one
marketplace (and hence the stock has more than one pair of option classes). In such cases, we only
include the pair of option classes listed on the “domestic” option marketplace, which we define as the
option marketplace of the country in which the underlying stock is primarily listed. In the rare case where
a stock only has options listed in another country than the country in which the underlying stock is
primarily listed, the stock (and hence the foreign-listed pair of option classes) is left out of the sample.
Finally, we only include classes of American options, and there are two main reasons for this. First, the
liquidity in American options is generally substantially higher than the liquidity in European options on

27 The industry categories are Banks, Financial Services (Sector), Life Insurance, Nonlife Insurance and Real Estate Investment &
Services.

28 For example, the daily number of traded put (call) contracts of an option class is measured as the sum of all put (call) contracts
of all put (call) options on the underlying stock listed on a certain derivatives marketplace that are traded during the day,
irrespective of the expiry dates and strike prices of the individual options.

                                           20
the same stock. Secondly, all stocks that have listed European options also have listed American options,
while opposite does not hold true. Because the dataset only contains one option class for puts and one
option class for calls per stock, the dataset only contains one observation per underlying stock per day.

To be included in the sample, an observation must fulfill the following condition: data on trading volume
of the call and the put option classes has to be contemporaneously available. This requirement leaves out
18 percent of the number of observations, whereof the majority is excluded due to missing option data
from January 1, 2008 until May 20, 2008 (the dropped observations primarily belong to option classes of
stocks listed in the U.S.). The final dataset contains 171 pairs of option classes (and hence 171 financial
stocks) and 116,528 observations.

As seen in Table 1, 91 of the 171 pairs of option classes are listed on an U.S. exchange, and these pairs
represent more than half of the total sample in terms of number of observations (52 percent of the total
number of observations). Moreover, as can be seen in Figure 4, a handful of stocks (firms) represent a
major fraction of the aggregated average daily trading volume: half of the average daily number of put
contracts traded belongs to options on seven stocks, half of the average daily number of call contracts
traded belongs to options on five stocks, and half of the average daily number of traded shares in the
underlying stock is represented by seven stocks.

Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of the monthly cumulative number of traded put and call contracts, as
well as the monthly cumulative trading volume in the underlying stock across countries over time. Notice
that stocks and pairs of option classes of some countries lack observations for some time periods, the
most obvious example being that we have no data for U.S. options and stocks until May 2008. Figure 5
also illustrates the development of average daily trading volume for an average option class (stock) over
time. Table 4 reports average daily trading volume, open interest and put-to-option ratio for an average

option class (stock) for each month throughout the sample period.29 Further summary statistics are

reported in Table 2.

4.2 Methodology
We examine the impact of the bans on the level and composition of option trading activity graphically
and in fixed effect panel regressions. The graphic illustrations show different measures of option trading
activity over time. Most of the figures compare the average level of the relevant measure for each day
during a 41 day window ranging from 20 days before the introduction date up to 20 days after the introduction
date with the average level of the measure for all non-ban observations except those belonging to the 20
days preceding the introduction of the bans. We complement these figures with similar graphic
illustrations focusing on the average level of the relevant measure for each day during a 41 day window

29 The put-to-option ratio is calculated as the daily number of traded put contracts over the total daily number of traded option
contracts (puts+calls).

                                           21
ranging from 20 days before the removal date up to 20 days after the removal date.30 The graphic illustrations

provide indications on how the short sale bans impacted option market activity, even though formal
testing is left to the fixed effect panel regressions.

Using our panel of option and stock data from 10 countries adopting bans on short sales at some point in
time during the period from January 1, 2008 through February 28, 2011 and various subsamples, we
estimate the following fixed effect model:

where is some measure of option trading activity for option class at time . On the right-hand side of
the equation, we include

     (i) a constant ;
    (ii) a constant representing time-invariant characteristics of the underlying stock of option
              class ;
     (iii) a dummy variable that is equal to one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales
           – both naked and covered) are forbidden in the underlying stock of option class at time
            and zero otherwise;
    (iv) weekly time dummies ;
    (v) a vector for a number of time varying control variables, including return of the
            underlying stock, bid-ask spreads of the underlying stock and the standard deviation of the

            return of the underlying stock based on the previous 10 observations.31 These control

             variables are only used in selected regressions and are not part of our standard specification.

All three control variables are chosen to represent time varying characteristics of the underlying stocks,
and they have all been pointed out as being correlated with the adoption of short sale bans by previous
empirical work of, among others, Beber and Pagano (2010) and Boehmer et al. (2009). By controlling for
these variables in selected specifications, we aim to capture the direct effect of the short sale bans on

30 More specifically, we examine option trading activity around the introduction of the bans by estimating the following fixed
effect model: , where is some measure of option
trading activity for option class at time , represents time-invariant characteristics of the underlying stock of option class
(stock-level fixed effects), represents weekly time dummies (time fixed effects), is a day dummy that equals one if the
relevant ban is introduced in 20 days and zero otherwise, is a day dummy that equals one if the ban is introduced in 19 days
 nd zero otherwise, nd so on… This continues up to , which is a day dummy that equals one if the ban was introduced 19
days ago and zero otherwise. stands out by equaling one throughout the remainder of the ban period (that is, from ban day
20 up to the removal of the ban) and zero for all other days. We then plot the estimated coefficients of the dummies
through . In this setup, all non-ban observations, except those belonging to the 20 days preceding the ban introduction date,
perform the role as control. In the graphs focusing on the removal of the bans, a corresponding procedure is used. The main
difference is that all non-ban observations, except those belonging to the 20 days following the removal of the bans perform the
role as control. In the graphic illustrations, we make no difference between naked and covered bans.

31 Stock return is based on closing prices and expressed in decimals. Bid-ask spread is the percentage bid-ask spread expressed in
decimals and calculated as the ask price minus the bid price (at closing) divided by the bid-ask midpoint. Standard deviation of
the return of the underlying stock is based on the previous 10 observations and expressed in decimals.

                                           22
option trading activity, that is, changes in option trading activity due to investors trying to find alternative
ways to profit from declining prices, rather than impacts resulting from (i) the bans having a detrimental
effect on the liquidity and market quality on the underlying market and (ii) increased inventory holding
costs and adverse selection costs of option market makers. Hence, the extended specification allows us to
check whether the results of our standard specification are not simply a reflection of the short sale bans

having an impact on the underlying market (other than not allowing short sales).32

We use the following measures as left-hand side variables:

    (i) number of option contracts traded;
    (ii) number of outstanding option contracts (open interest);
    (iii) a ratio of the number of put option contracts traded over the total number of option
             contracts traded (puts+calls).

For the measures not being ratios, we also test for nonlinear relationships by including regressions with
log-level functional form.

Our specification of the regression equation exploits the following features of the panel dataset:

    (i) different countries adopted and removed their short sale bans on different dates;
    (ii) the stringency of the bans varied across countries: in some countries the ban only prohibited
             naked short sales, while in others, the ban ruled out all short sales (both naked and covered

               short sales).33

In this setup, option classes of stocks that are not yet subject to a ban, and option classes of stocks that
have been subject to a been but for which the ban has been removed, as well as each option class before
and after the ban periods of their underlying stocks, perform the role as control. All regressions allow for
stock-level fixed effects as well as time fixed effects (weekly). This implies that we allow time-invariant
characteristics of the underlying stock of option class to be correlated with other explanatory variables
in each time period (for example whether the underlying stock of option class , at some point in time,
will be subject to a ban or not), and for unobserved variables that are constant across stocks but change
over time (e.g. broad market moves). All regressions are estimated with heteroskedasticity robust standard

32 Investors buy puts when they believe that the price of the underlying stock will decline going forward, and equivalently they
buy c lls when they believe th t the stock price will incre se Hence, if investors b se their beliefs bout tomorrow’s stock return
on tod y’s return, the return of the underlying stock is likely to affect option trading volume. In addition, we find it reasonable to
suspect that stock return is negatively correlated with the adoption of bans on short selling. Bid-ask spreads is a widely used
measure for liquidity on the stock market, and Beber and Pagano (2010) and Boehmer et al. (2009) find evidence that the size of
the bid-ask spread is positively correlated with the adoption of short sale bans. Moreover, bid-ask spreads may also be correlated
with the inventory holding costs and adverse selection costs of option markets makers, which in turn is likely to affect the supply
of liquidity in options (Grundy et al., 2010). We also choose to control for the standard deviation of the return of the underlying
stock, since its changes may increase the inventory risk of option market makers, and hence reduce their willingness to provide
liquidity (Bollen et al., 2004).

33 ee section ”2 Adoption of Short Sale b ns round the world” nd “4 1 D t ” for more det iled ccount of how the fe tures
of the short sale bans differed across countries.

                                           23
errors which are clustered at the level of the underlying stock, the latter allowing for dependence in the
residuals across time for a given option class (and hence for correlation in within ).

All regressions are run with two different sets of ban dummies. In the first set up, we include one ban
dummy for all types of short sale bans, and hence we make no difference between naked bans (bans on
naked short sales) and covered bans (bans on all short sales – both naked and covered). In the second set
up, we allow for different effects of naked and covered bans by including one ban dummy for naked bans

and one ban dummy for covered bans.34 In addition, all regressions are run in two further versions: one

version where the control variables presented above are excluded (the “standard specification”), and one
version where the control variables are included (the “extended specification”). Thus, we use four
specifications for each dependent variable.

A major issue with our specification is that there is reason to believe that the adoption of short sale bans
is endogenous. Most financial regulators imposed the bans as a reaction to sharp price declines, high
return volatility, intense speculations on the default of financial institutions and a loss of confidence for
the financial markets. Probably, the problems were more severe and emerged earlier in some countries in
our sample than in others, which may have resulted in some countries adopting short sale bans earlier
and/or bans with stricter requirements than others. In as far option trading activity is correlated with
these time varying variables related to the crisis, and to the extent the variables are country specific (that
is, not market-wide), we run the risk of obtaining biased results.

We deal with the potential endogeneity problem related to the adoption of the bans by the introduction
of our stock-level control variables. After having read the ban announcements of several financial
regulators, we have noticed that return and volatility on the stock market were two of the most important
measures taken into account by financial regulators when deciding whether and when they should impose
bans on short sales. By adding stock-level return and stock-level volatility (as well as stock-level bid-ask
spreads) to the list of explanatory variables, we aim to control for cross-country differences in time
varying variables affecting the likelihood of a country imposing a ban. In addition, we rerun all regressions
for a sample period starting in December 2008 (rather than in January 2008). In December, all countries
in our dataset had adopted short sale bans. This means that we rely solely on the removal of the bans in
our difference-in-difference re-estimation. This procedure eliminates the potential endogeneity problem

34 More specifically, we allow for different impacts of naked and covered bans by estimating the following fixed effect model:
                                                             where is a dummy variable that is equal to
one if naked short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed in the underlying stock of option class at time and
zero otherwise; and is a dummy variable that is equal to one if even covered short sales are forbidden in the
underlying stock of option class at time and zero otherwise (that is, is equal to one when all short sales, both
naked and covered short sales, are forbidden and zero otherwise). Coefficients of interest are and , which represent the
respective estimated effects of naked bans and covered bans on . Estimation of this specification yields the exact same results
as when estimating the following specification: where
is defined as in the text.

                                           24
by excluding the endogenous event (however, the results may still suffer from the removal of bans being
endogenous).

Another potential endogeneity problem is that most of the bans included in our dataset were adopted at a
time when the situation on the financial markets all around the world was very turbulent. For example,
most of the bans were adopted within a week after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. In as far the
financial turmoil per se resulted in increased option trading activity (e.g. by attracting more speculators)
we run the risk of obtaining biased results by assigning this effect to the concomitant short sale bans. We
deal with the potential problem caused by market-wide developments on the financial markets by
allowing for weekly time fixed effects, which will take out broad market moves. In addition, we deal with
both potential endogeneity problems by presenting graphic illustrations of the changes in option trading
activity around the removal of the bans, the intuition being that the financial turbulence was not as strong
at the time of the lifting of the bans and that the lifting of the bans were more random than were the
adoption of the bans.

5. Results

5.1 Descriptive Results
Table 3 reports average daily trading volume and open interest for an average option class separately for
the ban periods and non-ban periods. As seen in the table, the average daily trading volume of put
options is higher during the ban periods (4,447 contracts) compared to the non-ban periods (3,920
contracts). The bans also seem to be associated with an increase in the trading volume of call options
(6,320 contracts for the ban periods vs. 4,064 contracts for the non-ban periods). Similar indications are
given for open interest of both puts and calls. Note that we make no difference between naked bans
(bans on naked short sales) and covered bans (bans on all short sales – both naked and covered).

Next, we examine the impact of short sale bans on option trading activity graphically. We compare the
average level of the relevant measure for each day during a 41 day window ranging from 20 days before
the introduction date up to 20 days after the introduction date with the average level of the measure for
all non-ban observations except those belonging to the 20 days preceding the introduction of the bans

(henceforth called the control group).35

Figure 6 illustrates the level of trading volume of put options around the introduction of the bans. There
is a slight increase in the trading volume of puts (relative to the control group) from an average of 743
contracts for the 20 days preceding the introduction of the bans (green horizontal line) to 1,815 contracts
for the 20 days following the introduction date (red horizontal line). However, from the look of the
graph, it is hard to assign any increase in option trading volume to the introduction of the bans, as the

35 A more det iled description of how the gr phs re cre ted is given in the methodology section (“4 2 Methodology”)

                                           25
trading volume starts to rise about 10 days prior to the introduction date. Moreover, the trading volume
of puts reaches its highest point a couple of days before the introduction date and then drops substantially
during the days that follow.

The noticeable peak a couple of days before the introduction of the bans is a bit puzzling. One potential
explanation to why we observe the peak is that most of the bans in our sample were adopted within a
week after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. However, to the extent the bankruptcy of Lehman had a
market-wide impact on option trading activity (e.g. by attracting more speculators), this impact should be
captured by the time fixed effects (week dummies). Moreover, September 19 was the last trading day in
options expiring on September 20 (which was a monthly expiration date), and many countries included in
our sample adopted their bans shortly after this date (see Figure 2 and Table 1). In untabulated results, we
find that the trading volume of puts is higher during days preceding option expiration dates. More
specifically, the trading volume is on average 767 contracts higher during the three days preceding an
expiration date compared to all other days, and the result is significant at the one percent level. However,
the results illustrated in Figure 6 remain unchanged when we control for expiration of options, and hence

the peak is likely to have another cause.36 Furthermore, the fact that the trading volume of puts starts to

rise about 10 days before the introduction of the bans may indicate that the adoption of the bans is
endogenous. Financial regulators are likely to have introduced the bans as a reaction to country specific
time varying variables related to the crisis, and the endogeneity problem emerges when these variables are
correlated with option trading activity.

In Figure 7 we do a similar graphical analysis for open interest of put options. In line with the results
presented in Figure 6, open interest of puts (relative to the control group) is on average higher during the
20 days following the introduction date (60,631 contracts) than for the 20 days preceding the introduction
of the bans (30,797 contracts). However, as in the case with trading volume we see signs of pre-trends,
and it is hence problematic to assign any effect to the introduction of the short sale bans. The sharp
decline around the introduction date coincides with the expiration of options for several of the countries
included in the sample.

Furthermore, in Figure 8 and 9 we examine the level of trading volume and open interest of put options
around the removal of the bans. As mentioned in the methodology section, this is done in order to mitigate
potential endogeneity problems related to the adoption of the bans. As in the case with ban inception
dates, we see no clear changes in option trading activity that can be assigned to the removal of the bans.
The noticeable drop in open interest 13-14 days after the lifting date coincides with the expiration of
options for several of the countries included in the sample. The results illustrated in Figure 8 do not
change when we control for option expiration dates.

36 We control for the expiration of options by including a dummy variable that is equal to one for the three days preceding an
option expiration date and zero otherwise to the list of explanatory variables. When including the expiration dummy in our
standard specification, the estimated coefficient for the dummy equals 767 and it is significantly different from zero at the one
percent level.

                                           26
The graphical results provide no strong evidence that short sellers attempted to circumvent the bans by
migrating to the option markets. Even though trading volume and open interest of put options on
average is higher during the period after (before) the introduction (removal) of the bans, it is hard to
assign the results to the bans.

5.2 Regression Analysis
In order to examine the entire sample period more thoroughly, formalize the results obtained in the
graphical illustrations and allow for different effects of naked bans (bans on naked short sales) and
covered bans (bans on all short sales – both naked and covered), we now turn to the regression analysis.
We start out by focusing on the impact of the short sale bans on option trading volume. We then turn to
open interest and the composition of option trading activity. Subsequently, we test the robustness of the
results by introducing control variables representing time-variant characteristics of the underlying stock.
Finally, as a further robustness test, we rerun the regressions for various subsamples of countries, option
classes and time periods. All results from the regression analysis presented here are significant at the five
percent level (at least) if not stated otherwise.

5.2.1 Option Trading Volume
We start out by focusing on the impact on option trading volume, as measured by the daily number of
traded put and call contracts. When analyzing the entire sample, the coefficient of the Ban dummy in
column 2 of Table 5, panel C, indicates that the bans on short sales (irrespective of type) resulted in
increased overall trading volume of options. The coefficient suggests that the bans are associated with an
increase in the daily number of traded options by 2,905 contracts. In column 1, panel C, where we allow
for different impacts of naked and covered bans, the results suggest that bans on naked short sales are
associated with an increase in the daily number of traded options by 3,400 contracts. Interestingly,
covered bans have no significant impact (even though the coefficient is positive).

In panel A and B of Table 5 we investigate the impact on the daily number of traded contracts for put
options and call options separately. The coefficient of the Ban dummy in column 2, panel A and B,
suggests that the bans (irrespective of type) have a statistically significant positive impact on both the
number of traded puts and the number of traded calls. The bans (irrespective of type) are associated with
an increase in the number of traded puts by 1,117 contracts and an increase in the number of traded calls
by 1,788 contracts. Again, the results indicate that naked and covered bans have different impacts, the
difference being larger for puts than for calls. The coefficient of the Naked ban dummy shown in column
1, panel A and B, indicates that naked bans are associated with an increase in the number of traded puts
by 1,580 contracts, whereas covered bans do not seem to have any impact at all. Naked bans are
associated with an increase in the number of traded calls by 1,820 contracts, while covered bans are
associated with an increase in the number of traded calls by 1,713 contracts (significant at the 10 percent
level). To get a feeling of the economic significance of these results, the average daily number of traded

                                           27
put and call contracts per option class during the pre-ban and post-ban periods is 3,920 and 4,064
contracts respectively (see Table 3).

When rerunning the regressions with a log-level functional form, we obtain significant coefficients for the
ban dummies only for call options (see column 5 and 6 of Table 5, panel B). The results suggest that the
short sale bans (irrespective of type) are associated with an increase in the daily number of traded call
contracts by 19.8 percent. Bans on naked short sales are associated with an increase in the daily number
of traded call contracts by 23.1 percent, while there is no evidence that covered bans had any impact at
all.

5.2.2 Open Interest
We investigate the impact of the short sale bans on option trading activity further by examining the effect
on open interest, which is the number of option contracts outstanding on a given day. In Table 6, panel
A, B and C, the dependent variable is open interest of puts, calls and all options (put+calls) respectively.
The results are in line with those obtained when using trading volume as dependent variable. This is
expected since the correlation between open interest and the daily number of traded contracts is high
(0.72 for puts and 0.60 for calls). For puts, the bans on short sales (irrespective of type) are associated
with an increase in the number of outstanding puts by 39,827 contracts (see column 2, panel A), whereas
the corresponding figure for calls is 64,151 contracts (see column 2, panel B). In column 1, where we
allow for different impacts of naked and covered bans, bans on naked short sales are seen to increase the
number of outstanding puts by 48,901 contracts and the number of outstanding calls by 55,489 contracts.
Consistent with the results obtained when using trading volume as dependent variable, covered bans do
not have a statistically significant impact on the open interest of put options. For calls, however, the
coefficient for the Covered ban dummy, displayed in column 1, panel B, is significantly positive at the 10
percent level and corresponds to an increase in the number of outstanding calls by 85,848 contracts
during the ban period. When rerunning the regression with a log-level functional form we fail to obtain
significant coefficients for all ban dummies, both for put and call options (see column 5 and 6, panel A, B
and C). The average number of outstanding contracts per option class during the pre-ban and post-ban
periods is 208,481 contracts for puts and 211,060 contracts for calls.

The results so far suggest that the bans are associated with an increase in option trading volume and that
this increase can partially be assigned to an increase in the number of outstanding option contracts.
Furthermore, the results indicate that the impact on option trading activity is greater for naked bans than
for covered bans, especially for put options. This finding is a bit surprising. By prohibiting all short sales,
both naked and covered short sales, covered bans are stricter than are naked bans. Intuitively, covered
bans should therefore have an impact on the demand for options at least as large as the impact of naked
bans. There are, however, several potential explanations to why we obtain these results. First of all, some
countries that adopted covered bans imposed increased delivery requirements for market makers, and the
exemptions for market makers in some covered regimes were not as extensive as in countries only

                                           28
banning naked short sales.37 Secondly, theoretical models and results of previous empirical work suggest

that stricter short sale restrictions have a more detrimental effect on the liquidity and market quality on
the stock market. Thus, a potential explanation to the observed difference between the impact of naked
and covered bans on option trading activity is that covered bans may have resulted in higher inventory
holding costs (including higher hedging costs) and adverse selection costs for option market makers than
did naked bans, and hence covered bans may have had a more detrimental effect on the supply of
liquidity in options on banned stocks.

5.2.3 Composition of Option Trading Volume
The results presented above already indicates that the short sale bans had a larger economic impact on the
daily number of traded call contracts than on the daily number of traded put contracts. This observation
is confirmed by the results presented in column 1 and 2 of Table 7, where the dependent variable is a
ratio of the daily number of traded put contracts over the total daily number of traded option contracts
(puts+calls). The coefficient of the Ban dummy in column 2 indicates that the short sale bans (irrespective
of type) are associated with a decrease in the fraction of put contracts by 4.5 percentage points. In column
1, where we allow for different impacts of naked and covered bans, the coefficients indicates that both
types of bans are associated with a statistically significant decrease in the fraction of put contracts (even
though the estimated effect is greater for covered bans). To get a feeling of the economic significance of
these results, the average fraction of overall option trading volume that originates from put options is
46.9 percent during the pre-ban and post-ban periods.

5.1.3 Introduction of Control Variables
In column 3 and 4 of Table 5, panel A, B and C, we investigate whether the results so far are robust to
the introduction of stock-level time varying control variables. We control for the following characteristics
of the underlying stock: return, bid-ask spreads and the standard deviation of return based on the

previous 10 observations.38 All three variables have been pointed out as being correlated with the

adoption of short sale bans by previous empirical work. The reason why we choose to control for these
variables is that we want to (i) capture the direct effect of the short sale bans on option trading activity,
that is, changes in option trading activity due to investors trying to find alternative ways to profit from
declining prices, rather than impacts resulting from the bans having an effect on the underlying market

37 In, Switzerland the prohibitions applied to all market participants. In the U.S., the temporary rule (Rule 204T), which was
announced on September 17, 2008 (two days before the announcement of the ban prohibiting all short sales in specified financial
stocks), imposed enhanced delivery requirements on sales of all equity securities and limited market makers ability to hedge by
penalizing failure to deliver. In Canada, the order did not distinguish between different types of market participants.

38 All control variables are expressed in decimals.

                                           29
(other than prohibiting short sales), and (ii) mitigate the potential endogeneity problem related to the

adoption of the bans (further described in the methodology section).39

When the extended specification is estimated, the signs, significance levels and magnitude of the ban
dummies remain the same as in the standard specification estimated in column 1 and 2. In line with
theoretical predictions, the estimated coefficient of the bid-ask spread of the underlying stock is estimated
to be negative and it is significantly different from zero at the one percent level for puts as well as for calls
(see column 3 and 4 of Table 5, panel A and B). Moreover, in line with the intuition that investors buy
puts when prices fall and calls when prices rise, the coefficient of the return of the underlying stock
shown in column 3 and 4, panel A and B respectively, is estimated to be negative for puts and positive for
calls (however, it is only significantly different from zero in the former case). Finally, in contrast to the
theory that higher volatility raises the inventory holding costs of market makers, the coefficient of the
rolling standard deviation of return based on the previous 10 observations is positive and significant for

puts and negative but insignificant for calls.40 However, the economic significance is questionable for all

control variables. For example, an increase in the bid-ask spread of the underlying stock by one
percentage point is associated with a decline in the daily number of traded puts by 33 contracts and a
decline in the daily number of traded calls by 76 contracts (when we allow for different impacts of naked
and covered bans), which are rather small declines in comparison to the average daily trading volume
during the pre-ban and post-ban periods of 3,920 contracts for puts and 4,064 contracts for calls. The
average bid-ask spread in our sample is 0.34 percent, which means that an increase of the spread by one
percentage point is quite substantial.

Neither does the introduction of the three control variables alter the signs, significance levels nor the
magnitude of the estimated coefficients of the ban dummies in column 3 and 4 of Table 6, panel A, B and
C, where we measure option trading activity as open interest. Of all three control variables, the bid-ask
spread of the underlying stock is the only one that is estimated to have a significant impact on open
interest. A one percentage point increase in the bid-ask spread is associated with a decrease in the open
interest of puts by 1,343 contracts and a decrease in the open interest of calls by 1,749 contracts (when we
allow for different impacts of naked and covered bans). Also the results regarding the impact of the bans
on the composition of option trading volume are unaffected by the introduction of the control variables,
which can be seen in column 3 and 4 of Table 7.

The results in this subsection confirm that option trading activity, as measured in terms of option trading
volume and open interest, was higher during ban periods than during non-ban periods. As the results are
robust to the introduction of stock-level time varying variables that are likely to reflect variables that

39 The introduction of variables reflecting time varying characteristics of the underlying stock that are correlated with the
adoption of short sale bans is an indirect way to control for country specific time varying variables that could potentially be
correlated with both the adoption of short sale bans and option trading activity.

40 However, the fact that we do not obtain a negative and significant coefficient for the volatility of the return of the underlying
stock is not surprising, as return volatility is also likely to be positively correlated with the demand for options.

                                           30
affect the supply of liquidity in options, there is reason to believe that much of the observed increase in
option trading activity can be explained by an increased demand for options on banned stocks. However,
even after having controlled for time varying characteristics of the underlying stock that are likely to affect
option market makers willingness to supply liquidity, naked bans are still estimated to have a greater
impact on the trading volume and open interest of put options than are covered bans. This finding is a bit
puzzling and indicates that (i) naked bans are associated with a larger increase in the demand for put
options than are covered bans, or (ii) our control variables do not effectively control for variables that
affect the supply of liquidity in options. Furthermore, to the extent the control variables pick up country
specific time varying variables that are correlated with both the adoptions of short sale bans and option
trading activity, the robustness of the results reduces the likelihood that the results so far are biased due to
the adoption of bans being endogenous.

5.1.4 Subsample Analyses
As a further robustness test we rerun the regressions for various subsamples of countries, option classes
and time periods. More specifically, we estimate the standard specification for a subsample where all
option classes of U.S. stocks are excluded, as well as for a subsample where the ten largest option classes
in terms of average daily number of traded contracts are excluded. Furthermore, we re-estimate the
standard specification for a sample period starting in December 2008 (rather than in January 2008), when
all countries in our data set had adopted bans on short sales. Finally, we rerun the regressions for a
subsample only containing option classes of stocks listed in countries that only adopted bans on naked
short sales, and another subsample of option classes of stocks listed in countries that only adopted bans
on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales).

5.1.4.1 Exclusion of Options on Non-U.S. Stocks
As pointed out in the data section, 91 of the 171 pairs of option classes in the main dataset are listed on
an U.S. exchange, and these pairs represent more than half of the total sample in terms of the number of
observations. The announcement of the U.S. ban prohibiting all short sales (both naked and covered
short sales) in 797 financial stocks on September 19, 2008 coincided with the announcement of the
TARP. If the announcement of the TARP had an impact on option trading activity by itself, this impact
will automatically be assigned to the ban due to their concomitant announcements. As options on U.S.
stocks represent a majority of the number of observations this could in turn result in biased results. A
subsample where all option classes of U.S. stocks are excluded allows us to check whether the results
presented in previous sections are not simply a reflection of a differential between the impact of the short
sale bans on trading activity for options on U.S. stocks and options on stocks listed in the rest of the
world.

As seen in column 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Table 8, panel A and B, most of the results obtained when using the
entire sample remains unchanged when options on U.S. stocks are excluded. The estimates of the
coefficients of the ban dummies generally remain sizeable and significantly different from zero in the

                                           31
specifications examining the impact of the bans on the number of traded puts, number of traded calls and
open interest of puts. Some of the coefficients are smaller in absolute value, but this probably reflects the
fact that the average daily number of traded contracts of U.S. options is higher than for options on stocks
listed in other countries. There are, however, two main differences in the results. First, the estimated
coefficients of the ban dummies in column 3 and 4, panel B, where the dependent variable is open
interest of calls, all lose their significance. Secondly, there is no longer evidence that the bans had an
impact on the fraction of overall option trading volume that originates from put options (see panel C).
These results indicate that the estimated impact of the bans on the fraction of overall option trading
volume that originates from put options obtained in earlier estimations can be assigned mainly to options
on U.S. stocks.

5.1.4.2 Exclusion of Options with High Trading Volume
As seen in Figure 4, option classes of a handful of stocks represent a major fraction of the aggregated
average daily trading volume in our sample. The second subsample analysis, in which we exclude the ten
largest options classes in terms of average daily number of traded contracts, allows us to check whether
the results obtained when using the entire sample is simply not a reflection of the bans having a large

imp ct on “large” option classes and a small or no imp ct on “small” option classes.41 The resulting

estimates of the coefficients of the ban dummies, shown in column 5, 6, 7 and 8 of Table 8, panel A, B
and C, are quite interesting. First, the coefficients become considerably smaller, which is probably a
reflection of the average trading volume being considerably sm ller when the ten “l rgest” option cl sses
are excluded from the sample. Maybe more interesting is that the statistical significance changes
dramatically. As seen in column 5 and 6, panel A and B, the estimated impact of short sale bans
(irrespective of type) on the daily number of traded put contracts and the open interest of puts is no
longer statistically significant, nor is the estimated impact of naked bans. In column 7 and 8, Panel A, on
the other hand, where the dependent variable is the daily number of traded call contracts, the coefficients
of the Ban dummy and the Covered ban dummy are still significant, whereas naked bans are no longer
estimated to have a significant impact on the number of traded call contracts. When it comes to open
interest of calls (column 7 and 8, Panel B), it is only covered bans that are estimated to have a statistically
significant impact. In column 3 and 4, panel C, where the dependent variable is the daily number of
traded put contracts over the total daily number of traded option contracts (puts+calls) we see that the
signs, magnitude and statistical significance of the coefficients of the ban dummies are unaffected.

From these results, we draw the conclusion that much of the results obtained in previous sections can be
assigned to option classes with high trading volume. In a sense, these findings are bad news as they

41 For put options, the following firms are excluded (in order of size): Citigroup Inc. (the U.S.), Allianz SE (Germany), Bank of
America Corporation (the U.S.), General Electric CO. (the U.S.), ING Groep N.V. (the Netherlands), UBS AG (Switzerland),
Bank AG (Germany), J. P. Morgan Chase & Co. (the U.S.), Schweiz Ruckversicherungs-Gesellschaft AG (Switzerland) and Wells
Fargo & CO New (the U.S.). For call options, the following firms are excluded (in order of size): Citigroup Inc. (the U.S.), Bank
of America Corporation (the U.S.), Allianz SE (Germany), General Electric CO. (the U.S.), ING Groep N.V. (the Netherlands),
J. P. Morgan Chase & Co. (the U.S.), UBS AG (Switzerland), Schweiz Ruckversicherungs-Gesellschaft AG (Switzerland),
Goldman Sachs Group Inc (the U.S.) and Deutsche Bank AG (Germany).

                                           32
indicate that we have not managed to mitigate the potential endogeneity problem related to the adoption
of the bans. The excluded option classes belong to stocks of several of the major financial institution
around the world. It is likely that these firms were relatively more exposed to time varying variables
related to the crisis (such as house prices, the degree of stability in the financial system, etc) and that
potential crisis-related problems of these firms received relatively more publicity compared to firms
remaining in the sample. Hence, it is likely that the excluded firms attracted relatively more speculators.
To put in other words, the correlation between country specific time varying variables and option trading
activity is likely to have been higher for the excluded firms than for the firms remaining in the sample.
Furthermore, it is likely that financial regulators put a relatively high weight on the financial condition and
speculative attacks of short sellers in the stocks of these firms when deciding whether and when they
should impose bans on short sales. However, it may also be the case that the underlying stocks of the
excluded option classes were more liquid than the underlying stocks of option classes remaining in the
sample (even under the short sale bans), and hence market makers may have been more willing to provide
liquidity in these options.

5.1.4.3 Shorter Sample Period
In a way to further test the robustness of our results, we re-estimate the standard specification for a
sample period ranging from December 1, 2008 to February 28, 2011 (rather than from January 1, 2008 to
February 28, 2011). In December, all countries in our sample had adopted short sale bans. This means
that we rely solely on the removal of the bans in our difference-in-difference re-estimation, and hence this
procedure eliminates the potential endogeneity problem related to the adoption of the bans by excluding

the endogenous event.42

The results from this subsample analysis are shown in Table 9. We see that the signs of all estimated
coefficients remain unchanged compared to when estimating the standard specification for the entire
sample period (shown in Table 5, 6 and 7). The major difference is that the statistical significance of the
estimated impacts is reduced. For trading volume of put options, the estimated effect of bans (irrespective
of type) and bans on naked short sales are still significant, but only at the 10% level. The estimated impact
of bans (irrespective of type) and covered bans on the trading volume of call options are also still
significant, but again only at the 10% level. For open interest, the coefficients of the ban dummies all lose
their significance for both puts and calls. Bans (irrespective of type), naked bans and covered bans are all
still estimated to reduce the proportion of overall option trading volume that originates from put options,
but the estimated coefficient of the Naked ban dummy is no longer significantly different from zero.

There are at least two potential explanations why the statistical significance declines. First of all, the
results from the estimations where we use the entire sample period may be biased. The adoption of the
bans may be correlated with some country specific time varying variable that is also correlated with

42 This robustness check hinges on the assumption that the removal of the bans is more random than is the adoption of the bans.

                                           33
option activity. Hence, in the results presented in Table 5 through 7, changes in option trading activity
have been assigned to the bans, even though it may have changed due to some other reason. Secondly,
when we exclude all observations belonging to the first 11 months of our sample, we exclude a substantial
fraction of all non-ban observations and a major share of the number of changes from 0 to 1 and from 1
to 0 in the ban dummy variables. Hence, the difference-in-difference estimation is not s “sh rp” s when
all observations are included in the regressions.

5.1.4.4 Did Naked Bans and Covered Bans have Different Effects?
In an attempt to further investigate the surprising result that naked bans generally seem to have larger and
more statistically significant impacts on option trading activity of put options than do covered bans, we
rerun the regressions for another two subsamples. The first subsample only includes options classes of
stocks listed in countries that only adopted bans on naked short sales, and the second subsample only
includes option classes of stocks listed in countries that only adopted bans on all short sales (both naked
and covered short sales). Option classes of stocks that were subject to both types of bans but at different

points in time are excluded from both subsamples.43

The results from the re-estimations are shown in Table 10 and they provide (weak) support that naked
bans and covered bans have different effects on option trading activity, especially for put options. The
results obtained so far suggest that both naked and covered bans generally have a positive impact on
option trading activity, but in several of the specifications (especially those focusing on puts) it is only the
coefficient of the Naked ban dummy that is significantly different from zero. In contrast to most of the
results obtained so far, covered bans are now estimated to have a negative impact on all measures of option
trading activity (except for open interest of calls). However, the coefficient is only statistically significant
for trading volume of puts. More specifically, covered bans are associated with a decrease in the daily
number of traded puts by 274 contracts (see column 3, panel A). In line with previous results presented in
table 5 through 7, the coefficient of the Naked ban dummy is positive in most specifications, but it is only
significantly different from zero in column 1, panel A, where the dependent variable is the daily number
of traded put contracts (significant at the 10 percent level).

In Table 10, panel C, where the dependent variable is the proportion of overall option trading volume
that originates from put options, the coefficients of both ban dummies are estimated to be negative,
which is in line with the results from the estimation of the standard specification in Table 7. However, it
is only the coefficient of the Covered ban dummy that is estimated to be significantly different from zero.

Notice that a major fraction of the number of observations, option classes and countries are excluded
from this subsample analysis as a majority of the stocks in our dataset were subject to both types of bans
but at different points in time. This may partially explain the observed differences between the results

43 Countries in our main sample that only adopted bans on naked short sales are Austria, France, Germany and Spain. Countries
that only adopted bans on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) include Canada and the U.K.

                                           34
reported in this section and the results obtained when estimating the version of the standard specification
that allows for different impacts of naked and covered bans.

6. Conclusion

In this thesis, we study the bans on short sales that were adopted around the world in connection with the
financial crisis of 2007-2009. With few exceptions, the bans only prohibited short sales of stocks and not
trading in options. Using option and stock data from 10 countries that adopted bans on short sales at
some point in time from January 1, 2008 through February 28, 2011 and fixed effect panel data
techniques, we examine how the short sale bans affected the option markets. More specifically, we
examine whether short sellers used the option markets as a substitute for direct short selling during the
ban periods, and whether they did so primarily by trading put options or by trading call options.

To the extent the bans induced short sellers to move to the option markets, we would expect to see an
increase in the demand for options, and hence an increase in both option trading volume and open
interest of options. However, it is also likely that the bans reduced option market makers’ ability to hedge,
increased their hedging costs and made it more expensive for them to carry inventory and trade with
informed investors, and hence reduced their willingness to provide liquidity in options on banned stocks.
The net effect of the bans on option trading activity is thus ambiguous.

In contrast to previous empirical work, we find that the short sale bans are associated with a statistically
and economically significant increase in option trading volume and open interest for both put and call
options, especially for options with high trading volume. When allowing for different effects of naked
bans (bans on naked short sales) and covered bans (bans on all short sales – both naked and covered), we
find that naked bans generally are associated with an increase in option trading activity, while the results
for covered bans are more ambiguous. Furthermore, we find that the bans are associated with a decrease
of the fraction of overall option trading volume that originates from put options, especially for options on
stocks listed in the U.S.

Our results suggest that the short sale bans were accompanied by an increase in the demand for options
on banned stocks, and that covered bans reduced the supply of liquidity in options on banned stocks
more than did naked bans. Furthermore, the results indicate that the demand for calls increased more
than the demand for puts, which in turn suggests that investors speculated on declining stock prices by
writing calls rather than buying puts, or that investors viewed the low price levels prevailing during the
ban periods as an opportunity to enter long positions at favorable prices. However, graphical results and
various subsample re-estimations indicate that the adoption of the bans is endogenous. Hence, it is hard
to assign the observed effects to an attempt by short sellers to circumvent the bans. The ambiguous
results suggest that further studies focusing on the impact of short sale bans on the option markets are
needed to enhance our understanding of the effectiveness of bans on short sales of stocks.

                                           35
7. References

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, “Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time- eries Effects”, Journal of
Financial Markets 5(1), 31-56.

Bai, Yang, Eric C. Chang, and Jiang Wang, 2006, “ sset Prices under Short-Sales Constraints”, working
paper, MIT, November.

Battalio, Robert, nd P ul chultz, 2009, “Regul tory Uncert inty nd M rket Liquidity: The 2008 hort
  le B n’s Imp ct on Equity Option M rkets”, working paper, University of Notre Dame, September.

Beber, less ndro, nd M rco P g no, 2010, “ hort-Selling Bans around the World: Evidence from the
2007-09 Crisis”, working P per, University of msterd m, J nu ry.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, Charles M. Jones, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2008, “Which Shorts are Informed?”, Journal
of Finance 63(2), 491-527

Boehmer, Ekkehart, Ch rles M Jones, nd Xi oy n Zh ng, 2009, “ h ckling hort ellers: The 2008
 horting B n”, working p per, Columbi Business chool, eptember.

Bollen, Nicholas P.B., Tom Smith, and Robert E. Whaley, 2004, “Modeling the Bid/ sk Spread:
Measuring the Inventory-Holding Premium”, Journal of Financial Economics 72(1), 97-141.

Bris, rturo, Willi m N Goetzm nn, nd Ning Zhu, 2007, “Efficiency nd the Be r: hort les nd
M rkets round the World”, Journal of Finance 62(3), 1029-1079.

Ch ng, Eric C , Joseph W Cheng, nd Yinghui Yu, 2007, “ hort-Sales Constraints and Price Discovery:
Evidence from the Hong Kong m rket”, Journal of Finance 62(5), 2097-2121.

Ch roenrook, nch d , nd H zem D ouk, 2005, “M rket-Wide Short-Selling Restrictions”, working
paper, Cornell University, August.

Comerton-Forde, C role, nd T lis J Putnins, 2009, “ re hort ellers M nipul ting the M rket?”,
working paper, University of Sydney, October.

Desai, Hemang, Srinivasan Krishnamurthy, and Kumar Venkataraman, 2006, “Do Short Sellers Target
Firms with Poor Earnings Quality? Evidence from Earnings Restatements”, Review of Accounting Studies
11(1), 71-90.

Di mond, Dougl s W , nd Robert E Verrecchi , 1987, “Constr ints on hort-Selling and Asset Price
Adjustment to Private Information”, Journal of Financial Economics 18(2), 277-311.

Grundy, Bruce D., Bryan Lim, and Patrick Verwijmeren, 2010, “Do Option Markets Undo Restrictions
on Short Sales? Evidence from the 2008 Short- le B n”, working Paper, University of Melbourne, June.

Harris, Lawrence E., Eth n N mv r, nd Bl ke Philips, 2009, “Price Infl tion nd We lth Tr nsfer
During the 2008 SEC Short-Sale Ban”, working paper, University of Southern California, June.

Jones, Ch rles M , 2008, “ horting Restrictions: Revisiting the 1930’s”, working p per, Columbi Business
School, September.

Jones, Ch rles M , nd Owen L mont, 2002, “ hort le Constr ints nd tock Returns”, Journal of
Financial Economics 66(2-3), 207-239.

                                           36
Kolasinksi, Adam C., Adam V. Reed, and Jacob R. Thornock, 2009, “Prohibitions versus Constr ints:
The 2008 Short Sales Regul tions”, working p per, University of Washington, June.

Miller, Edw rd M , 1977, “Risk, Uncert inty, nd Divergence of Opinion”, Journal of Finance 32(4), 1151-
1168.

OEA, 2009, Analysis of the July Emergency Order Requiring a Pre-Borrow on Short Sales, Memorandum.
Washington D.C: U.S. Securities and Exch nge Commission’s Office of Economic Analysis. Available
online: http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/shortsales/oeamemo011409.pdf [2011-05-16].

Saffi, Pedro A.C., and Kari Sigurdsson, 2008, “Price Efficiency nd hort elling”, working paper,
University of Navarra, January.

SEC, 2008a, Emergency Order Pursuant to Section 12(k)(2) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Taking Temporary
Action to Respond to Market Developments, Release no. 58166, July 15. Washington D.C: U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission. Available online: http://www.sec.gov/rules/other/2008/34-58166.pdf [2011-05-
17].

SEC, 2008b, Emergency Order Pursuant to Section 12(k)(2) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Taking Temporary
Action to Respond to Market Developments, Release no. 34-58572, September 17. Washington D.C: U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. Available online: http://www.sec.gov/rules/other/2008/34-
58572.pdf [2011-05-17].

SEC, 2008c, Emergency Order Pursuant to Section 12(k)(2) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Taking Temporary
Action to Respond to Market Developments, Release no. 34-58592, September 18. Washington D.C: U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. Available online: http://www.sec.gov/rules/other/2008/34-
58592.pdf [2011-05-17].

SEC, 2008d, Emergency Order Pursuant to Section 12(k)(2) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 Taking Temporary
Action to Respond to Market Developments, Release no. 58591, September 18. Washington D.C: U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission. Available online: http://www.sec.gov/rules/other/2008/34-58591.pdf
[2011-05-17].

SEC, 2008e, Amendment to Emergency Order Pursuant to Section 12(k)(2) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Taking Temporary Action to Respond to Market Developments, Release no. 58611, September 21. Washington
D.C: U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available online:
http://www.sec.gov/rules/other/2008/34-58611.pdf [2011-05-17].

SEC, 2008f, Amendments to Regulation SHO, Release no. 34-58775, October 14. Washington D.C: U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. Available online: http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2008/34-
58775.pdf [2011-05-17].

Stoll, Hans R., 1978, ”The Supply of Dealer Services in Securities Markets”, Journal of Finance 33(4),
1133-1151.

 trömqvist, M ri , 2009, “Hur påverk r bl nkning fin nsiell m rkn der?”, Ekonomiska kommentarer (7).
Stockholm: Sveriges Riksbank. Available online:
http://www.riksbank.se/upload/Dokument_riksbank/Kat_publicerat/Ekonomiska%20kommentarer/2
009/ek_kom_nr_7_svny.pdf [2011-05-16].

                                           37
8. Appendix

 Table 1. Overview of the Dataset

 Country Ban start date: Ban lift date:   Ban start date: Ban lift date:       Scope of ban Number of   Fraction of Duration    Obs. Fraction of  Obs. with  Fraction  Obs. with  Fraction Obs. with  Fraction of
                 Naked         Naked         Covered       Covered                                 pairs of     total option        6                total obs.   naked ban   of obs.  covered ban  of obs.     ban        obs.
                                                                                                                                            (days)
                                                                                                                options classes     classes

 Austria 2008-10-27 still banned fin 4 2.3% 855 3,147 2.7% 2,319 73.7% 0 0.0% 2,319 73.7%
 Canada 2008-09-19 2008-10-08 fin 7 4.0% 20 4,844 4.2% 0 0.0% 98 2.0% 98 2.0%
 France 2008-09-22 2011-02-01 fin 10 5.8% 863 7,408 6.4% 5,553 75.0% 0 0.0% 5,553 75.0%
       1 2008-09-20 2009-05-31 fin 7 4.0% 254
 Germany                                                                                                5,617 4.8% 2,600 46.3% 0      0.0% 2,600 46.3%
             2010-05-19 still banned fin 7 4.0% 286
    2
 Italy         2008-09-23 2009-07-31 2008-10-01 2009-05-31 fin, then all 11 6.4% 312 8,474 7.3% 561 6.6% 1,813 21.4% 2,374 28.0%
          3
 Netherlands   2008-09-22 2008-10-04 2008-10-05 2009-06-01 fin 4 2.3% 253 3,244 2.8% 40 1.2% 660 20.3% 700 21.6%
 Spain 2008-09-24 still banned all 8 4.6% 888 6,363 5.5% 4,944 77.7% 0 0.0% 4,944 77.7%
         4 2008-09-19 2009-01-16 fin 7 4.0% 120
 Switzerland                                                                                               8,655 7.4% 7,089 81.9% 480 5.5%    7,569 87.5%
             2008-09-19 still banned all 17 9.8% 893
 UK 2008-09-19 2009-01-16 fin 12 6.9% 120 8,350 7.2% 0 0.0% 927 11.1% 927 11.1%
          5 2008-07-21 2008-08-12 fin 7 4.6% 23
 UnitedStates                                                                                              60,426 51.9% 52,302 86.6% 1,108 1.8% 53,410    88.4%
             2008-09-18 still banned 2008-09-19 2008-10-08 naked-all, covered-fin 91 52.6% 894
 Total 171 116,528 100.0% 75,408 5,086 80,494

  1 The ban adopted in Germany on May 19, 2010, applied to the same stocks as the ban ranging from September 20, 2008 to May 31, 2009.
  2 In Italy, the financial regulator initially banned naked short sales in financial stocks (imposed on September 23, 2008). On October 1, the ban was extended to include also covered short sales in
  financial stocks, and on October 10, the ban was extended further to include all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) in all stocks. On December 31, 2008, the stringency of the ban on
  short sales in non-financial stocks was reduced to prohibit naked short sales only, and on May 31, 2009, the stringency of the ban on short sales in financial stocks was reduced to prohibit naked
  short sales only.
  3 On September 22, 2008, the Netherlands imposed a ban on naked short sales in financial stocks, and two weeks later, on October 4, the ban was replaced by a ban on all short sales (both naked
   and covered short sales).
  4 On September 19, 2008, Switzerland adopted a ban on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) in specified financial stocks and a ban on naked short sales in all other stocks.
  5 The seven stocks in our sample that were subject to the ban on naked short sales in 19 financial stocks imposed by the U.S. SEC on July 21, 2008, were also subject to the ban on naked short
  sales in all U.S. stocks imposed on September 18, as well as the ban on all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) in 797 financial stocks imposed on September 19.
  6 Number of days with restrictions on short sales (no difference is made between naked and covered bans).

                                                                   38
 Table 2. Summary Statistics

Variable Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
vm_put 116,528 4,284 16,749 0 960,433
vm_call 116,528 5,622 36,447 0 4,924,182
vm_all 116,528 9,906 48,877 0 5,263,235
vm_put-to-option 106,075 0.444 0.279 0.000 1.000
oi_put 116,526 220,580 624,688 0 9,522,233
oi_call 116,526 256,321 951,197 0 20,100,000
oi_option 116,526 476,902 1,541,719 0 28,200,000
vm_undrl 116,528 17,241 62,681 0 3,772,638
Table 2 reports summary statistics for our dependent variables and the trading volume of the underlying stock. Vm_put is the
trading volume of put options, measured as the daily number of traded put contracts (each contract covers 100 shares); vm_call
is the trading volume of call options, measured as the daily number of traded call contracts; and vm_all is the sum of the two
(i.e. vm_put+vm_call). Vm_put-to-option is a ratio of the daily number of traded put contracts over the daily number of traded
option contracts (i.e. vm_put/vm_all). Oi_put is the open interest of put options, measured as the number of outstanding put
contracts on a given day; oi_call is the open interest of call options, measured as the number of outstanding call contracts on a
given day; and oi_all is the sum of the two (i.e. oi_put+oi_call). Vm_undrl is the trading volume of the underlying stock,
measured in thousands of shares. Each option contract covers 100 shares.

 Table 3. Daily Averages for an Average Option Class for the Ban Periods and Non-Ban Periods

             dummy vm_put vm_call vm_all vm_put-to-all oi_put oi_call oi_all
                0 3,969 4,155 8,125 0.468 211,285 220,584 431,869
Naked ban
                1 4,435 6,324 10,759 0.432 225,029 273,425 498,455
                0 4,297 5,656 9,953 0.444 220,829 254,980 475,810
Covered ban
                1 4,001 4,882 8,883 0.450 215,124 285,703 500,827
                0 3,920 4,064 7,984 0.469 208,481 211,060 419,542
Ban
                1 4,447 6,320 10,767 0.433 225,997 276,583 502,579
Table 3 reports the average daily trading volume, open interest and put-to-option ratio for an average option class separately
for the ban periods and non-ban periods. Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short sales are forbidden and
covered short sales are allowed and zero otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales
are forbidden and zero otherwise. Ban is a dummy variable that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short
sales – both naked and covered) are forbidden. Hence, Ban equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and
Covered ban is equal to one and zero otherwise. Vm_put is the trading volume of put options, measured as the daily number of
traded put contracts (each contract covers 100 shares); vm_call is the trading volume of call options, measured as the daily
number of traded call contracts; and vm_all is the sum of the two (i.e. vm_put+vm_call). Vm_put-to-option is a ratio of the daily
number of traded put contracts over the daily number of traded option contracts (i.e. vm_put/vm_all). Oi_put is the open
interest of put options, measured as the number of outstanding put contracts on a given day; oi_call is the open interest of call
options, measured as the number of outstanding call contracts on a given day; and oi_all is the sum of the two (i.e.
oi_put+oi_call). Each option contract covers 100 shares.

                                          39
 Table 4. Monthly Statistics

ym vm_put vm_call vm_all vm_put-to-option oi_put oi_call oi_all vm_undrl
2008m1 6,097 5,295 11,392 0.527 279,143 222,162 501,305 20,254
2008m2 5,996 5,635 11,631 0.498 313,703 268,440 582,143 17,692
2008m3 6,073 5,240 11,313 0.502 310,172 273,857 584,029 21,169
2008m4 5,205 5,922 11,127 0.463 306,477 263,011 569,488 15,548
2008m5 4,285 7,337 11,622 0.476 223,725 205,670 429,395 15,143
2008m6 4,326 3,226 7,552 0.515 185,223 177,134 362,357 13,291
2008m7 4,431 3,757 8,188 0.485 206,010 199,034 405,044 16,980
2008m8 3,149 2,966 6,115 0.466 225,460 219,635 445,095 11,024
2008m9 5,110 4,868 9,978 0.507 229,593 227,956 457,550 19,993
2008m10 4,483 4,648 9,131 0.484 224,457 236,322 460,778 17,654
2008m11 3,644 4,013 7,658 0.467 216,241 260,081 476,322 15,315
2008m12 2,601 3,052 5,653 0.434 182,252 234,179 416,431 11,456
2009m1 4,084 4,081 8,165 0.446 148,185 174,110 322,294 17,623
2009m2 4,350 4,733 9,083 0.460 170,849 184,871 355,720 21,745
2009m3 5,157 6,208 11,365 0.424 185,976 206,604 392,580 27,547
2009m4 5,000 6,794 11,794 0.408 208,221 232,516 440,737 23,500
2009m5 4,515 6,037 10,552 0.423 236,079 259,326 495,405 21,307
2009m6 3,797 4,331 8,128 0.431 235,245 263,851 499,096 16,293
2009m7 3,567 4,763 8,330 0.425 231,585 259,755 491,340 16,224
2009m8 4,124 6,738 10,861 0.412 242,639 281,779 524,418 23,337
2009m9 3,932 5,399 9,330 0.429 235,830 277,079 512,909 20,030
2009m10 3,726 5,193 8,919 0.440 232,087 276,892 508,979 16,914
2009m11 3,197 3,634 6,831 0.443 245,988 291,834 537,823 13,614
2009m12 2,692 3,579 6,271 0.434 219,621 266,454 486,075 15,585
2010m1 3,473 4,511 7,984 0.427 173,363 218,318 391,680 16,634
2010m2 3,142 3,603 6,745 0.447 184,459 220,088 404,548 16,224
2010m3 2,937 4,027 6,964 0.412 186,849 225,621 412,469 15,917
2010m4 3,447 5,597 9,044 0.417 197,988 249,859 447,847 20,469
2010m5 4,776 5,148 9,925 0.474 248,747 308,936 557,683 27,168
2010m6 2,660 2,998 5,658 0.441 240,537 303,914 544,452 18,607
2010m7 3,297 4,851 8,147 0.412 214,962 268,829 483,791 15,563
2010m8 4,503 5,796 10,299 0.442 231,318 300,850 532,168 12,481
2010m9 4,537 7,992 12,529 0.427 231,422 299,682 531,104 12,727
2010m10 6,415 8,630 15,045 0.435 238,874 307,064 545,938 14,492
2010m11 5,914 9,091 15,005 0.454 260,939 333,532 594,471 14,648
2010m12 4,889 10,658 15,548 0.414 239,428 324,576 564,004 13,776
2011m1 7,090 13,286 20,377 0.419 213,849 287,885 501,734 17,087
2011m2 5,892 9,183 15,075 0.414 208,313 268,675 476,988 14,856
 Table 4 reports the average daily trading volume, open interest and put-to-option ratio for an average option class (stock)
 for each month throughout the sample period. Vm_put is the trading volume of put options, measured as the daily number
 of traded put contracts (each contract covers 100 shares); vm_call is the trading volume of call options, measured as the
 daily number of traded call contracts; and vm_all is the sum of the two (i.e. vm_put+vm_call). Vm_put-to-option is a ratio of
 the daily number of traded put contracts over the daily number of traded option contracts (i.e. vm_put/vm_all). Oi_put is
 the open interest of put options, measured as the number of outstanding put contracts on a given day; oi_call is the open
 interest of call options, measured as the number of outstanding call contracts on a given day; and oi_all is the sum of the
 two (i.e. oi_put+oi_call). Vm_undrl is the trading volume of the underlying stock, measured in thousands of shares. Each
 option contract covers 100 shares.

                                          40
            Table 5. The Effect of Short Sale Bans on Option Trading Volume

 Regressions of option trading volume on different types of ban dummies and a number of control variables, using an
 international panel of daily option and stock data from 10 countries that adopted bans on short sales of stocks at some point
 in time between January 1, 2008 and February 28, 2011. All regressions include stock-level fixed effects and time fixed effects
 (weekly). In Panel A the dependent variable is the daily number of traded put option contracts; in panel B it is the daily
 number of traded call option contracts; and in panel C it is the total daily number of traded option contracts (puts+calls).
 Each option contract covers 100 shares. Daily number of traded put (call) contracts is measured as the sum of all put (call)
 contracts of all American put (call) options on the underlying stock listed on the domestic derivatives marketplace that are
 traded during the day, irrespective of the expiry dates and strike prices of the individual options. Hence, we only have one
 observation per underlying stock (firm) per day. The regressions are run with two different functional forms: level-level and
 log-level. Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are
 allowed and zero otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales are forbidden and
 zero otherwise. Ban is a dummy variable that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked
 and covered) are forbidden. Hence, Ban equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban is equal
 to one and zero otherwise. Return is the daily return of the underlying stock, expressed in decimals. Bid-ask spread is the
 percentage bid-ask spread of the underlying stock at closing, expressed in decimals. SD is a moving standard deviation of the
 return of the underlying stock based on the previous 10 observations, expressed in decimals. The standard errors are robust
 for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the stock level. The numbers in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates are t-
 statistics.

                               Panel A. Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Put Contracts

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable vm_put vm_put vm_put vm_put log(vm_put) log(vm_put) log(vm_put) log(vm_put)
Naked ban 1579.827** 1552.421** 0.002 -0.005
                           (2.42) (2.32) (0.02) (-0.05)
Covered ban 18.191 43.413 -0.188 -0.165
                           (0.04) (0.09) (-1.60) (-1.39)
Ban 1117.187** 1093.729** -0.054 -0.054
                                       (2.08) (2.00) (-0.59) (-0.58)
Bid-ask spread -3287.178*** -3461.145*** -3.306*** -3.324***
                                                  (-3.29) (-3.70) (-16.40) (-16.32)
Return -1717.854** -1704.784** -0.327* -0.326*
                                                  (-2.24) (-2.24) (-1.86) (-1.86)
SD 1721.654*** 1727.334*** 0.594*** 0.594***
                                                  (2.69) (2.65) (3.03) (3.02)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 116,528 116,528 114,733 114,733 116,528 116,528 114,733 114,733
Included option classes All All All All All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171 171 171 171 171
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          41
                               Panel B. Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Call Contracts

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable vm_call vm_call vm_call vm_call log(vm_call) log(vm_call) log(vm_call) log(vm_call)
Naked ban 1819.904*** 1513.072*** 0.231** 0.220**
                           (2.63) (2.74) (2.28) (2.17)
Covered ban 1712.656* 1716.739* 0.120 0.155
                           (1.90) (1.91) (1.05) (1.34)
Ban 1788.131*** 1574.980*** 0.198** 0.200**
                                       (2.69) (2.74) (2.13) (2.15)
Bid-ask spread -7630.605*** -7607.125*** -4.345*** -4.352***
                                                  (-2.93) (-2.99) (-22.33) (-22.43)
Return 2956.836 2955.072 0.650* 0.651*
                                                  (1.64) (1.64) (1.85) (1.85)
SD -435.793 -436.559 0.274* 0.275*
                                                  (-0.31) (-0.31) (1.66) (1.67)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 116,528 116,528 114,733 114,733 116,528 116,528 114,733 114,733
Included option classes All All All All All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171 171 171 171 171
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                           Panel C. Dependent Variable: Total Number of Traded Option Contracts

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable vm_all vm_all vm_all vm_all log(vm_all) log(vm_all) log(vm_all) log(vm_all)
Naked ban 3399.730*** 3065.492*** 0.096 0.089
                           (2.82) (2.79) (1.00) (0.93)
Covered ban 1730.846 1760.152 -0.046 -0.016
                           (1.40) (1.42) (-0.43) (-0.15)
Ban 2905.319*** 2668.709*** 0.054 0.057
                                      (2.75) (2.76) (0.61) (0.64)
Bid-ask spread -10917.783***-11068.270*** -3.986*** -3.998***
                                                  (-3.16) (-3.28) (-20.53) (-20.50)
Return 1238.981 1250.287 0.239* 0.240*
                                                  (1.03) (1.03) (1.96) (1.97)
SD 1285.861 1290.774 0.393*** 0.394***
                                                  (0.82) (0.82) (2.63) (2.63)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 116,528 116,528 114,733 114,733 116,528 116,528 114,733 114,733
Included option classes All All All All All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171 171 171 171 171
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          42
            Table 6. The Effect of Short Sale Bans on Open Interest of Options

 Regressions of open interest on different types of ban dummies and a number of control variables, using an international
 panel of daily option and stock data from 10 countries that adopted bans on short sales of stocks at some point in time
 between January 1, 2008 and February 28, 2011. All regressions include stock-level fixed effects and time fixed effects
 (weekly). In Panel A the dependent variable is the daily open interest of put option contracts; in panel B it is the daily open
 interest of call option contracts; and in panel C it is the total daily open interest of all option contracts (puts+calls). Each
 option contract covers 100 shares. Open interest of put (call) contracts is measured as the sum of all outstanding put (call)
 contracts of all American put (call) options on the underlying stock listed on the domestic derivatives marketplace on a
 specific day, irrespective of the expiry dates and strike prices of the individual options. Hence, we only have one observation
 per underlying stock (firm) per day. The regressions are run with two different functional forms: level-level and log-level.
 Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero
 otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales are forbidden and zero otherwise. Ban is
 a dummy variable that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked and covered) are
 forbidden. Hence, Ban equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban is equal to one and zero
 otherwise. Return is the daily return of the underlying stock, expressed in decimals. Bid-ask spread is the percentage bid-ask
 spread of the underlying stock at closing, expressed in decimals. SD is a moving standard deviation of the return of the
 underlying stock based on the previous 10 observations, expressed in decimals. The standard errors are robust for
 heteroskedasticity and clustered at the stock level. The numbers in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates are t-statistics.

                                  Panel A. Dependent Variable: Open Interest of Put Options

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable oi_put oi_put oi_put oi_put log(oi_put) log(oi_put) log(oi_put) log(oi_put)
Naked ban 48901.067** 47003.977** 0.136 0.134
                           (2.22) (2.17) (1.35) (1.33)
Covered ban 18273.366 18762.162 0.025 0.021
                           (0.81) (0.84) (0.21) (0.18)
Ban 39826.982** 38419.109** 0.103 0.099
                                       (2.00) (1.98) (1.03) (0.99)
Bid-ask spread -134334.51***-137590.37*** -0.127 -0.140
                                                  (-4.89) (-5.34) (-0.92) (-0.96)
Return 1732.980 1977.607 -0.076*** -0.075***
                                                  (0.16) (0.19) (-2.75) (-2.76)
SD -20377.313 -20271.248 0.253** 0.253**
                                                  (-0.51) (-0.51) (2.13) (2.13)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 116,526 116,526 114,732 114,732 116,526 116,526 114,732 114,732
Included option classes All All All All All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171 171 171 171 171
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          43
                                  Panel B. Dependent Variable: Open Interest of Call Options

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable oi_call oi_call oi_call oi_call log(oi_call) log(oi_call) log(oi_call) log(oi_call)
Naked ban 55488.718** 52177.780** 0.149 0.147
                           (2.13) (2.19) (1.41) (1.36)
Covered ban 84725.804* 85848.307* 0.113 0.112
                           (1.69) (1.73) (1.10) (1.09)
Ban 64150.805** 62412.852** 0.139 0.137
                                       (2.00) (2.04) (1.39) (1.35)
Bid-ask spread -174859.43** -170977.73** -0.297 -0.301
                                                  (-2.02) (-2.07) (-1.55) (-1.54)
Return 19510.892 19219.242 -0.024 -0.024
                                                  (0.71) (0.70) (-1.27) (-1.26)
SD -42340.788 -42467.241 0.175*** 0.175***
                                                  (-0.43) (-0.43) (2.70) (2.70)

Option-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 116,526 116,526 114,732 114,732 116,526 116,526 114,732 114,732
Included option classes All All All All All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171 171 171 171 171
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                  Panel C. Dependent Variable: Open Interest of All Options

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable oi_all oi_all oi_all oi_all log(oi_all) log(oi_all) log(oi_all) log(oi_all)
Naked ban 104389.786** 99181.757** 0.120 0.115
                           (2.36) (2.38) (1.28) (1.23)
Covered ban 102999.170 104610.468 0.067 0.065
                           (1.47) (1.50) (0.68) (0.65)
Ban 103977.787** 100831.961** 0.104 0.100
                                       (2.08) (2.11) (1.16) (1.10)
Bid-ask spread -309193.94***-308568.09*** -0.277** -0.283**
                                                  (-2.84) (-2.94) (-2.04) (-2.03)
Return 21243.872 21196.849 -0.046** -0.045**
                                                  (0.56) (0.56) (-2.24) (-2.24)
SD -62718.100 -62738.488 0.190** 0.190**
                                                  (-0.46) (-0.46) (2.48) (2.48)

Option-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 116,526 116,526 114,732 114,732 116,526 116,526 114,732 114,732
Included option classes All All All All All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171 171 171 171 171
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          44
   Table 7. The Effect of Short Sale Bans on the Composition of Option Trading Volume

 Regressions of the proportion of put contracts of overall option trading volume on different types of ban dummies and a
 number of control variables, using an international panel of daily option and stock data from 10 countries that adopted bans
 on short sales of stocks at some point in time between January 1, 2008 and February 28, 2011. All regressions include stock-
 level fixed effects and time fixed effects (weekly). The dependent variable is a ratio of the daily number of traded put option
 contracts over the total daily number of traded option contracts (puts+calls). Each option contract covers 100 shares. Daily
 number of traded put (call) contracts is measured as the sum of all put (call) contracts of all American put (call) options on
 the underlying stock listed on the domestic derivatives marketplace that are traded during the day, irrespective of the expiry
 dates and strike prices of the individual options. Hence, we only have one observation per underlying stock (firm) per day.
 Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero
 otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales are forbidden and zero otherwise. Ban is
 a dummy variable that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked and covered) are
 forbidden. Hence, Ban equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban is equal to one and zero
 otherwise. Return is the daily return of the underlying stock, expressed in decimals. Bid-ask spread is the percentage bid-ask
 spread of the underlying stock at closing, expressed in decimals. SD is a moving standard deviation of the return of the
 underlying stock based on the previous 10 observations, expressed in decimals. The standard errors are robust for
 heteroskedasticity and clustered at the stock level. The numbers in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates are t-statistics.
 The reason that the number of observations in these regressions is lower than in table 5 and 6 is that for some option classes,
 the number of traded contracts equals zero in some days, resulting in the denominator being zero for those days.

            Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Put Contracts over Total Number of Traded Option Contracts

                                       (1) (2) (3) (4)
Dependent variable vm_put-to-option vm_put-to-option vm_put-to-option vm_put-to-option
Naked ban -0.039*** -0.038***
                                       (-4.16) (-4.03)
Covered ban -0.058*** -0.059***
                                       (-4.93) (-5.09)
Ban -0.045*** -0.045***
                                                              (-5.08) (-5.05)
Bid-ask spread 0.163*** 0.159***
                                                                                      (9.38) (8.84)
Return -0.173* -0.173*
                                                                                      (-1.92) (-1.92)
SD 0.053** 0.053**
                                                                                      (2.17) (2.16)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 106,075 106,075 104,568 104,568
Included option classes All All All All
Number of option classes 171 171 171 171
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          45
             Table 8. Subsample Analysis 1: Non-U.S. and Ten Largest Excluded

 Regressions of various measures of option trading activity on different types of ban dummies for two subsamples of
 countries and option classes, using an international panel of daily option and stock data from countries that adopted bans on
 short sales of stocks at some point in time between January 1, 2008 and February 28, 2011. The first subsample, denoted
 “non-U ”, excludes all option classes of U.S. stocks The second subs mple, denoted “ten l rgest excluded”, excludes the ten
 largest option classes in terms of average daily number of traded contracts. All regressions include stock-level fixed effects
 and time fixed effects (weekly). In panel A the dependent variable is the daily number of traded put (call) option contracts; in
 panel B it is the daily open interest of put (call) option contracts; and in panel C it is a ratio of the daily number of traded put
 option contracts over the total daily number of traded option contracts (puts+calls). Each option contract covers 100 shares.
 Daily number of traded put (call) contracts is measured as the sum of all put (call) contracts of all American put (call) options
 on the underlying stock listed on the domestic derivatives marketplace that are traded during the day, irrespective of the
 expiry dates and strike prices of the individual options. Hence, we only have one observation per underlying stock (firm) per
 day. Open interest is measured as the sum of all of put (call) contracts outstanding on a specific day. Naked ban is a dummy
 variable that equals one if naked short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero otherwise. Covered ban
 is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales are forbidden and zero otherwise. Ban is a dummy variable
 that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked and covered) are forbidden. Hence, Ban
 equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban are equal to one and zero otherwise. The
 standard errors are robust for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the stock level. The numbers in parenthesis below the
 coefficient estimates are t-statistics.

                           Panel A. Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Put and Call Contracts

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable vm_put vm_put vm_call vm_call vm_put vm_put vm_call vm_call
Naked ban 1529.741** 1114.464** 153.461 277.509
                           (2.48) (2.27) (0.97) (1.22)
Covered ban -170.841 115.146 -182.291 786.157***
                           (-0.36) (0.26) (-0.86) (2.66)
Ban 1030.593** 821.148** 48.433 436.900**
                                       (2.14) (2.41) (0.37) (2.43)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 56,102 56,102 56,102 56,102 109,015 109,015 109,015 109,015
                                                                                                  ten largest     ten largest     ten largest     ten largest
Included option classes non-US non-US non-US non-US
                                                                                 excluded     excluded     excluded     excluded
Number of option classes 80 80 80 80 161 161 161 161
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          46
                              Panel B. Dependent Variable: Open Interest of Put and Call Options

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Dependent variable oi_put oi_put oi_call oi_call oi_put oi_put oi_call oi_call
Naked ban 55420.734** 34145.397 5814.198 9806.787
                           (2.39) (1.66) (0.54) (0.83)
Covered ban 1263.448 22453.711 -175.468 28779.742**
                           (0.08) (0.49) (-0.02) (1.98)
Ban 39523.383** 30713.415 3940.419 15752.565
                                       (2.11) (1.20) (0.39) (1.37)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 56,100 56,100 56,100 56,100 109,013 109,013 109,013 109,013
                                                                                                  ten largest     ten largest     ten largest     ten largest
Included option classes non-US non-US non-US non-US
                                                                                 excluded     excluded     excluded     excluded
Number of option classes 80 80 80 80 161 161 161 161
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                  Panel C. Number of Traded Put Contracts over Total Number of Traded Option Contracts

                                               (1)                             (2)                             (3)                             (4)
Dependent variable              vm_put-to-opt            vm_put-to-opt            vm_put-to-opt            vm_put-to-opt
Naked ban                          -0.005                                             -0.045***
                                           (-0.44)                                                       (-4.39)
Covered ban                        -0.017                                              -0.060***
                                           (-1.23)                                                       (-4.94)
Ban                                                         -0.009                                            -0.050***
                                                                          (-0.82)                                                       (-5.33)

Stock-level fixed effcts                Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
Time-fixed effects                  Weekly                   Weekly                   Weekly                   Weekly
Number of observations            46,886 46,886                   98,562                   98,562
Included option classes             non-US non-US            ten largest excluded ten largest excluded
Number of option classes             80                     80                    161 161
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          47
                    Table 9. Subsample Analysis 2: Shorter Sample Period

 Regressions of various measures of option trading activity on different types of ban dummies, using an international panel of
 daily option and stock data from 10 countries that adopted bans on short sales of stocks at some point in time between
 December, 2008 and February 28, 2011. All regressions include stock-level fixed effects and time fixed effects (weekly). In
 Panel A the dependent variable is the daily number of traded put (call) contracts; in panel B it is the daily open interest of put
 (call) contracts; and in panel C it is a ratio of the daily number of traded put option contracts over the total daily number of
 traded option contracts (puts+calls). Each option contract covers 100 shares. Daily number of traded put (call) contracts is
 measured as the sum of all put (call) contracts of all American put (call) options on the underlying stock listed on the
 domestic derivatives marketplace that are traded during the day, irrespective of the expiry dates and strike prices of the
 individual options. Hence, we only have one observation per underlying stock (firm) per day. Open interest is measured as
 the sum of all of put (call) contracts outstanding on a specific day. Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked
 short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals
 one if even covered short sales are forbidden and zero otherwise. Ban is a dummy variable that equals one if short sales
 (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked and covered) are forbidden. Hence, Ban equals one when one of the
 two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban is equal to one and zero otherwise. The standard errors are robust for
 heteroskedasticity and clustered at the stock level. The numbers in parenthesis below the coefficient estimates are t-statistics.

                             Panel A. Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Option Contracts

                              (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent variable vm_put vm_put vm_call vm_call vm_all vm_all
Naked ban 1556.808* 619.538 2176.346
                             (1.76) (0.86) (1.43)
Covered ban 20.809 2198.986* 2219.795
                             (0.04) (1.70) (1.27)
Ban 816.686* 1380.595* 2197.282**
                                             (1.70) (1.93) (2.19)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 90,125 90,125 90,125 90,125 90,125 90,125
Included option classes All All All All All All
Number of option classes 170 170 170 170 170 170
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                        Panel B. Dependent Variable: Open Interest

                              (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Dependent variable oi_put oi_put oi_call oi_call oi_all oi_all
Naked ban 21276.036 10630.511 31906.547
                             (1.09) (0.40) (0.74)
Covered ban 14694.238 104162.255 118856.493
                             (0.47) (1.46) (1.18)
Ban 18104.345 55702.350 73806.695
                                             (0.98) (1.27) (1.23)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 90,124 90,124 90,124 90,124 90,124 90,124
Included option classes All All All All All All
Number of option classes 170 170 170 170 170 170
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          48
        Panel C. Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Put Contracts over Total Number of Traded Option Contracts

                                                               (1)                                                             (2)
Dependent variable                         vm_put-to-option                                  vm_put-to-option
Naked ban                                     -0.012
                                                          (-1.04)
Covered ban                                   -0.067***
                                                          (-4.68)
Ban                                                                                          -0.039***
                                                                                                                        (-3.51)

Stock-level fixed effcts                             Yes                                               Yes
Time-fixed effects                               Weekly                                            Weekly
Number of observations                          81,764                                              81,764
Included option classes                                  All                                                        All
Number of option classes                         170                                              170
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          49
                  Table 10. Subsample Analysis 3: Naked and Covered Bans

 Regressions of various measures of option trading activity on different types of ban dummies for two subsamples of
 countries and option classes, using an international panel of daily option and stock data from countries that adopted bans on
 short sales of stocks at some point in time between January 1, 2008 and February 28, 2011. The first subsample, denoted
 “n ked regimes”, only includes option cl sses of stocks listed in countries th t only adopted bans prohibiting naked short
 s les The second subs mple, denoted “covered regimes”, only includes option classes of stocks listed in countries that only
 adopted bans prohibiting all short sales (both naked and covered short sales). Option classes of stocks that were subject to
 both types of bans at different point in time are excluded from both subsamples. All regressions include stock-level fixed
 effects and time fixed effects (weekly). In panel A the dependent variable is the daily number of traded put (call) option
 contracts; in panel B it is the daily open interest of put (call) option contracts; and in panel C it is a ratio of the daily number
 of traded put option contracts over the total daily number of traded option contracts (puts+calls). Each option contract
 covers 100 shares. Daily number of traded put (call) contracts is measured as the sum of all put (call) contracts of all
 American put (call) options on the underlying stock listed on the domestic derivatives marketplace that are traded during the
 day, irrespective of the expiry dates and strike prices of the individual options. Hence, we only have one observation per
 underlying stock (firm) per day. Open interest is measured as the sum of all put (call) contracts outstanding on a specific day.
 Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero
 otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if all short sales (both naked and covered short sales) are forbidden
 and zero otherwise. The standard errors are robust for heteroskedasticity and clustered at the stock level. The numbers in
 parenthesis below the coefficient estimates are t-statistics.

                           Panel A. Dependent Variable: Number of Traded Put and Call Contracts

                                   (1) (2) (3) (4)
Dependent variable vm_put vm_call vm_put vm_call
Naked ban 3806.489* 4355.219
                                   (1.81) (1.60)
Covered ban -274.319** -146.023
                                                                                    (-2.27) (-0.67)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 22,535 22,535 13,194 13,194
Included options classes naked regimes naked regimes covered regimes covered regimes
Number of option classes 29 29 19 19
t- statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                             Panel B. Dependent Variable: Open Interest of Put and Call Options

                                   (1) (2) (3) (4)
Dependent variable oi_put oi_call oi_put oi_call
Naked ban 43703.501 75425.198
                                   (1.24) (1.65)
Covered ban -8539.863 1901.545
                                                                                    (-0.88) (0.15)

Stock-level fixed effcts Yes Yes Yes Yes
Time-fixed effects Weekly Weekly Weekly Weekly
Number of observations 22,533 22,533 13,194 13,194
Included options classes naked regimes naked regimes covered regimes covered regimes
Number of option classes 29 29 19 19
t statistics in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                          50
    s
                      Panel C. Number of Traded Put Contracts over Total Number of Traded Option Contracts

                                                      (1) (2)
    Dependent variable                       vm_put-to-option vm_put-to-option
    Naked ban                                     -0.024
                                                               (-1.35)
    Covered ban                                                                                      -0.065***
                                                                                                                            (-2.99)

    Stock-level fixed effcts                          Yes Yes
    Time-fixed effects                            Weekly Weekly
    Number of observations                       16,448 12,438
    Included options classes                      naked regimes covered regimes
    Number of option classes                       29 19
     t statistics in parentheses
    * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

    Figure 1. Expected Effects of Short Sale Bans on Option Trading Activity

                                                                                    Pre ban supply
P2 =                                                                     Pre ban demand
P2*
                                                                                     Ban period supply 1
P1                                                                    Ban period demand 1
                                                                                     Ban period supply 2
                                                                               Ban period demand 2

                 Q2* Q1 Q2
    Figure 5 illustrates the expected effects of a short sale ban on option trading activity in options on stocks that are
    subject to the b n For simplicity, let’s use option tr ding volume s me sure for option tr ding activity. The
     quantity of options is on the x-axis and the price of option liquidity is on the y-axis. If short sale bans induce investors
    to switch to the option markets, we would expect to see an increase in the demand for options (for long put positions
     nd short c ll positions) This incre se in dem nd is illustr ted by shift of the blue solid dem nd curve denoted “Pre
    b n dem nd” to the right The b n is lso likely to incre se the dverse selection costs nd inventory holding costs of
    option market makers, which reduces their willingness to provide liquidity. This is illustrated by a shift of the red solid
    supply curve denoted “Pre b n supply” to the left s we c n see, the net effect of the b n on option tr ding volume
     is ambiguous. If the demand increases more than the corresponding decrease of the supply, we would expect option
     trading volume to increase from Q1 to Q2. On the other hand, if the supply decreases more than the corresponding
     increase in the demand, we would expect option trading volume to decrease from Q1 to Q2*. In both scenarios, the
    equilibrium price paid by the party demanding liquidity to the party supplying liquidity (mainly option market makers)
    increases (shown by the increase of the price from P1 to P2=P2*). On the option markets, this increase would be
    reflected by an increase in the bid-ask spreads of options on banned stocks (increased bid-ask spreads of options on
    banned stocks are documented by Battalio and Schultz (2009) and Grundy et al. (2010)).

                                             51
            Figure 2: Ban Periods around the World, January 2008 – February 2011

Austria

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Netherlands

Spain

Switzerland

UK

United States

                01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-   01-
                01-   02-   03-   04-   05-   06-   07-   08-   09-   10-   11-   12-   01-   02-   03-   04-   05-   06-   07-   08-   09-   10-   11-   12-   01-   02-   03-   04-   05-   06-   07-   08-   09-   10-   11-   12-   01-   02-

              20082008200820082008200820082008200820082008200820092009200920092009200920092009200920092009200920102010201020102010201020102010201020102010201020112011

                                                      Naked ban Covered ban

             Figure 2 illustrates the introduction and removal of short sale bans of varying stringency around the world. Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short
              sales are forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales are forbidden and
             zero otherwise. Ban is a dummy variable that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked and covered) are forbidden. Hence, Ban
             equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban is equal to one and zero otherwise.

                                                                 52
      Figure 3: Fraction of Stocks Subject to a Ban

100%

 90%

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%
                                                                                                                           Ban
                                                                                                                                      Naked ban
 40%
                                                                                                                                            Covered ban

 30%

 20%

 10%

 0%

        2008m12008m22008m32008m42008m52008m62008m72008m82008m9      2009m12009m22009m32009m42009m52009m62009m72009m82009m9      2010m12010m22010m32010m42010m52010m62010m72010m82010m9      2011m12011m2
                                   2008m102008m112008m12                       2009m102009m112009m12                       2010m102010m112010m12
        Figure 3 illustrates the fraction of stocks in the sample that is subject to a ban over time. Naked ban is a dummy variable that equals one if naked short sales are
        forbidden and covered short sales are allowed and zero otherwise. Covered ban is a dummy variable that equals one if even covered short sales are forbidden and
        zero otherwise. Ban is a dummy variable that equals one if short sales (either naked short sales or all short sales – both naked and covered) are forbidden. Hence,
        Ban equals one when one of the two dummy variables Naked ban and Covered ban is equal to one and zero otherwise.

                                                                53
Figure 4. Cumulative Distribution of Average Daily Trading Volume

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
                                                          vm_put
  50%
                                                                     vm_call
  40%
                                                             vm_undrl
  30%
  20%
  10%
  0%
         1
            11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81 91
                                    101111121131141151161171

Figure 4 illustrates the cumulative distribution of average daily trading volume across option
classes/stocks. Each variable is sorted independently from smallest to largest. Vm_put is the
trading volume of put options, measured as the daily number of traded put contracts (each
contract covers 100 shares); vm_call is the trading volume of call options, measured as the
daily number of traded call contracts; and vm_undrl is the trading volume of the underlying
stock, measured in thousands of shares.

                                         54
Figure 5. Distribution of Trading Volume across Countries

                         Put options                                                 Call options

 100%                                                                   100%
  90%                                                                 90%
                                                                                  Austria                                                                                       Austria
  80%                                                                 80%
                                                                    Canada                                                                         Canada
  70%                                                                 70%
                                                                            France                                                                                  France
  60%                                                                 60%
  50%                                                       Germany        50%                                                   Germany
  40%                                                                Italy             40%                                                            Italy
  30%                                                           Netherlands      30%                                                       Netherlands
  20%                                                           Spain           20%                                                        Spain
  10%                                                                 10%
                                                                                Switzerland                                                                                 Switzerland
  0%                                                           0%
                                              UK                                                  UK
                                                                                   United States                                                                                  United States
        2008m12008m32008m52008m72008m92009m12009m32009m52009m72009m92010m12010m32010m52010m72010m92011m1                    2008m12008m32008m52008m72008m92009m12009m32009m52009m72009m92010m12010m32010m52010m72010m92011m1
                      2008m11          2009m11          2010m11                                    2008m11         2009m11         2010m11

     14                                                                                  14
     12                                                                                  12
     10                                                                                  10
      8                                                                                  8
      6                                                                                  6
      4                                                                                  4
      2                                                                                  2
   Thousands of contracts                                                                    Thousands of contracts0
      0

         2008m12008m32008m52008m72008m92009m12009m32009m52009m72009m92010m12010m32010m52010m72010m92011m1                       2008m12008m32008m52008m72008m92009m12009m32009m52009m72009m92010m12010m32010m52010m72010m92011m1
                      2008m11         2009m11         2010m11                                      2008m11        2009m11        2010m11

                                                                 55
                    Underlying

100%
 90%
                                                                       Austria                     Figure 5 illustrates the distribution of the monthly cumulative number of
 80%                                                                                         traded put and call contracts, as well as the monthly cumulative trading
                                                               Canada
 70%                                                                                        volume in the underlying stock across countries over time. In addition,
                                                                        France                      average daily trading volume for an average option class (stock) is illustrated
 60%
                                                                      Germany                   below. Note that each option contract covers 100 shares.
 50%
 40%                                                             Italy                      NB: Stocks and pairs of option classes of some countries lack observations
 30%                                                                                 for some time periods, the most obvious example being that we have no
                                                                      Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                     data for U.S. options and U.S. stocks until May 2008.
 20%                                                       Spain
 10%
                                                                          Switzerland
 0%
                                          UK
                                                                            United States
       2008m12008m32008m52008m72008m92009m12009m32009m52009m72009m92010m12010m32010m52010m72010m92011m1
                    2008m11         2009m11         2010m11

   30
   25
   20
   15
 Millions of shares10

    5
    0

       2008m12008m32008m52008m72008m92009m12009m32009m52009m72009m92010m12010m32010m52010m72010m92011m1
                    2008m11        2009m11        2010m11

                                                                56
    Figure 6. Trading Volume of Put Options around the Introduction of the Bans

10000



  5000

      0

-5000
        -20 -10 0 10 20
                                         Introduction of ban

                                vm_put 5-day average
                                 lb ub

    Figure 6 compare the average level of trading volume of puts for each day during a 41 day window ranging from 20 days
    before the introduction date up to 20 days after the introduction date with the average level of the measure for all non-
    ban observations except those belonging to the 20 days preceding the introduction of the bans. See the methodology
     section for the specification used. We make no difference between naked bans (bans on naked short sales) and covered
    bans (bans on all short sales – both naked and covered), and thus we use the Ban dummy in order to decide on the
     introduction date. The second ban period is used for the U.S. (the ban period starting on September 18, 2008) and the
    first ban period is used for Germany (the ban period starting on September 20, 2008). Observations belonging to the first
     ban period in the U.S. and the second ban period in Germany are dropped as they shall not be part of the control group.
    “lb” nd “ub” re the lower nd upper bound of 90 % confidence interval for the estimated coefficients. The green
     horizontal line is the average of the coefficients for the 20 days preceding the introduction of the bans, and the red
    horizontal line is the average of the coefficients for the 20 days following the introduction date.

                                             57
      Figure 7. Open Interest of Put Options around the Introduction of the Bans

150000



100000



 50000

        0

          -20 -10 0 10 20
                                           Introduction of ban

                                    oi_put 5-day average
                                    lb ub

      Figure 7 compare the average level of open interest of puts for each day during a 41 day window ranging from 20 days
      before the introduction date up to 20 days after the introduction date with the average level of the measure for all non-
      ban observations except those belonging to the 20 days preceding the introduction of the bans. See the methodology
       section for the specification used. We make no difference between naked bans (bans on naked short sales) and covered
      bans (bans on all short sales – both naked and covered), and thus we use the Ban dummy in order to decide on the
       introduction date. The second ban period is used for the U.S. (the ban period starting on September 18, 2008) and the
      first ban period is used for Germany (the ban period starting on September 20, 2008). Observations belonging to the first
       ban period in the U.S. and the second ban period in Germany are dropped as they shall not be part of the control group.
      “lb” nd “ub” re the lower nd upper bound of a 90 % confidence interval for the estimated coefficients. The green
       horizontal line is the average of the coefficients for the 20 days preceding the introduction of the bans, and the red
        horizontal line is the average of the coefficients for the 20 days following the introduction date.

                                              58
    Figure 8. Trading Volume of Put Options around the Removal of the Bans

 5000

      0

-5000
        -20 -10 0 10 20
                                    Removal of ban

                               vm_put 5-day average
                                 lb ub

    Figure 8 compare the average level of trading volume of puts for each day during a 41 day window ranging from 20 days
    before the removal date up to 20 days after the removal date with the average level of the measure for all non-ban
    observations except those belonging to the 20 days following the removal of the bans. See the methodology section for
     the specification used. We make no difference between naked bans (bans on naked short sales) and covered bans (bans
    on all short sales – both naked and covered), and thus we use the Ban dummy in order to decide on the removal date. In
     some countries (e.g. Austria, Spain, Switzerland and the U.S), the bans are still in effect, and observations belonging to
    option classes of stocks listed in these countries are thus dropped for this graphical analysis. The first ban period is used
    for Germany (the ban period starting on September 20, 2008 and ending on May 31, 2009). Observations belonging to
    the second b n period in Germ ny re dropped s they sh ll not be p rt of the control group “lb” nd “ub” re the
    lower and upper bound of a 90 % confidence interval for the estimated coefficients. The green horizontal line is the
     average of the coefficients for the 20 days preceding the removal of the bans, and the red horizontal line is the average of
    the coefficients for the 20 days following the removal date.

                                             59
      Figure 9. Open Interest of Put Options around the Removal of the Bans

150000


100000


 50000

        0

-50000
          -20 -10 0 10 20
                                      Removal of ban

                                    oi_put 5-day average
                                    lb ub

      Figure 9 compare the average level of open interest of puts for each day during a 41 day window ranging from 20 days
      before the removal date up to 20 days after the removal date with the average level of the measure for all non-ban
      observations except those belonging to the 20 days following the removal of the bans. See the methodology section for
      the specification used. We make no difference between naked bans (bans on naked short sales) and covered bans (bans
      on all short sales – both naked and covered), and thus we use the Ban dummy in order to decide on the removal date. In
      some countries (e.g. Austria, Spain, Switzerland and the U.S), the bans are still in effect, and observations belonging to
        option classes of stocks listed in these countries are thus dropped for this graphical analysis. The first ban period is used
       for Germany (the ban period starting on September 20, 2008 and ending on May 31, 2009). Observations belonging to
      the second b n period in Germ ny re dropped s they sh ll not be p rt of the control group “lb” nd “ub” re the
       lower and upper bound of a 90 % confidence interval for the estimated coefficients. The green horizontal line is the
       average of the coefficients for the 20 days preceding the removal of the bans, and the red horizontal line is the average of
       the coefficients for the 20 days following the removal date.

                                              60