 Tick sizes and stock market volatility: A regression
              discontinuity approach

                Emelie Jonsson & Jesper Welander

                            Bachelor thesis
                  Stockholm School of Economics

                          May 30, 2012

                             Abstract
   Increasing the tick size has been suggested as a countermeasure to high volatil-
ity on stock markets caused by growing high-frequency trading. To identify the
potential effects of such an increase, we isolate the effect of the tick size change
on volatility through a regression discontinuity design (RDD), utilizing the sharp
increase in the tick size at 100 SEK where the tick size changes from 0.05 SEK to
0.10 SEK. The study is restricted to the Stockholm Stock Exchange, the 30 largest
stocks on the market, OMXS30, and a range of share prices between 90 and 110
SEK. Volatility is measured in two ways: the level relative high-low range and the
logarithm of the range, both as daily measures. While no direct causality between
the tick size change and the level daily range could be isolated, the results for the
log range indicate an average increase of about 10% following an increased tick size.
This effect is corroborated by earlier panel studies isolating this effect. With the
exception of types of volatility not controlled for in the daily range measure, such
as clustered volatility, the results indicate that stock markets would not benefit, as
hypothesized, from a marketwide increase in tick sizes.

Keywords: Tick size, volatility, high-frequency trading, the Stockholm Stock Ex-
change

We would like to thank Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal for knowledgeable assistance, Patrik
Br˚akenhielm, Johan Erikson for valuable input and Erik Eklund for providing data
for this study. All errors are our own.

                                 1
Contents

1 Introduction 3

2 Background 5
   2.1 The Stockholm Stock Exchange and market trends . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   2.2 Tick Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

3 Empirical research 6
   3.1 Effects of marketwide tick size changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.2 Panel studies on tick size changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

4 Data 8

5 Methodology 9
   5.1 Volatility estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   5.2 The Regression Discontinuity Design model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.3 RDD specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.4 RDD specification tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
        5.4.1 Discontinuity in treatment variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         5.4.2 Discontinuities away from the cutoff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         5.4.3 Discontinuities in covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
        5.4.4 Assignment variable manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

6 Results 14
   6.1 Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.2 Regression results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

7 Specification testing 18
   7.1 Discontinuity in treatment variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.2 Discontinuities away from the cutoff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.3 Discontinuities in covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.4 Assignment variable manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   7.5 Discussion of other potential issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

8 Conclusion 20

9 References 22

A Appendix 26

                                      2
1 Introduction

           th
On the 28   of October 2011, Peter Norman, Minister for Financial Markets for the
Swedish Ministry of Finance, hosted a conference on high-frequency trading (HFT). One
of the topics discussed was the impact of HFT on the stock market, where an increase in
volatility was mentioned as one of the drawbacks. While current research is divided on
whether or not HFT have increased volatility, it was made clear during the conference
that smaller investors as well as institutional investors have lost their confidence in
the market, mainly due to a perceived increase in the market volatility. Concerned
about their investors, marketplaces want to counter this notion. A suggested method
for decreasing volatility was an increase in tick size, that is the smallest possible increase
for a price of a traded equity [1]. Not limited to this conference, this countermeasure
has been suggested by numerous parties earlier [2, 3]. This thesis aims to investigate
what effect such an increase could have on the market volatility.
    Since the late 1990s the tick sizes have gradually decreased for stock markets globally
[4, 5, 6, 7]. On the Stockholm Stock Exchange, for example, the tick size has decreased
with 80 to 90% between 2004 and 2011 for stocks within the 50 to 150 SEK range [8, 9].
Seeing as tick size decreases are not a new occurrence there exist several studies inves-
tigating the effect of such changes. These studies are largely parts of one of two groups:
studies examining the effect of a marketwide change in the tick size at a predetermined
point in time, and panel studies aiming to isolate the effect, often through a stepwise
increase in tick size as the stock price increases over a certain value. Results from both
types of studies are rather unequivocal concerning the sign effect on volatility. Bessem-
binder [10, 4] and Ronen et al. [5], among others, find that the market volatility is lower
following a tick size decrease.
    This study mainly differs in two ways compared to previous research. Firstly, the
effect of the tick size change is analysed using data where HFT is prevalent to a large
degree, conversely to earlier studies that are focused on tick size changes in the late 1990s.
Seeing as an increase in the tick sizes is proposed as a countermeasure to HFT induced
volatility, the prevalence of HFT should affect the impact of a tick size change. The main
reason being an increased incentive of high-frequency traders to place passive orders with
a higher tick size, although it is also possible that a larger tick size obfuscates stock price
movements more than a smaller tick size, potentially leading to less speculation. In turn,
this would lower any market volatility caused by high-frequency algorithms. Secondly,
using a nonparametric approach such as regression discontinuity design (RDD) allows
investigation of non-linear behaviour and isolation of any tick size effect on volatility, in
the direct vicinity of the threshold.
   Since previous research has indicated that effects of tick size changes are larger
for stocks with more frequent trading [11] this study focus on the 30 largest stocks
(OMXS30) on the Stockholm Stock Exchange. For this subset of stocks there is a dis-
continuity in the tick size at 100 SEK, where the tick size changes from 0.05 SEK to
0.10 SEK. These tick sizes are unchanged during the examined time period. Hence,
the RDD is estimated using daily data on the Stockholm Stock Exchange (SSE) close

                                      3
to the 100 SEK threshold. The price range used is 90-110 SEK and observations date
between January 2010 and December 2011. To control for any estimation bias caused
by 15% of the observations crossing over the tick size discontinuity during a day, that is
being exposed to both tick sizes, two specifications for the price are used. These are the
volume weighed average price (VWAP) and the closing price, the former slightly better
at estimating on which side of the discontinuity most trades were made than the lat-
ter. The dual specification allows an approximation of the bias caused by the crossover
observations.
    With one-period data, volatility is estimated as the difference of the highest and the
lowest prices of the day relative to the volume weighted average price (VWAP), from
now on denoted as range. As concluded by Garman and Klass [12], Alizadeh et al. [13]
as well as Hau [14], among others, this measure is a good estimator of volatility, robust
to microstructure noise and more importantly, efficient and robust to tick size changes.
Furthermore, the logarithm of the range is close to Gaussian in its distribution [13]. The
RDD is run with both the level and the log range, where the level range is included as
a misspecification test.
    Using log range as a measure for volatility, an increase in the tick size increases the
range with about 10% for both price specifications. These results are robust to increases
in bandwidth. Introducing the level range estimate, the results are more ambiguous.
Despite the size of the treatment effect being roughly equal to that in the log range,
few of these results are significant using different bandwidths with most p-values above
0.2. Hence, the null hypothesis of no change cannot be rejected for the level range. The
lower significance is however expected. As the distribution of the daily range is skewed,
with high variance and many outliers, the log range mitigates some of these problems
and should be more indicative of the real tick size change effect.
   Comparing the two price specifications, the results for the average price are more
significant and show a larger effect. The difference in significance is anticipated, seeing
as the VWAP is better than the closing price as a proxy for the real price during a day.
This could indicate that the significance of the VWAP specification could have been
better using more frequent data, lowering the number of crossover observations.
   While results are weak, likely explained by the issue with crossovers, regressions
indicate that an increase in tick size leads to a higher daily range. In turn this implies
that market volatility would increase as a result of increasing tick sizes, conversely to
the hypothesized relation. The sign effect of the tick size change is equal to that of most
previous literature. However, not all effects are accounted for in this paper. For example,
the daily range does not control for types of volatility such as clustered volatility and
mini flash equity failures. If these are affected by a tick size change, the results of this
study could be misleading. On the other hand, the daily range as a measure should
capture many of the effects of volatility that a smaller investor would be subjected to, so
the conclusions are still highly relevant. Furthermore, volatility effects of a marketwide
tick size increase would be subject to changes in exogenous factors. Nonetheless, earlier
research indicate that the effect of an event tick size decrease, and an isolated decrease
is of the same sign. Hence, our results should be applicable. In conclusion, our study

                                      4
indicates that an increased tick size would either increase the market volatility or leave
it unchanged.
   The paper will be structured as follows. We will begin by giving a background to
the issue, and then discuss current research on this topic. In section four an overview
of the data is given, followed by section five, where a description of our methodology is
outlined. This section includes how volatility is measured, background and specification
of our model as well as how we test the assumptions necessary for performing a RDD. In
section six descriptive statistics as well as the results are presented. We conclude with
robustness checks of our findings and a conclusion where our results are put into a larger
perspective and in relation to our initial question.

2 Background

To put our research into perspective, the following section presents a short description of
the Stockholm Stock Exchange, its characteristics and trends, followed by an overview
of tick sizes.

2.1 The Stockholm Stock Exchange and market trends
The NASDAQ OMX Stockholm Stock Exchange (SSE) is part of NASDAQ OMX Group
Inc., the worlds largest exchange company. The bourse is open between 9.00 and 17.30.
OMX Nordic, which the SSE is part of, lists 790 companies and on a daily basis over 287
thousand trades are executed amounting to a total value of 2.7 billion Euros [15]. Stocks
on the SSE are part of one of three segments: Large Cap, Mid Cap and Small Cap.
Within the Large Cap segment the OMXS30 group consist of the 30 most traded stocks,
based on a market value weighted index. The index is reweighed on a semi-annual basis,
                                              st
every July and December. From July 1  2009 until the end of 2011 the list has been
unchanged [16].
                      st
   On November 1  2007, a new law was issued on the Swedish market. Before this all
equities had to be traded on a regulated market and the SSE acted as monopoly. The
introduction of the Markets of Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID) fragmented the
market as it was opened up for competition [17]. In 2011 the four largest market places
for Swedish equities, based on turnover, are the SSE (70%), Chi-X (15%), BATS Europe
(6%) and Burgundy (6%) [18]. Trades on regulated markets represent about 84% of
traded volume in Swedish equities, as an average between 2008 and 2012 [18].
    One large trend, globally as well as on the SSE, is the increased algorithmic and high-
frequency trading. Algorithmic trading refer to computerized trading by predetermined
instructions, while high-frequency traders either take advantage of market inefficiencies
by fast order execution or conduct market making. Orders are often high in number
and positions are held for a short period [2]. In a survey conducted by The Ministry of
Finance (FI) 80% of banks and institutions active on the Swedish equity market 2012
disclose using algorithmic trading while 14% use high-frequency trading strategies [2].
In 2011, HFT contributed to about 35% of trading for the European equity market,

                                      5
compared to below 15% in 2005 [19]. As for the market perception of these changes,
the FI survey reports that about 50% of the Swedish banks and institutions believe that
volatility has increased, out of which 42% attribute these changes to increases in HFT
[2].

2.2 Tick Size
A tick size is the smallest possible increment of a stock price [10]. As such, if the tick
size is 0.1, the price of a stock at 100.00 SEK may only increase to 100.01 SEK or above
in similar increments, with no intermediate values. Since the late 1990s, tick sizes have
gradually been lowered for many stock markets globally [4, 5, 6, 7]. On the SSE, for
example, between 2004 and 2011 the tick size for the OMXS30 stocks within the 50-150
SEK price range was reduced to between one fifth and one tenth of the 2004 levels [8, 9].
    In the end of October 2009, following an effort by the Federation of European Secu-
rities Exchanges (FESE) to harmonize the European stock market, the SSE adopted the
FESE tick size table 2 (FESE 2) for the OMXS30 stocks. In June 2010 it was extended
to the whole Large Cap segment [20]. FESE 2 employs a tiered tick size structure where
the tick size changes incrementally as a function of price at certain cutoff values. For
example, the tick size for equities with prices between 50.00 and 99.95 SEK is 0.05 SEK,
and the tick size for stocks between 100.00 and 499.9 SEK is 0.10 SEK. Relative to the
stock price, the largest tick size of this table is 0.1%, for stocks priced higher than 0.50
SEK.
   Since FESE 2 was introduced there has only been smaller changes to the tick size
structure. A new cutoff point was introduced at 2 SEK where the span before ranged
from 1 SEK to 5 SEK and cutoff points were introduced for prices above 10 000 SEK
per share. The tick size table used in the end of 2011 for all Large Cap and OMXS30
stocks is reported in Table 1.

3 Empirical research

The research on tick size is divided into two groups - studies examining the effect of a
marketwide change in the tick size, and panel studies isolating the effect.

3.1 Effects of marketwide tick size changes
Several studies have analysed effects of tick size changes on transaction costs and market
characteristics as a result of a stock market unilaterally decreasing tick sizes for all stocks
at one point in time. Examining impacts on volatility, Ronen and Weaver find that
a marketwide reduction of $1/8 ticks to $1/16 ticks on the American Stock Exchange
(AMEX) in 1997 significantly decreases both daily and transitory volatility [5]. Similarly,
Bessembinder studies the change of fractional pricing into decimal pricing on the New
York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ Stock Market in 2001, concluding that the
intraday return volatility decreased as a result of the decreased tick size [4]. In both
studies volatility is measured as the standard deviation of average returns.

                                      6
    In contrast, La Spada et al. observe that there is an increase in clustered volatility
with a decrease in tick size [21]. Clustered volatility refers to the observation that large
price changes of a stock tend to be followed by similar large price changes and vice
versa for small changes [22]. The clustered volatility is measured as the autocorrelation
function of 15 minute absolute returns [21]. Related, Gillemot, Farmer, and Lillo find
that changes in tick size can be important in determining the persistence of volatility [23],
that is the tendency that volatility sticks at a value despite external changes. Similarly,
Onnela et al. observe that the tick size determines price stickiness as the proportion of
zero returns increase with an increasing tick size [24].
   As for other effects of a change in tick size, Ronen and Weaver [5] and Goldstein
and Kavajecz [6], among others, show that the absolute bid-ask spread decreases for a
marketwide tick-size reduction on AMEX and NYSE respectively. The same sign effect
have been found for the relative spread, rather than the absolute spread, by Bessembinder
[4] for changes on NYSE and Ahn et al. [7] on Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE). For the
most illiquid stocks, Goldstein et al. find an increase in the bid-ask spread [6]. Relating
the bid-ask spread to volatility, Plerou et al. [25], Lee, Mucklow and Ready [26] as
                                                   ′
well as Goodhart and O Hara [27] conclude that the bid-ask spread and the volatility
are positively related. However, it is shown that the direction of causality is such that
volatility affects the spread rather than the opposite [27].
    Lastly, Bacidore et al. conclude that a decrease in tick size will change the order
flow so that the rate of orders is higher, but the size of orders is smaller [28]. As for the
effect on volume Ahn et al. find that there is no significant change as the AMEX tick
size decreased from $1/8 ticks to $1/16 ticks [29].
   In conclusion, apart from contradictory outcomes on volatility with regards to in-
traday clustering there are a few general effects of a marketwide decrease in tick size:
the bid-ask spread decreases, the rate of orders increase and order size decreases. Fur-
thermore the traded volume is unaffected. It is worth noting that all these studies are
performed at events where the market changes the tick size, hence these are not nec-
essarily isolated and there may be exogenous factors causing these effects. Results of
studies aiming to isolate this effect are outlined in the following section.

3.2 Panel studies on tick size changes
Bessembinder, studying the effects of stocks around the tick size change at $10 on the
NASDAQ, finds that the volatility is higher both after a tick size increase and a tick
size decrease. This is explained as a result of the increase in information flow that is
associated with the change [10]. When pooling the results on both sides of the discon-
tinuity, Bessembinder finds that the median volatility is lower with a smaller tick size,
irrespective of whether the tick size increases or decreases. It is also observed that the
bid-ask spread decreases and the liquidity is unchanged [10].
   Ke et al. examine firms that change between NS$0.1 and NS$0.5 tick sizes, and
pools this data to isolate the effects of the tick size change. Concluding, similarly
to Bessembinder, that a larger tick size results in an increased bid-ask spread, higher
volatility and increased negative autocorrelation, but no difference in traded volume [30].

                                      7
    For the Paris Bourse, Hau investigates the stock characteristics around a tick size
change, using data from 1995 to 1999 and a panel regression technique to isolate the
tick size change effect, where volatility is measured by the relative range of highest and
lowest prices. The range is argued to be non-biased by tick size changes. Hau finds that
a 10 fold increase in the tick size, from FF 0.1 to FF 1, increases volatility with 30% and
states that higher transaction costs increases volatility [14].
   Niemeyer and Sand˚as, looking at tick size changes around the 100 SEK threshold on
the Stockholm Stock Exchange, uses cross-sectional data and estimates the effect using
a three-stage least squares regression. They find a positive relation between tick size and
bid-ask spread and weak support that tick size negatively affects traded volume [31].
   Lastly, Ascioglu et al. examine minimum tick sizes on the Tokyo Stock Exchange,
finding that trade size and the number of trades are more significant determinants than
price of whether the tick size is binding or not. They argue that tick sizes should be
assigned using frequency of trading and price rather than just price, as it is today [11].
    Combining the results from panel studies with the general effects in the event studies,
most studies find that a decreased tick size lowers volatility apart from clustered volatility
that is found to increase. Moreover, a decreased tick size generates a smaller bid-ask
spread while the effect on volume seems to be either unchanged or slightly negative.

4 Data

The primary data is collected from NASDAQ OMX for observations before 2011 and
SIX Telekurs thereafter, and is curated by Erik Eklund at the Stockholm School of
Economics. The data consists of daily prices for all instruments traded on the SSE
and variables include the daily highest, lowest and closing prices, end of day bid and
ask prices, daily traded volume and company id. To complement this data with daily
                                                                                     rd
average price and number of trades as well as data on Nordea between January 3  2010
             th
and June 15   2010 that was missing, historical data for the stocks were downloaded
from NASDAQ OMX Nordic [32]. The remaining issue with the dataset is that the end
                                 rd                        th
of day ask prices between the 3   of January and the 15  of July 2011 are missing.
    For the purposes of this thesis, the analysis is limited to the stocks included in the
OMXS30 index. Firstly because OMXS30 are the most liquid stocks, meaning that
they tend to have comparatively smaller transaction costs than less liquid stocks, in
turn making the tick size more relevant relative to other sources of transaction costs.
Secondly, since Ascioglu et al. concludes that trading activity is a major determinant
for whether the tick size is binding or not, the OMXS30 stocks are most suitable [11].
Information regarding what stocks are included in the OMXS30 Index is collected from
the NASDAQ OMX semi-annual OMXS30 index reviews [33, 34].
                                                                             st
   The data is further limited to the time period between January 1  2010 to December
   st
31  2011. During this time period, there has only been smaller changes to the FESE
Table 2. The limitation to recent data allows analysis of the potential impact on any
volatility caused by high-frequency trading.
    This study focus on the tick size change around 100 SEK, seeing as that is the most

                                      8
frequently crossed threshold for the OMXS30 stocks. All observations outside a 10%
interval from this threshold are dropped, that is outside the 90-110 SEK interval, based
on both the VWAP and the closing price. To control for firm specific effects and to
avoid selection bias, only stocks with observations both above and below the threshold
are kept. The omitted stocks are ERIC-B, LUPE, SKF-B and TEL2-B. The final dataset
consists of 13 stocks and a total of 2029 observations.
   Even though stocks only present on one side of the cutoff are dropped, most stocks
are unevenly distributed around the threshold. This is one of the potential sources of
selection bias. Dropping data to even the number of observations on each side could
control for the bias, but would reduce the total number of observations with about two
thirds. This reduction could lower the significance of our tests. Similarly there could
be time specific effects, which cannot be controlled for by the same reason as the firm
specific effects. Both these biases need to be considered when analysing the results.

5 Methodology

5.1 Volatility estimation
One of the more commonly used methods of measuring volatility using one period data
is the daily range, that is the difference between the highest and the lowest prices during
the day. Both Beckers and Hau conclude that the range is more accurate and more
efficient than the standard deviation [35, 14]. It is also robust to tick size changes [14].
Furthermore Alizadeh et al. concludes that the natural logarithm of the range is fairly
close to Gaussian and robust to microstructure noise [13]. Compared to proxies such as
log of absolute or squared returns it has a lower variance [13] and does account for price
fluctuations during the day.
   Among others, Garman and Klass have made variants of the daily range measure
and argue that the estimate is made more precise when the closing and opening price
is added [12]. They find that the high-low-close-open (HLCO) measure is about seven
times more efficient than the standard deviation. Using the HLCO estimate would be
preferable but the data used for this study does not contain information on the opening
price. For this reason the original range measure will be used. While it is possible to use
the closing price from the previous day, this would not account for price changes while
the market is closed and could cause bias. Furthermore, the original range measure is
only slightly less efficient than the HLCO estimate [12].
    Inspired by Hau volatility is estimated by the log relative range [14],
                               (       )
                                        Hi − Li
                              log(range)i = log              ; (1)
                                                    V W APi
and the corresponding level range,

                                    Hi − Li
                                 rangei =         ; (2)
                                                V W APi

                                      9
where H is the highest price and L the lowest during a day and V W AP is the daily
volume weighted average price. There are two notable benefits of using the log range.
Firstly it is more closely Gaussian in distribution than the level range. Secondly, using
the log reduce the impact of outliers on regression estimates. To account for potential
misspecifications the level range is also included in our analysis.

5.2 The Regression Discontinuity Design model
The main regression of this thesis is run using the Regression Discontinuity Design
(RDD). This method isolates the impact of a change in treatment by examining only a
narrow interval. More specifically a RDD relaxes ceteris paribus assumptions of variables
that may be uncontrollable in practical research without controlled experimental testing.
Furthermore, this method has a high internal validity [36] and minimizes misspecification
and endogeniety issues as well as allows for non-specified functional forms [37].
   A RDD is performed by finding a discontinuity in the data, and narrowly limiting
the data used in analysis to a small range above, and below the discontinuity. In essence,
by doing this one can assume that the observations right above the discontinuity and
just under the discontinuity are roughly equal in other aspects. That is, assuming that
one cannot accurately predict or influence on which side of the discontinuity to end up.
Hence, the regression can be described as a local randomized experiment.
   For a sharp RDD, it is assumed that treatment, W , is allocated only as a function
of one variable, and of the form:
                           {
                                 1 Xi ≥ Z0
                        Wi =                                     (3)
                                     0 otherwise
   In a fuzzy RDD, the probability of treatment does not have to jump from 0 to 1 at
the cutoff point Z0, but there must still be a discontinuity in the probability of treatment
for the method to correctly estimate the effect [36].
    In relation to this, a difficulty arise with our data since a stock can fluctuate between
the two different tick sizes within a day. This observation is being both treated and non
treated, opposite the common sharp RDD assumption. As the data allows no definite
allocation of whether these observations are treated or non-treated, a fuzzy RDD could be
appropriate. However, the discontinuity in the probability of treatment is very small for
our data. A stock with an average price close to the cutoff point should experience a fairly
equal distribution of intraday prices around the tick size threshold at 100 SEK, leading
to observations right above and right below the threshold having an approximately
50% probability of treatment. Seeing as a fuzzy RDD requires a discontinuity in the
probability of treatment, in the best case, this lead to weak estimates for a fuzzy RDD
but could also cause significant bias as the denominator in the local Wald estimate
would be small relative to the numerator. A relatively small denominator magnifies any
estimation errors. For this reason, the problem is implemented as a sharp RDD with
some alterations to control for the crossover issue. For example, both the average and
the closing price are used for estimating the cutoff point.

                                     10
    The treatment effect in the sharp regression discontinuity design is calculated as the
difference in the estimates just above and right below the cutoff point Z0, that is:

                  = lim E[Y |X = Z0 + ϵ] − lim E[Y |X = Z0 + ϵ] (4)
                           ϵ#0                        ϵ"0

where Z0 is the cutoff point, X the assignment variable price and Y the outcome variable
range.
   All regression discontinuity estimates are estimated using the method developed by
Nichols [38], and are adapted to conform with Imbens [36], Fuji [39] and Lee [37]. The
treatment effect is estimated by running local linear regressions on each side of the cutoff
value since these lower bias compared to other nonparametric regression methods such
as simple kernel estimators. For the calculation of the local linar regression, rectangular
kernels are used as recommended by Imbens et al. with robustness testing for different
bandwidths, h. In essence, using a rectangular kernel means that standard regressions are
estimated over numerous small bins with size h on each side of the cutoff point, where the
kernel affects the weighting of the observations. While a more advanced kernel could add
attractive features such as smoothing the local linear polynomials or better control for
covariates, such kernels add unnecessary complexity as most benefits are easily controlled
for in a rectangular kernel design [36] and make no significant difference in asymptotic
bias [37]. Following Imbens et al. the local linear polynomial regression to the left of
the discontinuity (non-treated observations) is given by the optimization problem:
                    ∑    Xi − Z0
               ˆ                                                          2
         (ˆ l;  l) = arg min       K(        ) × (Yi − − × (Xi − Z0)) ; (5)
                           ;                h
                                 i:Xi<Z0

and the corresponding equation for the observations to the right (treated observations)
of the discontinuity,
                    ∑    Xi − Z0
               ˆ                                                           2
         (ˆ r;  r) = arg min       K(        ) × (Yi − − × (Xi − Z0)) ; (6)
                           ;                h
                               i:XiZ0
where the rectangular kernel is given by:
                          {
                               1=2 −1 ≤ u ≤ 1
                      K(u) =                                       (7)
                                    0 otherwise

    The optimization problem provides the estimator for the treatment effect,

                                    ˆ = ˆ r − ˆ l: (8)
    Details for the estimations used of the treatment effect variance is given in Fuji (2009)
[39].
   To find the optimal bandwidth, given a sharp RDD design, Imbens method is used.
Optimal implies minimizing the mean square error for a RDD, and is estimated such
     ˆ         1=5
that hopt ∝ N    , where N are the number of observations. Specifics for calculation of
the optimal bandwidth are presented in Imbens (2011) [40].

                                     11
    As recommended by Imbens et al., we report the estimate for the optimal, double the
optimal and half of the optimal bandwidth. Since our regression bears characteristics of
the fuzzy RDD and Imbens et al. recommend increasing the bandwidth further when
using this specification, the estimate for four times the optimal bandwidth is additionally
reported. While the treatment effect estimates using the smallest bandwidths will be
highly biased due to the crossover observations, they are kept as a control of any bias
caused by high bandwidths due to possible differences in the functional form of the
outcome variable from the linear estimation of the regression.
   To correctly implement and draw inference from a RDD, a small number of assump-
tions on the characteristics of the underlying observations needs to be controlled for.
These RDD robustness checks are described in section 7, specification testing.

5.3 RDD specification
In this study, OMXS30 stocks with prices within both the 90-100 SEK and the 100-110
SEK interval in a period between 2010 and 2011 on the Stockholm Stock exchange are
analysed. Thus, a 10% interval around the cutoff point Z0 (100 SEK) is studied. Stocks
below the 100 SEK threshold has a tick size of 0.05 SEK, whereas the tick size is 0.1
SEK above.
   Due to the use of daily data, the RDD is not as sharp as if intraday data had
been used. As discussed in the previous section, approximately 15% of the analysed
observations crosses over the tick size threshold during a day, and are subjected to both
tick sizes. To control for this in a sharp RDD specification, two different measures of
price are used, the volume weighted average price (V W AP ) and the closing price. The
former estimate is better at estimating on which side of the discontinuity most trades
were executed than the latter, allowing an estimation of the impact of the crossover
observations by comparing the two specifications.
   The volume weighted average price is defined as
                  ∑
                                          (Si × Pi)
                           V W APi =   ∑      ; (9)
                                                 Si

where S is the number of bought shares and P is the price. The closing price is the end
of the day closing price.
   When estimating volatility, two different measures will be used. As specified in
section 5.1 a commonly used measure is the natural logarithm of the range, where range
is defined as

                                    Hi − Li
                                 rangei =         : (10)
                                                V W APi
   The log range will be our main estimator for volatility. As a test of robustness and to
identify potential misspecifications the level range will also be reported. The regression
specification can be described as,

                              Yi = m(Pi) +  Ti + i (11)

                                     12
for an observation i where Yi is either range or log range, Ti = 1(P > Z0) where P is
either the volume weighed average or the closing price, and m(Pi) is a smooth function
of price, approximated by the local linear regressions.
    Summarizing, four different specifications will be tested, where each of the level range
and log range volatility estimates are regressed on both the average and the closing
price. For all specifications the cutoff point is defined by Z0 = 100 SEK. Four different
bandwidths are reported for each estimation.

5.4 RDD specification tests
5.4.1 Discontinuity in treatment variable
For a RDD to be valid there needs to be a discontinuity in the treatment variable W , tick
size, at the cutoff point Z0. This discontinuity is normally sharp and given by market
directives, as described in section 2.2 Tick Size. However, due to the abstraction of using
daily data, the discontinuity must be analysed.
   The effect from crossover observations is tested by graphing the price on the x-
axis displaying the frequency of crossover and non-crossover observations for small price
intervals. This allows an estimation of the impact and the price range for which our
sharp specification is valid.

5.4.2 Discontinuities away from the cutoff
To estimate any impact of spurious correlation, tests are performed to find any disconti-
nuities in the treatment variable away from the chosen threshold 100 SEK. This is tested
using the procedure for RD-regressions by Imbens et al., as specified in the RDD model
section above. The regression is run separately for observations above and below the
cutoff in order to eliminate any impacts from the actual discontinuity. The regression is
                                                                                                      th
run on both the closing and the average price, respectively for the median and the 25
                 th
as well as the 75   percentile, since these values increase the power of the test of finding
any discontinuities [36]. Percentiles for prices are reported in Table 12. The same four
bandwidths as described previously were used. In the results we look for any significant
discontinuities in the relative range, using both the level and the range estimates.

5.4.3 Discontinuities in covariates
Following the procedure for testing for discontinuities in covariates by Imbens [36], sharp
RDD regressions at 100 SEK are run for variables other than range. The tested variables
are, log(trades), log(volume) and log(spreadrelative), where

                                       Bi − Ai
                               spreadrelative = 2         ; (12)
                                       Bi + Ai
where Bi is the end of day bid price for observation i and Ai is the end of day ask price.
The relative spread is used to minimize any price change effects. The log refer to the
natural logarithm, which is used to make the distributions relatively more Gaussian.

                                     13
The level regressions were run, but displayed rather minor differences. For this reason,
these results are omitted from the reported values. In addition to current values, lagged
covariates are tested in order to investigate any differences in predetermined character-
istics. One day is used for lagging. Longer lag was tested, lowering the treatment effect
significance further. Since these are less significant, only the one day lagged observations
are reported. All covariates are tested using the four aforementioned bandwidths.

5.4.4 Assignment variable manipulation
For the RDD to correctly estimate the treatment effect, there must be no possibility of
manipulation of the assignment variable. Hence, the data is tested for uniform distribu-
tion around the point of the discontinuity, using McCrary’s density test [41]. Briefly, the
test involves two steps. First, all observations are plotted in a histogram where the bin
width is calculated following McCrary. Secondly, local linear regressions are run for the
values on both sides of the discontinuity, regressing the normalized count of observations
over the midpoint of the histogram bin. Standard deviations for the local linear regres-
sions are also calculated and added to the plot. The outcome is presented as a graph
where a smooth line over the threshold would indicate that there is no manipulation in
the assignment variable.

6 Results

6.1 Descriptive statistics
Comparing the summary statistics for the two different price measures, the volume
weighted average price (VWAP) and the closing price, the measures are seemingly equiv-
alent. From our specification the minimum and maximum price is restricted to 90 and
110 respectively. Both price specifications have a mean price of 100.50, rounded to two
decimal places. They display an average standard deviation of about 5.5 SEK and a
kurtosis slightly lower than for a normal distribution, implying that they are somewhat
more uniformly distributed over the price interval. Furthermore, as seen in the summary
statistics in Table 2 for the average price and Table 3 for the closing price, there are
stocks present on only one side of the tick size threshold, ERIC-B, TELE2-B, LUPE and
SKF-B. These observations are omitted before running any regressions in order not to
skew the results with any potential firm specific effects, but are kept in the descriptive
statistics to allow comparison.
    Analysing the data with regards to the range, the results are separated by the relative
range and log of range as well as on the closing and the volume weighted average price,
and are reported in Tables 4-7. The mean of the level range for most stocks are around
0.03, for both the average and the closing price as well as both above and below the
cutoff point. Two notable exceptions are ELUX-B, displaying a slightly higher mean
below the cutoff (0.45 for VWAP and 0.43 for close) and SCV-B, showing a slightly
higher mean above the cutoff (0.45 for VWAP and 0.46 for close). On average, the mean

                                     14
level range for about 50% of the stocks increases after the cutoff. There is no apparent
difference in standard deviation neither above nor below the cutoff point.
   The observations for the level range are generally positively skewed (on average
about 0.23). The extreme is NOKI-SEK, displaying a skew of 5. Stocks tend to be
skewed similarly above and below the cutoff point, only being slightly lower above the
cutoff than below, thus not affecting the validity of our results. The kurtosis changes
around the discontinuity. The maximum kurtosis is 32.6 for NOKI-SEK below the cutoff
point in the VWAP specification. Most stocks display a kurtosis close to three but the
average kurtosis is high, caused by NOKI-SEK, SCA-B, SWED-A and SKA-B all having
a kurtosis above 15. Due to the large kurtosis and the slight skew, these results does
not follow a normal distribution. For this reason, our main specification for estimating
volatility will be log range as this would benefit the local linear regressions by better
satisfying the CLM assumptions and reduce the impact of outliers [42]. Descriptives for
the level range can be found in Table 4 for the VWAP and Table 5 for the closing price.
    As found in previous research, the log range should be close to Gaussian [14]. With
the exception of NOKI-SEK all stocks have a kurtosis and skewness close to a normal
distribution both for the average and the closing price, when log range is used. Further-
more, both the skewness and the kurtosis are more similar above and below the cutoff for
individual stocks, compared to the level range values. Thus, using log range generates a
more controlled setup for our main regression. Similar to the level range the mean and
standard deviation for the log range of all stocks are fairly alike on both sides of the
discontinuity, with a mean between -3 and -4 and a standard deviation between 0.4 and
0.5. A summary of the log range statistics can be found in Table 6 for the average price
and in Table 7 for the closing price.
    As data from two different years are used, the values of both the level and log range
for the different years are compared in Table 8. Noticeable is that about 60% of the
observations are from 2010 and that the mean range is slightly higher in 2011. Similarly
the standard deviation is higher in 2011. Consistent with the statistics mentioned above,
the log range follows a normal distribution whereas the level range is positively skewed
and shows a high kurtosis. Both specifications are however closer to a normal distribution
in 2011 than in 2010.
   Lastly, descriptive statistics of covariates is reported in Tables 9-10. Both the ab-
solute range and the relative spread are higher for observations with a larger tick size
(above 100 SEK), than those with the smaller tick size. In the case of the absolute range
that could be caused by the price difference between the observations. On the other
hand, both trades and volume are lower for the observations with the larger tick size,
than the observations with the smaller tick size. These changes are consistent for both
price measures.
    The descriptive statistics do indicate that there is a difference in most variables with
a larger tick size compared to a smaller. While this effect is clear for the covariates and
the biased absolute range measure, it is not as apparent for the relative range measures.
Hence, there is a need to analyse the regression results before coming to any conclusions.

                                     15
6.2 Regression results
When analysing the results attained from the RDD regressions, one general criteria is
used. Even though four different bandwidths are reported, three of these are seen as more
significant due to our specification generating a RDD which is somewhere in between
sharp and fuzzy. As Imbens recommends to use larger bandwidths when analysing a
fuzzy RDD [36] the results for half the optimal bandwidth are only reported for validation
purposes. Since about 15% of our observations are both above and below the cutoff point
during the same day, and these mainly lie close to the cutoff, these observations will have
a proportionately larger impact on the estimate as the bandwidth decreases. This is an
issue seeing as the range of these stocks will be less different than non-crossover stocks,
affecting the statistical significance of the regression. As an example, consider one stock
with a VWAP of 99.9 SEK, and another stock with a VWAP of 100 SEK. For practical
purposes, both stocks can be assumed to having had a price below 100 SEK for 50% of
the day, and above 100 SEK for the other 50% of the day. Hence, they are approximately
equally treated by the larger and the smaller tick sizes respectively during the day. On
average, then, their volatilities should be equal. The problem being that these stocks
are identified as different. One treated and one non-treated. For apparent reasons this
lowers the significance of any discontinuity that would otherwise exist. Hence, it is
also believed that the lower significance of this specification does not pose a problem
with the robustness of our results. Therefore larger bandwidths will be considered more
representative of the real effect.
   Examining the regression results in Table 11 and Figures 1-4, the effect of a tick
size change is not apparent. Although the estimated effects for the level and log ranges
are approximately similar, their significance is substantially different. In the text that
follows, a thorough analysis of both results and implications will be presented, starting
with log range as this is the main specification.
    Using the log range as an estimate for volatility, a clear effect from an increase in
the tick size is seen, the daily range is increased. The effect of the tick size change, on
average, was 12.15% for the average price specifications, and 9.69% for the closing price
specifications. Since the average absolute range was roughly 2.6 SEK, see Tables 9 and
10, for both the average price and the closing price specifications, this would correspond
to an increase in the average spread of 0.32 and 0.25 SEK for the average and the closing
prices respectively.
    The difference between the closing price and average price specifications in the regres-
sion results is notable. The estimated treatment effect for the average price specification
is slightly higher than the estimates for the closing price specification. Furthermore,
the p-values for the average price specification are higher. The results are however un-
surprising. As discussed in previous sections: while the density distributions of both
the closing price and the average price specifications should be centred roughly around
the same value, the closing price is less correlated to the actual prices during the day.
Though there is some significance to the closing price explaining whether the prices dur-
ing the day generally were above or below the discontinuity, there is more significance to
the average price. For this reason, the closing price results in a distribution that is less

                                     16
sharp around the discontinuity, resulting in the lower economic and statistic significance
of these specifications.
   Looking at a change in the log range, using optimal and larger bandwidths, the
p-values are between 0.05 and 0.08, indicating that the change is rather statistically
significant. However, when half the bandwidth is used the p-value increases to 0.2. This
increase in the p-value is expected, as described above. Further comparing the different
bandwidth specifications, it is clear that the treatment effect initially decreases as the
bandwidth is increased. Once again, the exception is half the optimal bandwidth, where
the effect is slightly lower than for the optimal bandwidth. However, this difference is
not significant. Looking at the VWAP specification, the treatment effect is 17% for the
optimal bandwidth, decreasing to around 8% for four times the optimal bandwidth. With
even larger bandwidths, such as eight and ten times the optimal, the effect converges
toward 10% at a very high significance, both statistically and economically.
    The pattern is similar for the closing price but the effect is more moderate. For the
optimal bandwidth the treatment effect on the log range is about 12% while the effect is
roughly 6% for four times the bandwidth and converges to around 9% as the bandwidth
is increased further. These results would indicate that the effect of the tick size change on
the range is higher right by the cutoff point and that the effect is levelled off the further
away it comes, (of course excluding half the bandwidth and thus the observations in the
near vicinity of the cutoff).
   As a robustness check, the behaviour of the level range when the tick size changes
is analysed. Consistent with the log range results, an increased tick size is associated
with a higher range, looking only at the regression coefficients. On average the level
range increases with about 0.4 percentage points. Given that the mean level range is
0.028 this is approximately equivalent to the 10% increase using the log range, and
is true for both the average and the closing price. Yet, there is a large discrepancy
in the significance of the level and the log range results. Most level range results are
highly insignificant, making it impossible to reject the null of no change. However, the
results using four times the optimal bandwidth for both the close price and the VWAP
are highly significant. Considering that the data for level range were both skewed and
showed a high kurtosis this result is expected. Not unlike the effect of the logarithm, a
higher bandwidth includes more values, which lower the impact of outliers.
    In summary, these results indicate that an increase in tick size increases the range as
seen in the changes in the log range, when observations are sorted by the volume weighed
average price. These results are somewhat robust to misspecification in the form of using
close prices and the level range, though they lower the significance, albeit expectedly,
for reasons discussed earlier. Similarly, the lower significance at lower bandwidths is
expected due to the issue with crossover observations. As the bandwidth increases, the
estimated increase in range caused by an increase in the tick size converges to about
10%, common to all specifications.

                                     17
7 Specification testing

To validate the regression results, we test the specification in the light of the assumptions
underlying the regression discontinuity design. In this section, we analyse the robustness
of our results based on these assumptions.

7.1 Discontinuity in treatment variable
Even though the Stockholm Stock Exchange forces treatment of shares on the market
when crossing a boundary, leading to a sharp discontinuity, the abstraction to daily data
creates some fuzziness. There is however still a discontinuity that is sharp for a subset
of observations that do not cross the tick size boundary. Even though the assumption
of a discontinuity is fulfilled, as all stocks sufficiently above the discontinuity is treated
and vice versa, we need to analyse the fuzziness.
   As can be seen in Figures 5 and 6, there are significant numbers of crossovers
roughly 2 SEK above and 2 SEK below the threshold. Outside this range, the num-
ber of crossovers decreases quickly. For this reason, any bandwidth for which this range
represents a high proportion of the range in the bandwidth likely causes biased esti-
mates. So, a lower bound for the bandwidth should be at least 2. Not surprisingly, the
optimal bandwidth for many of our regressions is between 2 and 3, leading credence to
the assumption that inference from half the bandwidth specification should be limited.

7.2 Discontinuities away from the cutoff
To analyse any tendency of spurious correlation, it is necessary to estimate whether
there are any significant discontinuities away from Z0. The results are reported in
Tables 13-16. There are few significant discontinuities for the level range under either
                                                                               th
price specification. There is a slightly significant discontinuity at the 25   percentile
above the threshold, with the half and the optimal bandwidths reporting significance
at a 10% level. However, this diminishes with increasing bandwidth. As such, it seems
to be caused by spurious correlation. The log range specifications are slightly more
significant on average, but the significant observations seems to be located around the
threshold for the closing price, indicating an impact from crossover observations. As
for the average price the discontinuity is harder to explain. The observation with the
                                                        th
highest significance at the optimal bandwidth, the 25   percentile, is visualized in Figure
7. As seen in the figure, there is an outlying cluster in the vicinity of the cutoff point,
which if removed minimizes the discontinuity, but it is still not possible to conclude with
any certainty that results may not be impacted by spurious correlation.

7.3 Discontinuities in covariates
The results from the regressions on the covariates are reported in Tables 17-18 and
Figures 8-10. Few of the reported ex post treatment effects for the VWAP specification
are statistically significant at all, with the exception being the number of trades when

                                     18
using a double or quadruple bandwidth. While this would suggest that the covariates
should be equal over the cutoff, the result is surprising given the amount of research on
both event and panel studies showing a definite relation between the tick size and the
bid-ask spread for example. Similarly, Figure 9 clearly shows that the bid-ask spread is
downwards limited by the minimum tick size. Hence, there should be a discontinuity in
the estimate assuming that the upper bound after the tick size change does not change
markedly. It is hypothesised that these somewhat surprising results are due to the
crossover issues as discussed in previous sections. This is further validated by the rather
high significance for the spread when testing the close price. Due to both the closing
proce and the spread being end of day values, this regression corresponds a sharp design.
Hence, it is significant of the real effect on the bid-ask spread. The difference between
the closing price and VWAP specifications might indicate the breadth of the crossover
problem for the main regression of this study. Also surprising is the high significance
on volume for the closing price specification. It is especially notable since it is the only
variable that remains quite as significant when using lagged variables.
   Running the same tests for the other covariates lagged one day decreases the dis-
continuities to a point where none of the treatment effects are statistically significant.
Given these results, even though there might be differences in the non-lag covariates,
there is seemingly no difference in the lagged, adding credibility to the assumption of no
difference in predetermined characteristics of the observations. Hence, any difference in
the discontinuity should be caused by the tick size change and nothing else. The non-
lagged variables do limit assumptions of causality, seeing as it is impossible to discern
whether the tick size change causes higher volatility or e.g. the bid-ask spread or the
volume is the cause, but as the predetermined characteristics are equal, there should be
little doubt that it is the tick size that is the primary cause for this difference. Relating
the results with earlier studies, volatility has been shown to cause higher bid-ask spreads
and not vice versa, so even in the case of ex post significant characteristics, we should
be able to infer causality for the VWAP specification.

7.4 Assignment variable manipulation
As can be seen in Figures 11 and 12, there is no significant discontinuity in the density at
the tick size change at 100 SEK for the average price specification. For the closing price,
there is a difference, in the range of one standard deviation from the other. There is a
slight hump right above the discontinuity for both figures. While this might be a result
of sticky pricing right above 100 SEK, it should be noted that there could potentially
be a difference that our density regression does not account for. It could also just be
an anomaly in the data used. As is, however, it is estimated that this does not pose
a problem for the average price specification, seeing as the densities at the cutoff are
relatively equal. While there should be no possibility of manipulating the stock price
due to market rules and the discontinuity could be random, caution should be taken in
inference from the closing price specification.

                                     19
7.5 Discussion of other potential issues
One drawback of the regression specification is an assumption that every observation is
independent. As such, it is assumed that there are no correlation between observations,
and no firm or time fixed effects, for example. While this could lead to unbiased estima-
tions if assuming that the observations are evenly distributed across firms, thresholds,
and time, our summary statistics show that this is not necessarily true. For this reason,
it would be beneficial to use a method that control for these issues, such as using a
multivariate kernel instead of the uniform kernel in the estimation of the local linear
polynomials in the regression discontinuity design, as described by Black et al. [43].
Including fixed effects could also help reduce the high variance of estimates, causing low
significance.
    Furthermore, other measures for volatility accounting for intraday changes or other
effects that HFT could create could potentially generate other results. Lastly, looking at
other cutoffs or other stock segments would increase the external validity of our findings
in order to see how the overall market is affected by the change.

8 Conclusion

As seen in the results, an increase in the tick size generates different results for the level
and the log range specifications. Though the null hypothesis of no change cannot be
rejected when the level range is used, the log range specification implies a 10% increase
in the range when the tick size is increased.
    While the effect of the tick size change on the daily level range is weak in significance,
considering both volatility estimates implies an economically as well as statistically sig-
nificant change in the range that is consistent with earlier research. Assuming that the
low significance of some of the specifications is caused by the problem with crossover
observations, as indicated by the alternative closing price specification, and that the
measure of volatility used in the regression specifications does capture any significant
volatility on the market, our results imply that an increase in tick size will increase
market volatility.
   Under these assumptions, a tick size increase could be counterproductive if used
only as a method of lowering volatility. A surprising conclusion seeing that this was
suggested at the conference hosted by Peter Norman at the Ministry of Finance on the
28th of October 2011 [1]. Based on this study an increased tick size would thus not be
recommended as a remedy for the increased volatility.
   If the assumptions fail, a recommendation is made more difficult. For example, the
daily range might be unable to capture volatility caused by high frequency trading as it
is suspected that the daily range fails to correctly capture impacts from, for example,
small flash equity failures. That is when a stock price changes by more than a certain
small percentage, 0.5-1% or so, within a few seconds. If the price movement is small
enough not to affect the daily range, it will be unnoticed in the range. On the other hand,
volatility in the form of flash equity failures should not affect most non-HFT investors,

                                     20
other than psychologically. Similarly, the range might be unable to capture volatility
changes such as clustered volatility. Seeing that a smaller tick size has been shown
to lead to large trades being divided into smaller orders, an increased tick size could
decrease the autocorrelation between orders. Autocorrelation will in turn likely decrease
the clustered volatility. So, assuming that HFT disproportionately affects these types
of intraday volatility rather than the range, our results will overestimate the increase
in volatility for a change in tick size. To accurately predict the effect, studies should
be performed using intraday data looking at volatility estimates uncontrolled for in this
study.
   Using intraday data would also provide a more sharp specification of treatment
around the discontinuity, likely increasing the statistical significance of the results. The
significance could further be increased by using multivariate kernels in the regression.
The use of such kernels will allow correlation between observations, and relax the as-
sumptions on independence between observations in this study. It would also further
minimize any bias caused by sample selection where the distribution of firms are not
equal across the threshold in tick size, either by number of observations, by date or
other characteristics.
    Furthermore, as this thesis only examines the isolated effect that an increased tick
size would have on market volatility, there could be other exogenous factors affecting
the impact on market volatility if the bourse decided to introduce a marketwide tick
size increase. However, earlier research indicate that the impacts on volatility of a
marketwide tick size decrease, and an isolated decrease is of the same sign. For this
reason, it is assumed that this relationship will hold for an increase as well.
    In conclusion, our results show that daily volatility increases when increasing the tick
size. These results do not include all types of volatility, two exceptions being clustered
volatility and mini flash equity failures. Earlier research observing a negative relationship
between tick size and clustered volatility suggests that there might be a trade-off between
impacts on different types of volaility. Seeing as the volatility captured in this study
should affect the concerned smaller investors to a larger degree than the uncontrolled
volatility, we recommend markets to be cautious of increasing the tick size.

                                     21
9 References

References

 [1] Riksarkivet. Conference on high-frequency trading hosted by Peter Norman; 2011.

 [2] Finansinspektionen, (FI). Investigation into high frequency trading and algorith-
    mic trading; 2012. [Accessed 13-May-2012]. Available from: http://www.fi.se/
     upload/90_English/20_Publications/10_Reports/2012/htf_eng.pdf.

 [3] Sibbern B, Wennerberg C, Møller P, Hvalsøe A, Strid J. Computer trad-
     ing in the nordics, Seminar 8; 2012. [Accessed 13-May-2012]. Avail-
    able from: http://www.dbmf.dk/media(1346,1030)/Copenhagen_-_Seminar_
     8th_of_February_-_Algo_trading_in_the_Nordic_markets.pdf.

 [4] Bessembinder H. Trade Execution Costs and Market Quality after Decimalization.
     Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. 2003;38(4):747–777.

 [5] Ronen T, Weaver DG. ‘Teenies’ anyone? Journal of Financial Markets.
     2001;4(3):231–260.

 [6] Goldstein MA, Kavajecz KA. Eighths, sixteenths, and market depth: changes in
    tick size and liquidity provision on the NYSE. Journal of Financial Economics.
    2000;56:125–149.

 [7] Ahn HJ, Cao CQ, Choe H. Decimalization and competition among stock mar-
     kets: Evidence from the Toronto Stock Exchange cross-listed securities. Journal of
     Financial Markets. 1998;1:51–87.

 [8] NASDAQ OMX. General Cash Market News - Change in tick size
    at Stockholmsb¨orsen; 2011. [Accessed 13-May-2012]. Available from:
    https://newsclient.omxgroup.com/cdsPublic/viewDisclosure.action?
     disclosureId=343383.

 [9] NASDAQ OMX. NASDAQ OMX Nordic Market Model 2.6; 2011. [Accessed
    13-May-2012]. Available from: http://www.nasdaqomx.com/digitalAssets/75/
     75620_nasdaqomxnordicmarketmodel2.6.pdf.

[10] Bessembinder H. Tick Size, Spreads, and Liquidity: An Analysis of Nasdaq Securi-
     ties Trading near Ten Dollars. Journal of Financial Intermediation. 2000;9(3):213–
     239.

[11] Ascioglu A, Comerton-Forde C, McInish TH. An examination of minimum tick sizes
    on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Japan and The World Economy. 2010;22:40–48.

[12] Garman MB, Klass MJ. On the Estimation of Security Price Volatilities from
     Historical Data. The Journal of Business. 1980;53(1):67–78.

                                     22
[13] Alizadeh S, Brandt MW, Diebold FX. Range-Based Estimation of Stochastic
     Volatility Models. Journal of Finance. 2002;57(3):1047–1091.

[14] Hau H. The Role of Transaction Costs for Financial Volatility: Evidence from the
    Paris Bourse. Journal of The European Economic Association. 2006;4:862–890.

[15] NASDAQ OMX. Trading all Nordic equities on one platform; 2012. [Accessed
    13-May-2012]. Available from: http://nordic.nasdaqomxtrader.com/trading/
     equities/.

[16] NASDAQ OMX. Rules for the Construction and Maintenance of the OMX Stock-
    holm 30 Index, Version 1.3;. [Accessed 13-May-2012]. Available from: https:
     //indexes.nasdaqomx.com/docs/methodology_OMXS30.pdf.

[17] International Financial Law Review. Mifid; 1 November 2007. [Accessed 13-May-
     2012]. Available from: http://www.iflr.com/Article/1976931/Mifid.html.

[18] Thomson Reuters. European Market Share Reports by Region/Country
    2008-2011; 2012. [Accessed 13-May-2012]. Available from: http:
    //thomsonreuters.com/products_services/financial/financial_products/
     a-z/market_share_reports/.

[19] Powell SB. High Frequency Trading, How the market developed and where
     it is headed; September 2011. [Accessed 13-May-2012]. Available
    from: http://www.thehedgefundjournal.com/magazine/201109/commentary/
     high-frequency-trading.php.

[20] NASDAQ OMX. Global Data Products Nordic Weekly Newsletter May
    25, 2010, #17; 2010. [Accessed 30-April-2012]. Available from: http:
    //nordic.nasdaqomxtrader.com/digitalAssets/68/68564_global_data_
     products_newsletter_2010-17.pdf.

[21] La Spada G, Farmer JD, Fabrizio L. Tick size and price diffusion. Econophysics of
     Order-driven Markets. 2011;p. 173–187.

[22] Mandelbrot B. The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices. Journal of Business.
    1963;36:394–419.

[23] Gillemot L, Farmer JD, Lillo F. There’s more to volatility than volume. Quantitative
     Finance. 2006;6(5):371–384.

[24] Onnela JP, T¨oyli J, Kaski K. Tick size and stock returns. Physica A-statistical
     Mechanics and Its Applications. 2009;388:441–454.

[25] Plerou V, Gopikrishnan P, Stanley HE. Quantifying fluctuations in market liquidity:
     Analysis of the bid-ask spread. Phys Rev E. 2005 Apr;71:46–131.

[26] Lee CMC, Mucklow B, Ready MJ. Spreads, depths, and the impact of earnings
     information: an intraday analysis. Review of Financial Studies. 1993;6:345–374.

                                     23
[27] Goodhart CAE, O’Hara M. High frequency data in financial markets: Issues and
     applications. Journal of Empirical Finance. 1997;4(2-3):73–114.

[28] Bacidore J, Battalio RH, Jennings RH. Order submission strategies, liquidity sup-
     ply, and trading in pennies on the New York Stock Exchange. Journal of Financial
    Markets. 2003;6:337–362.

[29] Ahn HJ, Cao CQ, Choe H. Tick Size, Spread, and Volume. Journal of Financial
     Intermediation. 1996;5:2–22.

[30] Ke MC, Jiang CH, Huang YS. The impact of tick size on intraday stock price
     behavior: evidence from the Taiwan Stock Exchange. Pacific-basin Finance Journal.
     2004;12:19–39.

[31] Niemeyer J, Sand˚as P. An Empirical Analysis of the Trading Structure at the
    Stockholm Stock Exchange. Stockholm School of Economics; 1995. 44. Available
     from: http://ideas.repec.org/p/hhs/hastef/0044.html.

[32] NASDAQ OMX. Historical prices. shares; 2010. [Accessed 3-April-2012]. Available
     from: http://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/shares/historicalprices/.

[33] NASDAQ OMX. Semi-Annual Review of OMX Stockholm 30 Index; 2010. [Accessed
    13-May-2012]. Available from: http://ir.nasdaqomx.com/releasedetail.cfm?
     releaseid=476602.

[34] NASDAQ OMX. Semi-Annual Review of OMX Stockholm 30 Index; 2011. [Accessed
    13-May-2012]. Available from: http://ir.nasdaqomx.com/releasedetail.cfm?
     ReleaseID=583209.

[35] Beckers S. Variances of Security Price Returns Based on High, Low, and Closing
     Prices. Journal of Business. 1983;56.

[36] Imbens GW, Lemieux T. Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice.
     Journal of Econometrics. 2008;142:615–635.

[37] Lee DS, Lemieux T. Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics. Journal of
    Economic Literature. 2010;48:281–355.

[38] Nichols A. RD: Stata module for regression discontinuity estimation; 2007. Statis-
    tical Software Components, Boston College Department of Economics. Available
     from: http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456888.html.

[39] Fuji D, Imbens G, Kalyanaraman K. Notes for Matlab and Stata Regression Dis-
    continuity Software; 2009. Available from: http://www.economics.harvard.edu/
     files/faculty/33_rd_software_09aug4.pdf.

[40] Imbens G, Kalyanaraman K. Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discon-
     tinuity estimator. Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice, Institute for Fiscal
    Studies; 2011. CWP05/10.

                                     24
[41] McCrary J. Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
     design: A density test. Journal of Econometrics. 2008;142:698–714.

[42] Wooldridge J. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. 4th ed. South-
    Western College Pub; 2009.

[43] Black D, Galdo J, Smith J. Evaluating the regression discontinuity design us-
    ing experimental data. Unpublished;University of Michigan. [Accessed 13-May-
    2012]. Available from: http://www.clsrn.econ.ubc.ca/events/pdf/Jeffrey%
     20Smith%20et%20al.pdf.

                                     25
A Appendix

  Table 1: Tick size table for Large Cap stocks on the SSE, introduced 1 April 2011

                                       Price
                        From To Tick size
                                0.0000 0.4999 0.0001
                                0.5000 0.9995 0.0005
                                1.0000 1.9990 0.0010
                                2.0000 4.9980 0.0020
                                5.0000 9,9950 0.0050
                               10.0000 49.9900 0.0100
                               50.0000 99.9500 0.0500
                              100.0000 499.9000 0.1000
                              500.0000 999.5000 0.5000
                            1,000.0000 4,999.0000 1.0000
                            5,000.0000 9,995.0000 5.0000
                           10,000.0000 19,990.0000 10.0000
                           20,000.0000 39,980.0000 20.0000
                           40,000.0000 49,960.0000 40.0000
                           50,000.0000 79,950.0000 50.0000
                           80,000.0000 99,920.0000 80.0000
                          100,000.0000 100.0000
                         Notes: All prices in SEK and reported
                            with all significant figures from the mar-
                         ket model specification. The tick size
                         table is based on FESE tick size table
                          2, which is aimed to harmonize tick size
                           regimes for the most liquid stocks in Eu-
                          rope. Apart from the introduction of new
                       thresholds at 2 SEK and above 10000
                            SEK, this tick size structure have been in
                                                  th
                          effect since October 26   2009, and June
                                 th
                          7  , 2010 for OMXS30 and Large Cap
                            shares at the SSE respectively.

                                     26
Table 2: Descriptive statistics for the volume weighted average price within the 90 to
110 SEK interval

     Ticker N Min Mean Max Std. dev. Skew. Kurt.
     ALFA 141 95.9300 104.1309 109.9200 3.5068 0.0328 1.8639
     ATCO-A 59 95.8100 103.6512 109.6200 3.9028 -0.2005 1.8540
     ATCO-B 149 90.1300 101.4679 109.7400 5.3417 -0.5025 2.2131
     BOL 177 90.1900 99.2213 109.9200 5.3842 0.3568 2.2183
     ELUX-B 64 95.0300 103.6716 109.0000 3.4639 -0.3950 2.5350
     ERIC-B 39 90.0100 92.2759 95.6500 1.6690 0.7081 2.2877
     LUPE 31 90.2500 93.1826 97.0000 2.0189 0.1592 1.7399
     NOKI-SEK 63 91.5200 99.0554 109.7200 5.6638 0.5792 1.9724
     SAND 175 90.0400 99.0529 109.9700 5.4612 0.1168 1.8265
     SCA-B 388 90.0900 100.2342 109.8700 4.6846 -0.3421 2.0803
     SCV-B 135 90.6600 100.5513 109.9200 4.5609 0.1005 2.2633
     SKA-B 119 90.0800 100.9977 109.9700 5.7345 -0.2388 1.8262
      SKF-B 1 109.1100 109.1100 109.1100 - - -
     SSAB-A 213 90.3100 101.8128 109.7900 5.4236 -0.2853 1.8483
     SWED-A 182 90.1300 98.6279 109.9900 6.0329 0.3499 1.7712
     TEL2-B 39 102.0100 106.7113 110.0000 1.9003 -0.1665 2.5913
     VOLV-B 164 90.1500 99.8849 109.9600 6.3270 0.0517 1.5451
     Total 2139 90.0100 100.4901 110.0000 5.5458 -0.1352 1.8666
    Notes: Hyphens indicate too few observations. The statistics are based on daily 2010-
     2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90; 110]
    SEK based both on closing price and average price.

                                     27
Table 3: Descriptive statistics for the closing price within the 90- 110 SEK interval

   Ticker N Min Mean Max Std. dev. Skew. Kurt.
   ALFA 141 96.0000 104.1337 110.0000 3.6117 0.0674 1.8126
   ATCO-A 59 96.0000 103.6466 109.4000 3.8955 -0.2631 1.8581
   ATCO-B 149 90.6000 101.5658 109.6000 5.3417 -0.4987 2.1711
   BOL 177 90.3500 99.1636 110.0000 5.3321 0.3766 2.2543
   ELUX-B 64 95.3000 103.6930 109.7000 3.5255 -0.3855 2.4986
   ERIC-B 39 90.2000 92.3423 96.2500 1.7018 0.7329 2.3321
   LUPE 31 90.1500 93.4516 97.2500 2.0456 0.2455 1.9617
   NOKI-SEK 63 90.7000 98.9238 109.2000 5.7303 0.5231 1.8784
   SAND 175 90.1500 99.0434 110.0000 5.4852 0.1658 1.8546
   SCA-B 388 90.0000 100.2347 109.8000 4.7329 -0.3601 2.0857
   SCV-B 135 91.4000 100.5219 109.9000 4.5740 0.1266 2.2005
   SKA-B 119 91.0000 101.1092 109.9000 5.6732 -0.1918 1.7934
   SKF-B 1 109.3000 109.3000 109.3000 - - -
   SSAB-A 213 91.2000 101.7735 110.0000 5.4261 -0.2872 1.8194
   SWED-A 182 90.0500 98.6239 110.0000 6.0108 0.3523 1.7679
   TEL2-B 39 101.8000 106.6000 109.9000 1.9211 -0.1587 2.6389
   VOLV-B 164 90.0000 99.8143 109.9000 6.3961 0.0461 1.5527
   Total 2139 90.0000 100.4861 110.0000 5.5558 -0.1266 1.8543
  Notes: Hyphens indicate too few observations. The statistics are based on daily 2010-
  2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90; 110]
  SEK based both on closing price and average price.

                                   28
                                        -   -                     -

                6.02935.03965.37225.05594.6311    8.61757.6788  3.16923.33232.58157.4845
            kurtosis               17.806219.404914.7219         11.2416
                                                  the volume
                                      -  -                   -                                                 i

                1.66241.58531.43831.18540.9822  3.87201.93303.27111.87712.67230.82600.77710.19581.58792.1567
           skewness                                                          V W AP
                    -   -        -
            sd
                0.01340.01490.01460.01640.0136  0.02170.01240.00910.02300.01240.00910.01030.00730.01120.0146
                   -   -

            mean0.02820.02550.02910.03330.0390  0.02550.02880.01800.04530.02670.02290.02490.02600.02430.02740.0272
        Observations at or above 100 SEK
                               -  -                1                     110] SEK based both on closing price and                  the lowest price and
            N     46   74 53     24 81   68 69     78 39 82        ;                 i
              121  102             225      126                           L
                                                                  1189              ;
                                                                                                                               i    i
                                                       Observations are from daily 2010-2011 data forL
                                        −
                                                            -         -                             i
                                                    H V W AP

               3.81194.19506.22269.03812.76832.77142.34984.17192.85169.98753.0729  4.0966              =
          kurtosis               32.593016.6258      14.5141  19.7350           i
                           -     -
                                                                      range
                1.14831.02721.67461.74680.18310.75040.03035.43951.09263.13480.62672.25750.96022.81761.09342.7018
            skewness
                           -     -
            sd
                0.01220.00910.01360.01710.01020.00740.01280.02720.01450.01300.01350.01460.00930.01460.01050.0150
                          -     -
                                                                                         While stocks that are present on only one side of the threshold will be omitted from
        Observations below 100 SEKmean
                0.02860.03180.02540.03380.04500.02090.03120.02450.03100.02230.03470.03300.02160.02350.02380.0270
                          -     -
           N  20 13 47   11 39 31 39 94   67 50   87     82
                      103           163         104     950

                                                              is the highest price during a day for an observation,
                                                                     i
                                            Hyphens indicate missing or too few observations.
                                                      H


         tickerALFAATCO-AATCO-BBOLELUX-BERIC-BLUPENOKI-SEKSANDSCA-BSCV-BSKA-BSKF-BSSAB-ASWED-ATEL2-BVOLV-BTotal
                                                                  Notes:OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90average price. The shares below 100 SEK have a tick size of 0.05 while shares at or above 100 SEK have a ticksize of 0.1 SEK. All non-integer values are reported to four decimal places. The level range is given by,whereweighed average price.regression testing, these are included in the table for comparison.

Table 4: Descriptive statistics for the level range, using the volume weighted average price to separate observations around100 SEK

                                    29
                                        -   -                     -

                6.47685.09825.45085.49304.3104    7.92957.5117  3.21903.41892.58153.7659
            kurtosis               18.706816.868017.3537         11.4338
                                                  the volume
                                      -  -                   -                                                 i

                1.74321.48241.48071.26020.9142  4.02601.79253.02441.81502.94530.82430.76560.19580.86872.1696
           skewness                                                          V W AP
                    -   -        -
            sd
                0.01320.01310.01470.01620.0137  0.02160.01260.00940.02280.01200.00900.01020.00730.00970.0145
                   -   -

            mean0.02780.02490.02890.03250.0395  0.02470.02900.01830.04560.02630.02290.02470.02590.02430.02650.0271
        Observations at or above 100 SEK
                               -  -                1                     110] SEK based both on closing price and                  the lowest price and
            N     48   74 56     24 83   71 67     76 39 80        ;                 i
              121  100             232      125                           L
                                                                  1197              ;
                                                                                                                               i    i
                                                       Observations are from daily 2010-2011 data forL
                                        −
                                                            -         -                             i
                                                    H V W AP

               2.86524.00705.72828.62212.08132.77142.34984.34982.90609.03173.0172  7.0978              =
          kurtosis               31.963417.7142      14.0957  19.2360           i
                           -     -
                                                                      range
                0.89411.33041.52161.6869-0.75220.75040.03035.35801.15723.29340.56492.07380.94462.75661.64322.6732
            skewness
                           -     -
            sd
                0.01350.01520.01360.01720.00860.00740.01280.02730.01440.01300.01270.01480.00960.01460.01200.0151
                          -     -
                                                                                         While stocks that are present on only one side of the threshold will be omitted from
        Observations below 100 SEKmean
                0.03070.03590.02590.03440.04340.02090.03120.02500.03090.02200.03390.03330.02190.02360.02480.0272
                          -     -
         N         8
               20 11 49     39 31 39 92   64 52   88     84
                      103           156         106     942

                                                             is the highest price during a day for an observation,
                                                                     i
                                            Hyphens indicate missing or too few observations.
                                                      H


         tickerALFAATCO-AATCO-BBOLELUX-BERIC-BLUPENOKI-SEKSANDSCA-BSCV-BSKA-BSKF-BSSAB-ASWED-ATEL2-BVOLV-BTotal
                                                                  Notes:OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90average price. The shares below 100 SEK have a tick size of 0.05 while shares at or above 100 SEK have a ticksize of 0.1 SEK. All non-integer values are reported to four decimal places. The level range is given by,whereweighed average price.regression testing, these are included in the table for comparison.

Table 5: Descriptive statistics for the level range, using the closing price within the 90- 110 SEK interval, separated aboveand below the cutoff point 100 SEK

                                    30
                                        -   -                     -

                2.96822.63112.78092.62244.0330  7.99323.29014.66323.29784.55802.37252.56973.08543.19953.1059
             kurtosis
                    -   -        -

                0.53610.64520.1723-0.0766-0.3556 1.99370.47490.70180.31260.17310.1265-0.1476-0.57650.10230.2776
                                                                                 the volume weighed
               skewness                                                                              i
                    -   -        -
            sd
                                                                           V W AP
                0.41460.49880.46610.48540.3517  0.47760.37670.39520.44640.40070.35360.39990.32410.38180.4715
                   -   -

          mean
                 -3.6603-3.8004-3.6479-3.5154-3.3031 -3.8242-3.6224-4.1055-3.1965-3.7066-3.7761-3.7535-3.7252-3.7653-3.6691-3.7191
        Observations at or above 100 SEK                                  ;
           N             -  -             1                        )
                   46   74 53      24 81   68 69      78 39 82                  i  i
              121  102             225      126                     L
                                                         1189
                                                                 −      the lowest price and
                                                                                                                               i           i
                                        H V W APL
                                               -       -                    (
                                                                             110] SEK based both on closing price and average price. ;
                2.43783.27772.72422.55802.53262.28652.34762.39614.23692.59824.12482.23773.61242.51973.0651            = log
         kurtosis              12.3230
                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                              )
                           -     -

                                                                       range
                0.36980.17020.49480.1057-0.33220.1465-0.68792.44280.07480.5851-0.23000.58310.27800.29410.09540.2387
             skewness                                                            log(
                           -     -
            sd
                0.39550.27290.46710.47300.23440.34700.47960.48200.45260.45310.40040.37160.41000.51190.42350.4822
                          -     -

       Observations below 100 SEKmean
                 -3.6328-3.4827-3.7886-3.4987-3.1260-3.9286-3.5649-3.8909-3.5759-3.9165-3.4371-3.4834-3.9223-3.8905-3.8273-3.7315
                          -     -
           N  20 13 47   11 39 31 39 94   67 50   87     82
                       103            163         104     950                      While stocks that are present on only one side of the threshold will be omitted from regression

                                                               is the highest price during a day for an observation,

                                                                 i
                                                      H


         tickerALFAATCO-AATCO-BBOLELUX-BERIC-BLUPENOKI-SEKSANDSCA-BSCV-BSKA-BSKF-BSSAB-ASWED-ATEL2-BVOLV-BTotal
                                                                    Notes: Hyphens indicate missing or too few observations. Observations are from daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90The shares below 100 SEK have a tick size of 0.05 while shares at or above 100 SEK have a tick size of 0.1 SEK.All non-integer values are reported to four decimal places. The log of the relative range is given by,whereaverage price.testing, these are included in the table for comparison.

Table 6: Descriptive statistics for the log of the relative range using volume weighted average price within the 90- 110 SEKinterval, separated above and below the cutoff point 100 SEK

                                    31
                                    -   -                     -

             3.07402.53412.81512.61013.9878  9.36113.04674.40503.21354.92822.35122.56373.08542.75413.1038
         Kurtosis
                 -   -        -

             0.56490.50040.2137-0.0790-0.3700 2.28340.41310.69140.27640.12580.1196-0.1714-0.5765-0.07740.2775
                                                                              the volume weighed
          Skewness                                                                      i
                 -   -        -

                                                                        V W AP
             0.40890.46510.46700.49080.3518  0.46540.38520.40450.44480.38980.35440.39870.32410.36300.4701
         St. Dev.
                 -   -

       Mean
      Observations at or above 100 SEK-3.6704-3.8072-3.6561-3.5441-3.2893 -3.8541-3.6184-4.0910-3.1886-3.7169-3.7761-3.7634-3.7302-3.7653-3.6942-3.7230
                                           ;
        N             -  -             1                        )
                48   74 56      24 83   71 67      76 39 80                  i  i
            121  100             232      125                     L
                                                         1197                   the lowest price and
                                                                   −        i
                                                                                                                          i
                                                   H    L
                                          V W AP
                                            -       -                    (
                                                            Observations are from daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30

             2.18543.00742.52872.50972.36272.28652.34762.49074.45332.60583.72402.24383.57562.80473.0663 110] SEK based both on closing price and average price. The ;
                              11.1723                                    = log
       Kurtosis                                                                  i
                                                                                          )
                        -     -
                                                                    range
             0.22720.52780.38750.1294-0.91260.1465-0.68792.24780.10360.6264-0.28490.50250.25340.28390.21150.2375
                                                                                    log(
         Skewness
                        -     -

             0.42170.37790.47040.46710.21930.34700.47960.49080.44800.45000.39050.38180.41410.51230.44580.4840
         St. Dev.
                        -     -
     Observations below 100 SEK
       Mean
              -3.5711-3.3951-3.7661-3.4781-3.1567-3.9286-3.5649-3.8725-3.5785-3.9295-3.4572-3.4787-3.9064-3.8838-3.7997-3.7267
                       -     -
       N         8
            20 11 49     39 31 39 92   64 52   88     84
                   103           156         106     942

                                                           is the highest price during a day for an observation,

                                                                      i

                                                     H

       TickerALFAATCO-AATCO-BBOLELUX-BERIC-BLUPENOKI-SEKSANDSCA-BSCV-BSKA-BSKF-BSSAB-ASWED-ATEL2-BVOLV-BTotal
                                                                Notes: Hyphens indicate missing or too few observations.stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90shares below 100 SEK have a tick size of 0.05 while shares at or above 100 SEK have a tick size of 0.1 SEK. Allnon-integer values are reported to four decimal places. The log of the relative range is given by,whereaverage price. While stocks that are present on only one side of the threshold will be omitted from regression testing,these are included in the table for comparison.

Table 7: Descriptive statistics for the log of the relative range, using closing price to separate observations around 100 SEK

                                   32
Table 8: Descriptive statistics for range and log range, separated by year

                              Log of relative range
 Year N Min Mean Max Std. Dev Skewness Kurtosis
 2010 1253 -5.1557 -3.7881 -1.6881 0.4498 0.2864 3.4204
 2011 886 -4.9833 -3.6348 -1.9271 0.4978 0.1464 2.7633
 Total 2139 -5.1557 -3.7246 -1.6881 0.4762 0.2588 3.0889

                               Level relative range
 Year N Min Mean Max Std. Dev Skewness Kurtosis
 2010 1253 0.0058 0.0252 0.1849 0.0133 3.0331 24.7677
 2011 886 0.0069 0.0299 0.1456 0.0163 1.8512 9.0649
 Total 2139 0.0058 0.0272 0.1849 0.0148 2.4077 15.2000
Notes: Observations are from daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where
all observations are within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price
and average price. The level range is given by,

                                Hi − Li
                            rangei =         ;
                                           V W APi

where where Hi is the highest price during a day for an observation, Li the lowest
price and V W APi the volume weighed average price. The log range is just the
natural log of the range as described above. All non-integer values are reported
to 4 d.p.

                               33
 Table 9: Descriptive statistics for covariates, sorted around 100 SEK by average price

                                     Observations below 100 SEK
               Absolute range Rel. spread Trades Volume
 Ticker Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev.
 ALFA 2.8300 1.2115 0.1750 0.4229 3634 1504 2807697 1522991
 ATCO-A 3.1269 0.8899 0.5962 0.5113 5415 1816 4941532 1909484
 ATCO-B 2.4011 1.3006 0.2511 0.2223 1842 1130 1227786 842310
 BOL 3.2155 1.6100 0.1398 0.1542 7163 2794 4937167 2632226
 ELUX-B 4.4182 1.0167 0.1182 0.0681 6831 1848 3177000 999980
 ERIC-B 1.9256 0.6890 0.0500 0.0000 8823 2417 12160454 4555016
 LUPE 2.9113 1.1863 0.1107 0.0789 3882 1853 1881955 997922
 NOKI-SEK 2.3397 2.6383 0.3667 0.4659 1933 2571 1731075 2639431
 SAND 2.9383 1.3947 0.0856 0.0654 6514 2672 6232735 3255095
 SCA-B 2.1288 1.2506 0.1018 0.1042 4003 1658 2730980 1474479
 SCV-B 3.3590 1.3126 0.3052 0.4016 3322 1841 1389932 689570
 SKA-B 3.1240 1.3122 0.0990 0.0786 4421 1369 2142798 761322
 SKF-B - - - - - - - -
 SSAB-A 2.0638 0.8721 0.0690 0.0338 3628 1495 2090864 965844
 SWED-A 2.2010 1.3680 0.0756 0.0485 5391 2851 4661514 2385586
 TEL2-B - - - - - - - -
 VOLV-B 2.2409 0.9838 0.0741 0.0603 8479 4355 9051541 7193144
 Total 2.5717 1.4296 0.1484 0.2316 5118 3128 4170428 4028164

                                    Observations at or above 100 SEK
               Absolute range Rel. spread Trades Volume
 Ticker Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev.
 ALFA 2.9587 1.4208 0.2318 0.2624 2899 1441 2086382 1088381
 ATCO-A 2.6772 1.5380 0.1826 0.1198 4934 2397 5416541 2749974
 ATCO-B 3.0436 1.5533 0.1676 0.1358 1742 1099 1069958 549630
 BOL 3.4750 1.7040 0.1164 0.0495 5982 2270 4344477 2344281
 ELUX-B 4.0736 1.3912 0.1632 0.0821 5287 1330 2495540 769749
 ERIC-B - - - - - - - -
 LUPE - - - - - - - -
 NOKI-SEK 2.6646 2.1927 0.2375 0.1974 2300 2089 2419912 2644384
 SAND 2.9963 1.2909 0.1174 0.0434 5606 2133 5372304 2752118
 SCA-B 1.8611 0.9273 0.1807 0.1920 2677 1137 2225065 1118607
 SCV-B 4.7316 2.4115 0.1971 0.2062 4078 2388 1769086 1085304
 SKA-B 2.7971 1.2626 0.1260 0.0581 3329 814 1633285 450537
 SKF-B 2.5000 - 0.3000 - 2987 - 2753108 -
 SSAB-A 2.6373 0.9614 0.1338 0.0533 3786 1373 2217241 991968
 SWED-A 2.7205 1.0693 0.0929 0.0189 5912 1951 5419580 1921948
 TEL2-B 2.5897 0.7745 0.5308 0.6237 2862 846 2076333 739159
 VOLV-B 2.8884 1.1574 0.1045 0.0342 9151 2790 10452121 3805337
 Total 2.8508 1.5250 0.1843 0.2168 4121 2555 3308895 2961761
Notes: Hyphens indicate missing or too few observations. The statistics are based on daily 2010-
2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90; 110] SEK based
both on closing price and average price. The absolute range is the difference between the highest
and lowest prices of a stock during a day. The rel. spread is the difference between bid and ask
prices, relative to the midprice of bid and ask. Trades is the number of executed trades in a day,
and volume the number of shares traded. Trades and volume are rounded to integers, while the
absolute range and spread are reported to 4 d.p.
 Table 10: Descriptive statistics for covariates, sorted around 100 SEK by closing price

                                     Observations below 100 SEK
               Absolute range Rel. spread Trades Volume
 Ticker Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev.
 ALFA 3.0425 1.3497 0.1775 0.4232 3487 1418 2730351 1475044
 ATCO-A 3.5318 1.5252 0.6227 0.5605 5812 2521 5369615 2955264
 ATCO-B 2.4643 1.3107 0.2490 0.2188 1891 1134 1260188 840667
 BOL 3.2791 1.6281 0.1393 0.1549 7235 2849 4985971 2715530
 ELUX-B 4.2500 0.8523 0.1125 0.0744 5976 1414 2740926 501835
 ERIC-B 1.9256 0.6890 0.0500 0.0000 8823 2417 12160454 4555016
 LUPE 2.9113 1.1863 0.1107 0.0789 3882 1853 1881955 997922
 NOKI-SEK 2.3897 2.6462 0.3615 0.4677 1958 2575 1767123 2646196
 SAND 2.9223 1.3853 0.0826 0.0640 6443 2593 6113990 3002356
 SCA-B 2.0952 1.2439 0.0942 0.0933 3965 1649 2670162 1431576
 SCV-B 3.2742 1.2275 0.3133 0.4092 3217 1759 1355458 628218
 SKA-B 3.1596 1.3482 0.0962 0.0772 4387 1353 2127774 750859
 SKF-B - - - - - - - -
 SSAB-A 2.1028 0.9005 0.0724 0.0414 3613 1492 2080762 964052
 SWED-A 2.2203 1.3751 0.0753 0.0483 5367 2787 4643137 2342615
 TEL2-B - - - - - - - -
 VOLV-B 2.3411 1.1661 0.0732 0.0599 8673 4426 9280990 7239722
 Total 2.5874 1.4467 0.1462 0.2324 5118 3168 4186549 4079288

                                    Observations at or above 100 SEK
               Absolute range Rel. spread Trades Volume
 Ticker Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev.
 ALFA 2.9236 1.4011 0.2314 0.2624 2924 1466 2099166 1106692
 ATCO-A 2.6031 1.3606 0.1937 0.1245 4864 2206 5298647 2522097
 ATCO-B 3.0255 1.5633 0.1670 0.1364 1716 1093 1050925 537356
 BOL 3.3865 1.6896 0.1172 0.0465 5882 2112 4276547 2187127
 ELUX-B 4.1161 1.3938 0.1616 0.0809 5492 1551 2594343 885512
 ERIC-B - - - - - - - -
 LUPE - - - - - - - -
 NOKI-SEK 2.5833 2.1869 0.2458 0.1956 2260 2089 2361333 2648040
 SAND 3.0127 1.3037 0.1206 0.0442 5706 2285 5524658 3100151
 SCA-B 1.8918 0.9513 0.1819 0.1913 2743 1213 2281225 1185981
 SCV-B 4.7500 2.3866 0.1944 0.2022 4142 2394 1784141 1096125
 SKA-B 2.7597 1.2216 0.1300 0.0571 3322 826 1629736 455852
 SKF-B 2.5000 - 0.3000 - 2987 - 2753108 -
 SSAB-A 2.6144 0.9581 0.1324 0.0528 3798 1373 2225363 992350
 SWED-A 2.7072 1.0570 0.1000 0.0000 5958 2037 5465160 1966669
 TEL2-B 2.5897 0.7745 0.5308 0.6237 2862 846 2076333 739159
 VOLV-B 2.7994 1.0227 0.1095 0.0301 8966 2654 10246214 3655929
 Total 2.8366 1.5139 0.1856 0.2160 4129 2522 3301966 2911806
Notes: Hyphens indicate missing or too few observations. The statistics are based on daily 2010-
2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90; 110] SEK based
both on closing price and average price. The absolute range is the difference between the highest
and lowest prices of a stock during a day. The rel. spread is the difference between bid and ask
prices, relative to the midprice of bid and ask. Trades is the number of executed trades in a day,
and volume the number of shares traded. Trades and volume are rounded to integers, while the
absolute range and spread are reported to 4 d.p.
              Table 11: RDD regression results

                    Average price Closing price
              log range range log range range
 ˆ (hˆopt) 0.170** 0.00425 0.125* 0.00346
                (0.0889) (0.00492) (0.0801) (0.00317)
                 [0.056] [0.388] [0.118] [0.275]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) 0.164 0.0130** 0.0835 0.000817
                (0.129) (0.00710) (0.107) (0.00523)
                 [0.204] [0.067] [0.434] [0.876]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) 0.106** 0.00370 0.106** 0.00249
                (0.0611) (0.00345) (0.0579) (0.00259)
                 [0.082] [0.283] [0.066] [0.337]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) 0.0824** 0.00516*** 0.0649* 0.00405***
                (0.0448) (0.00239) (0.0433) (0.00192)
                 [0.066] [0.031] [0.134] [0.035]
 N 2029 2029 2029 2029
Notes: Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30
stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90; 110] SEK
based both on closing price and average price. For a highest price,
Ht, a lowest price, Lt, and a volume weighed average price V W APi
of an observation, the level range is given by

                            Hi − Li
                       rangei =         :
                                     V W APi

The log range is defined as the natural logarithm of the above range
estimate. Treatment effect estimates, ˆ , are calculated using a RDD,
regressing range on the closing price, where values on each side of
the tested percentile are fitted with local linear regressions using an
optimal bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). For ro-
bustness, the discontinuity is tested for four different bandwidths, half
the optimal value, the optimal value, twice the optimal value and four
times the optimal value. Standard errors are provided in parentheses
and p-values in brackets. Significance levels are marked according to,
* p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1, *** p < 0:05

                           36
Table 12: Percentile statistics for the volume weighted and closing price within the
90- 110 SEK interval, separated above and below the cutoff point 100 SEK. Excluding
ERIC-B, LUPE, SKF-B and TELE2-B

                                           Percentile (SEK)
                  Observations below 100 SEK Observations at or above 100 SEK
      Percentiles Closing price Average price Closing price Average price
         1% 90.25 90.19 100.00 100.14
         5% 90.90 90.92 100.50 100.56
         10% 91.45 91.52 101.00 101.05
         25% 93.05 93.12 102.30 102.41
         50% 95.25 95.35 104.40 104.49
         75% 97.55 97.68 107.00 106.82
         90% 99.10 99.24 108.80 108.78
         95% 99.50 99.65 109.30 109.37
         99% 99.85 99.92 109.90 109.91

     Observations are from daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations
     are within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price and volume weighed
     average price. This data does not include stocks that are only present either above or
     below 100 SEK. All values are reported to 2 d.p.

                                     37
Table 13: Testing for discontinuities in the level range away from 100 SEK, using the
volume weighed average price

                   Observations below 100 SEK Observations at or above 100 SEK
              93.12 SEK 95.35 SEK 97.68 SEK 102.41 SEK 104.49 SEK 106.82 SEK
                 p25 p50 p75 p25 p50 p75
 ˆ (hˆopt) 0.00777*** 0.000735 0.00122 0.00837** 0.00648 0.00542
                (0.00354) (0.00488) (0.00540) (0.00470) (0.00560) (0.00566)
                  [0.028] [0.880] [0.821] [0.075] [0.247] [0.339]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) 0.000499 -0.000395 0.00644 0.0115** 0.00950 -0.0000739
                (0.00409) (0.00648) (0.00799) (0.00611) (0.00847) (0.00596)
                  [0.903] [0.951] [0.420] [0.060] [0.262] [0.990]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) -0.00190 -0.00312 -0.00294 0.00496* 0.00244 -0.00129
                (0.00273) (0.00344) (0.00392) (0.00318) (0.00364) (0.00346)
                  [0.487] [0.364] [0.453] [0.118] [0.502] [0.709]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) -0.00316* 0.00278 -0.000161 0.000312 0.00269 0.00217
                (0.00225) (0.00232) (0.00310) (0.00233) (0.00255) (0.00243)
                  [0.160] [0.231] [0.959] [0.893] [0.290] [0.371]
 N 880 880 880 1149 1149 1149
Notes: Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are
within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price and average price. p25-p75 refer to the
percentiles of volume weighed average price, V W AP , in the specified range, where observations, i,
are categorized as below if V W APi ∈ [90; 100) SEK, and categorized as above if V W APi ∈ [100; 110]
SEK. For a highest price, Hi and a lowest price, Li, of an observation, the level range is given by

                                         Hi − Li
                                      rangei =         :
                                                      V W APi

Treatment effect estimates are calculated using a RDD, regressing the level range on the volume
weighed average price, where values on each side of the tested percentile are fitted with local linear
regressions using an optimal bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). To avoid the 100
SEK discontinuity affecting the estimates, the observations for which each regression is run is limited
to only one side of the 100 SEK threshold. For robustness, the discontinuity is tested for four different
bandwidths, half the optimal value, the optimal value, twice the optimal value and four times the
optimal value. Standard errors are provided in parentheses and p-values in brackets. Significance
levels are marked according to, * p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1, *** p < 0:05

                                     38
Table 14: Testing for discontinuities in the level range away from 100 SEK, using the
closing price

                  Observations below 100 SEK Observations at or above 100 SEK
              93.05 SEK 95.25 SEK 97.55 SEK 102.30 SEK 104.40 SEK 107.00 SEK
                 (p25) (p50) (p75) (p25) (p50) (p75)
 ˆ (hˆopt) -0.00349 -0.000667 -0.00347 0.00527 -0.000780 -0.00158
                (0.00684) (0.00464) (0.00638) (0.00423) (0.00381) (0.00475)
                  [0.610] [0.886] [0.587] [0.213] [0.838] [0.739]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) -0.00309 -0.0000577 -0.00217 0.00184 -0.00256 -0.00266
                (0.00795) (0.00768) (0.00915) (0.00615) (0.00525) (0.00569)
                  [0.697] [0.994] [0.812] [0.765] [0.625] [0.640]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) -0.00131 0.000548 0.00339 0.000277 0.00153 -0.00325
                (0.00459) (0.00321) (0.00439) (0.00323) (0.00262) (0.00297)
                  [0.775] [0.864] [0.440] [0.932] [0.559] [0.274]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) -0.00383 0.00155 0.00317 -0.00356* 0.00213 0.000439
                (0.00326) (0.00230) (0.00317) (0.00244) (0.00194) (0.00218)
                  [0.239] [0.501] [0.316] [0.145] [0.272] [0.841]
 N 872 872 872 1157 1157 1157
Notes: Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are
within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price and average price. p25-p75 refer to the
percentiles of of closing price, P c, in the specified range, where observations, i, are categorized as
below if P ci ∈ [90; 100) SEK, and categorized as above if P ci ∈ [100; 110] SEK. For a highest price,
Hi, a lowest price, Li, and a volume weighed average price V W APi of an observation, the level range
is given by
                                         Hi − Li
                                      rangei =         :
                                                      V W APi
Treatment effect estimates are calculated using a RDD, regressing range on the closing price, where
values on each side of the tested percentile are fitted with local linear regressions using an optimal
bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). To avoid the 100 SEK discontinuity affecting the
estimates, the observations for which each regression is run is limited to only one side of the 100 SEK
threshold. For robustness, the discontinuity is tested for four different bandwidths, half the optimal
value, the optimal value, twice the optimal value and four times the optimal value. Standard errors
are provided in parentheses and p-values in brackets. Significance levels are marked according to, *
p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1, *** p < 0:05

                                     39
Table 15: Testing for discontinuities in the log range away from 100 SEK, using the
volume weighed average price

                  Observations below 100 SEK Observations at or above 100 SEK
              93.12 SEK 95.35 SEK 97.68 SEK 102.41 SEK 104.49 SEK 106.82 SEK
                 p25 p50 p75 p25 p50 p75
 ˆ (hˆopt) -0.0877 -0.000944 0.00952 0.110 0.115* 0.0779
                (0.0933) (0.120) (0.110) (0.0990) (0.0882) (0.0844)
                  [0.347] [0.994] [0.931] [0.264] [0.191] [0.356]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) 0.219** 0.0519 0.0521 0.180 0.0967 -0.131
                 (0.121) (0.187) (0.167) (0.146) (0.128) (0.131)
                  [0.069] [0.782] [0.755] [0.216] [0.451] [0.318]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) -0.152*** 0.114* 0.0690 0.00463 0.0937* 0.0131
                (0.0749) (0.0812) (0.0864) (0.0733) (0.0610) (0.0688)
                  [0.042] [0.162] [0.424] [0.950] [0.125] [0.850]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) -0.174*** 0.101* 0.167*** 0.0351 0.116*** 0.0582
                (0.0682) (0.0643) (0.0796) (0.0648) (0.0571) (0.0651)
                  [0.011] [0.115] [0.036] [0.588] [0.041] [0.371]
 N 880 880 880 1149 1149 1149
Notes: Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are
within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price and average price. p25-p75 refer to the
percentiles of volume weighed average price, V W AP , in the specified range, where observations, i,
are categorized as below if V W APi ∈ [90; 100) SEK, and categorized as above if V W APi ∈ [100; 110]
SEK. For a highest price, Hi and a lowest price, Lt, of an observation, the log range is given by
                                   (       )
                                            Hi − Li
                                      log(range)i = log              :
                                                          V W APi

Treatment effect estimates are calculated using a RDD, regressing the log range on the volume weighed
price, where values on each side of the tested percentile are fitted with local linear regressions using
an optimal bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). To avoid the 100 SEK discontinuity
affecting the estimates, the observations for which each regression is run is limited to only one side
of the 100 SEK threshold. For robustness, the discontinuity is tested for four different bandwidths,
half the optimal value, the optimal value, twice the optimal value and four times the optimal value.
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and p-values in brackets. Significance levels are marked
according to, * p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1, *** p < 0:05

                                     40
Table 16: Testing for discontinuities in the log range away from 100 SEK, using the
closing price

                  Observations below 100 SEK Observations at or above 100 SEK
              93.05 SEK 95.25 SEK 97.55 SEK 102.30 SEK 104.40 SEK 107.00 SEK
                 p25 p50 p75 p25 p50 p75
 ˆ (hˆopt) -0.0203 0.162* 0.118 -0.0638 0.0508 -0.120
                 (0.103) (0.102) (0.103) (0.0863) (0.0869) (0.100)
                  [0.844] [0.113] [0.253] [0.460] [0.559] [0.229]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) -0.00707 0.0258 0.134 0.131 -0.118 -0.194*
                 (0.151) (0.151) (0.151) (0.127) (0.131) (0.138)
                  [0.963] [0.864] [0.375] [0.302] [0.367] [0.159]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) -0.0857 0.0675 0.200*** -0.112* 0.0347 0.0642
                (0.0797) (0.0691) (0.0854) (0.0698) (0.0606) (0.0740)
                  [0.282] [0.329] [0.019] [0.109] [0.567] [0.386]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) -0.129** 0.0716 0.215*** -0.147*** 0.0656 0.114**
                (0.0727) (0.0634) (0.0796) (0.0628) (0.0551) (0.0610)
                  [0.075] [0.259] [0.007] [0.019] [0.234] [0.062]
 N 872 872 872 1157 1157 1157
Notes: Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are
within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price and average price. p25-p75 refer to the
percentiles of closing price, P c, in the specified range, where observations, i, are categorized as below
if P ci ∈ [90; 100) SEK, and categorized as above if P ci ∈ [100; 110] SEK. For a highest price, Hi, a
lowest price, Li, and a volume weighed average price V W APi of an observation, the log range is given
by                                   (       )
                                            Hi − Li
                                      log(range)i = log              :
                                                          V W APi
Treatment effect estimates are calculated using a RDD, regressing the log range on the closing price,
where values on each side of the tested percentile are fitted with local linear regressions using an
optimal bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). To avoid the 100 SEK discontinuity
affecting the estimates, the observations for which each regression is run is limited to only one side
of the 100 SEK threshold.For robustness, the discontinuity is tested for four different bandwidths,
half the optimal value, the optimal value, twice the optimal value and four times the optimal value.
Standard errors are provided in parentheses and p-values in brackets. Significance levels are marked
according to, * p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1, *** p < 0:05

                                     41
     Table 17: Testing for covariate discontinuities at 100 SEK, average price

                   Ex post characteristics (tn) Ex ante characteristics (tn−1)
               ln trades ln spread ln volume ln trades ln spread ln volume
 ˆ (hˆopt) 0.0879 0.0530 0.216** 0.103 0.0670 0.161*
                (0.0967) (0.155) (0.119) (0.100) (0.147) (0.123)
                 [0.364] [0.733] [0.069] [0.304] [0.649] [0.188]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) -0.135 0.0592 -0.195 -0.177 0.0733 -0.269*
                (0.133) (0.221) (0.162) (0.140) (0.209) (0.171)
                 [0.312] [0.789] [0.229] [0.207] [0.725] [0.115]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) -0.106* 0.0961 0.0862 -0.0548 0.0440 0.0701
                (0.0696) (0.110) (0.0855) (0.0707) (0.106) (0.0869)
                 [0.127] [0.384] [0.313] [0.438] [0.679] [0.420]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) -0.130*** 0.0579 0.0251 -0.0805* -0.0114 0.0401
                (0.0512) (0.0778) (0.0629) (0.0510) (0.0767) (0.0627)
                 [0.011] [0.457] [0.689] [0.114] [0.881] [0.522]
 N 2029 1636 2029 2022 1626 2022
Notes: The assigment variable, average price, is calculated as the volume weighed average
price. Spread refer to the relative spread, that is the spread in percentage terms of the
midprice of the bid and ask prices. Number of observations for testing spread is lower
                                                                      rd                    th
than the other tests due to missing ask prices between January 3   2011 and June 15
2011. The ex ante characteristics are represented by one day lagged variables. Treatment
effect estimates, ˆ , are calculated using a RDD, regressing each covariate on the volume
weighed average price, where values on each side of the tested percentile are fitted with local
linear regressions using an optimal bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). For
robustness, the discontinuity is tested for four different bandwidths, half the optimal value,
the optimal value, twice the optimal value and four times the optimal value. Standard
errors are provided in parentheses and p-values in brackets. Coefficients and standard
errors reported to 3 s.f., and p-values to 3 d.p. Significance levels are marked according
to, * p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1, *** p < 0:05. Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for
OMXS30 stocks, where all observations are within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both
on closing price and average price.

                                   42
     Table 18: Testing for covariate discontinuities at 100 SEK, closing price

                   Ex post characteristics (tn) Ex ante characteristics (tn−1)
               ln trades ln spread ln volume ln trades ln spread ln volume
 ˆ (hˆopt) 0.127* 0.372*** 0.339*** 0.170** 0.341*** 0.242***
                (0.0979) (0.156) (0.116) (0.0960) (0.150) (0.116)
                 [0.195] [0.017] [0.004] [0.076] [0.023] [0.036]

 ˆ (0:5hˆopt) 0.0973 0.434*** 0.191 0.125 0.0887 0.136
                (0.126) (0.211) (0.152) (0.132) (0.201) (0.154)
                 [0.439] [0.039] [0.211] [0.341] [0.660] [0.379]

 ˆ (2hˆopt) 0.0968* 0.223*** 0.198*** 0.0479 0.117 0.175***
                (0.0749) (0.111) (0.0867) (0.0720) (0.113) (0.0852)
                 [0.196] [0.045] [0.023] [0.506] [0.301] [0.040]

 ˆ (4hˆopt) -0.0440 0.141** 0.0716 -0.0211 -0.0399 0.0802*
               (0.0568) (0.0801) (0.0642) (0.0523) (0.0798) (0.0625)
                 [0.439] [0.078] [0.265] [0.687] [0.617] [0.200]
 N 2029 1636 2029 2022 1626 2022
Notes: The assigment variable by which treatment is indicated is the closing price. Spread
refer to the relative spread, that is the spread in percentage terms of the midprice of the
bid and ask prices. Number of observations for testing spread is lower than the other tests
                                              rd                   th
due to missing ask prices between January 3   2011 and June 15   2011. The ex ante
characteristics are represented by one day lagged variables. Treatment effect estimates, ˆ ,
are calculated using a RDD, regressing each covariate on the closing price, where values on
each side of the tested percentile are fitted with local linear regressions using an optimal
bandwidth, hˆopt, calculated follwing Imbens (2009). For robustness, the discontinuity
is tested for four different bandwidths, half the optimal value, the optimal value, twice
the optimal value and four times the optimal value. Standard errors are provided in
parentheses and p-values in brackets. Coefficients and standard errors reported to 3 s.f.,
and p-values to 3 d.p. Significance levels are marked according to, * p < 0:2, ** p < 0:1,
*** p < 0:05. Tests are performed on daily 2010-2011 data for OMXS30 stocks, where all
observations are within the interval [90; 110] SEK based both on closing price and average
price.

                                   43
            Half optimal bandwidth                   Optimal bandwidth
         .2                                                           .2

        .15                                                    .15

         .1                                                           .1

      Level range                                           Level range
        .05                                                    .05

       0                                             0
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

          Double optimal bandwidth             Quadruple optimal bandwidth
         .2                                                           .2

        .15                                                    .15

         .1                                                           .1

      Level range                                           Level range
        .05                                                    .05

       0                                             0
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 1: RDD results for the average price and level range, using four different band-
widths. Where the optimal bandwidth is calculated using Imbens (2009) method.

                                     44
            Half optimal bandwidth                   Optimal bandwidth
         .2                                                           .2

        .15                                                    .15

         .1                                                           .1

      Level range                                          Level range
        .05                                                    .05

       0                                             0
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

          Double optimal bandwidth            Quadruple optimal bandwidth
         .2                                                           .2

        .15                                                    .15

         .1                                                           .1

      Level range                                          Level range
        .05                                                    .05

       0                                             0
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 2: RDD results for closing price and level range using four different bandwidths.
Where the optimal bandwidth is calculated using Imbens (2009) method.

                                     45
            Half optimal bandwidth                   Optimal bandwidth
       −1                                           −1

       −2                                           −2

       −3                                           −3
     log range                                           log range
       −4                                           −4

       −5                                           −5
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

          Double optimal bandwidth             Quadruple optimal bandwidth
       −1                                           −1

       −2                                           −2

       −3                                           −3
     log range                                           log range
       −4                                           −4

       −5                                           −5
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 3: RDD results for average price and log range using four different bandwidths.
Where the optimal bandwidth is calculated using Imbens (2009) method.

                                     46
            Half optimal bandwidth                   Optimal bandwidth
       −1                                           −1

       −2                                           −2

       −3                                           −3
     log range                                           log range
       −4                                           −4

       −5                                           −5
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                 Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

          Double optimal bandwidth             Quadruple optimal bandwidth
       −1                                           −1

       −2                                           −2

       −3                                           −3
     log range                                           log range
       −4                                           −4

       −5                                           −5
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                 Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 4: RDD results for closing price and log range using four different bandwidths.
Where the optimal bandwidth is calculated using Imbens (2009) method.

                                     47
        100


        80


        60

    Percent

        40


        20


        0
             90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110

                        count of nocrossover  count of crossover

Figure 5: Number of crossover observations as a function of average price, displayed as
percent of total numbers of observations within a 1 SEK interval. The ticks shown on
the x-axis refers to whole numbers but is placed in the middle of ech bin.

                                     48
        100


        80


        60

    Percent

        40


        20


        0
             90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110

                        count of nocrossover  count of crossover

Figure 6: Number of crossover observations as a function of closing price price, displayed
as percent of total numbers of observations within a 1 SEK interval. The ticks shown
on the x-axis refers to whole numbers but is placed in the middle of ech bin.

                                     49
         .2                                                        .15


       .15
                                                                       .1

         .1

     Level range                                             Level range.05
        .05


       0                                             0
        −4 −2 0 2 4 6             −2 0 2 4 6 8
        Average price where 0 is p25 below z0 (93.12 SEK)     Closing price where 0 is p25 above z0 (102.30 SEK)

       −2                                           −1

                                             −2
       −3

                                                    −3

     log range−4                                            log range
                                                    −4

       −5                                           −5

          −4 −2 0 2 4 6          −5  0  5
       Average price where 0 is p50 above z0 (104.49 SEK)     Closing price where 0 is p50 below z0 (95.25 SEK)

Figure 7: The most significant discontinuities away from the cutoff point Z0 (100 SEK)
for all four regression specifications, looking only at the optimal bandwidth.

                                     50
       10                                            10


       9                                             9


       8                                             8


       7                                             7
      log number of trades

       6                                             Lagged log number of trades6
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

       10                                            10


       9                                             9


       8                                             8


       7                                             7
      log number of trades

       6                                             Lagged log number of trades6
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                 Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 8: Testing for discontinuities for log of number of trades at Z0 (100 SEK) for
both the average and the closing price. To test for predetermined characteristics the
variable is also lagged.

                                     51
       −4                                           −4

       −5                                           −5

       −6                                           −6

     log relative spread−7                                               −7
                                                Lagged log relative spread
       −8                                           −8
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

       −4                                           −4

       −5                                           −5

       −6                                           −6

     log relative spread−7                                               −7
                                                Lagged log relative spread
       −8                                           −8
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                 Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 9: Testing for discontinuities for log of relative spread at Z0, (100 SEK), for both
the average and the closing price. To test for predetermined characteristics the variable
is also lagged.

                                     52
       18                                            18


       16                                            16


     log volume14                                              14
                                                         Lagged log volume

       12                                            12
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                Average price where 0 is 100 SEK                      Average price where 0 is 100 SEK

       18                                            18


       16                                            16


     log volume14                                              14
                                                         Lagged log volume

       12                                            12
        −10 −5 0 5 10        −10 −5 0 5 10
                 Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK                       Closing price where 0 is 100 SEK

Figure 10: Testing for discontinuities for log of traded volume at Z0, (100 SEK), for both
the average and the closing price. To test for predetermined characteristics the variable
is also lagged.

                                     53
      .08


      .06


    Density.04


      .02


     0
        80  90  100  110  120
                                      Average price

Figure 11: Estimation of the density of observations right above and just below the
cutoff point Z0, (100 SEK), for average price.

                                     54
       .1


      .08


      .06

    Density
      .04


      .02


     0
        80  90  100  110  120
                                         Closing price

Figure 12: Estimation of the density of observations right above and just below the
cutoff point Z0, (100 SEK), for the closing price

                                     55