Stockholm School of Economics Spring 2013
Department of Finance

Telling True from False
Do Markets React Efficiently to Takeover Rumors?

Alexander Kronvall*
Ossian Hanning**

Abstract

This thesis examines how U.S. markets react to 345 different takeover rumors, and how efficiently the
market is capable of distinguishing between true and false rumors. The markets do appear to react
differently to true rumors, with a statistically significant difference in the stock price reaction on the
day of the rumor, giving weight to the hypothesis that the market can discern true rumors from false.
Using this finding, we attempt to create a trading strategy by applying methods previously used for
estimating the likelihood of success for takeovers to rumors. With the use of logit classification models
and holdout samples we seem to be able to distinguish between true and false rumors with some success,
but we cannot profit from trading on the rumors. Using an out-ofsample dataset also on the U.S.
market as well as a sample of U.K. rumors, we manage to classify rumors with some degree of precision
using the model constructed from estimates from the primary sample. The stock market seems to be
reacting efficiently to rumors as we cannot find any evidence to the contrary. We also find a rumor run-
up before the rumor publication, which we attribute to the rumor diffusing through the market rather
than to insider trading.

Keywords: Takeover Rumors, Market Efficiency, Event Study, Mergers and Acquisitions, Logit
Analysis

Tutor: Francesco Sangiorgi
Date: 15 May 2013

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank our tutor Francesco Sangiorgi, Assistant Professor at
the Department of Finance, Stockholm School of Economics, for his valuable input and guidance
throughout the process of writing this thesis.

* 22179@student.hhs.se ** 22184 Qstudent.hhs.se

CONTENTS

1. Introduction

2. Previous Literature 4
2.1 Rumors in financial markets ......0ccccccccececcesecscsscsecsecsesscsececsesecesecsesscsessessesscsessessesecseecsesseseseesseeeeee 4
2.2 Takeover prediction 6
2.3 Bankruptcy prediction ........cecceceecessesseeeeesceseesecseeessceseeeececesesseeeesecsseceeesecseeseeeeseseeeeesaeseeeenseeaeeeeseeeaees 7
2.4 Media and the market .......0...cccccecsesesseseescesesescseecscsesesecscsesessscsesscscsesesssseseaesesseseseseacsessesceesesessesenesessens 7
2.5 Preannouncement run-up and insider trading 0.0... ccc eeeeseeeseeeeeeeeneceeeeseeseeceeeseeseeseeseeeeesseeseseaessseeeennees 8
3. Data 9
B.1 Rumor data ..cccccccccccccccecccecscsscscsscsscsecsesscsecsecsesecsssecsesscsscsessssscsecsesessecsssecsessssecsessssecsessesesesssseeeeseseae 9
3.2 Stock and accounting data cece eeeececeesseeeeeeensceeesseseeeesececsaeceesesecsecsesseceaeseseseeneeseesseeseeceeneeseeseeeeneeeee 10
3.3 Data for robustness teSts ....c.ccccccccce cece csecsescsscecsesscsecsesscceeecsessescsscsecsessssecsessseessessessesssscsesssssseeeesseeee 10
4. Methodology and Theory 11
4.1 Event study methodology .....ccecccecessesecesseseeeeessseeesseeseecsseseseseceeesanseeeaeseecesseessesseeseesssenseeesseesnesseeeeeeee 11
4.2 Corrections for outliers and missing data 0... cc eececeeeeeeseesesenseseesensceecseesceesesseeecsenecaeeestssnesseeeseeeneeaeeee 14
4.3 Tests for difference .....ccccccceccccc cece cscscsscsecsecsesscsessscscsecsececsssscsecsesscsecsessessssecsesecsesssseeseesssecsessseessesasees 14
4.4 Bankruptcy probability formulas... ce cceccceesececceseeseeeeeseceseceseeseeeeceeceseseeseseceeeeesesaeeeeeeesseseeeeeensereenee 15
4.5 Binary logit regression analysis. lS
4.6 Model specifications .........ccceeeeseceseseeeeseseeeseeseeeeeeseeeseseresseeeeesecsseeaesseeseeeseseeseeeasesceeesaeseeeeeeeaeseeseeseneses 16

4.7 The Efficient Markets Hypothesis

4.8 Connections between takeover likelihood and book values ......cccccccsceeeseeeeessesees esses eesseseesesseeeeseeeeee 18
4.9 Insider trading in our dataset... ccccceecessceeeeeseeeescescseeecescsecseeseeecsecseeeeecesseeeeescesaeeeseeseesaseeeeseseeeseeaeeee 19
5. Results 20
5.1 Descriptive statistics ON TUMOTS.........ccceeesceseeseeeecesesecescesecesecesecsecesecseceaeeceaeceeceeesecseecaeeeeseeneseaseeaeeaee 20
5.2 Stock market reaction around rumor publications ........cccceeeeseeseeeeeeeeseceseeseceseeeeeeseseseseeeneeaeeteesnseseeaee 22
5.3 Characteristics of firms depending on veracity Of PUMOT ........ceceeeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeseeteeeeeeeeesenteeenaee 28

5.4 Difference testing.

5.5 Regressions on difference in rumor day reaction based on veracity .......:ccsceecsseeeeeeseeseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeseeees 31
5.6 Logit regressions and trading model specification..........ccccceeesecereeeeeeeseeeseeeeeseeeeesseenseseeseeseeseenaeeneeeaea 35
5.7 Classification of rumors and outcome of trading strategy.......ccccceceeceseeeeeeeseeeeseeseesseseessseteeseseeeeeneeeeen 38
5.8 Robustness tests .......ccccccccssesecscsesseseessescscscsesscsesesesecscsesesssesescscsesesecscscsesesseseseseacsessescsssesesscseseessesenseceeee 42
6. Conclusion 49
7. Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research 51
8. References 53

A. Appendix 56

1. INTRODUCTION

Few corporations in today's information-driven financial markets have not at least once come across
rumors about themselves. Rumors can concern almost any business-related matter and vary greatly in
how strongly they impact markets. A rumor, when compared to an announcement, often contains little
information. Sources are often either not revealed or report anonymously what they know to journalists
or other investors. In most cases, details are sparse and investors have to rely on other indicators than
the rumor report itself to judge the veracity of the rumor. One common type of rumors in finance
concerns takeovers. As the premium for takeovers sometimes go as high as 50 percent! above the current
market value, and an investor that holds the stock at a point early enough in the process is able to
capture a majority of this, takeover rumors can be argued to be of particular interest to researchers.
The returns from making the right call can be very large and the ability to correctly estimate the
veracity of takeover rumors could potentially prove very profitable.

This thesis investigates the reaction of the U.S. stock market to rumors concerning acquisitions as
they are published in the media. First, we examine whether the market appears to be able to distinguish
between rumors that are followed by a takeover (hereafter referred to as true rumors) and rumors that
are not followed by any bids (hereafter referred to as false rumors) and find that the market reacts more
strongly to the publication of true rumors than to false. We investigate simple strategies such as whether
it is profitable to buy and hold the target stock as a rumor surfaces, and what profits are achieved if
one would be able to trade either on only true or only false rumors. We show that no abnormal holding
period returns can be made from simply buying and holding rumored target firms, but that the difference
between the buy-and-hold returns of trading on true rumors and false rumors are noticeable.

Second, we seek potential explanations for the difference in the stock market’s reaction to the
publication of true and false rumors by examining whether there is any difference in the run-up before
the rumor, but do not find any statistically significant difference between the two rumor types. We do,
however, find a statistically significant run-up for rumors overall, which could be a signal that the run-
up is evidence of the rumor diffusion process (as described by Van Bommel, 2003; based on Kyle, 1985)
throughout the market rather than of insider trading. If the rumor run-ups were only caused by insider
trading, we would expect a smaller run-up before false rumors which we do not find. The fact that both
trading volume and stock price reaction are larger for rumors that are followed by bids tells us that
there is some form of information not readily visible in the rumors themselves; even when controlling
for the level of detail in the published rumor and how well-reputed the news source is, the difference
between true and false rumors changes little.

Third, we attempt to use the information that is publicly available to determine if we can classify
rumors depending on whether the rumored target firm is more or less likely to be acquired. Dietrich &
Sorensen (1984), Palepu (1986), Walter (1990) and Barnes (1998) are some of a number of papers

attempting to use firm-specific characteristics to classify firms as more or less attractive to acquirers.

1 As established by, among others, Comment and Jarrell (1988).

1

The notion is that firms that are resource-constrained but exhibit high growth; firms that have an
abundance of resources but exhibit low growth; smaller firms; and firms that are badly managed are all
more likely to be taken over than the average firm. Variables of interest may thus be market
capitalization, sales growth and the price-to-earnings ratio. The technique used is strikingly similar to
the bankruptcy prediction models by Altman (1968), Ohlson (1980) and Zmijewski (1984), models that
are all in popular use and considered successful in estimating the probability of bankruptcy for firms.
All of the papers on acquisition prediction mentioned above find that it is possible to classify firms into
targets and non-targets better than chance, but that the technique is unwieldy to apply on the markets.
The reason is that the number of non-targets outnumber the number of targets by more than 30-to-1
in the wild (Palepu, 1984), and that the models used only skews the odds in one's favor. Furthermore,
the efficient markets hypothesis states that it might not be possible to trade profitably using these
models, as stock prices should have already internalized the increased likelihood of an acquisition.

By combining the techniques used by these papers (dichotomous classification models using book
values and financial key ratios) with an event, the publication of a rumor, we see whether we can find
any systematically different target firm characteristics between true and false rumors and whether these
characteristics help explain some of the difference in the reaction to the publication of rumors. The
difference between looking at all firms listed on a market and only the firms that have been identified
as potential takeover targets in rumors is that instead of non-targets outnumbering targets by 30-to-1
the ratio is closer to 3-to-1. We find a model that, using financial key ratios and other firm-specific
characteristics as well as the level of detail of the rumor, manages to classify firms significantly better
than chance (while avoiding data snooping biases as the sample is divided into a training set and a
validation set). None of the different investment strategies we formulate using the model, some of which
are more conservative and some of which are less conservative, yield any statistically significant
abnormal one-year holding period returns. However, we find that by adding the abnormal return on the
day of publication of the rumor results in a model with a significantly higher degree of explanatory
power. This means that we are unable to observe the underlying information that the market uses to
distinguish between true or false rumors, but we can use the information inherent in the market reaction
in combination with the explanatory power we find in the firm-specific characteristics to identify true
rumors. The model specification including the abnormal return on the day the rumor is published
manages to classify rumors as true or false even better. However, no profits that are statistically different
from zero are achieved using any trading rule based on this model either, implying that the market
already has incorporated this information into the stock price.

Fourth, for robustness, we test whether we can replicate the results we found in our U.S. sample
(from the M&A database Zephyr) with a dataset from a different source, also containing U.S. acquisition
rumors (from Bloomberg). Ascertaining that no target firms are included in both datasets, we estimate
the model coefficients on the U.S. Zephyr sample and apply the model with these estimated coefficients
to the U.S. Bloomberg sample. The same model with the same coefficients is applied to a U.K. sample,
also from Zephyr, and we find that we are able to classify rumors into groups based on the likelihood
of them being true better than chance in these two datasets as well.

The thesis is divided as follows: in section 2, we go over the previous literature on the topic. In

section 3, we discuss our dataset and initial data generation. In section 4 we present the methodology

used and the theoretical framework that lays the foundation for the rest of our thesis. Section 5 lists
the results we arrive at, and section 6 sums up our conclusions based on the results. Section 7 concludes

with the limitations of the study and some suggestions for potential areas for further research.

Hypothesis 1: Markets are able to distinguish between true and false acquisition rumors, be it using

public or private information.

While the opposite could be possible, several aspects point towards the hypothesized outcome being
the more likely case. Previous works on the topic have found that some financial key ratios differ
systematically between targets and non-targets. The possibility of insider information being traded
on also opens up for larger trading volumes and abnormal returns for the rumors that actually hold
water. We do not expect, however, to be able to explain the exact causes of a potential difference
between true and false rumors quantitatively as we cannot observe variables such as insider

information.

Hypothesis 2: It is not possible to profit from following a buy-and-hold strategy based on acquisition

rumors.

This is a relatively straightforward test of market efficiency, and given efficient markets a profitable

trade on rumors should not on average be possible.

Hypothesis 3a: It is possible, as an uninformed trader, to use public information (including the stock

market’s reaction pattern) to distinguish between true and false acquisition rumors.

Our hypothesis is that characteristics that make some firms more likely to be taken over than others
exist, analogous to some of the papers within the field of takeover prediction. We however also
believe that a model based on firm characteristics can be built upon by including some of the private

or unobservable information reflected in the target stock price reaction that is not publicly available.
Hypothesis 3b: It is not possible to profit from acquisition rumors using only this public information.
The expectation is that the market's reaction to an acquisition rumor is efficient enough to eliminate

any possible profits from trading on the rumors, regardless of whether the stock price reaction is

used as an indicator or not.

2. PREVIOUS LITERATURE

Before we present our findings it is only natural to look at what has previously been done on the topic
at hand and what lessons can be learned from the works of others. We start off by briefly summarizing
the research done on rumors. As we use our findings on the stock market’s reaction on takeover rumors
to predict which rumors are more likely to be true (and result in an acquisition) an understanding of
the field of takeover prediction and the tools most commonly used will prove beneficial. Another field
where much effort has been made toward finding predictive models is the field of bankruptcy prediction.
We take a closer look at some of the papers within this field, both to learn from its long history and
some of its missteps along the way, but also to later prove a linkage between the probability of
bankruptcy and that of being taken over. Since we look at rumors that are diffused by the media, by
large international news outlets as well as smaller online-only publications, rather than by word-of
mouth, the relationship between the media and the stock market is highly relevant. A phenomenon
commonly seen before takeovers is a significant run-up in the stock price, for which one potential
explanation is rumors. In academia, the run-up is also often linked to insider trading, which is why we

conclude this section with some papers which agree with this view and some that do not.

2.1 Rumors in financial markets

One of the earliest empirical papers on the effect of rumors on stock markets is Rose (1951), who
hypothesize that trends, unidirectional movements of stock prices in the stock market, are caused by
rumors. These trends are named stickiness and Rose is able to identify a certain degree of stickiness in
the market. While he manages to discard several other explanations for the stickiness, he is unable to
ascertain that rumors have an effect on the market.

After Rose, not much significant research was done on rumors until the 1990’s when Pound and
Zeckhauser (1990) did a study on actual rumors, using 42 takeover rumors published in the Wall Street
Journal column Heard on the Street. Their findings show that, on average, no excess return can be
realized through buying (or selling) rumored target stocks for a holding period of one year, indicating
that the market reacts efficiently to rumors. Pound and Zeckhauser’s study reveals, however, that there
is a significant run-up in prices before the publication of the rumor, indicating that the rumor has
already been disseminated in the investment community prior to publication in the column.

Pound and Zeckhauser’s research was followed by a similar study by Zivney, Bertin, and Torabzedeh
(1996). Zivney et al., however, also study another column in the Wall Street Journal called Abreast of
the Market, published on the same page of the journal as the Heard on the Street column. Analyzing a
total of 871 takeover rumors divided between the two columns they find that the market reacts in a
much stronger fashion to the rumors published in the Abreast of the Market column. They calculate
that the cumulative abnormal return of a portfolio of rumored target stocks has a mean of -4.32% in a
period of 80 days following the rumor publication and that it is hence possible to make a profit by
trading on this overreaction. Contrary to the Pound and Zeckhauser study, Zivney et al. thus conclude

that the market is not fully efficient in its reaction to rumors.

Both Pound and Zeckhauser and Zivney et al. find that a majority of the takeovers rumored in the
column never take place, but they do not try to determine if there are any differences between true and
false rumors. This is where we believe that our study can contribute; by examining the characteristics
of the firms appearing in the true and false rumors, respectively, in addition to separating the market
reaction on basis of the validity of the rumor we are able to build upon the findings of the two
aforementioned studies.

Chou et al. (2010) attempt to predict takeovers based on only cumulative abnormal return around
the publication date of the rumor using 74 rumors that led to a takeover announcement and 187 that
did not. Thus, their study bears some similarities with our study. Using this approach, contrary to the
findings of the present study, Chou et al. are not able to establish a statistically significant difference
in the stock price reaction following true and false rumors on the day of publication of the rumor. They
are instead able to find differences in the period preceding the rumor publication, a finding that we have
been unable to replicate.

There are a great number of psychological studies treating the topic of rumors. While many are
beyond the scope of the present, more quantitative, study there are still some interesting considerations
in these papers. One example is Kimmel (2004), who finds that rumors that ultimately prove to be true
become more credible and precise as they are transmitted, in contrast to false rumors which grow

progressively more distorted.

Trading volume and rumors

One of the most recent papers on rumors is Gao and Oler (2012). They find abnormally high trading
volumes during the period following a takeover rumor and that the volume consists of both significant
buy- and sell-sides. Looking at explanations as to why investors would want to sell on takeover rumors
they discard several reasons before concluding that investors act rationally when selling. As so few
takeover rumors actually materialize (twelve percent of the rumors in their sample) shorting the rumors

becomes a profitable trading strategy.

Credibility of rumors

DiFonzo and Bordia (1997) find, using experimental stock simulations, that people, contrary to their
stated opinion that rumors are non-credible, trade on rumors as if they were news. Oberlechner and
Hocking (2004) show in a questionnaire-based study find that traders prioritize the speed of news and
anticipated impact on the markets above the accuracy of the information. Kosfeld (1998) states that
the important characteristic of a rumor is not whether it is true or false, but rather the inability to tell
the difference and that a rumor becomes more credible with the extent it is communicated as well as

the number of sources reporting it.

Rumors on the Internet

Many of the papers concerning rumors were written before the popularization of the Internet as a source
of information, a tool that has simplified and created new ways for the dissemination of rumors. Clarkson
et al. (2006) examine whether or not postings about rumored takeovers on Internet Discussion Sites
(IDS) affect stock prices. They find that there are significant intraday abnormal returns and volume
during a 10 minute posting interval and significant trading volume during the 10 minute interval
immediately preceding it, in the predicted direction. Using these findings they discuss whether traders
use IDS to manipulate the prices of stocks they already have a position in. Tumarkin and Whitelaw
(2001) perform a similar study on the at-the-time leading investment discussion forum Ragingbull.com
and find that message board activity does not predict returns or trading volume. Their findings refute
the possibility that the market can be manipulated by discussion site postings and are instead consistent

with market efficiency.

2.2 Takeover prediction

If rumors is an area of study that is still relatively unexplored, the same cannot be said about the
research concerning takeovers. A large number of papers have been published on the subject, each
introducing a new model aiming to identify firms that are likely to be takeover targets. Among these
papers are Simkowitz and Monroe (1971), Castagna and Matolesy (1976), Belkoui (1978) and Dietrich
and Sorensen (1984). The study by Dietrich and Sorensen was the first to apply a logit regression
analysis to the question of takeover prediction, an approach that is largely followed by this study. Using
this analysis tool on several accounting values they are able to create a model with an accuracy rate of
90 percent.

Palepu (1986) presents some damning criticism toward the earlier work and lay down some ground
rules for how to construct a model for takeover prediction. His criticism is mainly focused on the fact
that previous studies had not used random sampling of their data (leading to biased estimates and
unrealistic error rates) and that the probability cutoff used was often chosen arbitrarily. We have tried
to keep his criticism in mind when constructing our model. Palepu then develops a model for takeover
prediction himself, but as he was not able to find any specification that made its explanatory power
significant he reached the conclusion that it is not possible to robustly predict takeovers beforehand.
This finding was later challenged by Powell (1997) who states that Palepu’s decision rule to create
trading portfolios (to include as many target firms as possible) is erroneous and that the portfolios
should instead be formed by maximizing the proportion of target firms to non-target firms. This is also
the decision rule applied in this thesis. Powell then convincingly shows that by following this rule, it is
in fact possible to create a profitable takeover prediction model. Barnes (1998) also tries to improve on
the methodology of Palepu (1986) and includes anticipatory share price movements in his model. Unlike
Powell (1997), Barnes confirms the findings of Palepu and states that the semi-strong form of the
efficient market hypothesis is valid since the market has already accounted for the probability of a firm
being a takeover target. More recent work on takeover prediction include Branch and Yang (2003) who
look at takeover bids and extend the scope of the model beyond accounting data by using the form and
size of proposed payment as determinants and conclude that cash offers are more likely to succeed than

equity offers. Branch further improves on the model in Branch and Wang (2009) by using a pair-

matched logit regression and including other factors such as stock price, bid competition and target
resistance.

Consequently, there is empirical evidence showing both that it is and that it is not possible to predict
which firms are more likely to be takeover targets. The present study sides with the views of, among
others, Dietrich and Sorensen (1984), Powell (1997) and Branch and Yang (2003): that it is possible to
formulate a model that allows classification of firms into those more and less likely to be taken over.
None of the papers find conclusive evidence that it is possible to trade profitably using their models, a

conclusion that we are hesitant to make as well.

2.3 Bankruptcy prediction

While this thesis deals with the question of takeovers and takeover prediction, the field of bankruptcy
prediction is closely related. Both fields try to predict a major event in the lifespan of a company by
using publicly available data. Barnes (1998) points out that the major difference between predicating
takeovers and predicting bankruptcies is the larger influence of insider trading and rumors, the very
topic of this study, on takeover prediction.

The classic paper in this field is Altman (1968), who by using a sample of only 66 firms is able to
formulate a model for bankruptcy prediction that has proven to stand the test of time and is still in
popular use today. Zmijewski (1984) tries to improve on Altman’s model by addressing the biggest
concern of all previous work in the field: that the models are constructed using non-random samples.
Building upon Altman’s model, Zmijewski’s model was able to correctly identify 72 percent of the
bankrupt firms in his sample. Ohlson (1980) also challenges the conclusions of previous work by arguing
that these papers were not careful enough with the timing of the data used. Specifically, that the highly
accurate predictions of some papers were reached by using data from after the companies entered
bankruptcy. Correcting for this error and adding some additional factors, Ohlson is still able to find a

robust prediction model, albeit with a slightly lower accuracy rate than that of earlier works.

2.4 Media and the market

Engelberg and Parsons (2009) and Peress (2012) present strong cases for the role that media plays in
relation to the stock market. The former by showing that investors who live in areas where an event
was reported in the local newspaper trade significantly more in the concerned stock than investors in
other areas and the latter by demonstrating that trading volume falls by twelve percent during
newspaper strikes. Tetlock (2007) and Dougal et al. (2011) find that the level of pessimism each day in
the Wall Street Journal column Abreast of the Market and which journalist writes the column can
predict the direction the market takes, findings that clearly demonstrate that not only the information

content of media reporting matters but also the way it is framed.

2.5 Pre-announcement run-up and insider trading

Jarrell and Poulsen (1989) present several explanations to the commonly observed pre-announcement
run-up in stock prices, including insider trading and investors trying to get a foothold, but find that the
presence of rumors is the most significant explaining factor. They establish, however, that investing in
rumored takeover targets is very risky; the variance of one-year excess returns after the publication of
a takeover rumor is found to be exceptionally high. Sanders and Zdanowicz (1992) are unable to identify
significant abnormal trading volume before takeover announcements and use this finding to draw the
conclusion that insider trading is not as prevalent as is sometimes believed. Holland and Hodgkinson
(1994) find that press reporting prior to announcements explains the run-up and that any potential
insider trading is done in such small volumes that it is unable to move the share price. Muelbroek (1992)
is, on the contrary, able to show an abnormal return of three percent on insider trading days prior to a
takeover announcements and that almost half of the pre-announcement run-up takes place during these
days. Bettis (1995) presents a test to gauge the validity of a rumor using a line of thinking based on
insider trading activities. Since investors are barred from trading on private information one can use
these insiders’ trading activity to judge a rumor’s validity. If the insider is trading after the publication
of the rumor, the rumor is most likely false since the insider otherwise would be committing a crime.
On the other hand, if one would expect insider activity and there is none the rumor may be valid. Bettis
does not, however, perform a quantitative data analysis of this test but instead presents three cases in

support of his hypothesis.

3. DATA

The primary data sources used are the M&A database Zephyr and COMPUSTAT. Additionally, data
from Yahoo! Finance (FTSE100 historical values), the Bank of England (3-month Treasury bills as
proxy for the risk-free rate) and the Ken French Data Library (Fama-French factors for the U.S.) is

collected.

3.1 Rumor data

An extensive number of observations on mergers and acquisitions is available through Zephyr, with
data on a total of 89 747 acquisitions and institutional buyouts in the U.S. We filter these observations
to make sure the target firms are either publicly traded or, in the case of true rumors, have been publicly
traded prior to the acquisition. No filters are used for acquiring firms, both since the acquiring firm is
often unknown at the rumor stage and also because the acquiring firm seldom shows any noticeable
stock price reactions in conjunction with acquisitions (Betton et al., 2008).

The rumors are manually screened to ascertain that they really can be considered to be rumors.
Zephyr's rumor categorization is often very broad, and sometimes classifies events such as company
press releases concerning signed letters of intent or memorandums of understanding about acquisitions
as rumors. Thus, a closer scrutiny of Zephyr's data is required. In addition to filtering the Zephyr data
down to rumors only, each rumor record is examined and classified by whether it is reported by a major
or minor news source, and whether the initial rumor publication contains what can be deemed to be

‘detailed' information. A set of selection criteria are set up for the classification of rumors:

- The rumor may not spring from a press release issued by the firm; if the only source given by

Zephyr is an involved company the rumor is not included.

- The firm has not made any public statements (affirmations or denials) regarding the rumor on

the days just after the rumor publication.

- The rumor is not based on the event that the firm has hired an investment bank or advisor to

look for potential buyers.
- At least three days must pass before any official announcement occurs.

Rumors that are classified as coming from 'major news sources’ are rumors that originate from
Reuters, Bloomberg, The New York Times, the Wall Street Journal and similar outlets, while non-major
news sources are for instance online-only news sources or smaller news networks. Rumors are considered
‘detailed' if they contain suggestions for potential bid premiums or suggestions for which the acquiring
firm might be, or otherwise provide convincing details. A rumor is considered true if the rumor is
followed by an acquisition announcement within a year, or within two years if there is good reason to
believe that the rumor has a good connection to the acquisition (for example, rumor information on a
potential acquirer is correct) and the completion of the acquisition occurs within a maximum of two

years.

3.2 Stock and accounting data

The rumor data is then merged with stock data from COMPUSTAT. Thomson Reuters Datastream
and CRSP were both evaluated as potential data sources, but COMPUSTAT was chosen as it had stock
price and volume data for the largest number of the securities in our sample. Stock data for one year
before and one year after the rumor publication is kept for each rumor to allow for the estimation of
normal returns as well as the calculation of potential profits from trading on the rumor. Only rumors
where the concerned stock of the target firm is listed in the COMPUSTAT database for our period are
included in our study. The data is then complemented with annual report data for the three years
preceding the rumor publication, for which COMPUSTAT is used as well. We end up with a dataset

consisting of a total of 354 takeover rumors, 104 of them true rumors and 250 false.

3.3 Data for robustness tests
For robustness, data on takeover rumors from the U.K. markets is also downloaded and screened in the
same way as the U.S. rumors. The same criteria are used as filters and Zephyr rumor data is used for
the U.K. dataset as well. The U.K. rumors are then merged with COMPUSTAT annual report data
and COMPUSTAT daily security data. Several noticeable differences can be seen in the U.K. rumor
data in Zephyr, compared to the data stemming from the U.S. Zephyr appears to have a larger amount
of U.K. rumors recorded compared to the size of the U.K. market, and a slightly different distribution
of false and true rumors. The firms are also marginally smaller than for the U.S., which could contribute
to differences in the results. In the end we have 290 U.K. rumors of which 79 are true and 211 are false.
Another robustness check is performed by verifying the findings from the primary Zephyr dataset
using rumor data also on the U.S. market, provided by Bloomberg. This out-of-sample data contains
less information than the primary dataset. Only the date of the rumor is available; no data on the dates
for when announcements or completions of takeovers took place is present - only whether the rumor
was followed by a takeover or not. The source of the rumor is not listed either. Therefore, the data is
of slightly lower quality than the main U.S dataset but still serves well as an out-of-sample dataset to
test the external validity of the Zephyr results. The dataset from Bloomberg contains a total of 1875
rumors on 717 companies during the period 2005-2010, and the data is complemented with stock data
and annual report data in the same way as the other two datasets. Bloomberg only provides ticker
symbols as firm identifiers and we therefore manually verify and match some of the ticker symbols with
the corresponding firm in the stock data. We also ensure that no overlap exists between the main
dataset and the Bloomberg out-of-sample dataset, considering that they both cover the U.S. market
during the same time period. After the filtering, we end up with 1520 rumors from Bloomberg, split

between 235 true rumors and 1285 false rumors.

10

4, METHODOLOGY AND THEORY

In this section we lay out the empirical framework that we use to examine the market’s reaction to the
publication of rumors and the methods used to create a trading strategy. First, normal and abnormal
performances of the target firms’ securities are calculated around the publication of the rumor. Once
the rumor, pre-rumor and post-rumor reactions have been calculated a variety of regression techniques
are used. Ordinary least squares (OLS) models are used in a first attempt to explain the cross-sectional
returns on and around the rumor publication date, using both the veracity of the rumor but also other
potential explanatory factors as independent variables. Building on this, logit regression models are
employed to investigate whether public data available on the rumored target before the rumor date,
such as book values, financial key ratios and market capitalization, and rumor-specific information, such
as the source, its level of detail and the market reaction, say something about the probability of the

rumor leading to a takeover.

Rumor timeline

An overview of the timelines surrounding false and true rumors can be seen in Figure 1 and Figure 2,
respectively. A false rumor consists of a prerumor period, a post-rumor period and a rumor day, which
is the day the rumor is reported by the media. A true rumor also consists of a prerumor period and
post-rumor period, but is followed by a bid announcement, which is considered a verification of the
authenticity of the rumor. If the bid succeeds, the announcement is also followed by a completion of the

takeover.

Figure 1. Timeline for false rumors.

Pre-rumor period Post-rumor period

Rumor day

Figure 2. Timeline for true rumors.

| Pre-announcement period | |

Pre-rumor period | Post-rumor period | Post-announcement period |

Rumor day Announcement day Completion day

4.1 Event study methodology

The dominating methodology used in this study is an event study. MacKinlay (1997) discusses the use
and applications of event studies in finance and defines an event study as a study that measures the
impact of some event on the value of a firm using security prices observed over a relatively short time
period. The methodology has ever since the 1960’s been successfully applied to studies on mergers and
acquisitions, with Manne (1965) as an early example. An event study requires calculation of the normal
performance of a firm's security, from which the abnormal performance of the security around the event

can be determined.

11

The simple market model (the CAPM)
MacKinlay (1997) suggests several different methods for estimating the normal performance of a stock.

One of the simpler models for this purpose is the CAPM (Capital Asset Pricing Model) specified as
Er) =% +a, + Binet, (Tmt - T;) + &

where 7 is the logarithmic stock return for security i, Tmxe is the return for the market and 7; is the
risk-free rate. Bmxei is a measure of the systematic risk of security i in relation to the market and @; is
the performance of security i after accounting for the systematic risk. For the U.S., a value-weighted
index encompassing NASDAQ, Amex and NYSE is used as a proxy for the market return. For the U.K.,
the FTSE100 is used. The risk-free rate used is the 1-month U.S Treasury and the 3-month U.K. Bank

of England Treasury bill rate for the two markets respectively. Abnormal returns are calculated as
ARie = Tit — [ree + at Bmatet,i Tmake,t - Te)

Where AR;, is the abnormal return for security i on day t, 7 is the logarithmic stock return for security
ion day t, nxee is the return for the market and rf; is the risk-free rate. a; and Bmxe, are estimated

using the CAPM.

The Fama-French three-factor model
An alternative model, meant to provide more accurate expected returns, is the Fama-French three-

factor model, which includes two more factors than the CAPM. It is specified as
Er) =% +a, + Binet, (Tmt - a) + BumiiHML + BsupiSMB + &

where 7; is the logarithmic stock return for security i and Tnx is the return for the market. HML is the
return of a portfolio that is long firms with the highest book-to-market ratios and short firms with the
lowest book-to-market ratios and SMB is the return on a portfolio that is long firms with low market
capitalization (small firms) and short firms with high market capitalization (big firms). Bym1,; and Bsup,i
are measures of how the return of security i co-moves with these portfolios. a; is the performance of
security i after accounting for the systematic risk in relation to both the market and these portfolios. A
value-weighted index encompassing NASDAQ, Amex and NYSE is used as a proxy for the market
return. The risk-free rate used is the Lmonth U.S Treasury bill rate. The abnormal returns for this

model are calculated as
AR ig = Tit — (Qi + Binet il Rmxee — Me] + BamiiHM Le + Bop iSMBz).

The Fama-French three-factor model will be used for our main dataset, but as daily HML- and SMB-
returns are only readily available for the U.S., the simple CAPM will be used when analyzing the U.K.

data in our robustness tests. A comparison between the CAPM and the Fama-French model, using our

12

U.S. data, showed that the differences between the two are very small. The application of the different

models should thus not be a big concern when comparing the U.S. and the U.K. data.

Cumulative abnormal return (CAR) and cross-sectional regression analysis

Abnormal returns are summed over a period of time to achieve a cumulative abnormal return,
-ymn
CAR,(n, mM) = Vien ARit.

As suggested by MacKinlay (1997), we will use an event window of 120 days in the span of 180 days to
60 days before the publication of the rumor. This is to make sure that the beta coefficients are not
affected by the event itself, and will allow us to look at rumor run-ups as far as 60 days before the
rumor without the estimation period overlapping with the run-up returns.

MacKinlay (1997) further discusses how insights can be gained by creating cross-sectional models to
examine the association between the magnitude of the abnormal return and characteristics specific to

the event observation. A regression model for this should take the form
AR; = Bo + BiX1i + + BmXmi + &

where E(¢;) = 0, AR; is the abnormal return for observation i, Xj;,m = 1,...,M, are M characteristics
for observation i and €; is the error term that is uncorrelated with the independent variables. B,,,m =
0,...,M are the regression coefficients. Since we have no reason to believe that the assumption of
homoscedasticity will hold, the regression model is estimated using OLS with homoscedasticity-

consistent (robust) standard errors.

Measuring abnormal volume
We also investigate the abnormal trading volume around the rumor publication. Jarrell and Poulsen
(1989) and Bajo (2010) find that the normalized abnormal volume (NAV) is a suitable measure for this.
The NAV for a security i on day t is computed as

TV ie — Hi

NAV, = it — Hit

it

N(TVit — Hit). TV; is trading volume, computed as the

—1iyyv =
where [j= yuist TVi¢ and oj =

natural logarithm of (trading volume + 1), for security i on day t; u and o are the mean and standard
deviation of trading volume in an N day window in a period prior to the observation. Jarrell and Poulsen
(1989) use an estimation window of 150 days, looking at a ‘clean’ period of 170 days before the event
to 20 days before the event, while Bajo use a period of the 66 days directly preceding his event. We will
use the same estimation window as for our market models, 120 days, a window close to the time span

Jarrell and Poulsen (1980) used.

13

Bajo (2010) finds that the logarithmically transformed trading volume closely follows a normal
distribution and as the NAV is similar in construction to a t-statistic we can classify trading volume as

extreme if the daily trading volume is more than 2.33 standard deviations from the mean.

4.2 Corrections for outliers and missing data
As is always the case when dealing with real-world data there is the issue of outliers, missing data and
other impurities in the data. To adjust for this, three different techniques are applied: winsorizing,

trimming and imputation.

Winsorizing and trimming

To illustrate the abnormal returns and trading volumes around the rumor publication in graphs, the
average cumulative abnormal return and NAV is calculated for each day. Because of a small number of
outliers, the graphs are heavily skewed for some days. To make the figures more representative of the
sample as a whole, both winsorizing and trimming were considered. Winsorizing, however, appears to
provide the best results with the least information lost. Some accounting ratios are nevertheless
trimmed; for example, negative dividend payout ratios are treated as missing values. Winsorizing is
done at the five percent level, which means that all observations above the 95th percentile are set to

the 95th percentile and all observations below the 5th percentile are set to the 5th percentile.

Imputation

When returns are missing on a trading day for some firm, we carry forward the preceding price. The
alternative would be to interpolate prices on those days, which would give the day with a missing price
an average of the price before and after the day in question. Carrying forward the preceding price is
argued to be the most correct method to adjust for missing prices in our dataset, considering that some
of the firms in the sample have very low market capitalizations and could be missing prices simply

because there were no trades on the days with missing price data.

4.3 Tests for difference

When testing for differences in abnormal returns between true and false rumors, during various time
periods, we use Student's t-test. The test compares the means of two samples in order to test equality.
We use the variant of the t-test where the sample sizes are allowed to differ but variances are assumed
to be approximately equal, since this assumption seems to hold reasonably well for our sample. The
simple one-sample t-test is also applied to investigate whether the abnormal returns around the rumor
publication differ from zero. To account for some of the non-normality of the abnormal returns we also
use the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and Mood’s median test, the latter considered slightly weaker but still
useful. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test tests the null hypothesis that two populations are equal against the
alternative hypothesis that one population tends to have larger values than the other. Mood’s median
test is a simpler alternative to the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, only counting the number observations
above or below the median of the combined sample, as opposed to ranking them and adding up their

rank-sum.

14

4.4 Bankruptcy probability formulas

To control for bankruptcy risk, we use three different models: Ohlson's probabilistic bankruptcy model,
Zmijewski’s probabilistic bankruptcy model and the most popular - Altman's Z-score (Ohlson, 1980;
Zmijewski, 1984; Altman, 1968).

The Ohlson model can be calculated as

Z = -1.3 — 0.4 x log(GNP — Deflated Total Assets) + 6.0 x Solvency — 1.4 x ( we ) +0.1 x CurrentRatio — 2.4 x

Total Assets.

EquityIsNegative — 1.8 x ROA+0.3 x (Feng om operations) — 1.7 x NetIncomeNegativePast2Y ears — 0.5 x Ne Nena

Total Liabilities INT ¢l-|NIe—-a1
which is transformed into a probability through

1
PO Tte*
The Zmijewski model is calculated as
1 43-48 Net Income Total Liabilities Current Assets
= -4.3 — 45x 7X — 0.04x
Total Assets + Total Assets Current Liabilities
and transformed into a probability in the same way as the Ohlson model.
Altman's Z-score is calculated as
2=656 Working Capital 43.26 Retained Earnings 46.72 EBT + Interest + Market Value of Equity
= 6.56 X 26 X 72x .05 x
Total Assets Total Assets Total Assets Total Liabilities

Altman's Z-score differs from the other models in that it is not converted into a probability but can
take any continuous value. The Z-score has cutoff points above and below which firms are considered
healthy or unhealthy. Firms with a Z-score above 2.99 are considered healthy, firms below 2.99 are
considered to be in a gray zone and firms below 1.81 are considered to be in financial distress (Altman,

1968).

4.5 Binary logit regression analysis
Binary logit regressions are used to model dichotomous outcome variables such as, which is our case, a
rumor, which can be classified as true or false following our definitions. A binary logit regression has

the specification

»
In (PO) = 21 = Bo + Baka + Bake +--+ BaXn
U

in which p; is the probability of a rumor i being followed by a successful bid (being true) and where n

independent variables are included. The probability of a rumor being followed by a successful bid can

be backed out and is calculated as

pi=1/(ite*).

15

Dependent variables in logit regressions can just like in other types of regressions be either continuous
or categorical. Several different types of model specifications are tried. Once a model is found, our main
sample is divided at random into an estimation sample (training set) and a prediction sample (validation
set), where we estimate the model parameters - the logit regression coefficients - on the estimation
sample and then apply these coefficients to our prediction sample to arrive at estimated probabilities of
the rumors in the validation set being true. To get a better indication of how well the model performs,
repeated random sub-sampling cross-validation is used’. This entails repeatedly shuffling the dataset
and splitting it in the same proportions each time, where we, following a common rule of thumb, assign
1/3 of the sample to the validation set and 2/3 to the training set. The model parameters are estimated
on the training set and applied to the validation set each time, and the accuracy of the model is recorded
for each iteration. This allows us to get a better idea of how well the model performs on an independent
dataset. Repeated random sub-sampling cross-validation is usually repeated a few hundred to a few
thousand times depending on the complexity of the model, and an average value of the fit is calculated
over all the runs. In this respect, the method shares some similarities with Monte Carlo simulations.
We perform the process 200 times, providing a reasonable trade-off between computational execution
time and precision in the values.

A t-statistic for whether the model outperformed chance can be calculated as

where p is the proportional chance criterion, a measure of the expected classification accuracy rate based
on chance alone and z is the proportion of total individuals correctly classified. The proportional chance

criterion is calculated as

p=c?+(1-c)?

where c is the actual proportion of the individuals from the group of interest in the whole sample

(Barnes, 1998; Hair et al., 1995).

4.6 Model specifications

Difference between true and false rumors
This is a simple regression run in order to see whether there is any statistically significant difference in
the abnormal return reaction caused by true and false rumors on the rumor day. This is equivalent to

a t-test of the difference between the true and false rumor samples.

ARoi = Bo + BiTrue; t+ &

2 Kohavi (1995) presents a good review of cross-validation methods like this one.

16

Cross-sectional CAR taking into account detail and source of rumor

In this regression, additional variables are included in order to explore to what extent the rumor effect
can be explained by rumor-specific characteristics, such as whether the rumor originates from a major
source (see data section) or contains a significant amount of detail. The regression seeks to determine
whether the difference in reaction between true and false rumors derive from true rumors being published

in more reputable sources or being more detailed than false rumors.
ARoi = Bo + by True; + B,MajorSource; + B3Detailed; + €;

Cross-sectional CAR taking into account firm-specific factors

Additionally, a regression is run containing firm-specific variables and the bankruptcy risk of the firm,
to see whether these factors help explain the price jump on the rumor day. If we can eliminate the effect
of the categorical variable indicating whether a rumor is true or false, we might be able to extract some

of the factors the market uses to estimate the probability of a rumor being true.
ARoi = Bo + bi True; + B,MajorSource; + B3Detailed; + DY: BFirmspecificPropertyi.s + &

Logit regression using rumor- and firm-specific properties and including stock market reaction

The logit regression attempts to classify firms as true or false after the stock market has reacted to the
rumor. By determining factors that contribute to explaining whether a rumor is true or false, we can
formulate a model for predicting takeover targets from a sample of rumored firms. We include the rumor
reaction into the logit model. Ideally, we would be able to include the information the market uses to
judge the validity of the rumor as a variable. However, this information is not quantifiable or
unobservable; it could be private information, nuances in the rumor report or some other information
that leaked to the market but that Zephyr failed to report and that we failed to find. Given that we
cannot observe this information, we are instead able to incorporate it indirectly in the regression by

including the abnormal rumor day return.

1

pi (True) = 1+ oe Bot Bi ARio +d jb jFirmspecificProperty ij,¢-1 +24 Br Rumor SpecificProperty ix)

Logit regression using rumor- and firm-specific properties but excluding stock market reaction

The logit regression is rerun without using the stock market reaction on the rumor day in an attempt
to test if the classification can be performed using only public information available beforehand and the
content of the rumor itself (excluding the information inherent in the reaction of the stock market to

the rumor publication).

1

pi(True) = 1 4 @ Both; BjFirmSpecificProperty j,—1 +L, BeRumorSpecificProperty ix.)

17

Using these logit models, we attempt to see whether it is possible to achieve abnormal holding period
returns by classifying rumors into true or false and trading on them. Since the rumor day reaction is
included in the first model, our strategy will consist of buying at the close price of the rumor day and
holding the rumored stock for a period of 365 days or the delisting of the stock, whichever comes first.
The abnormal holding period return is the return of the stock during this period compared to the market
index for the year, after dividends have been accounted for. The alternative is to use the cumulative
abnormal return for the period. However, compounding the abnormal return for such a long period leads
to unreasonable discrepancies between the cumulative abnormal return and the holding period return
as even small inaccuracies in model alphas are magnified 365 times. Another alternative would be to
ignore alphas or re-estimate the model for stocks excluding the alphas. After consideration of the
alternatives we concluded that we would use the holding period return and that we would use the value-
weighted market index as a benchmark in calculation of excess returns. This was deemed the most
appropriate considering that an overwhelming majority of the beta values in our dataset are close to
one (see Table 4) and the reduced likelihood of estimation errors due to the simpler nature of these
calculations. The holding period return is calculated as
_ Dividends + (Pra1 — Pr)

HPR, = 5 0

4.7 The Efficient Markets Hypothesis

Fama (1970) defines an efficient market as a market where security prices fully reflect all available
information. The adjustment of security prices differ between three information subsets of the
hypothesis. In the weak-form subset, all security prices are assumed to reflect all information contained
in historical prices. In the semi-strong subset prices are thought to adjust accordingly and immediately
to all other public information as well. Finally, the strong form assumes that prices reflect all public

and private information, an assumption that is commonly seen as more of a theoretical scenario.

4.8 Connections between takeover likelihood and book values
There are numerous theories seeking to explain why some firms may be more likely to be taken over
than others. Some of the more popular theories are summarized by Barnes (1998) and presented here.

Inefficient management is often suggested as a possible attractant for acquiring firms. Firms which
underperform their competitors with low profits are suggested to be more vulnerable to takeovers than
firms which outperform their peers. Inefficiently managed firms may also be undervalued. Both these
factors are captured in ratios such as profit margins, return on equity, price-to-earnings, the dividend
payout ratio and market-to-book.

Growth-resource mismatches are also popular explanations. The theory suggests that low growth-
resource rich and high growth-resource poor firms are likely acquisition targets. Firms with low activity
ratios or low growth history could also be attractive to acquiring firms. Cash-constrained firms could
be easy takeover targets for rich firms, as the rich firms can help fund the expansion of the constrained
firm. The capital structure of a firm could also affect how attractive a firm is as a takeover target. A

firm with very low leverage can be seen as having unutilized debt capacity. These different notions of

18

why some firms may exhibit properties that make them more attractive as targets than others can be
captured in several different accounting ratios. Sales growth over the past few years, the current ratio,
the solvency/leverage level and interest coverage ratio could all be indicators for some of these scenarios.

Additionally, a firm with very high leverage may be in some form of distress, and could potentially
be saved by a white knight acquirer. Firms in financial distress that are close to bankruptcy could also
potentially be more interesting to acquirers, since the value of a revived firm usually exceeds the value
of solely liquidating its assets in bankruptcy. We intend to investigate whether such a connection
between the bankruptcy risk and the likelihood of a firm being taken over exists, using three measures
from the field of bankruptcy prediction: Altman's Z-score, Zmijewski's probability measure and Ohlson's
probability measure. All of these measures are tested in different model specifications to determine if
there is a connection and if they can help discern between true and false rumors.

The size of the target firm is another variable that could play a role in how likely a firm is to be
acquired. Palepu (1986) suggests that the likelihood of acquisitions decreases due to what he calls
‘transaction costs' that increase with size. Another simple reason stated by Barnes (1998) is that the
larger a firm is, the fewer firms that are larger than the firm itself exists and thus there are fewer
potential acquirers. The market capitalization of the firm or the total assets of the firm should be

capable of explaining this notion.

4.9 Insider trading in our dataset

Toeholds registered with a 13D SEC filing? could have been potential precursors to the rumor, but
Zephyr records when a rumor appeared in conjunction with a filing, and no such rumors were included
in our sample. Insider trading is also heavily regulated in the U.S. A Form 4 or 5 SEC filing has to be
submitted at the latest two days after a change in the ownership share of any director, officer or owner
if the ownership is above ten percent. Directors and other employees are required by law to ensure that
information about their company is not used unlawfully in the purchase or sale of securities. Any rumors
where information regarding insider trading SEC filings is available in Zephyr are dropped, thus
hopefully reducing the likelihood of legal insider trading being the cause of the rumor reactions in our
sample. That leaves room for word-of-mouth dissemination of the rumor, illegal insider trades or very

late or illegal toehold acquisitions to explain any abnormal rumor reaction before the rumor publication.

3 The Securities and Exchange Commission requires anyone who acquires ownership of more than 5 percent of any class of
publicly traded securities in a public company to submit a Schedule 13D filing within 10 days. Any changes in the ownership
above 1 percent require additional submissions.

19

5. RESULTS

The results section is introduced with descriptive statistics on the rumor datasets, including graphs
illustrating the different events of interest. The graphs and the accompanying tables indicate some
differences between true and false rumors. These differences are then further explored by applying OLS
regression techniques and difference testing. Once a difference has been established logit regressions are
used to distinguish potential explanatory variables. The results from the logit regressions are applied in
the formulation of trading strategies using probability cutoffs with various degrees of conservativeness,
after which we present the extent to which the strategies are able to classify true and false rumors as
well as the returns these strategies yield. In the robustness test section, we briefly present results for

the U.K. and Bloomberg datasets.

5.1 Descriptive statistics on rumors
The rumor publication events are distributed as is shown in Table 1. A large number of false rumors
were circulating during the period between 2006 and 2008, most likely created in the turbulent business

climate caused by the fall of Lehman Brothers and the consequential financial crisis.

Table 1. Distribution of rumors over the years

This table provides a short summary of how the rumors from the Zephyr U.S. dataset are
distributed after the filtering explained in the data section. The rumors are divided based
on whether they are followed by an acquisition bid announcement (true) or not (false).

Year Number of true rumors Number of false rumors
2000 - 2002 6 20
2003 - 2005 34 67
2006 - 2008 46 123
2009 - 2011 35 47
2012 8 23
Total 129 280

Table 2 shows that a total of 34 out of the 129 true rumors are followed by an announcement within 20
days of the rumor publication day. For nearly all true rumors, less than 300 days pass between the

rumor being published and a bid announcement.

20

Table 2. Days between rumor and _ subsequent
announcement for true rumors

This provides a short summary of how many days pass
between the rumor being published and the announcement
of a bid. Rumors where less than three days passed before
an announcement were not included in our sample, as

explained in the data section.

Days between rumor and announcement Frequency
4-5 days 12
6 - 10 days 8
11 - 20 days 14
21 - 60 days 26
60 - 180 days 45
181 - 300 days 17
> 300 days 7
Total 129

Returns from trading on rumors
Table 3 displays, consistent with Zivney et al. (1996) and Pound and Zeckhauser (1990), that buying
on rumors do not on average allow an investor to make any money, with the average return for our
full sample being -1.8%, a result not statistically different from zero due to the high variability in the
returns. For true rumors, the average return is 14.0% and for false rumors -8.4%, indicating that an
investor capable of distinguishing between the two could potentially use this ability to trade profitably.
As is evident in Figure 3, most firms subject to true rumors exhibit positive returns during the one-
year period following the rumor publication while the returns of falsely rumored firms are more evenly
split between positive and negative reactions. The span is, however, very large for both true and false

rumors, with extremes in both directions, showing that a rumor being true does not guarantee a profit.

Table 3. One-year holding period returns for target firms from close on
rumor publication day to close 365 days later

For the whole sample, for true rumors only and for false rumors only, this table
provides a summary for the holding period returns that materialize when the
target firms are held for one year following the close on the day the rumor is
published. This is simply the return you would earn if you bought the rumored
target firm after the rumor and held it for one year. Holding period returns are
calculated as

_ Dividends + (Pui — Pa)

HPR, =
n P,

Variable Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
Whole Sample 354 -1.8% 42.3% -99.6% 152.1%
True Rumors 104 14.0% 36.5% -87.7% 126.7%
False Rumors 250 -8.A% 42.9% -99.6% 152.1%

21

Figure 3. Distribution of one-year holding-period returns for target
firm from close on rumor publication day to close 365 days later

For true rumors and for false rumors, this histogram shows the distribution of
the holding period returns. It is based on 104 true rumors and 250 false rumors,
with a total of 354 rumors. The fraction is positive in both directions, making
the figure mirrored along the x-axis.

3

o = a a | I | | meee -s
AS
25
35
1 1
-1 -5 0 5 1 15

HPR(1, 365)

False

HE True

5.2 Stock market reaction around rumor publications

The rumor reaction distribution, shown in Figure 4, is very dense just above the zero mark, with most
stocks reacting with less than ten percent and very few with more than 15 percent. The fraction of
reactions that are negative is also noticeably larger for false rumors, and there is a visibly higher
density of false rumors around the zero mark compared to true rumors. The fraction of rumors that
have a comparably significant positive reaction is decidedly larger for true rumors. The difference in
the distribution between true and false rumors for the rumor day reaction is nevertheless not as
apparent as for the one-year holding period return shown in Figure 3.

Figure 4. Distribution of CARs for target firm from day -1 to +1
based on veracity

This is a histogram showing the distribution of CAR(-1;+-1) around the rumor
publication date, divided by whether the rumor ends up being true or false. The
abnormal returns are calculated using the Fama-French three-factor model. The
y-axis shows the fraction that falls within a certain bin. The fraction is positive
in both directions, making the figure mirrored along the x-axis. The histogram
is based on 112 true rumors and 247 false rumors.

4
Bo
25
= 9 --8 | Ze ==
a
2
3
44
1 ;
-4 -2 0 2 4 6
CAR(-1, 1)
False
HE Tre

22

Figure 5, displaying the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for true and false rumors, tells
us there is a clear difference in the market reaction between the two rumor types. For both true and
false rumors, the increase appears to continue on the day following the rumor publication, but with a
more pronounced subsequent jump for the true rumors, corresponding to a few additional percentage
units. The observable jump in the winsorized graph is approximately ten percent for true rumors and
five percent for false rumors. This difference of five percent between true and false rumors is consistent
with the difference found by Zivney et al. (1996).

Figure 6 shows that the reaction to the rumor depends on what news source published the rumor
report. Consistent with expectations, major news sources such as the Wall Street Journal and Reuters
have a larger impact on markets than smaller, less known news sources. The premium for the rumors
coming from a major source appears to be as large as five percent. Figure 7 shows that even when the
sample is restricted to rumors from the same type of source, the discrepancy between true and false
rumors remains intact.

The existence and the extent of the jump confirm the media’s role in diffusing information in the
stock market, since one would expect that many of the rumors had spread via word-of mouth prior to
publication. That we observe a stronger reaction to rumors published in more reputable sources indicates
that the stock market takes other factors into account than just the information content when processing
news or, as in this case, rumors. These findings are in line with the existing literature on the effect on

the stock market of media reporting (for example Tetlock, 2007; Dougal et al., 2011).

Figure 5. Winsorized ACAR for target firms day -30 to +30 relative
to rumor publication contingent on veracity

This figure shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for the days
-30 to +30 around the rumor publication day for both rumors that are followed
by an acquisition (true) and rumors that are not (false). The figure is based on
129 true rumors and 280 false rumors, where the CARs are winsorized on the
5% level every day before the average is calculated.

T T T 1 1
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Day relative to rumor day

True rumors

TTT False rumors

23

Figure 6. Winsorized ACAR for target firms day -30 to +30 relative
to rumor publication contingent on source

This figure shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for the days
-30 to +30 around the rumor publication day for true and false rumors together,
with different lines for only those rumors that come from major sources (see
data section for further explanation), those that do not come from major sources
and the average altogether. The figure is based on 129 true rumors and 280 false
rumors, where the CARs are winsorized on the 5% level every day before the

average is calculated.

15>

AR(-30, t)

AC

-.05-4
r r r r ; ;
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Day relative to rumor day
Major
- Non-major

All

Figure 7. Winsorized ACAR for target firms day -30 to +30 relative
to rumor publication contingent on source and veracity
This figure shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for the

days -30 to +30 around the rumor publication day with different lines for only
(see data section for further

those rumors that come from major sources
explanation) and all rumors, and further divided based on the veracity of the
rumor. The figure is based on 129 true rumors and 280 false rumors, where
the CARs are winsorized on the 5% level every day before the average is

calculated.

157

ACAR(-2

30 20 -10 0 10 20 30
Day relative to rumor day
True - Major Only
----- False - Major Only
- True- All
—-—- False - All

24

Figure 8 shows the same effect but for rumors with a low level of detail compared to all rumors in the
sample. The difference is small here as well, with rumors of less detail generating market movements
that are one to two percentage units smaller than otherwise. However, the difference between true and
false rumors does not seem to be explained by the level of detail either. Figure 9 shows the normalized
abnormal volume, where we can clearly see a difference in the volumes traded on the rumor day between
true and false rumors. The normalized abnormal volume on the rumor day is above 2.33 for true rumors
on average, which would classify the trading volume as extreme. The same classification cannot be done
for the false rumors. No noticeable levels of abnormal volume can be seen in the 30-day window
preceding the rumor being published, which tells us that although there is stock price run-up in the pre-
rumor period, the volumes traded are small. (The pattern in the period following the rumor publication
is a pattern recurring every 7 days and is due to subsequent announcements or bids. Since the rumor
reaction has to occur on a trading day, every multiple of 7 days following the rumor day is guaranteed
to be a trading day, leading to a disproportionate amount of announcements or bids taking place on
these days.)

Figure 10 displays the CAR around the announcement, where the pre-announcement period is
significantly affected by rumors. Slightly more than a third of the total acquisition reaction in the period
is already incorporated into the price over the two weeks preceding the announcement due to the rumor.
This complements the existing empirical body trying to explain run-ups to bid announcements. Figure
11 shows the pattern Betton et al. (2008) found when investigating the reaction to the initial bid on
firms in the U.S. The pattern is remarkably similar to the one in our Figure 10, only showing
announcements preceded by rumors. This similarity suggests that rumors is a large contributing factor
to the general pre-announcement run-up. Betton et al. (2008) find that around one third of the bid
premium is incorporated into the price starting 20 to 30 days preceding the bid, which is consistent

with the run-up observed in our sample and shown in Figure 10.

Figure 8. Winsorized ACAR for target firms day -30 to +30
relative to rumor publication contingent on detail and veracity
This figure shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for
the days -30 to +30 around the rumor publication day for rumors that
were published with little details against all rumors, divided based on
the rumor veracity. The figure is based on 129 true rumors and 280 false
rumors, where the CARs are winsorized on the 5% level every day before
the average is calculated.

r r ; ; ;
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Day relative to rumor day

True - Not Detailed
----- False - Not Detailed
-> True - All
—-— - False - All

25

Figure 9. Winsorized NAV for target firms day -30 to +30 relative
to rumor publication contingent on rumor veracity

This figure show the average normalized abnormal volume (NAV) for the
days -30 to +30 around the rumor publication day for true rumors and for
false rumors. The graph includes subsequent bid announcement reactions.
The figure is based on 129 true rumors and 280 false rumors, where the
NAVs are winsorized on the 5% level every day before the average is
calculated.

TVie = Hit

NAV, ¢ =
it

where Hit = Foy TV, and oj4 = (T it Hit). TViz is trading

volume, computed as the natural logarithm of (trading volume + 1), for

security ion day t; # and o are the mean and standard deviation of trading

volume in an N day window in the period prior to the observation.

T T T T T T
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Day relative to rumor day

True rumors
---7- False rumors

Figure 10. Winsorized ACAR for target firms day -30 to +30 relative
to bid announcement

This figure shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for the days
-30 to +30 around the announcement day for all true rumors in our sample.
The figure is based on 129 true rumors, where the CARs are winsorized on the
5% level every day before the average is calculated. The reaction includes the
rumor reaction for rumors that had a rumor published less than 30 days before
the announcement.

155

aan

«
=

-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30

Day relative to announcement day

Figure 11. ACAR for target firms and bidding firms from day -40 to
day +10 relative to bid announcement

Source: Betton, Eckbo and Thorburn (2008)

This figure from a study of a very large sample of firms by Betton et al. (2008)
shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for the days -40 to
+10 around the announcement day for both bidding firms and target firms. The
figure is based on bids between 1980 and 2005.

25% +
£
5 20% 4
2
t
5 15% +
5
c
& 10% 4
s
S
5 5%
3°
&
S
S 0%+4
>
<

8% 2 2 © 2 re ° ey ° © 2

en ' ~
Trading days relative to initial control bid
Bidder, private target (N= 9,480) lili Bidder, public target (N = 6,210)
- - - Target, private bidder (N=3,017) —— Target, public bidder (N = 5,193)

27

5.3 Characteristics of firms depending on veracity of rumor

Table 4 shows general firm-specific information on the rumored target firms in the dataset divided
depending on whether the rumors ex-post are true or false. There are few striking differences between
the two categories. Consistent with theory, the median values for the market capitalization of the firms,
the values of their total assets and their annual revenues all indicate that firms that are not acquired
seem to be larger than the firms that are acquired. It also appears as if firms in the false rumor category
may have a lower bankruptcy probability than firms that are the subject of true rumors. The median
value for the Altman Z-score for the firms in the true rumor category is within what Altman denotes a
gray zone, below 2.99, while the median value for the firms in the false rumor category is above this
level.

We do not observe any clear differences in financial key ratios at this stage, and cannot conclusively
say that firms that are acquired suffer from a resource growth mismatch or are managed worse than the
firms that are not acquired. The market beta values for both samples are very close to the beta of the
market portfolio (8 = 1) suggesting that our dataset represents a good cross-section of the market. The
alpha values are reassuringly close to zero indicating that the Fama-French three-factor model does a

good job at explaining the return composition of our sample.

5.4 Difference testing

By performing three different tests (the Wilcoxon Rank-sum test, Student’s t-test and Mood’s median
test) we, in Table 5, investigate whether the cumulative abnormal returns realized around the rumor
publication differ between true and false rumors. The tests show that no significant difference in the
period preceding the publication can be established. While CAR(-30, -1) is significant in the rank sum
test it is not in the other tests, and can thus not with confidence be said to show any difference between
the two groups. Additionally, all three tests confirm what we have already seen in the figures; there is
a significant difference in the reaction in the stock price on the day of publication between the true and
the false rumors. There may also be differences in abnormal return in the few days following the rumor
publication, but the tests do not all agree that the difference is significant. CAR(-10, 10) and CAR(-20,
20) both show statistically significant differences between true and false rumors, but primarily because
the periods both include the rumor day.

In Table 6, we perform t-tests again, but now testing whether there is a significant reaction in the
stock prices for the whole sample in the periods before and after the rumor publication. We find that
starting 14 days prior to the rumors publication, there is a statistically significant run-up of about two
percentage points. To reduce any possible effects regarding the exact timing of the publication of the
rumor we redo the difference test for a period ending two days before the date of publication. Even with
this correction we find a statistically significant run-up in the period starting 14 days before the
publication. The most obvious explanation to this run-up is that someone with insider information is
trading on the target firm before the rumor is published. In that case, however, we would expect a
trader with such an information advantage to only trade on true rumors, or at least to trade more on

true rumors than on false rumors.

28

Table 4. Descriptive accounting data for the rumored firms divided on the validity of the rumor

This table provides an overview of the characteristics of the falsely rumored firms and the ones that were eventually taken over in a first attempt to distinguish any
differences between the two groups. Some items are shown as they appear in the annual reports while others are calculated financial ratios or measures of bankruptcy.
Betas and alphas are estimated using the three-factor model.

False rumors True rumors

Variables Obs. Mean SD Min Ist Q__ Median 3rd Q Max Obs. Mean SD Min Ist Q_— Median 3rd Q Max

Market Cap 248 8 047.82 27 209.48 0.34 509.56 1 707.87 6 211.79 371 743.10 113 4 137.26 10 216.20 1.30 321.04 1190.39 3 496.10 90 695.58

Balance sheet. items
Total Assets 241 13 602.27 56 429.27 0.81 593.68 2 204.09 7 296.00 775 410.00 102 8 494.56 27019.34 11.48 337.10 1 246.66 3 799.67 199 946.20
Total Liabilites 241 10 425.53 51 974.11 0.70 279.09 1051.20 4 443.47 747 204.00 102. 6957.26 24 652.45 0.54 151.92 715.382 2 632.43 185 628.40

Income statement items
Revenue 241 5 752.32 19 526.14 0.00 332.76 1307.08 4552.40 263 989.00 102 2 862.85 5 479.89 0.00 233.51 765.18 2 394.58 34 115.00
EBIT 239 843.13 3042.34 — -759.50 9.00 149.86 507.07 35 872.00 101 455.22 1517.88  -190.77 7A 81.60 283.86 13 467.82
Net Income 241 423.84 1836.98 — -973.69 -3.29 66.30 259.75 25 330.00 102 145.20 553.94 -1 627.60 -4.40 19.29 135.50 2 769.00

Ratios
Return on Assets 241 -3.43% 32.66% — -375.09% -1.16% 2.48% 6.42% 39.12% 102 -1.42% 23.42% -173.09% -0.89% 2.14% 5.79% 64.92%
Return on Equity 226 -2.89% 68.33% — -637.10% 0.22% 8.72% 16.75% 247.29% 97 0.08% 56.55%  -408.74% -0.74% 7.21% 12.78% — 270.55%
Sales growth 236 14.12% 40.53% —-96.61% = -1.73% 10.16% 23.90% — 395.24% 101 10.83% 26.22% 42.94% 0.00% 7.76% 21.10% — 160.55%
Log of Sales Growth 213 10.78% 26.40% — -234.50% 1.58% 9.98% 20.46% — 142.54% 93 11.64% = 21.27% = -26.48% 1.27% = 6.22% = 19.67% ~~ 132.29%

Solvency 241 0.41 0.30 -0.88 0.22 0.41 0.62 0.98 102 0.36 0.39 -1.82 0.16 0.39 0.60 1.00

Leverage 241 2.23 11.07 -60.45 0.49 1.31 2.56 134.17 102 3.46 6.52 -9.10 0.54 1.42 3.68 37.50

Current Ratio 203 2.82 4.74 0.22 1.13 1.62 2.86 AT.86 86 2.59 2.73 0.34 1.31 1.88 2.61 15.30

Interest Coverage 183 15.59 113.23 -920.03 1.16 3.87 13.98 89 21.43 107. -141.98 1.19 3.31 7.4L 922.82
Dividend Payout Ratio 239 ~-0.04 3.97 102 0.23 1.47 -9.89 0.00 0.00 0.17 8.26

0.00 0.00 0.28

Price/Earnings 241 11.04 125.56 -0.33 13.75 25.04 102 57.00 385.71  -568.13— -1.46 17.62 30.71 3 671.82
Profit margin 235 -15.54% 165.94% -1784.32% 2.88% 10.86% — 20.85% 89.73% 100 -5.70% = 118.02% -947.85% 3.19% 8.62% — 19.90% 77.74%

Market-to-Book 241 1.51 1.98 0.00 0.44 0.93 1.79 14.46 102 1.37 1.38 0.00 0.42 0.96 1.69 6.15

st Turnover 241 0.84 0.74 0.00 0.32 0.62 1.20 4.28 102 0.85 0.76 0.00 0.34 0.66 1.18 4.70

Bankruptcy likelihood
Altman Z-score 200 4.74 12.30 -57.05 1.50 3.06 5.48 119.02 85 3.18 3.77 -13.66 1.66 2.56 AAT 20.39
Zimjewskij probability 203 29.10% — 27.53% 0.49% 7.22% 20.50% 41.52% — 100.00% 86 33.08% 27.15% 0.44% = 10.41% 28.76% 52.68% — 100.00%
Ohlson probability 201 55.21% — 28.61% 0.01% 31.46% 56.00% 80.20% — 100.00% 86 62.23% — 27.31% 2.33% 38.71% 66.39% 83.66% — 100.00%

Betas and alphas
Market Beta 246 1.034 0.925 -2.319 0.625 0.994 1.345 6.650 113 0.968 0.829 4.554 0.545 1.000 1.373 2.560
Beta SMB 246 0.551 1.580 -11.692 -0.076 (0.387 1.007 12.677 113 0.300 1.231 -6.364 — -0.158 0.312 0.842 3.531
Beta HML 246 0.159 2.094 -7.883 -0.727 0.022 0.665 20.906 113 -0.041 1.322 -5.041 — -0.687 —-0.022 0.560 3.264
Alpha 246 -0.001 0.006 -0.068 -0.002 0.000 0.001 0.034 113 0.000 0.004 -0.020 -0.002 0.000 0.001 0.009

Rumor Year Sales ‘Total Current Assets

3Y Before Rumor Sales

Net Income Net Income Rumor Year §

. Total Equity Total Liabiliti
; Return on Equity: —_—_——
Tol Amas’ Return on Equity: 7 rauity

; Leverage:
Total Assets) “°VETABC! To equity

. . , > . 1 J
Ratio calculations: Return on Assets: ; Sales Growth: ; Log of Sales Growth: 3° In¢, ) ; Solvency: ‘urrent Ratio:

Provious Year Sales ‘Total Current Liabilities

EBIT

Interest Expenses

a . EBIT 7, a
; Dividend Payout Ratio: —+"'" _ ; price/Earnings:
” Interest Expenses

‘Total Sales

Market Capitalizat
Total Assets

ion

EBIT
Total Sales

Market C
Total

alization

Interest Coverage: ; Profit Margin: ; Market-to-Book: ; Asset Turnover:

Net Income

Table 5. Tests for significant difference between true and false rumors in CAR during various periods

This table shows, using three different tests (the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Student’s t-test and Mood’s median test), whether or not the stock price reactions in the true and false
sample differ during various time periods around the rumor publication date. The mean values for both true and false rumors are presented together with each standard deviation
and their combined standard deviation. For the rank-sum test the z-statistic is presented both as its true value and recalculated as the probability of the CAR of the two samples

being the same. For the t-tests, we included both one-sided and two-sided p-values as well as the standard error and the t-statistic. The t-tes me equal variances, an

assumption that seems to hold reasonably well (assuming unequal variances give approximately the same results). The median test is presented as chi-squared values and its
corresponding p-values, and complemented with continuity corrected values of both.

Rank Sum Test Student's T-test Median Test
Obs Obs Std. Dev Std. Dev Combined Mean Mean One-sided p- Two-sided — Std. : Chi- Chi-squared Cont.-corr.
CAR . . . Z-statistic  P-valuc ; T-statistic P-valuc
(False) (True) (False) (True) Std. Dev (False) (True) value (lower) p-value Error squared. (cont.-corr.) p-value
242 103 18.22% 24.68% 20.34% 1.49% 0.27% -1.867 0.03** 0.695 0.610 2.39% 0.510 3.239 0.072* 2.830 0.093*
242 103 15.22% 17.04% 15.76% 1.63% = 1.19% -0.873 0.19 0.593 0.814 1.86% 0.225 0.737 0.391 0.549 0.459
242 103 13.35% 13.23% 13.30% 2.11% 1.71% -0.015 0.49 0.601 0.799 1 a 0.255 0.007 0.934 0.001 0.972
242 103 11.17% 9.53% 10.69% 2.09% 1.63% 0.208 0.42 0.643 0.714 1.26% 0.366 0.389 0.533 0,256 0.613
242 103 8.59% 8.47% 8.55% 1.87% 1.33% 0.553 0.71 0.704 0.593 1.01% 0.536 0.007 0.934 0.001 0.972
242 103 7.55% 7.85% 7.63% 1.80% 1.38% 0.346 0.64 0.681 0.639 0.90% 0.470 0.007 0.934 0.001 0.972
242 103 7.13% 7.38% 7.19% 1.55% 1.44% -0.106 0.46 0.548 0.904 0.85% 0.120 0.151 0.698 0.073 0.787
242 103 6.44% 7.12% 6.64% 1.24% = 1.51% -0.846 0.367 0.734 0.78% -0.340 1.767 0.184 1.468 0.226
242 103 4.60% 6.10% 5.10% 0.81% 1.53% -0.372 0.115 0,229 0.60% -1.205 1.310 0.252 1.052 0.305
242 103 3.97% 5.49% 4.47% 0.72% 1.18% -0.240 0.41 0.189 0.377 0.53% -0.884 0.669 0.413 0.486 0.486
242 103 6.06% 10.92% 8.14% 2.99% 7.95% -A117 0.00*** 0.000*** 0.000*** -5.382 5.155 0.023** 4.635 0.03 1**
242 103 413% 6.36% 4.93% -0.04% 1.26% -0.204 0.42 0.013** 0.025** -2.251 0.083 0.773 0.028 0.867
242 103 5.51% 7.38% 6.16% 0.17% 1.66% -0.212 0.42 0.020** 0.039** -2.072 0.095 0.759 0.035 0.851
242 103 6.57% 8.04% 7.06% 0.27% 1.72% -0.576 0.28 0.041** 0.082* -1.747 0.003 0.954 0.004 0.952
CAR(-1,1) 242 103 7.71% 13.55% 10.28% 3.67% — 10.38% -4.609 0.00*** 0.000*** 0.000*** -5.815 11.881 0.001*** 11.084 0.001***
CAR(-2,2) 242 103 8.83% 13.56% 10.95% 3.97% 11.13% 1.633 0.00*** 0.000*** 0.000*** -5,.824 0.003*** 8.172 0.004***
CAR(-3,3) 242 103 12.51% 13.71% 13.22% 4.50% 11.17% ~4.553 0.00*** 0.000*** 0.000*** -4.400 0.000*** 12.706 0.000***
CAR 242 103 13.34% 15.87% 14.42% 4.75% 11.15% -4.063 0.00*** 0.000*** 0.000*** -3.849 0.001*** 9.573 0.002***
CAR(-10,10) 242 103 19.36% 21.04% 19.99% 3.59% 8.85% -2.512 0.01*** 0.013** 0.025** -2.247 0.012** 5.703 0.017**
CAR(-20,20) 242 103 23.20% 28.51% 25.18% 3.47% 12.24% -3.734 0.00*** 0.001*** 0.003*** -2.994 0.000*** 12.706 0.000***
CAR(-30,30) 242 103 29.27% 37.00% 31.82% 2.64% 8.17% ~3.413 0.00*** 0.070* 0.139 3.74% -1.481 0.000*** 12.706 0.000***

Stars indicating signficance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

However, as we just showed in Table 5, there does not appear to be any difference between true and
false rumors during the period running up to the rumor publication. This therefore makes it more likely
that what we are seeing is how the rumor is diffusing throughout the market by word-ofmouth and
similar channels. Of course, insider information leaking out could still very well be the initial spark of

the true rumors.

5.5 Regressions on difference in rumor day reaction based on veracity

Table 7 is a simple univariate regression showing that the abnormal return on the rumor publication
day is statistically different from zero, as well as how the rumor day return differs between true and
false rumors on average. True rumors have approximately 4.95% higher return on average than false
rumors, effectively confirming the results seen in Figure 5. The average return created as an effect of
false rumors, without winsorizing applied, is 2.99% on the rumor day, whilst true rumors induce a
reaction of 7.94%. When the regression is restricted to rumors where the rumor reaction is positive, as
is shown in Table 8, true rumors result in a stock price hike of approximately 10.16% and false rumors
a reaction of 5.13%, about the same difference as in the unrestricted regression. In other words, the
difference in reaction between the true and false rumors is not an effect of the stock market more
frequently reacting positively to rumors that later prove to be true than to false rumors. This is an
important finding as we attempt to create a model to determine if a rumor is true or false using the size
of the rumor day price reaction as one of the determinants. For this to work there has be a way, on
average, to tell the reaction of a true rumor apart from that of a false rumor even if both react positively,
which Table 8 suggests is possible. Table 9 reveals that when controlling for the reputation of the source
and the level of detail of the rumor report, the difference in reaction between true and false rumors does
not change, a confirmation of what Figure 6 and 7 show. That only one of the variables (in this case
“Major News Source”) is significant in the regression is due to the fact that both variables serve as
different proxies for the same aspect — the credibility of the rumor.

In Table 10 the abnormal return on the day of publication is regressed on the categorical variable
indicating whether a rumor is true or not while controlling for numerous different factors that could
be the real causes of the difference. Despite controlling for these different firm-specific factors we are
unable to further explain the difference in the stock price jump on the rumor publication day. The
difference in reaction caused by a rumor being true still remains at about five percent, virtually the
same as with no control variables. The other variables that are statistically significant (leverage and
price-to-earnings ratio) have coefficients so small that they do not add much explanatory power. This
serves as evidence that the market also uses other more abstract or non-quantifiable factors than the
ones suggested by the theories in Barnes (1998), and the level of detail and source of the rumor itself,
when it appraises the probability of a rumor being true. While we are unable to determine what these
factors are we can still use the rumor day reaction in order to, indirectly, include the information in
the classification of rumors as true or false and subsequently to determine whether the market reacts

efficiently to rumors.

Table 6. Test for difference from zero in CAR for all rumors during various time periods

This table shows, using Student’s t-test, whether or not the stock price reactions in all rumors in our dataset differ from zero during various time periods around the rumor

publication date. The mean values for all rumors are presented together with the standard deviation for each of the time periods. Both one-sided and two-sided p-values as well

as the standard error and the t-s > are included. Two different run-up periods are included, one ending one day before the publication of the rumor and one ending two days

prior to publication.

One-sided p- ‘Two-sided
CAR Obs Std. Dev Mean Std. Error — T-statistic
value (upper) p-value

CAR(-30,-1) 358 22.28% 1.26% 0.142 0.285 1.18% 1.071
CAR(-21,-1) 358 17.82% 1.42% 0.066* 0.132 0.94% 1.509
CAR(-14,-1) 358 15.37% 2.04% 0.006*** 0.013** 0.81% 2.509
CAR(-7,-1) 358 12.54% 1.88% 0.002*** 0.005*** 0.66% 2.835
5-1) 358 9.68% 1.80% 0.000*** 0.001*** 0.51% 3.510

) 358 7.92% 1.52% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.42% 3.621

) 358 7.46% 1.38% 0.000*** 0.001*** 0.39% 3.489

) 358 6.91% 1.17% 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.36% 3.203

) 358 4.91% 0.96% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.26% 3.684
CAR(-1,-1) 358 6.26% 0.63% 0.029** 0.059* 0.33% 1.896
AR(0) 358 8.00% 4.31% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.42% 10.199
CAR(1,1) 358 6.50% 0.66% 0.029** 0.057* 0.34% 1.909
CAR(1,2) 358 7.51% 0.93% 0.010*** 0.020** 0.40% 2.342
CAR(1,3) 358 8.23% 1.04% 0.009*** 0.017** 0.44% 2.388
CAR(-1,1) 358 10.34% 5.60% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.55% 10.239
CAR(-2,2 358 11.56% 6.20% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.61% 10.150
CAR(-3,3) 358 13.12% 6.52% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.69% 9.407
CAR(-5,5) 358 14.46% 6.88% 0.000*** 0.000*** 0.76% 9.006
CAR(-10,10) 358 19.77% 5.39% 0.000*** 0.000*** 1.04% 5.159
CAR(-20,20) 358 25.33% 6.44% 0.000*** 0.0U0*** 1.34% 4.808
CAR(-30,30) 358 33.95% 5.11% 0.002*** 0.005*** 1.79% 2.849
CAR(-30,-2) 358 21.38% 0.63% 0.287 0.575 1.13% 0.561
CAR(-21,-2) 358 16.45% 0.79% O18] 0.362 O.87% 0.913
CAR(-14,-2) 358 13.47% 1.41% 0.024** 0.048** 0.71% 1.983
CAR(-7,-2) 358 9.91% 1.25% 0.009*** 0.017** 0.52% 2.390
CAR(-6,-2) 358 8.70% 1.17% 0.006*** 0.012** 0.46% 2.540
CAR(-5,-2) 358 6.84% 0.89% 0.007*** 0.014** 0.36% 2.460
CAR(-4,-2) 358 6.29% 0.75% 0.012** 0,025** 0.33% 2.252
CAR(-3,-2) 358 5.74% 0.54% 0.038** 0.075* 0.30% 1.786
CAR(-2,-2) 358 5.31% 0.33% 0.121 0.248 0.28% 1.171

Stars indicating signficance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

32

Table 7. Regression of abnormal return
difference on rumor day

This regression shows the difference in abnormal
return between true and false rumors on the rumor
day. (This is equivalent to running a t-test on the
difference, but is included in this format to allow

comparison to table 9.)

Variables AR(0)
True 0.0495***
(0.0114)
Constant 0.0299***
(0.00390)
Observations 345
R-squared 0.078

Robust standard errors in parentheses

*** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 8. Regression of abnormal return
difference on rumor day contingent on
positive rumor day abnormal return

This regression shows the difference in abnormal
return between true and false rumors on the rumor
day, contingent on the market reacting favorably
to the rumor. (This is equivalent to running a t-
test on the difference, but is included in this format
to allow comparison to table 9.)

Variables AR(O)
True 0.0503***
(0.0121)
Constant 0.0513***
(0.00390)
Observations 263
R-squared 0.093

Robust standard errors in parentheses

** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 9. Regression of abnormal return on
rumor day with control for news source and
level of detail

This regression shows the difference in abnormal
return between true and false rumors on the rumor
day, with controls for the source and the level of
detail of the rumor.

Variables AR(0)
True 0.0485***
(0.0114)
Major News Source 0.0272***
(0.0102)
Detailed Rumor -0.00124
(0.0116)
Constant 0.0180***
(0.00464)
Observations 358
R-squared 0.103

Robust standard errors in parentheses

*** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 10. The abnormal return on the rumor day as a function of the veracity of the rumor while controlling for various factors

This table shows the regression result when the the abnormal return on the rumor day is regressed on the categorical variable True while controlling for a large number of

level of detail of the rumor, a number of different <

factors, including credibility of the source punting ratios and the likelihood of the firm going bankrupt. In the different

), size (Log of Total Assets and Log of Market

models we vary the variables used to represent bankruptcy probability (Altman’s Z-score, Zmijewskij and Ohlson probability

Capitalization) and profitability (Return on Assets and Return on Equity).

Dependent variable: Abnormal return on rumor day

Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 2 Model 4 Model 5 Model 6 Model 7 Model 8 Model 9 Model 10 Model 11 Model 12
True 0.05193" — 0.05286" —0.05270"* 0.05310" 0.05342" 0.05327" 0.05325" 0.05431" 0.05408" 00884" 0.05365" 0.05402
(0.01561) (0.01522) (0.01516) (0.01483) (0.01459) (0.01467) (0.01548) (0.01496) (0.01490) (0.01476) (0.01435) (0.01456)
Major News Source 0.01245 0.01352 0.01298 0.01637 0.01657 0.01677 0.01138 0.01191 0.01541 0.01610 0.01581
(0.01450) (0.01424) (0.01417) (0.01426) (0.01406) (0.01407) (0.01421) (0.01389) (0.01395) (0.01372) (0.01378)
Detailed Rumor 0.02314* 0.02182 0.01159 0.01521 (1.0112. 0.02221 1.02305 0.02134 0.01112 0.01581 0.01086
(0.01399) (0.01399) (0.01372) (0.01360) (0.01355) (0.01441) (0.01400) (0.014104 (0.01389) (0.01354) (0.01367)
Market-to-Book -0.00101 0.00362 -0.00259 0.00587 ~0.00490 0.00423 0.00352 0.00067 0.00116 0.00192 -0.00033 -0.00041
(0.00843) (0.00533) (0.00528) (0.0070) (0.00498) (0.00510) (0.00725) (0.00523) (0.00521) (0.00690) (0.00501) (0.00519)
Sales Growth 0.02953 0.02675 0.02728 0.01634 0.01889 0.01640 0.02963 9.02639 0.02721 0.01748 0.01977 0.01744
(0.02290) (0.02221) (0.02267) (0.02366) (0.02174) (0.02310) (0.02351) (0.02253) (0.02319) (0.02434) (0.02199) (0.02378)
Leverage -0.00297** 0.00256" -0.00316** —--0.00155** ——-0.00155** 0.00147" 0.00312" 0.00256" ——-0.00330""* —-0.00159** ——-0.00160** —-0.00152**
(0.00118) (0.00140) (0.00127) (0.00078) (0.00074) (0.00077) (0.00115) (0.00137) (0.00124) (0.00078) (0.00075) (0.00077)
Profit Margin 0.00283 0.00002 0.00219 0.00133 -0.00095 0.00161 0.00336 0.00038 0.00239 0.00158 -0.00173 0.00170
(0.00681) (0.00708) (0.00680) (0.00604) (0.00582) (0.00542) (0.00692) (0.00725) (0.00697) (0.00609) (0.00598) (0.00554)
Asset Turnover 0.00607, 0.00440, 0.00391 0.00011 0.00216 0.00232 0.00669 ).00448 0.00400 0.00065 0.00201 0.00255
(0.00715 (0.00604) (0.00604) (0.00700) (0.00550) (0.00569) (0.00734) (0.00621) (0.00618) (0.00709) (0.00569) (0.00586)
Dividend Payout -0.00509 0.00513 -0.00556 0.00443 -0.00501 0.00444 -0.00530 0.00522 -0.00578 ~0.00464 -0.00491 -0.00463
(0.00488) (0.00494) (0.00490) (0.00462) (0.00481) (0.00463) (0.00473) (0.00483) (0.00473) (0.00449) (0.00472) (0.00448)
Current Ratio -0.0016 0.00350 0.00179 0.00247 -0.00430 0.00241 -0.00116 0.00332 -0.00128 0.00184 -0.00436 0.00189
(0.00347) (0.00293) (0.00305) (0.00345) (0.00265) (0.00275) (0.00343) (0.00300) (0.00315) (0.00332) (0.00267) (0.00277)
Interest Coverage Ratio 0.00001 0.00000 0.00001 0.00002 ~0.00002 0.00001 0.00001 0.00001 0.00000 0.00002 -0.00003 -0.00001
(0.00004) (0.00003) (0.00003) (0.00005) (0.00004) (0.00004) (0.00004) (0.00003) (0.00003) (0.00005) (0.00004) (0.00004)
Price-to-Earnings Ratio -0.00003"** — -0.00003"** — -0.00003** — -0.00002*** — -0.00003*** —-0.00002*** —-0,00003°"" 0.00003" — -0.00003*** —-0.00002*** — -0.00003*** —~0.00002***
(0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001) (0.00001)
Altman's Z-score -0.00171 0.00154 0.00212 0.00129
(0.00429) (0.00380) (0.00421) (0.00369)
Zmijewski Probability 0.01449 -0.05353** 0.02067
(0.03953) (0.02625) (0.04127)
Ohlson Probability 0.01640 0.01375 0.01786 0.01204
(0.02339) (0.02263) (0.02326) (0.02241)
Return on Equity 0.01194 0.01104 0.01126 0.01272 0.01181 0.01192
(0.00847) (0.00819) (0.00856) (0.00882) (0.00842) (0.00891)
Return on Assets 0.04241 0.02720 0.04526 0.04149 0.02835 0.04423
(0.03524) (0.03577) (0.03531) (0.03546) (0.03528) (0.03528)
Log of Total Assets: -0.00681 -0.00734 -0.00643 0.00628, -0.00698 -0.00648
(0.00523) (0.00495) (0.00502) (0.00532) (0.00489) (0.00511)
Log of Market Capitalization -0.005 0.00641 -0.00529 0.00505 -0.00679 -0.00529
(0.00454) (0.00446) (0.004371 (0.00435) (0.00421) (0.00420)
Constant 0.07923* 0.08859" 0.0657: 0.07442 0.10060** 0.08413* 0.06387" 0.07672* 0.05024 0.05866 0.09487** 0.06811
(0.04478) (0.04753) (0.04982) (0.04601) (0.04505) (0.05075) (0.03736) (0.04298) (0.03563) (0.03881) (0.04156)
Observations 220 221 221 236 237 237 220 221 221 236 237 237

R-squared 0.17621 O.AT61A 0.17702 0.13838 0.15530 0.13936. 0.17392 0.17408 OATATA 0.13672 0.15763

0.13779

Robust standard errors in parcutheses
PF D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<O.1

5.6 Logit regressions and trading model specification

Table 11 shows the three logit model specifications that have the best joint explanatory power. The
signs of the coefficients are consistent with what theory suggests; larger firms appear to have a smaller
likelihood to be taken over, and rumors with a higher level of detail are more likely to be true. Of the
three bankruptcy measures, only Altman’s Z-score has a significant impact on the probability of a rumor
being true, but all measures have signs consistent with theory. Thus, rumors where the target firms
have a high risk of bankruptcy are more likely to be true than other rumors. A higher level of leverage
also increases the chance of being taken over; a factor that in part captures the same qualities as the
bankruptcy measures. While the price-to-earnings ratio is barely statistically significant the miniscule
coefficient renders the factor effectively economically insignificant. This indicates a smaller effect than
suggested by the theories presented in Barnes (1998), which state that either resource-constrained firms
with high growth or resource-rich firms with low growth (captured by the price-to-earnings ratio) are
more probable takeover targets. It can be added that extending the model to include sales growth,
another factor relevant to the resourcegrowth mismatch theory, did not result in any significant
improvement. The fact that the abnormal return on the rumor day is highly significant even with all
other variables included tells us again that the market has access to additional information that we
have been unable to identify, and that is not captured by the other variables in the logit regression.

Although Figure 9 seems to indicate that the trading volume on the day of the rumor would be a
valuable element to consider when trying to discern true rumors from false, we find that including it in
the logit regression contributes little (not shown). This is most likely due to the difference in volume
between the two rumor types mirroring the information inherent in the market price reaction, thus
making the inclusion of both redundant. Another aspect that could have been relevant to include in the
model is a potential run-up before the rumor publication but, consistent with Table 5 where we found
no statistically significant difference in the run-up between true and false rumors as well as the similar
findings of Barnes (1998), including the run-up does not contribute to the model.

Table 12 shows a logit regression using the model with the best explanatory power in Table 11,
Model 1, but excluding the market reaction to the rumor. The regression aims to see if it is possible to
categorically identify true and false rumors using only observable information (firm- and rumor-specific
properties). While this model performs worse than the model in Table 11, a significant portion of the
R-squared value (12%) is retained and most variables are still significant to the same extent as in Table
11. This shows that the identified variables are factors that actively contribute to whether a firm is a
likely takeover target or not, and hence factors that can be used, independently and collectively, to
estimate the veracity of an acquisition rumor.

Table 11 and 12 both paint a clear picture: apart from the level of detail in the rumor and the
unobservable information contained in the price jump the relevant factors to classify rumors as true or
false are the size of the firm, its profitability and the likelihood of it going bankrupt. To a smaller extent
the indebtedness of a firm the price-to-earnings ratio also hold some explanatory power. The differing
signs on the bankruptcy measurements and the return on equity, suggesting that at the same time
profitable firms and firms on the verge of bankruptcy are likely takeover candidates, indicate that it is
impossible to describe a typical target firm and that there are several reasons to why a firm is more or

less likely to be taken over.

35

Table 11. Logit regression to identify factors determining the veracity of rumors

This table shows the results of a logit regression aiming to find variables that explain whether
a rumor is true or false. The specification of the regression is as follows, where BANKRUPT
is Altman’s Z-score, Zmijewski probability or Ohlson probability in each of the three models.

Size is the natural logarithm of the total assets of the firm.

True = By + B,ARo + ByDETAIL + B,SIZE + ByROE + Bs;BANKRUPT + BgLEVER + BPE + €

As the standard R-squared measure is not defined for logit regressions, the commonly used
alternative McFadden’s R-squared and Adjusted R-squared are instead presented.

Dependent variable: True

Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3
AR (0) T.ITT2Q*** 8.41956*** 8.26838***
(-2.42733) (-2.35292) (-2.3421)
Detailed rumor 0.94759*** 0.88857*** 0.88739***
(-0.33166) (-0.31918) (-0.31938)
Size -0.25012** -0.19512** -0.18777**
(-0.10192) (-0.09345) (-0.09317)
Return on Equity 0.42044* 0.36400 0.25633
(-0.24731) (-0.23945) (-0.22365)
Altman's Z-score -0.13481***
(-0.04700)
Zmijewski probability 0.95871
(-0.78606)
Ohlson probability 0.33203

(-0.54938)

Leverage 0.06573* 0.05912* 0.07432**
(-0.03634) (-0.03530) (-0.03530)
Price/Earnings 0.00067* 0.00067* 0.00064
(-0.00039) -0.00039 (-0.00039)
Constant 0.51922 -0.63118 -0.63715
(0.79672) (-0.68007) (-0.71932)
Observations 269 272 271
McFadden's R-squared 0.169 0.153 0.150
McFadden's Adjusted R-squared 0.12 0.104 0.101

Robust standard errors in parentheses

*** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

36

Table 12. Logit regression excluding abnormal return

This table shows the results of repeating the logit regression in Table 11
but excluding the abnormal return on the rumor day.

True = By + B,DETAIL + B,SIZE + ByROE + ByZSCORE + BsLEVER + BcPE +

Since Altman’s Z-score proved to be the best bankruptcy measure in the
regression in Table 11 it is the only one used in this one. Size is the
natural logarithm of the total assets of the firm.

Variables True
Detailed rumor 1.24814***
-0.31851
Size -0.33291***
(-0.10034)
Return on Equity 0.54331*
(-0.28224)
Altman's Z-score -0.13790***
(-0.04289)
Leverage 0.04821
(0.03661)
Price/Earnings 0.00051
(-0.00038)
Constant 1.47965**
(-0.73677)
Observations 269
McFadden's R-squared 0.118
McFadden's Adjusted R-squared 0.075

Robust standard errors in parentheses

** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

5.7 Classification of rumors and outcome of trading strategy

Using the model specified in Table 11, we divide the sample into a training set and a validation set as
explained in the methodology section, estimate the coefficients of the model using the training set, and
then use the coefficients on the validation set to calculate probabilities of the different rumors being
true. Doing this repeatedly we arrive at the distribution seen in Table 13. By examining the t-statistics
presented it is apparent that the model performs significantly better than picking takeover targets at
random for all probability cutoffs above 0.3 (when the probability of a rumor being true estimated by
the logit regression is higher than 0.3). On average, with a cutoff of 0.5, we select 8.31 true rumors and
5.36 false rumors in the hold-out sample consisting of 75 rumors. Buying these rumors and holding them
for one year would yield, on average, a return of 4.16%, or about equal to the market return during the
same period. The 0.5 cutoff is the cutoff that maximizes the percentage of rumors correctly identified.
However, a slightly better return can be achieved using a 0.6 probability cutoff with only a minute
reduction of the success rate and the t-statistic. For any level higher than 0.6 the number of rumors
traded on becomes so low that the strategy can no longer be considered viable. While the numbers in
Table 13 only represent a third of the total dataset, one must keep in mind that the rumors are spread
out over a twelve-year period. For example, applying the 0.7 cutoff would entail investing in, on average,
only 1.4 stocks each year whereas a strategy using the 0.5 cutoff represents investments in 3.4 stocks

every year.

Table 13. Results from using the logit model including rumor day price reaction with repeated
random sub-sampling

This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model
True = Bo + ByARy + ByDETAIL + B3SIZE + B,ROE + B;BANKRUPT + BLEVER + B,PE +€

on two thirds of the total U.S. sample and then creating estimated probabilities using these coefficients for the

last third of the sample. This is done a total of 200 times, and the holding period return and the e s holding
period return for a year after the rumor publication as well as the number of false and true rumors found
above a certain cutoff is averaged over all iterations. The C-ratio is the fraction of true rumors above a cutoff
level divided by the total number of rumors above the cutoff level, and is a measure of the accuracy of the

model. It can also be used determine the most accurate cutoff level. Type I error lists the number of true

rumors not included above the cutoff, while the type II column lists the number of false rumors that are,

incorrectly, included above the cutoff (a negative value indicates that the classification performs worse than

by chance). The number of rumors in the validation set is 75 each time, with 174 rumors in the training set.

Cutoff — False True C-ratio Type 1 Error Type II Error % Correct HPR(1;365) Ex.HPR(1;365) — T-stat

0.1 - A7.89 32.76% 1.42 A7.89 40.91% 1.26% 0.22% -3.71
0.2 - 26.42 18.86 41.66% 5.23 26.42 61.73% 3.23% 2.40% 0.62
0.3 - 15.11 15.12 50.02% 8.80 15.11 71.14% 4.12% 1.58% 2.10
0.4 - 9.60 10.45 52.11% 13.91 9.60 71.57% 2.11% 0.82% 2.64
0.5 - 5.36 8.31 60.81% 16.14 5.36 74.17% 4.16% 0.07% 3.71
0.6 - 2.96 6.06 67.18% 18.40 2.96 74.00% 6.32% 1.64% 3.65
0.7 - 1.67 3.96 70.31% 19.85 1.67 73.89% 9.82% 2.93% 3.53
0.8 - 0.87 2.30 72.63% 21.99 0.87 72.32% 10.46% -0.51% 3.15
0.9 - 0.43 1.28 TA.85% 0.43 71.74% 10.02% -0.38% 3.04
1- 0.00 0.00 - 0.00 70.51% - - 2.74


Table 14 shows what the same technique yields using the model specification in Table 12, excluding the
abnormal return on the rumor day. By examining the number of firms above the different cutoffs and
the respective t-statistics it is clear that the model performs slightly worse than the model in Table 13,
but is still able to predict takeover targets significantly better than chance. A portfolio where the 0.4
probability cutoff is used earns a better return than any of the portfolios in Table 13, however the
returns are not statistically different from zero (as the standard deviation is larger than 40 percent most
iterations, resulting in a standard error of above 10 percent.) While insignificant, a larger return could
be caused by the exclusion of the rumor day return as a determining factor. Some firms that were
included in the portfolios in Table 13 because of their strong rumor day reaction rebound, due to the
rumor being proven false or for some other reason, during the following year and hence reduce the return
of the investment portfolio. Table 15 investigates a short selling strategy where all firms below a certain
cutoff are sold instead of bought. This strategy aims at identifying false firms instead of true firms,
which it manages to do with some accuracy. Below the 0.3 cutoff the model identifies 43.47 false rumors
and 9.25 true rumors on average, significantly better than chance, which allows us to make a non-risk
adjusted average HPR of 2.51% and an average excess return of 2.03%, none of which are statistically
different from zero (as standard errors here too are above 10 percent for nearly all iterations.) Figure
12 and 11 provide a more visual presentation of the classification results in Table 12 and 13, clearly
showing that a larger fraction of true rumors are identified at higher cutoffs.

All three model variants perform very well at classifying rumors into true or false categories.
However, the returns one can earn from trading on these rumors are far too modest (especially since
transaction costs are not considered) to justify it as a viable trading strategy, suggesting that the
efficient market hypothesis holds for takeover rumors. We have been able to identify factors that
contribute to the likelihood of a firm being taken over in addition to the information inherent in the
stock market reaction to the rumor. However, that we cannot profit on this ostensible information
advantage indicates that the market has already internalized this increased likelihood even before the

rumor publication through a higher pre-rumor stock price.

39

Table 14. Results from using the logit model excluding rumor day price reaction with repeated
random sub-sampling

This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B,DETAIL + B,SIZE + B,ROE + B,BANKRUPT + B,LEVER + BPE + €

on two thirds of the total U.S. sample and then creating estimated probabilities using these coefficients for the
last third of the sample. This is done a total of 200 times, and the holding period return and the excess holding
period return for a year after the rumor publication as well as the number of false and true rumors found
above a certain cutoff is averaged over all iterations. Firms above the C-ratio is the fraction of true firms
above a cutoff level divided by the total number of rumors above the cutoff level, and is a measure of the
accuracy of the model. It can also be used determine the most accurate cutoff level. Type I error lists the

number of true rumors not included above the cutoff, while the type IT column lis

the number of false rumors

c measures whether the cl cations above the

y, included above the cutoff. The t-stat

that are, incorre s
cutoffs are significantly more accurate than by chance (a negative value indicates that the classification
performs worse than by chance). The number of rumors in the validation set is 75 each time, with 174 rumors

in the training set.

Cutoff — False True C-ratio Type I Error Type II Error % Correct HPR(1;365) Ex.HPR(1;365)  T-stat

0.1 - 51.54 22.96 30.81% 1.23 51.54 36.42% 0.59% -0.65% -4.73
0.2 - 32.53 19.24 37.16% 4.93 32.53 54.97% 1.30% 0.24% -0.78
0.3 - 18.52 15.63 45.78% 8.32 18.52 67.46% 2.68% 1.46% 1.91
0.4 - 10.61 11.27 51.52% 13.25 10.61 71.20% 5.36% 4.02% 2.95
0.5 - 5.54 6.07 52.26% 18.48 5.54 71.35% 2.01% -0.01% 2.61
0.6 - 2.97 2.33 43.96% 21.59 2.97 69.90% 0.37% 2.54
0.7 - 1.39 0.72 34.20% 23.75 1.39 69.70% 0.21% 2.53
0.8 - 0.87 0.26 24.08 0.87 70.15% 0.91% -3.99% 2.59
0.9 - 0.41 0.13 24.25 0.41 70.29% 13.92% 4.43% 2.65
1- 0.00 0.00 - 24.12 0.00 70.92% - - 2.79

Table 15. Results from using the logit model including rumor day price reaction with repeated
random sub-sampling when shorting firms

This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B:ARy + B,DETAIL + B3SIZE + B,ROE + B;BANKRUPT + B.LEVER + B,PE +

on two thirds of the total U.S. sample and then creating estimated probabilities using these coefficients for the
last third of the sample. The firms below different cutoffs are then sold (shorted). This is done a total of 200
times, and the holding period return and the excess holding period return for a year after the rumor publication
as well as the number of false and true rumors found below a certain cutoff is averaged over all iterations. The
C-ratio is the fraction of true firms above a cutoff level divided by the total number of rumors above the cutoff
level, and is a measure of the accuracy of the model. It can also be used determine the most accurate cutoff
level. Type I error lists the number of false rumors not included below the cutoff, while the type I] column
lists the number of true rumors that are, incorrectly, included below the cutoff. The t-statistic measures
whether the classifications below the cutoffs are significantly more accurate than by chance (a negative value
indicates that the classification performs worse than by chance). The number of rumors in the validation set
is 75 each time, with 174 rumors in the training set.

Cutoff — False True C-ratio Type I Error Type II Error % Correct HPR(1;365) Ex.HPR(1;365)  T-stat

- 01 11.26 1.24 90.12% 47.86 1.24 41.14% 5.51% 1.56% -3.70
- 0.2 31.79 5.08 86.22% 26.60 5.08 61.76% ] 2.29% 0.66
- 0.83 43.47 9.25 82.46% 14.59 9.25 71.05% 2.51% 2.86
-04 A8.89 13.29 78.63% 9.79 13.29 72.13% -0.57% 3.09
- 0.5 52.65 16.19 5.89 16.19 73.32% -0.77% -1.82% 3.44
- 0.6 55.78 17.77 3.15 17.77 74.72% -0.49% -1.66% 3.75
- 0.7 57.20 20.83 1.62 20.83 73.11% -1.07% -2.25% 3.46
- 0.8 58.23. 22.25 0.91 22.25 72.35% -0.62% 1.83% 3.14
- 0.9 58.64 23.20 0.53 23.20 71.62% -0.75% -2.04% 2.99
-1 59.18 24.54 70.69% 0.00 24.54 70.69% -0.54% -2.17% 2.72

40

Figure 12. Estimated probabilities of rumors being true using
the logit model including rumor day price reaction and a single
representative random sample

This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B:ARo + B,DETAIL + B3SIZE + B,ROE + B;BANKRUPT + BgLEVER + B,PE +€

on two thirds of the total U.S. sample and then creating estimated
probabilities using these coefficients for the last third of the sample. This
is based on only one such random sampling of the U.S. data that
approximated the distribution in table 14. The total number of firms in
the validation set shown is 75.

T T T T T T T
0 a 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1
Estimated p(True)

False
HE True

Figure 13. Estimated probabilities of rumors being true using
the logit model excluding rumor day price reaction and a single
representative random sample

This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = Bo + ,DETAIL + B,SIZE + B,ROE + B,BANKRUPT + B,LEVER + B,PE + €

on two thirds of the total U.S. sample and then creating estimated
probabilities using these coefficients for the last third of the sample. This
is based on only one such random sampling of the U.S. data that
approximated the distribution in table 15. The total number of firms in
the validation set shown is 75.

pret

a4

0 A 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1.0
Estimated p(True)

False
HE True

Al

5.8 Robustness tests

For robustness, we redo some of the steps done for the U.S. on a U.K. dataset as well as on an out-of
sample U.S. dataset from Bloomberg to see if our findings hold when using other data. Table 16 is the
regression in Table 7 reproduced on the U.K. data, and shows that there is no statistically significant
difference in the rumor day reaction between true and false rumors in the U.K. Contingent on the
abnormal return being positive, however, the difference is statistically significant and firms subject to
true rumors gain on average 12.81%, more than in the U.S., while falsely rumored firms gain 5.5%
(compare with Table 9 for the U.S.). In other words, if the market reacts with positive abnormal returns,
as is expected since being named a potential takeover target is usually good news, it is possible to tell
a difference in the reaction for true and false rumors in the U.K market as well. Table 18, a regression
with a country dummy variable for the U.K. and an interaction term between a True dummy variable
and the U.K. dummy variable is included, tells us that there does not appear to be, on average, any
statistically significant difference between the U.S. and the U.K. when it comes to rumor reactions. This
is a first indication that we cannot reject that our findings from the U.S. dataset do not hold in the

U.K. market as well.

Table 16. U.K. data: regression of abnormal

return difference on rumor day

This regression shows the difference in abnormal
return between true and false rumors on the rumor
day for a U.K. sample, also from Zephyr, selected

in similar fashion to the U.S. sample. (This is

equivalent to running a t-test on the difference, but
is included in this format to allow comparison to
table 18.)

Variables AR(0)
True 0.0307
(0.0251)
Constant 0.026 1***
(0.00680)
Observations 273
R-squared 0.010

Robust standard errors in parentheses

** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 17. U.K. data: regression of abnormal
return difference on rumor day contingent
on positive rumor day abnormal return

This regression shows the difference in abnormal
return between true and false rumors on the rumor
day for the U.K. contingent on the market reacting
favorably to the rumor. (This is equivalent to
running a t-test on the difference, but is included

in this format to allow comparison to table 18.)

Variables AR(O)
True 0.0731**
(0.0303)
Constant 0.0550***
(0.00566)
Observations 185
R-squared 0.065

Robust standard errors in parentheses

** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 18. U.K. and U.S. data: regression of
abnormal returns on rumor day with
country dummy and interaction term

This regression tests whether we can reject the
hypothesis that the U.K. rumor reaction differs

from the U.S. rumor reaction.

Variables AR(0)
True 0.0502***
(0.0115)
Uk -0.00373
(0.00783)
True and UK -0.0111
(0.0311)
Constant 0.0298***
(0.00388)
Observations 609
R-squared 0.034

Robust standard errors in parentheses

** D<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Figure 14 shows the rumor day reaction for U.K. market, as Figure 5 illustrated for the U.S. Here, the
run-up appears to be distinct for true rumors, but not for false rumors, the 14 days preceding the rumor
publication. The U.K. also shows a more distinct upward-sloping ACAR trend after the rumor
publication compared with in the U.S. The U.S. sample exhibits a similar trend but only over a longer
period. These two differences are difficult to explain, and could be due to structural differences between
the markets. It also cannot be ruled out that it is caused by impurities in the U.K. sample or that
Zephyr's rumor collection process differs between the U.K. and the U.S. The U.K. reaction is more in
line with the diffusion process described by Kimmel (2004), who states that true rumors should become
more and more credible with time while the credibility of false rumors deteriorate. The exact causes of
this difference remain to be explored, something that is left to future research.

The data for the Bloomberg sample is even more imprecise, and we have reason to believe that the
rumor date present in the dataset is in many cases not the first publication date of the rumor but rather
the date when it was recorded by Bloomberg. As a consequence, the timing of the reaction is inexact
for some rumors and a graph showing the difference between the reaction for true and false rumors may
be misleading. Due to the large size of the Bloomberg dataset we have been unable to correct for these
imprecisions and therefore choose to not present a graph like Figure 14 for Bloomberg. The imprecise
timing also explains the smaller difference for the Bloomberg dataset between the model including the

rumor day reaction and the one that does not, compared to the other two datasets.

43

Figure 14. U.K.: Winsorized ACAR for rumored target firms day -30
to +30 relative to rumor publication, divided by veracity

This figure shows the average cumulative abnormal return (ACAR) for the days
-30 to +30 around the rumor publication day for both rumors that are followed
by an acquisition (true) and rumors that are not (false). The figure is based on
79 true rumors and 212 false rumors, where the CARs are winsorized on the 5%
level every day before the average is calculated.

1 1
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Day relative to rumor day

True rumors

TTT False rumors

To test the classification model, we estimate the coefficients in the logit model in Table 11 (including
the rumor day reaction) on the full U.S. main data sample, and use the resulting coefficients to estimate
a probability for the rumors being true or not in our two external datasets, on U.K. rumors and on
other U.S. rumors provided by Bloomberg. Figure 15 and 16 show the distribution of true and false
rumors both including and excluding the rumor day reaction on the U.K. dataset, while Figure 17 and
18 give the same graphical presentation for the Bloomberg sample. The model including the rumor day
reaction does noticeably better than the one excluding it for both samples, but both still perform
decidedly better than chance. The distribution of true rumors is still distinctly skewed toward the right
compared to the distribution of false rumors, indicating that the models are able to identify true rumors
in these samples as well. The difference in the classification results of the two models is, however, smaller
for the Bloomberg sample due to the imprecision of the data causing some rumor day reactions to not

be included.

44

Figure 15. U.K.: probabilities of rumors being true from logit model
including rumor day price reaction estimated on U.S. data
This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model
True = By + B:ARo + B2SIZE + B;ROE + B,BANKRUPT + BsLEVER + BoPE +€
on the full U.S. sample of 249 rumors and then using these coefficients to

estimate the probability of a rumor being true in the U.K. sample of 199 rumors.
Detail is not included as it was not recorded for U.K. rumors.

A
Ao | lites a...

1 1
0 at 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1
Estimated p(True)

&

False

HE Ire

Figure 16. U.K.: probabilities of rumors being true from the logit
model excluding rumor day price reaction estimated on U.S. data
This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B,SIZE + B,ROE + B3BANKRUPT + B,LEVER + BPE +
on the full U.S. sample of 249 rumors and then using these coefficients to

estimate the probability of a rumor being true in the U.K. sample of 199 rumors.
Detail is not included as it was not recorded for U.K. rumors.

3
24
= l fa a

A
27
3

T 1 T 1

0 Jl 2 3 A 5 6 7 8 9 1
Estimated p(True)
False
HE True

45

Figure 17. Bloomberg U.S.: probabilities of rumors being true using
the logit model including rumor day price reaction estimated on U.S.
data
This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B:ARy + B,SIZE + B3ROE + By,BANKRUPT + BsLEVER+ BPE +€
on the full U.S. (Zephyr) sample of 249 rumors and then using these coefficients
to estimate the probability of a rumor being true in the Bloomberg U.S. sample

of 783 rumors. DETAIL is not included as it cannot be determined for

Bloomberg U.S. rumors.

otttddndl... . .

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 J
Estimated p(True)

False

HE True

Figure 18. Bloomberg U.S.: probabilities of rumors being true using
the logit model excluding rumor day price reaction estimated on
U.S. data
This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B,SIZE + B,ROE + B3BANKRUPT + B,LEVER + BsPE+€
on the full U.S. (Zephyr) sample of 249 rumors and then using these
coefficients to estimate the probability of a rumor being true in the Bloomberg

U.S. sample of 783 rumors. DETAIL is not included as it cannot be determined
for Bloomberg U.S. rumors.

34

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1
Estimated p(True)

False
GE Truc

46

The t-statistics in Table 16 show that all U.K. rumors with an estimated probability of being true that
is above 0.4 have been selected significantly better than at random. The model performs, for most
cutoffs, significantly better than chance would in the Bloomberg dataset as well, as is shown in Table
17. While the model outperforms chance in the Bloomberg dataset it only manages to classify very few
rumors correctly and at very conservative probability levels, most likely due to the reduction of the
impact of the rumor day reaction caused by the imprecision of the dates provided in the dataset. As
expected, though, both the U.K. sample and the U.S. Bloomberg sample perform worse than the same
model does in the U.S. sample. This is partly because of the somewhat lower quality of data in these
samples. In particular, Bloomberg’s standards for what is required from a rumor in terms of credibility
in order for it to be reported appears to be lower than Zephyr’s. This is also apparent in the ratio of
false to true rumors, where Bloomberg is closer to 10-to-1, compared to the ratio in the Zephyr samples
and the distributions seen in papers such as Zivney et al. (1996) and Pound and Zeckhauser (1990)
where the ratio is approximately 3-to-1. It is also almost inevitable that differences exist between the
U.S. and U.K. markets in some form. Generally, however, it is encouraging to see how well one can
classify firms into targets and non-targets using only simple accounting ratios. Holding period returns
were not calculated for the Zephyr U.K. and Bloomberg U.S. samples, however, as the stock prices in
those datasets required more data processing.

As a last robustness test on both the main U.S. and the U.K. data, we ascertain that the difference
in the rumor day reaction between true and false rumors is not solely due to differences in target firm
size or other firm characteristics but due to other information available to the market. This was done
by matching the true and false rumors on a number of firm characteristics and the results of this
procedure can be seen in tables Al and A2 in the appendix. The difference in rumor day reaction
between true and false rumors in the U.S. remains statistically significant while the difference for the
U.K. is still statistically insignificant.

Descriptive statistics for the U.K. and Bloomberg datasets are included for sake of comparison with

the main dataset in tables A3 and A4 in the appendix.

AT

Table 16. U.K.: results from using the logit model including rumor day price reaction
estimated on U.S. data
This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B,ARy + BySIZE + B3ROE + B,BANKRUPT + B;LEVER+ BPE +€

on the full U.S. (Zephyr) sample of 249 rumors and then using these coefficients to estimate the
probability of a rumor being true in the U.K. sample. DETAIL is not included as it was not recorded for
U.K. rumors. The C-ratio is the fraction of true firms above a cutoff level divided by the total number
of rumors above the cutoff level, and is a measure of the accuracy of the model. It can also be used
determine the most accurate cutoff level. Type I error lists the number of false rumors included above
the cutoff, while the type II column lists the number of true rumors that are not included above the

cutoff. The t-statistic measures whether the clas: tions below the cutoffs are significantly more
accurate than by chance (a negative value indicates that the classification performs worse than by

chance). The model is run on 199 rumors, of which 56 are true and 143 are false.

Cutoff False True C-ratio Type 1 Error Type Il Error % Correct T-stat
0.1 - 136.00 56.00 29.17% 0.00 136.00 31.66% ~-10.56
0.2 - 102.00 49.00 32.45% 7.00 102.00 45.23% -5.22
0.3 - 52.00 27.00 34.18% 29.00 52.00 59.30% -0.40
0.4 - 25.00 21.00 45.65% 35.00 25.00 69.85% 3.50,
0.5 17.00 14.00 45.16% 42.00 17.00 70.35% 3.70
0.6 - 9.00 12.00 57.14% 44.00 9.00 73.37% 4.99
0.7 - 5.00 8.00 61.54% 48.00 5.00 73.87% 4,99
0.8 - 3.00 6.00 66.67% 50.00 3.00 73.37% 4.99
0.9 - 1.00 3.00 75.00% 53.00 1.00 72.86% 4,76
1- 0.00 0.00 - 56.00 0.00 71.86% 4,33

Table 17. Bloomberg U.S.: results from using the logit model estimated on U.S. data including
rumor day price reaction
This is the results from estimating the coefficients in the logit model

True = By + B,SIZE + B,ROE + B,BANKRUPT + B,LEVER + B;PE +¢€

on the full U.S. (Zephyr) sample of 249 rumors and then using these coefficients to estimate the probability
of a rumor being true in the Bloomberg U.S. sample. DETAIL is not included as it cannot be determined
for Bloomberg U.S. rumors. The C-ratio is the fraction of true firms above a cutoff level divided by the
total number of rumors above the cutoff level, and is a measure of the accuracy of the model. It can also
be used determine the most accurate cutoff level. Type I error lists the number of false rumors included
above the cutoff, while the type I column lists the number of true rumors that are not included above the
cutoff. The t-statistic measures whether the classifications below the cutoffs are significantly more accurate

than by chance (a negative value indicates that the classification performs worse than by chance). Out of
the 1520 rumors in the Bloomberg dataset, the required data to run the model was only available for 783

rumors (112 true and 671 false).

Cutoff False True C-ratio Type 1 Error Type Il Error % Correct T-stat
0.1 - 574.00 102.00 15.09% 10.00 574.00 25.42% -32.18
0.2 - 279.00 68.00 19.60% 44.00 279.00 58.75% -9.51
0.3 - 91.00 33.00 26.61% 79.00 91.00 78.29% 1.90
0.4 - 36.00 15.00 29.41% 97.00 36.00 83.01% 5.61
0.5 10.00 4.00 28.57% 108.00 10.00 84.93% 7.39

0.6 - 4.00 2.00 33.33% 110.00 4.00 85.44% 7.90
0.7 - 0.00 1.00 100.00% 111.00 0.00 85.82% 8.29
0.8 - 0.00 0.00 - 112.00 0.00 85.70% 8.16
0.9 - 0.00 0.00 - 112.00 0.00 85.70% 8.16
1- 0.00 0.00 - 112.00 0.00 85.70% 8.16

48

6. CONCLUSION

We have examined different hypotheses concerning rumors in financial markets, both in the U.S. and
in the U.K. Using rumors between 2000 and 2012, we have studied whether financial markets can tell
the difference between true and false rumors; whether markets react efficiently to rumors; whether it is
possible to use book values to tell the difference between true and false rumors; and whether the markets
have internalized this information or not.

First, we find a statistically significant difference between true and false rumors, where the market
reacts, on average, 4.95% stronger to the publication of true rumors than to false rumors. This result
stands even when controlling for the source reporting the rumor and the level of detail of the rumor.
We find that a rumor from a larger news source induces a rumor day reaction that is around 2.72%
stronger than for smaller news sources. This agrees with our first hypothesis, that markets can tell the
difference between true and false rumors. We can however only partially explain the information that
the market uses to distinguish between the two.

Second, we also find that it is not possible to profit by buying and holding rumors on average, as
one would expect; such a strategy would yield a return not statistically different from zero due to the
high volatility associated with trading on rumors. This is evidence that markets do appear to react
efficiently to rumors, in accordance with our second hypothesis.

Third, using logit models, we find that we are able to successfully classify rumored target firms both
in- and out-of-sample using the coefficients estimated in-sample. We find that smaller firms, firms with
high return on equity, and firms with high bankruptcy risk are all more likely to be taken over than
other firms. We, however, also find that there is a significant amount of information that we are unable
to control for that the market uses to distinguish between true and false rumors. We therefore establish
that the stock price abnormal return on the rumor publication day has strong explanatory power when
added to our model, serving as a proxy for information that cannot be readily observed. This information
could be information Zephyr missed to record, such as SEC filings on insider trading or block purchases
or further statements by the rumored target or acquiring firm. It could also be due to nuances in the
original news report that cannot be captured in a summary of a rumor, in line with how Tetlock (2004)
concludes that the way a news item is reported, and not only the content of the report, can make a
great difference in what effect it has on the market.

Despite the observed correlation between the rumor day abnormal return and some of the other
variables included in the sample, causing some concern about multicollinearity, the inclusion of the
rumor day return still contributes significantly to the classification of rumors as true or false. Other
statistically significant variables provide explanatory power to the model even when return is included,
which leads us to hypothesize that markets perhaps do not take into account all the information
available in some of the financial key ratios when judging the veracity of rumors. We therefore try
classifying firms by dividing our main sample into a training set and a validation set and can by using
this method classify rumors better than at random. While this result is unsurprising when the rumor
reaction is included in the logit model, considering the difference in reaction between true and false
rumors, the model still does better than chance when only financial key ratios are included. This agrees

with our third hypothesis and with the findings of for example Palepu (1986), Barnes (1998) and others
49

that have investigated the differences in characteristics between targets and non-targets (but not in
conjunction with rumors). The downfall is that only a fraction of the rumors can be classified, which
translates to very few identified rumors if the method were to be applied on future rumors as a trading
strategy.

Fourth, we find that it is not possible to profit using either of the two classification strategies in our
main sample. The reaction on the rumor publication day appears to be sufficient to capture any potential
profits on the rumor day rendering trading of targets after this reaction an unprofitable venture, both
in terms of normal and abnormal holding period returns. It is assumed that the stock market reacts
nearly instantly to the rumor. If the reaction is not instant, however, profits may be achievable if the
model (excluding the rumor day price reaction) is applied before the full reaction has materialized. All
strategies were shown unprofitable even without taking transaction costs into account; when controlling
for transaction costs, the ability to profit using these methods diminishes even further. These results
agree with our last hypothesis.

We compare our findings on the U.S. dataset with another sample of U.S. rumors as well as a sample
of U.K. firms and find that the same estimated logit model used in the main U.S. dataset also manages
to classify firms significantly better than chance in both the two other datasets. Due to the noisiness of
these datasets we have been unable to calculate returns to a buy-and-hold strategy using rumors with
any reasonable degree of certainty, but preliminary calculations show a lack of abnormal returns in
these markets as well.

We therefore find evidence for weak as well as semi-strong market efficiency in conjunction with
rumors. We also find no evidence to contradict strong-form market efficiency for rumors in the U.S., as
we do not find any statistically significant differences in the run-up between true and false rumors. We
believe that the difference between true and false rumors is likely to be due to public information that
we are unable to capture using the summaries available through Zephyr and annual report data. Finally,
we have also been able to show that the run-up prior to announcements caused by the rumors in our
dataset largely corresponds with the run-up observed in the market as a whole, demonstrated by for
example Betton et al. (2008). This finding suggests that rumors may be a large contributing factor to
the pre-announcement stock price run-ups and that the part played by insider trading may be

overstated.

50

7. LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

In the process of selecting the samples used, some assumptions have had to be made. These include that
Zephyr is not disproportionately reporting true rumors ahead of false rumors, and that the likelihood of
firms being dropped due to missing annual report data or missing stock data is independent of whether
the rumors are true or false. While these assumptions are unlikely to hold perfectly, we do not believe
that they invalidate the conclusions of this thesis.

Abnormal holding period returns for strategies are calculated by subtracting the market return for
the year from the holding period returns. This is done because the estimated daily alphas become
severely biased when added up over a period of 365 days as compared to a period of 60 days (the event
window used). It is also believed that the systematic risk is very likely to have changed for the target
firm with the event, and no period exists to re-estimate the factor betas as the holding period return is
calculated starting the day after the rumor publication. An alternative approach would have been to
use the pre-rumor factor betas and not include alphas in the normal return calculation, but we instead
choose to use the market return as a benchmark (equivalent to assuming market betas of one for all
target firms) since this method is less prone to error and provides satisfactory estimates of the abnormal
holding period returns.

Since the market reaction to a rumor publication differ quite significantly depending on the source
reporting it, controlling more closely for the initial source of the rumor could reveal interesting
information about how the market weighs similar news depending on which news outlet the report
originates from. Zephyr does not, in most cases, provide enough information to make such research
feasible. One way to investigate this better is to collect the rumors manually. Categorizing the rumors
further by the exact content and wording of the rumor report would also be possible if the rumors were
collected this way. Ideally, the existence of SEC filings concerning toeholds and insider trades in
conjunction with the rumor publications would also be manually verified.

Due to the relatively small amount of acquisition rumors, and the high volatility seen for the stocks
of rumored target firms, standard errors become very large for any buy-and-hold returns. This is one of
the reasons we cannot refute any of the hypotheses that markets react efficiently to takeover rumors.
Particularly so since only a small number of true rumors can be identified with confidence, making it
difficult to prove that the returns one can earn from trading on them are statistically different from
zero. A larger sample would allow for smaller standard errors and consequently improve the investigation
of market efficiency in conjunction with rumors. A larger sample could be collected by either manually
aggregating rumors, or by increasing the time span investigated.

Henderson (1989) presents common problems with event studies, and solutions to most of them.
Some of them include problems common to all regression models that involve stock prices, such as the
non-normality and serial correlation of stock returns. As he states, even though returns may not be
normally distributed, residuals often end up close enough to normal to ensure that a null hypothesis of
normality cannot be rejected. He also exposes the common problems of serial correlation and
nonsynchronous trading, which one partially could overcome by averaging leading, lagging and
contemporaneous beta values. He states, though, that these methods generally do not manage to

overcome the problem of autocorrelated residuals. Other problems could emerge from a larger correlation

51

between the daily residuals in the market model and the market return if the market was in a bear
market when betas were estimated and is in a bull market when the event occurs. Some of these matters
are not causes of too much concern in our study, while others could potentially introduce biases. Future
research could test for these biases and test whether any of them have a noticeable impact on our
findings.

In recent years, other techniques have shown that they might do a better job at a task such as the
one at hand than the logit model applied in this thesis. Both support vector machines (SVMs) and
artificial neural networks have shown to be at least as good as the simpler dichotomous probit? or logit
regression techniques at tasks such as estimating bankruptcy risk and identifying or classifying merger
and acquisition targets (Tan and Dihardjo, 2001; Min and Lee, 2005). Applying the same techniques to
this more niche topic of rumors could potentially provide even more promising results. The advantage
to using probit and logit regressions is their relative simplicity and how the estimated coefficients have
a simpler economic interpretation, while neural networks and support vector machines can be harder to
translate into relationships that can easily be explained.

Further investigations into other characteristics of the firms involved could also be conducted, such
as changes in the volatility of the stock before and after the rumor, and whether the systematic risk or
alpha of the firm shift with the rumor. Since the ability to profit from the rumor depends on how
efficiently, and especially how quickly, markets adjust to new news, examining intra-day stock reaction
to the rumor could reveal, for example, whether the market instantly reacted to the new information or

whether the adjustment takes place over a longer timespan.

4 Probit: regression models are very similar to logit models and serve, effectively, the same purpose. Instead of a using a logistic
function, probit is based on the normal cumulative distribution function.

52

8. REFERENCES

Altman, E.I. 1968, "Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate
Bankruptcy", Journal of Finance, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 589-609.

Bajo, E. 2010, "The Information Content of Abnormal Trading Volume", Journal of Business Finance
and Accounting, vol. 37, no. 7-8, pp. 950-978.

Barnes, P. 1998, "Can Takeover Targets be Identified by Statistical Techniques?: Some UK
Evidence", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 573.

Bettis, C. 1995, "A Test of the Validity of Friendly Takeover Rumors", Financial Analysts Journal,
vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 53-57.

Betton, S., Eckbo, B-.E. & Thorburn, K.S. 2007, "Chapter 15 - Corporate Takeovers" in Handbook of
Empirical Corporate Finance, ed. B. Espen Eckbo, Elsevier, San Diego, pp. 291-429.

Branch, B. & Yang, T. 2003, "Predicting Successful Takeovers and Risk Arbitrage", Quarterly Journal
of Business & Economics, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 3-18.

Castagna, A.D. & Matolesy, Z.P. 1981, "The Prediction of Corporate Failure: Testing the Australian
Experience", Australian Journal of Management (University of New South Wales), vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
23.

Chou, H., Yuan Tian, G. & Yin, X. 2010, "Rumors of Mergers and Acquisitions: Market Efficiency
and Markup Pricing", 23rd Australasian Finance and Banking Conference 2010 Paper.

Clarkson, P.M., Joyce, D. & Tutticci, I. 2006, "Market reaction to takeover rumour in Internet
Discussion Sites", Accounting & Finance, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 31-52.

Comment, R. & Jarrell, G.A. 1987, "Two-tier and negotiated tender offers: The imprisonment of the
free-riding shareholder", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 283-310.

Dietrich, J.K. & Sorensen, E. 1984, "An Application of Logit Analysis to Prediction of Merger
Targets", Journal of Business Research, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 393-402.

DiFonzo, N. & Bordia, P. 1997, "Rumor and Prediction: Making Sense (but Losing Dollars) in the
Stock Market", Organizational behavior and human decision processes, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 329-353.

Dougal, C., Engelberg, J., Garcia, D. & Parsons, C.A. 2012, "Journalists and the Stock Market",
Review of Financial Studies, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 639-679.

Engelberg, J.E. & Parsons, C.A. 2011, "The Causal Impact of Media in Financial Markets", Journal of
Finance, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 67-97.

Fama, E.F. 1970, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work", Journal of

Finance, vol. 25, no. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual Meeting of the
American Finance Association New York, N.Y. December, 28-30, 1969, pp. 383-417.

53

Gao, Y. & Oler, D. 2012, "Rumors and pre-announcement trading: why sell target stocks before
acquisition announcements?", Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 485-
508.

Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L. & Black, W.C. 1995, Multivariate Data Analysis,
Macmillan, New York.

Henderson, G.V.,Jr. 1990, "Problems and Solutions in Conducting Event Studies", The Journal of risk
and insurance, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 282-306.

Holland, K.M. & Hodgkinson, L. 1994, "The Pre-Announcement Share Price Behaviour of U.K.
Takeover Targets", Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 467-490.

Jarrell, G.A. & Poulsen, A.B. 1989, "Stock Trading before the Announcement of Tender Offers:
Insider Trading or Market Anticipation?", Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 225-248.

Kimmel, A.J. 2004, "Rumors and the Financial Marketplace", Journal of Behavioral Finance, vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 134-141.

Kohavi, R. 1995, "A Study of Cross-Validation and Bootstrap for Accuracy Estimation and Model
Selection", Morgan Kaufmann, , pp. 1137.

Kosfeld, M. 2005, "Rumours and Markets", Journal of Mathematical Economics, vol. 41, no. 6, pp.
646-664.

Kyle, A.S. 1985, "Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading", Econometrica, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1315-
1335.

MacKinlay, A.C. 1997, "Event Studies in Economics and Finance", Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 13-39.

Manne, H.G. 1965, "Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control", Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 73, no. 4, pp. p. 351.

Meulbroek, L.K. 1992, "An Empirical Analysis of Illegal Insider Trading", Journal of Finance, vol. 47,
no. 5, pp. 1661-1699.

Min, J.H. & Lee, Y., 2005, "Bankruptcy prediction using support vector machine with optimal choice
of kernel function parameters", Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 603-614.

Monroe, R.J. & Simkowitz, M.A. 1971, "Investment Characteristics of Conglomerate Targets: A
Discriminant Analysis", Southern Journal of Business, vol. 15, pp. 1-16.

Oberlechner, T. & Hocking, S. 2004, "Information sources, news, and rumors in financial markets:
Insights into the foreign exchange market", Journal of Economic Psychology, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 407-
424,

Ohlson, J.A. 1980, "Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy", Journal of
Accounting Research, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 109-131.

54

Palepu, K.G. 1986, "Predicting Takeover Targets: A Methodological and Empirical Analysis", Journal
of Accounting and Economics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 3-35.

Peress, J. 2012, "The Media and the Diffusion of Information in Financial Markets: Evidence from
Newspaper Strikes", INSEAD Working Papers Collection, , no. 36, pp. 1-53.

Pound, J. & Zeckhauser, R. 1990, "Clearly Heard on the Street: The Effect of Takeover Rumors on
Stock Prices", The Journal of Business, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 291-308.

Rose, A.M. 1951, "Rumor in the Stock Market", The Public Opinion Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 461-
486.

Sanders, R.W.,Jr. & Zdanowicz, J.S. 1992, "Target Firm Abnormal Returns and Trading Volume
Around the Initiation of Change in Control Transactions", The Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 109-129.

Tan, C.N.W. & Dihardjo, H. 2001, "A study of using artificial neural networks to develop an early
warning predictor for credit union financial distress with comparison to the probit model", Managerial

Finance, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 56-77.

Tetlock, P.C. 2007, Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the Stock Market,
Wiley-Blackwell.

Tumarkin, R. & Whitelaw, R.F. 2001, "News or Noise? Internet Postings and Stock Prices", Financial
Analysts Journal, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 41-51.

Van Bommel, J. 2003, "Rumors", Journal of Finance, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1499-1519.
Walter, R.M. 1994, "The Usefulness of Current Cost Information for Identifying Takeover Targets and
Earning Above-Average Stock Returns", Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, vol. 9, no. 2, pp.

349-377.

Wang, J. & Branch, B. 2009, "Takeover Success Prediction and Performance of Risk Arbitrage’,
Journal of Business & Economic Studies, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 10-25.

Zivney, T.L., Bertin, W.J. & Torabzadeh, K.M. 1996, "Overreaction to Takeover Speculation",
Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 89-115.

Zmijewski, M.E. 1984, "Methodological Issues Related to the Estimation of Financial Distress
Prediction Models", Journal of Accounting Research, vol. 22, pp. 59-82.

55

A. APPENDIX

Table Al. Using matching to confirm the difference in reaction between true
and false rumors

Matching of the two samples (true and false) using as firm-specific variables: Major News
Source, Return on Equity, Size (Log of Total Assets), Leverage, Sales Growth and
Probability of Bankruptcy (Zmijewskij). ATT (“Average Treatment Effect on the
Treated”) is the matched sample, “Treated” are the true rumors and “Controls” are the
false rumors. “Difference” is the difference between the two.

Variable Sample Treated Controls Difference — Std. Error T-stat
AR (0) Unmatched — 0.08823 0.02940 0.05883 0.01070 5.5
ATT 0.08823 0.03323 0.05501 0.01556 3.54

Table A2. Using matching to confirm the difference in reaction between true
and false rumors

Matching the two samples (true and false) using as firm-specific variables: Major News
Source, Return on Equity, Size (Log of Total Assets), Leverage, Sales Growth and
Probability of Bankruptcy (Zmijewskij). ATT (“Average Treatment Effect on the
Treated”) is the matched sample, “Treated” are the true rumors and “Controls” are the
false rumors. “Difference” is the difference between the two.

Variable Sample Treated Controls Difference Std. Error T-stat

AR(0) Unmatched — 0.07192 0.02656 0.04536 0.02655 1.71
ATT 0.07192 0.04440 0.02752 0.03822 0.72


Table A8. Descriptive accounting data for the rumored firms divided on the veracity of the rumor for the U.K. dataset

This table provides an overview of the characteristics of the falsely rumored firms and the ones that were eventually taken over. Some items are shown as they appear in

the annual reports while others are used to calculate ratios or measurements of bankruptcy. Betas and alphas are calculated using the CAPM. All book values and the

market capitalization are expressed in GBP.

False rumors

True rumors

Variables Obs. Mean sD Min Ist Q Median 3rd Q Max Obs. Mean sD Min Ist Q Median 3rd Q Max
Market Cap 194 3540.97 8 254.75 1.48 110.74 624.92 3041.45 76 030.63 TO 1946.88 2 943.93 0.46, T7386 574.42 1 878.70 25 649.97
Balance sheet items
4778.27 20 536.29 0.08 127.92 633.60 2 320.00 235 968.00 57 2017.29 3 294.20 3.04 140.78 2009.40 15 205.00
2753.05 11 611.61 0.16 61.49 390.30 1 242.74 133 855.00 57 1176.62 1 847.22 0.10 76.31 1 466.¢ 9 213.00
Income statement items
Revenue 153 4 277.63 20 036.49 0.00 96.62 582.30 2075.10 239 272.00 57 1499.75 2310.15 0.00 542.00 1 889.80 10 140.00
EBIT 153 470.60 2006.60 -1 298.70 4.89 47.40 201.70 22 004.00 57 138.74 225.23 -202.81 50.77 182.20 1 039.00
Net Income 151 28 1476.14 -1 188.90 -0.84 15.10 148.10 16 576.00 57 64.41 -400.50 21.80 84.60 .00
Ratios
Return on As: 150 -3.26% 34.60% — -295.07% — -1.60% 4.59% 7.50% 33.43% 57 5.07% 48.68% -359.11% 0.76% 3.81% 5.11% 23.47%
Return on Equity 143 1% -765.16% -1.09% 10.52% 19.10% — 427.02% 53 46% 30.07% —-166.02% 2.15%  — 8.98% 42.50%
Sales growth 142 15.30% - -98.85%  -0.80% 6.86% — 18.96% — 849.87% 54 28.87% 82.02% = -37.77% = —-1.89% — 5.42% 438.16%
Log of sales growth 120 10.51% 26.61% — -161.89% — 1.00% 9.25% 18.69% — 159.59% 39 9.41% 16.48%  -41.18% 1.51% 7.28% 59.44%
Solvency 153 0.38 0.38 -2.91 0.27 0.41 0.53 57 0.44 0.24 -0.44 0.30 0.47 0.97
Leverage 153 2.57 12.93 -69.24 0.85 2.34 57 3.25 14.19 23.69 0.65, 1.14 99.99
Current Ratio 153 2.24 5.13 0.21 0.93 1.22 1.72 ¢ 57 1.59 1.62 0.17 0.85, 1.13 9.27
Interest Coverage 144 9.06 84.14 -649.50 2.06 4.68 9.28 561.29 54 -0.49 56.25 -368.71 2.00 3.80 105.38
Dividend Payout Ratio 112 0.71 3.30 -5.00 0.16 0.38 0.57 32.72 46 0.41 2.66 -13.33 0.23 0.42 11.46
Price/Earnings 151 14.36 94.79 -350.40 -0.86 10.85 19.10 730.04 57 5.72 74.19 -526.78 6.51 15.39 90.67
Profit margin 147 -12.91%  103.20% -624.17% — 3.44% 9.12% 16.97% — 100.00% 55 0.75% 52.54%  -302.76% 3.10% 8.21% 47.25%
Market-to-Book 153 1.88 4.54 0.01 0.47 0.89 151 41.92 57 0.96 0.85 0.02 0.54 0.79 5.59
Asset Turnover 153 1.13 1.15 0.00 0.47 0.89 1.58 10.90 57 1.05 0.87 0.00 0.41 0.79 3.44
Bankruptcy likelihood
Altman Z-score 153 4.42 28.99 -160.29 1.57 2.67 3.93 284.56 57 3.48 8.83 -11.37 1.64 2.45 3.51 66.28
Zimjewskij probability 151 31.41% — 25.57% 0.19% = 11.95% 22.90% 44.95% — 100.00% 57 28.15% = 24.96% = 3.19% =— 9.27% ~— 20.54% ~—- 37.93% — 100.00%
Ohlson probability 145 65.38% — 28.44% 1.16% 46.07% 75.22% 89.14% — 100.00% 56. 67.55% 25.10% 5.78% 50.61% 74.84% 85.86% — 100.00%
Betas and alphas
Market Beta 194 0.871 0.933 -0.895 0.447 0.814 1.083 10.676 69 0.666 1.470 -2.602 0.214 0.605 0.997 10.2523
Alpha 194 -0.001 0.010 -0.030 -0.002 0.000 0.002 0.107 69 -0.005, 0.033 -0.271 -0.004 -0.001 0.001 0.020
Ratio calculations: Return on Assets: SP" ; Return on Equity: A" ; Sales Growth: PSS | Log of Sales Growth: $+ nA) ; Solvency: PEM ; Leverage: SAMS 5 Current Ratio: =

* EBIT 7 5
Interest Coverage: ——————_§ ; Dividend Payout Ratio:
Interest Expenses .

EBIT
Interest

=xpenses

; Price/Earnings:

Market Capitalization
Net Income

; Profit Margin: =" >> ; Market-to-Book:

Market Capitalization
Total

1s

; Asset Turnover:

‘Total Sales
Total Assets

Table A4. Descriptive accounting data for the rumored firms divided on the veracity of the rumor for the U.S. Bloomberg dataset.

This table provides an overview of the characteristics of the falsely rumored firms and the ones that were eventually taken over in. Some items are shown as they appear
in the annual reports while others are used to calculate ratios or measurements of bankruptcy. Betas and alphas are calculating using the three-factor model. All book
values and the market capitalization are expressed in GBP.

Rumor and no acquisition Rumor and acquisiton

Variables Obs. __ Mean. SD Min Ist Q__ Median 3rd Q Max Obs. Mean SD Min Ist Q__ Median 3rd Q Max

Market Cap 1285 7 509.78 27 786.85 41.10 1 246.98 3 142.32 7 562.71 858 353.10 235 3532.82 6 531.56 18.20 910.74 2191.31 4 105.63 79 956.04

Balance sheet items
Total As

is 1285 12 507.17 74 466.56 8.46 705.08 2 460.20 7 239.00 2364 452.00 227 9 886.22 73 779.68 26.51 498.26 1304.31 2953.20 782 896.00
Total Liabilites

1285 9 708.30 69 951.90 0.98 231.85 1139.08 3 959.30 2228 791.00 218 8 452.09 67 629.11 4.28 179.67 747.47 1 485.47 702 689.00

Income statement
Revenue 1285 4 629.40 7 679.83 -288.95 455.70 1614.09 5577.60 89 328.00 227 = 2730.69 7 461.70 3.10 193.09 774.00 1974.55 55
EBIT 1281 496.05 1396.97 -8 851.00 15.93 146.80 658.50 30 156.35 227 = 317.53 1225.76 = -461.04

528.00
0.14 76.01 318.76 12 531.00

Net Income 1285 187.82 800. -6 453.29 -6.84 76.67 328.00 7 438.00 227 170.92 713.99 -73 -7.20 46.78 206.00 6 312.00
Ratios

Return on Assets 1285 1.07% 19.52%  -156.89% -0.43% = 4.41% 8.96% 52.45% 227 -1.86% — 27.09% = -138.33% -0.81% — 4.15% 8.57% 43.13%
Return on Equity 1238 4.20% 92% 9.39% -0.93% 8.80% 18.55% 292.98% 200 6.19% 50.12% 320.12% 1.21% 8.31% 22.45% — 200.25%
Sales growth 1275 16.34% 50.29% — -230.71% -5.64% = 8.94% —- 29.19% 722.27% 226 40.37% = 95. -63.26% 1.59% = 12.28% = 37.82% —514.26%

Log of sales growth 1240 16.38% — 29.10% —-153.19% 1.79% — 11.78% — 28.40% 197.31% 219 23.15% 28.59% —-25.44% 6.63% 18.25% 33.47% ~— 24.27%

Solvency 1285 0.48 0.28 -1.84 0.32 0.50 0.70 0.96 218 0.46 0.29 -0.48 0.29 0.51 0.69 0.97

Leverage 1285 1.07 17.91 -592.56 0.39 0.91 1.84 50.84 218 111 3.68 -15.13 0.36 0.84 1.50 17.56

Current Ratio 1177 3.00 2.95 0.21 1.34 2.16 3.53 42.01 210 3.24 2.78 0.50 1.84 2.54 3.79 19.14

Interest Coverage 1032 29.39 113.62 -932.20 1.10 5.48 19.26 998.59 182 23.87 69.19 -248.80 0.12 7.59 49.06 350.13
Dividend Payout Ratio 1283 0.04 2.16 -52.20 0.00 0.00 0.10 9.65 227 0.06 0.28 -1.78 0.00 0.00 3.14

Price/Earnings 1285 60.65 729.95 -3 169.09 -2.44 14.99 29.87 12 504.52 227 40.75 216.97 -1 178.11 -1.56 14.58
Profit margin 1244 5.44% 56.71%  -669.28% 3.67% 10.62% — 20.25% 517.40% 225° -20.96%  124.40% -757.06% 1.16% 7.82%

1 364.63
74.51%

Market-to-Book 1285 2.91 21.23 0.01 0.69 1.48 2.87 744.26 227 2.39 2.44 0.03 0.95, 1.64 17.17

Asset Turnover 1285 0.83 0.66 -0.01 0.40 0.63 1.12 4.05 227 0.88 0.96 0.06 0.37 0.63 6.73
Bankruptcy

Altman Z-score 1177 8.02 34.48 -28.83 2.25 4.03 6.84 999.63 201 5.28 10.12 -6.69 1.89 3.33 6.67 95.86

Zimjewskij probability 1177 23.02% — 23.41% 0.40% 4.88% 15.53% — 33.33% 100.00% 201 25.68% 29.87% 0.75% 5.25% 14.53% 32.60% 99.94%

Ohlson probability 1176 47.96% — 27.58% 0.57% 22.22% 47.81% 71.40% 100.00% 201 47.92% 28.55% 0.81% 22.67% 44.86% 71.30% — 99.45%

Betas and alphas

Market Beta 1285 14151 0.706. 5.505 O.815.—s1.134.—«1.470 9.273 235° 1137) 0.724. 3.274727 529 3.549
Beta SMB 1285 0.479 0.998 —-7.249- 0.077 (0.389 0.926 10.551 235 0.565 «1.094. 2.388 0.051 0.454. 1.074. 7.765
Beta HML 1285 -0.094 - L417—-11.069 0.740 -0.131 0.598 7.246 235° 0.110 1.342 4.141 0.817 0.181 0.454 «5.298
Ratio calculations: Return on Assets: S““"" ; Return on Equity: a Sales Growth: #** Log of Sales Growth: $+ In( RB VS - Sotvoncy: BABY : Leverage: Mt a“ ; Current Ratio: ren Ast
Interest Coverage: ime ; Dividend Payout Ratio: ; Price/Earnings: Motes Coptetaation ; Profit Margin: a ; Market-to-Book: Market Coptetztion : Turnover: eal Sas


Table A5. False rumors in the U.S. main dataset

Target Name

Rumor date

CAR(-1;1)

HPR (1;365)

Market Cap (M$)

99 Cents Only Store
Adobe Sys
Akamai Technologies Inc.

All-American Sportpark Inc.

Allegheny Technologies Inc.

America First Apartment Investors Inc.
Ameristar Casinos Inc.

Asiainfo Holdings Inc

Bally Technologies Inc.

Bally Total Fitness Holding Corporation
Bj's Wholesale Club Inc.

Bib Munai Inc
Boise Cascade Corporation

Boyd Gaming Corporation

Brink's Company, The

Bristol-Myers Squibb Company
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company
Brocade Communications Systems Inc.
Cabg Medical h
Cadence Design Systems Inc.
Cal-Maine Foods Inc

Cambridge Heart Ine.

Capital One Financial Corporation
Capital Senior Living Corporation
Capisalsource Inc.

Choe Holdings Inc.

Cedar Fair Lp

Cedar Shopping, Centers Tne.

ems Ine.

Charles & Colvard Ltd

Charles River Laboratories International Inc.
Children's Place Retail Stores Inc, The
Ciphergen Biosystems Inc.

Cit Group Inc.

ions Company

Cnet Networks
Coinstar Inc
Colgate-Palmolive Company

Comerica Inc.

Commervial Metals Company

Compass Minerals International Inc.
Comtech Telecommunications Corporation
Comverse Technology In
Consolidated Freightways Corporation
Cooper Tire & Rubber Company
Cousins Properties Inc

Cullen/Frost: Bankers Inc.

agen Corporation

Da Consulting Group Inc
Devon Energy Corporation
Diamond Foods Inc

Dick's Sporting, Goods Tne
Dillard's Inc.

Dish Network Corporation
Dish Network Corporation
Dow Chemical Company, The
E*Trade Financial Corporation
Earthlink Ine

Eastman Kodak Company

Ebay Inc.
Edgar Online Inc.
Electronic Arts Inc

Eli Lilly And Company
Eme Corporation
Endologix hi
Entertainment Distribution Company Ine.(Old)
EstB Lauder Companies Inc

Euronet Worldwide Inc.

Kuroweb International Corporation

Exelixis In

Expedia h
Extreme Networks Inc.

Exxon Mobil Corporation

Fair Isaac Corporation

Falconstor Software Inc.

Federal-Mogul Corporation

Fifth Third Bancorp

First Community Bancorp Inc. (California)
Fomntain Powerboat Industries Ine
Freeport-Memoran Copper & Gold Inc
Gap Inc.

General Mills Inc

Genzyme Corporation

Jeorgia Gulf Corporation

Gramercy Capital Corporation

Granite City Food & Brewery Ltd
Greenbrier Companies Inc., The

Harley Davidson Inc.

Health Net In
Herley Industries Inc.

Hershey Company. The

Hollywood Casino Corporation
Home Depot Inc., The

Honeywell International Inc.
Hudson United Bancorp

Humana Ine.

Huntington Bancshares Inc.

Impax Laboratories Inc.
Independence Federal Savings Bank
Instinet Group Inc

International Coal Group Inc.

June 30, 2005
October 7, 2010
October 12, 2011

April 24, 2002

April 4, 2008

April 12, 2007
October 22, 2007
Feoruary 3, 2003

February 22, 2007
January 27, 2003
April 11, 2003
September 9, 2005
November 10, 2003
November 22, 2008
November 22, 2008

April 1, 2002,
March 22, 2006
October 5, 2009
Feoruary 9, 2006

June 4, 2007

July 14, 2003
October 19, 2007

November 25, 2002
March 24, 2008
January 5, 2011
Veoruary 9, 2011

July 2, 2007
January 23, 2008

March 4, 2008
December 9, 2010
October 12, 2007
November 2, 2001

September 25, 2012

April 28, 2004

September 28, 2005

May 14, 2007

May 11, 2001
August 16, 2012

November 18, 2009

June 23, 2003

July 31, 2006

March 3, 2009
Qetober 5, 2011

July 10, 2007

December 11, 2002
October L1, 2012

September 7, 2007

March 18, 2003

July 11, 2005

Aine 19, 2007

May 13, 2003

May 16, 2003

April 5, 2007
October 9, 2007

October 18, 2007
pruary 26, 2007
July 20, 2011
August 6, 2007
July 14, 2005
May 26, 2006
November 11, 2002
August 25, 2004

2002
2011
September 29, 2006
May 3, 2007
September 21, 2007
September 10, 2007
April 3, 2002
April 12, 2011
Jue 15, 2007
March 20, 2006
October 31, 2005
July 6, 2007
April 11, 2007
March 7, 2011
March 6, 2008
September 10, 2007
Jume 11, 2009
Jue 27, 2007
January 6, 2006
June 4, 2004
November 15, 2007
December 20, 2006
September 14, 2011
January 23, 2009
February 4, 2008
June 22, 2007
July 7, 2005
September 2, 2008
April 14, 2008
March 18, 2002
December 1, 2006
May 6, 2005
August 5, 2003
July 7, 2005
April 26, 2005
January 6, 2005
May 28, 2003
‘April 2. 2002
December 6, 2006

~5.1d%
1.59%
1.09%

80%,

8.57%

1.64%
1.94%
0.67%
4.65%
10.90%
10.36%
8%
5.4%
10.89%
9%
7 AMG

37%
%
1.34%
0.81%
5.13%
8.05%,
3.75%
3.51%
14.47%
5%
0.92%
3.14%
2.60%,

2.01%
i

%
4.75%
5.02%
17.33%
1.27%
2.67%
3.19%
0.22%
12.9206
13.63%
6.10%
LB81%
3.64%
2.99%
-1.44%
0.91%
2.57%
4.10%
17.71%
8.83%
4.17%
9.68%,
14.04%
1.01%
0.77%
2.01%
1.67%
7.67%
3.27%
1.60%
1.02%
7.30%
3.14%
2.22%
-1.31%
0.20%
0.27%
8.11%
0.49%
L71%
15.30%
0.14%
0.96%
4.41%

4.25%

4.07%

10.42%
3.26%
1.96%

12.47%

127%

9.18%

871%

-17.70%
-11.89%
62.13%
18.18%
68.90%
A.OT%
-76.79%

79.28%
-26.95%

-70.02%
9.00%
3.76%
6.60%
13.95%

7.57%
~0.31%

28.70%
69.08%
-1
16.88%

41.42%
-22.86%

11.42%
35.35%

-T7.72%
19.68%
1.47%
31.48%
56.05%
-15.49%
-18.34%
27.22%
1 RH%
4.56%
4.28%,
-94.06%
13.64%

65.53%
-22.85%
-76.61%
40.46)

20.25%
-26.71%
19.73%
10.13%
31%
1.03%
9.26%,
20.26%
45.06%
2.08%

827.7172
14800.32

TT08.139
232.7726
1661.223
216.1471
1123.451
225.9763
9271

207.1705
2070.856
3716.683
2737.898

3412.342
23.2118
6211.558
69117
8348
7125.485
211.4895
2335.473
117.945
1526.724
490.1977
26.1897
2060.866
759.1672
119.286
7734.171
3690.385
1120.048
3027.086
1345.519
1695.717
40248.06
8167.474
2682.92
1814.84
721.1029
4147.75
0.2941695
1345.401
1442.824
1600.574

1.642707
31536.29
304.1201
3153.071
1931.282
5762471
9205.26
41451.65

3712.02
917.7663
7626.689
45330.13
27.05318

164.526
148.0772
4845.849
1371494
10.64495,
1367.934
7282.587
581.3388

2182941
520.8777

1621.655
905
5461896
908.4077
24.08214
1784.564

763.969


Table A5 continued. False rumors in the U.S. main dataset

Target Name

Rumor date

CAR(-151)

HPR (1;365)

Market Cap (M8)

Interplay Entertainment Corporation
Penney Company Inc.

Jds Uniphase Corporation

Jefferies Group Inc

Jetblue Airways Corporation

Jo-Ann Stores Inc.

Jones Lang Lasalle Ine

Journal Register Company

Juniper Networks Inc.

Krispy Kreme Doughnuts Inc.
Laboratory Corporation Of America Holdings
Leap Wireless International Inc

> Wireless International Inc

Ligand Pharmaceuticals Inc.

Lighting Science Group Corporation
Local.Com Corporation

Longs Drug Stores Corporation

MT Bank Corporation

Macromedia Ine:

Magna-Lab Inc

Marriott International Inc.

Marsh & Mclennan Companies Inc

Mccormick & Schmi
Meristar Hospitality Corporation,
ay Games Ine,

Monster Beverage Corporation
Monster Worldwide Inc.

Morgan Stanley

Morgans Hotel Group Company
Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc.
Mpe, Office Trust Tne
Nanometries Inc.

Nasdaq Omx Group Inc., The
Nbty Inc

Net Perceptions Inc.

New York Community Bancorp Inc.
y York Times Company, The
y York Times Company, The
ymont Mining Corporation
Nitromed Inc.

North Coast Energy Inc.
Nui Corporation

Nyse Euronext, Inc.
Officemax Inc

Optical Communication Produ:
Optionsxpress Holdings Inc
Overseas Shipholding Group Inc.

Palm Inc.

Par Pharmaceutical Companies Inc.
Parametric Technology Corporation
Peabody Energy Corporation

asus Communications Corporation
Pennichuck Corporation

Pennsylvania Real Estate Investment Trust
Pep Boys - Manny, Moe And Jack, The
Pioneer Raileorp

Plains Exploration & Production Company Lp
Planet Hollywood International Inc.
Playboy Enterprises Inc.

Pne Financial Services Group Inc., The
Polaris Industries Ine,

Polycom Inc

Pricesmart Inc.

Pride International Inc

Primedia Inc.

Protalix Biotherapeutics Inc.

Publix Super Markets Inc.

Quest Diagnostics Inc.

Quest Software Inc.

Quicksilver Resources Inc
Quicksilver Resources Inc

Rackable Systems Inc.

Radioshack Corporation
Radioshack Corporation

Rambus Inc

Ramco-Gershenson Properties Trust
Resmed Inc

Rockwood Holdings Inc.

Rpe Inc

Saks Inc.

ks Inc.

lesforce.Com Inc.

Sangamo Biosciences Tne

ntarus Ine.

Sara Lee Corporation

Scientific Atlanta Lle
erwin-Williams Company, The
Siebel Systems Inc

ebel Systems Inc

Signature Bank

Skechers Usa Ine.

Smithfield Foods Ine.

Sonicblue In
nus Networks Inc.
uithern Union Company Inc

Ine.

af

Sprint Nextel Corpor:
St Jude Medical Inc.
aples Ine.
arwood Hotels &
arwood Hotels &
cel Dynamics Inc.

s Worldwide Inc.
s Worldwide Inc.

afood Restaurants Inc.

29, 2001
5 2005
January 20, 2004
April 18, 2007
July 10, 2012
May 31, 2007
February 26, 2007
June 19, 2008
August 18, 2006
June 23, 2003

October 4, 2004
July 31, 2012
Februa

October 27, 2010
July 2, 2007
May 19, 2003
May 19, 2010
December 26, 2002
March 17, 2003
October 16, 2007
July 8, 2005
December 14, 2007
January 2, 2008
June 19, 2002
June 9, 2004
April 30, 2012
January 6, 2006
March 31, 2005
August 13, 2008
April 10, 2012
August 21, 2012
August 17, 2010
February 23, 2011
March 28, 2007
February 24, 2003
May 18, 2004
October 19, 2006
May 12, 2009
March 19, 2007
March 22, 2006
February 14, 2003
October 28, 2003
December 8, 2008
October 26, 2005
September 29, 2003

21, 2007
h 25, 2008
aber 8, 2005
September 18, 2007
September 10, 2008
September 7, 2007
May 20, 2003
Fedruary 6, 2003
May 30, 2007
January 21, 2011
February 4, 2005
September 21, 2010
December 20, 2001
July 24, 2007
June 23, 2003
October 4, 2007
March 17, 201)
June 20, 2005
April 23, 2008
October 24, 2005,
November 2, 2009
January 7, 2002
July 5, 2007
March 12, 2003
July 19, 2010
May 6, 2004
April 11, 2007
March 26, 2010
May 14, 2007
September 12, 2007
April 7, 2008
June 30, 2008
March 7, 2008
August 8, 2011
August 30, 2010
October 16, 2007
February 11, 2008
November 22, 2008
July 2, 2007
October 4, 2006
December 19, 2005
smber 26, 2007
Mareh 31, 2005
July 15, 2003
Mareh 15, 2005
21, 2007
June 29, 2010
January 17, 2003
July 20, 2007
July 24, 2006
Jamuary 4, 2008
November 10, 2008
January 27, 2006
Sept 3, 2012
January 2, 2009

anber

9.12%

5%
0.70%
149%
156

5.73%
0.92%

0.62%
0.96%
6%

-0.06%
2.69%
0.08%

70%
2.16%
1%
20.42%
3.39%
2.22%
7.05%

16.47%
3.84%
3%
-11.65%
1.45%
0.01%
8.04%,
2.48%
0.38%
6.26%
44.73%
9.92%
0.07%

3.60%
6.80%
3.46%
9.70%
3.17%
9.50%
RAG
12.35%
15.38%
LLB1L%
41.06%
3.00%,
5.92%
L.78%

36.49%

16.35%

97.50%
126.16%
18.18%

51.03%

14.66%
26.55%,
8.68%
9.73%
70.33%
1.55%

12.12%,
-72.26%
-19.40%
-20.05%
7.77%,
17.69%
60.74%
115.86%
-20.76%

9.26%
64.05%
42.83%
7.60%
32.28%

18.16%
51.02%

43.04%
-19.58%
9.52%
0.27%
%
56.15%
11.95%
14.74%
47.80%
%
~A8.55%
~AR.G1%,
4.12%

2.25%
65.89%
10.60%
16.40%
0.50%
39.53%
51.12%
-T.60%
7.73%
3.96%
85.27%,
28.60%
47.88%
-72.90%
51.00%
67.15%
59%
L.78%

0.42%
0.36%

60.10%
21.84%
52.78%
-19.93%
-17.90%
12.21%
75.82%
-17.85%
27.73%

76.89841
1117.53

1448.721
718.5946
3747
6.483086
8526.784
10971.94
745.699
8558.503
1203.52
542.5701
612.8802

601.1633
10057.28
751.7538
O.8686644
14946.64
15176.46
767.3744

6478
663.1859
707.4907
1172
5107.8
6027.12
418.6651
11709.9,
164.6775,
263.5624
4908.56.
3421245
38.21073
6565.139
3: 193
801.9557
18449.45
315.3832
7741266
261.7609
6614.749
2083.497
117.0242
1579.728
2168.522
1455.535
729.8829
2039.829
12457.75
120.8541
5863042
1667.452
692.7322
13.59446,
3643.589
(1.24644
312.5003
13519.62
1676.567
2410.148
190.8445,
6761.249
763.8406
664.8285
4.01

2087.56
1178.474
418.0634
2665.941
4156.162

1784.35
412.4045
3061.929
1.097

2651.849

6793.792

207.6969
252.765

8512.926
4587.599
4841.158
817.3923
1026.485,
2640.729
45.2246
1892.055
2950.5)
126.5971
52489.19
17928.54
S8081.014

2915.87
13251.65
2729.219


Table A5 continued. False rumors in the U.S. main dataset

Target Name

Rumor date

CAR(-1;1)

HPR (1;365)

Market Cap (M$)

Stillwater Mining, Company:
gic Hotels & Resorts Inc
Student Loan Corporation, The

1 Corporation
ive Software Inc.

Teco Energy Inc.
Tellabs Inc.

‘Textron Inc.

Tibco Software Inc.

Tiffany & Company International Inc.
Timberland Company Inc., The

Tivo Inc.

Todhnnter International Ine
Transmeta Corporation

‘Travelzoo Inc

Travelzoo Inc

Travelzoo Inc.

True Religion Apparel Inc.

Tyson Foods Inc.

Unisys Corporation

United Bancshares Inc.

United Industrial Corporation

United States Cellular Corporation
Unumprovident Corporation

s 1 Industries Inc,

s Bancorp

Valassis Communications Inc.
Valnecliek Tne

Valucelick Inc

Valuevision Media Inc

Verint Systems Inc.

Verint Systems Inc.

Verizon Communications Inc.
Vitacost.Com In
Vsi Holdings Ine
Websense Inc.
Wellcare Management Group Inc., The
Wendy's/Arby's Group Inc

Whole Foods Marke: Inc.

Wr Grace & Company

Zimmer Holdings Inc.

Zonagen Inc.

April 7, 2010
March 9, 2007
December 28, 2007
May 12, 2003
October 15, 2008
August 6, 2007
February
March 19, 2007
April 12, 2002
July 20, 2007

il 9, 2009

© 25, 2008
June 25, 2007
November 15, 2006
February
Mareh 19, 2003
February 7, 2005
May 12, 2005
September 9, 2011
April 11, 2012
October 10, 2012
June 21, 2007
February 16, 2001
May 30, 2002
January 31, 2002
September 13, 2011
October 16, 2006
September 15, 2010
June 23, 2003
June 27, 2006
Jamary 5, 2011
June 14, 2007
November 26, 2008
August 22, 2007
November 20, 2006
July 16, 2007
May 26, 2010
February 25, 2002
h 17, 2011
17, 2002.
June 10, 2010
August 17, 2011
July 30, 2008
July 17, 2007
Mareh 17, 2006

4.02%
8.65%
2.12%
6.60%
12.63%
4.64%
3.64%
10.73%
0.50%
2.29%
31.61%
4.77%
10%
0%
13.80%
22.59%

4.69%
2.20%

24.33%
18.95%
OAS
7.40%
0.79%
7.82%

70%
20.49%
0.21%
-10.82%
0.04%
0.59%
10.16%
10.70%
5.07%
1.74%,
5.64%)
1.06%
9.05%

4.89%
8.10%
3.99%
0.19%,

56.61%
9.05%
68.45%
10.93%
22.66%
43.38%
-20.00%

58.67%
8.53%

8.21%
36.81%
17.11%
-20.80%
3.18%
15.05%
35.00%
17.92%
-26.59%
1.53%
-39.60%

-13.84%
40.04%
-18.05%
43.40%
90.00%
1%

0.00%

32.50%
-19.96%
2.98%

1347.312
164
2495.395,
13164.13
4102.687
28806.78
2082.122
1429.898
3714.397
4759.812
2215.653

387.
50.68347
226.583
578.8002
A885
388.0479
616.4705

2132.667
6800.871
03491

45935.8
1161.617

1244.97
2840.617

21.7552
953.8877

8.002:

1723.122
19678.79
89.55711


Table A6. True rumors in the U.S. main dataset

Target Name Rumor date CAR(-1;1) _HPR (1;365) Market Cap (M8)
24/7 Real Media Inc. April 25, 2007 19.48% 38.84%) 529.7132
7-Eleven Inc February 22, 2005 0.75% 3261.596
Abgenix Inc. November 29, 2005 4.54% 5 1473.393
Accredited Home Lenders Holding Company April 3, 2007 2.18% 38.689 318.0284
American Community Bancshares Inc September 6, 2007 6.27% 41.38% 69.24164
Aierus Group Company January 11, 2006 -1.15% 10.88%) 2351.761
Aviat, Networks Inc.'S Wimax Business May 5, 2011 4.94% 42.68% 232.6627
Bj's Wholesale Club Inc. November 10, 2010 9.80% 21.91% 2572.945
Blockbuster Inc. September 19, 2003 2.22% “64.47% 605.1014
Burlington Industries Inc. March 6, 200 1% -77.50% 09659
Catalina Marketing Corporation December 8, 2006 18.12% 4.019% 2.061
China Security And Surveillance Technology Inc. January 28, 2011 92% 1.15% 434.7623
Collateral Therapeutics Inc March 1, 2002 44Y, 9.87% 102.3452
Commerce Bancorp Inc June 29, 2007 10.66% 3.52% 7024.56
Compellent Technologies In October 26, 2010 4.01% 56.16% 754.3556
Concord Efs Inc March 10, 200:i =21.41% A 6391.829
Continental Airlines Inc. April 15, 2010 0.68% 3015.974
Countrywide Financial Corporation (Old) January 26, 2007 347% -85.06% 7014.09
Crown American Realty Trust Mareh 19, 2003 1.63% 28.95%) 320.4267
Csk Auto Corporation February 1, 2008 49% 81.18%) 396.9593
Deltek Inc July 18, 2012 13.42% 3578

Dobson Communications Corporation June 25, 2007 T.B5%, 715.528

Double-Take Software Inc. April 12, 2010 16.92%

Drs Technologies Inc. May 8, 2008 17.71% 26.06%
Efunds Corporation May 9, 2007 9.88% 28.049
Encysive Pharmaceuticals Inc. Tune 26, 2007 -10.09% 24.34%)

Equity Inns Inc June 6, 2007 9.90% A

Genentech Inc. July 21, 2008 12.78% 16.07%

Grey Global Group Ine. June 28, 2004 5.48% 12.30%

Juitar Center Ine. 1, 2007 1.97% ITA

Heelys Inc. 2012 20.58% 56.50957
Heritage Property Investment ‘Lrust Inc. September 15, 2005 1ay 2.76% 1655.168
Hilton Hotels Corporation November 22, 2006 5.36% 45% 910.64
Hollywood Casino Corporation Mareh 18, 2002 6% -20.20% 316.
Hughes Communications Inc January 20, 2011 30.79 1142.5
Hughes Supply Ini December 1, 2005 -2.91% 2662.952
Human Genome Scie October 18, 2011 28.94% 944.901
village Inc. February 15, 2006 7.70% 591.015
J Jill Group Ine. August 24, 2005 5.27% 380.7249
John Hancock Financial Services Inc. May 16, 2003 0.33% 9048.035
Kinetic Concepts Inc. July 6, 2011 7.84%

Kraft, Foods Inc August 30, 2006 2.74%

Legato Systems Inc. 4.57%

Lincare Holdings Ine 24.95%

Lucent Technologies Inc. 8.77% 9.57%

Lyondell Chemical Company July 12, 2007 3.50% 24.66%

Macdermid Inc. September 18, 2006 1.04%

Main Street Restaurant Group Inc. October 12, 2005 9.26%

Marketwatch Inc. November 1, 2004 6.81%

Massey Energy Comp October 18, 2010 6.40% 4994.943
May Department Stores Company, The January 19, 2005 9621.99
Meadow Valley Corporation November 20, 2007 22.55% 57.67405
Medimmune Inc. December 13, 2006 75.40% 9452.

Mercury Interactive Corporation May 1, 2006 T.89% 36% 3.498.368
Meristar Hospitality Corporation November 11, 2005 15.17% 20.23%) 841.6212
Mgi Pharma Inc. November 29, 2007 41.76% 2828.419
Microislet Inc. March 1, 2002 20.26605

Millipore Corporation: 5020.498

Mips Technologies Inc 19.88% 64.6586
Mission Resources Corporation July 20, 2004 3.65% 256.216
National City Corporation March 13, 2008 9.98% 5947.
Nautica Enterprises Inc June 20, 2003 8.90% 458.4:
Neuberger Berman Inc.(Old) 2003 14.10% 2627.812
Nextel Communications Ine. 9, 2004 4.10% 30601.6
Nextel Partners Inc 2005, 2.62%

Nicor In December 2, 2010 0.15%

North Coast Energy Inc. May 22, 2003 5.16%

Nymex Holdings In June 15, 2007 4.88% 20481.93
Optical Communication Products Inc. April 25, 2007 1.66%, TAS
Pactiv Corporation Inc. May 17, 2010 16.09% 38.63%) 3909.882
Pegasus Solutions Inc. June 30, 2005 3.95% -10.21% 198.6401
Pharmaceutical Product Development Inc. July 18, 2011 10.44% 19.31% 372.207
Pixar Animation Studios Inc. January 19, 2006 0.72%

Polymer Group Ine, April 7, 2010 15.89%

Pride International Inc November 2, 2010 5.23%

Protection One Inc. January 27, 2003 2.84% 24%

Pulitzer Ine. December 9, 2004 0.44% 0.99% 608.7298
Pyr Energy Corporation January 29, 2007 16.79% 36.17% 42,56527
Raleorp Holdings Inc. August 23, 2012 2.82% 4126.
Rawlings Sporting Goods Co. Inc. December 11, 2002 0.97% 63.0660
Remington Oil And Gas Corporation October 6, 2005 3.99% 19.91% 119.058
Renaissance Worldwide Inc. August 28, 2001 6.91% 56.09%) TTATISS
Ribapharm Inc March 10, 2003 0.21% 820.2964
Riskmetries Group Ine. January 22, 2010 13.7% 1194.208

2005.99
226.762
37.06828
22.54502
585.955

Savvis Inc. March 4, 2011 -1.33%
‘or Inc. October 22, 2003 21.20%
tek Corporation. y 4, 2008 3.24%,
lar Power Inc.
nosite Inc

earns & Lehman Ine. December 20, 2001 45.10%
erling Bancshares Inc January 14, 2011 14%

a Microsystems Inc. March 18, 2009 57.30% T1531
Talbots Inc., The Anpust 2, 2011 16.19% 82.92%, 202.0084
Ticketmaster Entertainment Inc. February 4, 2009 18.42% 150.81% 300.808
Timco Aviation Services Inc. June 30, 2006 49.94% 56.08% 67.1414
Tpc Group Inc, July 25, 2012 6.40% 4.0045
Unocal Corporation March 3, 2005 11.10% 15469.92
Usf Corporation February 23, 2005 1157.896

st Ine. September 4, 2008 2 Fy 8882.869
Wendy's International Inc. April 25, 2007 17.79% 2896.495
Wfs Financial Inc. August 23, 2005 14.61% 37.19% 2597.492
Whitehall Jewelers Inc. September 29, 2005 53.00% 16.18% 30.48585
Williams Pipeline Partners Lp January 19, 2010 17.60% 36.45% 645.9511
Wilmington Trust Corporation October 22, 2010 8.22%, 14.86%, 595.9098

Zaxeba Systems Inc. September 10, 2009 18.39% 127.27%


