Religious Frictions on the Capital Markets

                                                                               Abstract
                       Victor Andrée
                                                               The Malaysian government strives to establish an Islamic capi-
               22584@student.hhs.se           tal market in synchrony with the conventional market. Looking
                                                        at conventional bonds and sukuk (Islamic bonds) issued by the
                                                        same entity (Government of Malaysia), denominated in the same
                     Katarina Warg
                                                         currency and traded on the same trading platform we find a sta-
             22555@student.hhs.se
                                                          tistically significant price deviation for short and medium term
                                                          maturities. We construct and compare zero yield curves for both
                                                          markets as well as use the conventional yield curve to estimate
         Stockholm School of Economics
                                                          the issue specific price deviation of a sukuk. This paper argues
              Bachelor Thesis in Finance
                                                               that the frictions in part can be explained by illiquidity issues and
                            Spring 2014            finds that the proportions of zero returns has some explanatory
                                                         power on the yield spread.

               Keywords: Islamic finance, sukuk, Malaysian treasury market, yield spread,
                     illiquidity.

                Tutor: Paolo Sodini

               Acknowledgments: We would like to thank our tutor Paolo Sodini for valuable
                input and guidance.
Contents

1 Introduction 2
   1.1 Outline of paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

2 Background 4
   2.1 Basics of Islamic finance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.2 The Malaysian bond market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

3 Literature review 8
   3.1 Previous research on Islamic Finance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   3.2 Studies on illiquidity and bond yield spreads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

4 Data 10
   4.1 Market quotes: Discount, Clean Price and Bond Equivalent Yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

5 Theory and Methodology 12
   5.1 Hypothesis development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.2 Bond valuation, absence of arbitrage and the yield curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.3 Modelling the yield curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.4 Determining the yield spread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.5 Liquidity and frictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   5.6 Choice of liquidity measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

6 Results 21
   6.1 Yield curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   6.2 Model validation using arbitrage-free yields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
   6.3 Arbitrage-free yields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   6.4 Liquidity regression results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

7 Conclusion 39

8 Limitations and suggestions for future research 40
   8.1 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
   8.2 Suggestions for future research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

Appendices 44

Appendix A Sukuk principles 44

Appendix B Complementing tables and figures using Nelson-Siegel 45

                                       1
1 Introduction

On the Malaysian capital markets the conventional and Islamic financial sectors operate in parallel
with each other. According to the principles of Shariah, the charging of interest is prohibited which
has led to numerous financial innovations. The establishment of an Islamic market and its historical
tremendous growth could potentially drive financial inclusion in a country with a majority of Muslims
but can also be a cause of market frictions. As outlined in the Financial Sector Masterplan (2001)
and the Financial Sector Blueprint (2011), the government strives to enhance the Islamic financial
sector, aiming to establish two separate markets in synchrony.
    While conventional principles still constitute the basis for policy-making and monetary pol-
icy (Iqbal & Mirakhor, 2013), the Malaysian government issues bonds on both the conventional and
Islamic capital markets. The presence of two parallel markets, with similar products and cross-market
investors, constitutes an interesting research topic from a no-arbitrage perspective.
    Sukuk (Islamic bonds) and conventional bonds are issued by the same entity, are denominated in
the same currency and traded on the same trading platform. Investors can participate in both markets
and no preferential tax treatment is currently applied to either market. Some differences however
prevail. The sukuk market is significantly smaller and short-selling is not allowed. Short-selling of
conventional bonds is possible though heavily regulated. The Islamic derivatives market is practically
non-existent.
    According to the central bank of Malaysia, Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM, 2014), the structure at
issuance is different for a sukuk. A sukuk is always based on the transfer of an asset and cash flows
are created as a result of this transaction. However, the asset only forms part of the initial issuance
and does not constitute collateral. Like government issued conventional bonds, sukuk have a fixed
maturity, can bear coupons and the conventional yield-price relationship prevails. While some sukuk
structures applied on the corporate bond market can differ from conventional principles in terms of
coupon payments, government issues all have predetermined coupons. In effect, once the sukuk has
reached the secondary market issuance structures are irrelevant. In this paper, we investigate the
differences between sukuk and conventional bonds based on two hypotheses:
    Hypothesis 1: The yield of a sukuk should be equal to or lower than the yield of a comparable
conventional bond.
    Hypothesis 2: Illiquidity issues can cause a positive yield spread between Islamic and conventional
bonds.
   In the absence of arbitrage opportunities, a sukuk and a conventional bond issued by the
government of Malaysia with matching cash flows should have the same fundamental value. A
conventional investor should be indifferent between the two types while a Shariah conscious investor
should prefer sukuk. The Shariah conscious investor base should therefore accept a lower yield,

                                       2
driving up the prices, as argued by for example Azmat et al. (2013). This constitutes the foundation
of our first hypothesis.
    This study however finds that the opposite is true, finding strong evidence that the Islamic
less conventional yield spread is positive for short to medium term maturities. We apply various
techniques to determine the characteristics of the yield spread. We model Islamic and conventional
zero yield curves using the Nelson-Siegel model (Nelson & Siegel, 1987), estimated using non-linear
least squares as well as an approach inspired by Diebold & Li (2006). We then compare the term
structure and establish that the spread is positive for 1-7 year maturities over the studied time period
(2004–2014). The spread is a measure of the premium associated with the sukuk market. For longer
maturities we can observe a convergence and possibly a crossover.
    We can also determine on an issue-specific level that the excess yield of Islamic bonds is persistent
across the same maturities as above. Using the zero yield curve for the conventional market, we can
estimate the arbitrage-free price of a conventional bond with matching cash flows. We then obtain an
estimate of the cost of frictions by differencing the observed yield with the arbitrage-free yield.
    The second part of this paper investigates if liquidity has explanatory power on the yield spread.
We find that during the time period studied, the spread on zero rates has in general reverted towards
a persistent level, however with transitory fluctuations. We argue that these fluctuations can, at least
in part, be explained by illiquidity issues on the Islamic market. The transitory effects of illiquidity is
studied at the market level, as well as on the issue-specific level. Two different liquidity measures are
applied at the issue-specific level: the yield bid-ask spread and the proportion of zero returns. We
find that the proportion of zero returns can have some explanatory effect on the yield spread thus
finding some support for the second hypothesis.

1.1 Outline of paper

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 contains some necessary background on the
basics of Islamic finance and Islamic capital markets, in particular the Malaysian market. A review of
previous research on sukuk and bond market liquidity is presented in section 3. Therefter follows
a short description of the data used in section 4. The theory and methodology that constitue the
basis of this study are presented in section 5. There we outline the procedure for estimating the zero
yield curves, how we determine the yield spread and discuss how to interpret the spread. An outline
for how the illiquidity component is assessed is also included in this section. Section 6 presents
the results and our interpretation thereof, while section 7 gives our most important conclusions.
Section 8 presents the limitations of this study and presents suggestions for further research.

                                       3
2 Background

This section gives an overview of the basics of Islamic capital markets and the Malaysian bond market.
It is provided as a benefit to a reader unfamiliar with Islamic finance and Malaysian capital markets.
It is based on public information and knowledge provided by the central bank of Malaysia, Bank
Negara Malaysia (BNM), on its website. For a more profound review of the basics of Islamic finance
and Islamic capital markets we refer to, for example, Iqbal & Mirakhor (2013); Bacha & Mirakhor
(2013); Omar et al. (2013) and Krichene (2013).

2.1 Basics of Islamic finance

Islamic finance is based on ethical principles deemed compatible with Shariah (Islamic religious
law). There are three key prohibitions that differentiate Islamic and conventional finance. Firstly,
the prohibition of riba, or usury, forbids the charging of interest according to the conventional
interpretation of the Quran. Secondly, the prohibition of maisir (betting/gambling) and gharar
(dubious ambiguity/uncertainty) restrict speculation. Moreover, all companies that promote haram
(sinful) activities, such as gambling, consumption of alcohol or pork, are excluded from the Islamic
financial markets. This limitation imposes an ethical screening process of companies and assets
traded in the market.

2.1.1 Islamic bonds

Islamic bonds are called sukuk. Formally, a sukuk is a document representing the value of an asset.
The sukuk traded on the Malaysian treasury bond market are in practice a certificate of indebtedness.
Sukuk can be based on a range of different principles and the criteria for whether a principle is
considered Shariah compliant vary across countries. The principles relevant for this study are listed
in appendix A. Like conventional bonds, sukuk have a fixed maturity, a principal payable at maturity
and can bear coupons. Conventional bond valuation models are therefore commonly used to value
sukuk and the regular yield-price relationship prevails (Bank Negara Malaysia, 2014).
    The structure at issuance differs between sukuk and conventional bonds. As the charging of
interest is considered haram, a sukuk is asset-based. Issuance of conventional bonds entails the
exchange of money against a certificate of indebtedness. The issuer will then pay interest (coupons)
over the bond’s lifetime, followed by the principal at maturity. For a sukuk to be considered Shariah
compliant, the certificate of indebtedness must be based in the transfer of an asset. Typically, the
ownership of an asset is transferred between the issuer and lender so that the lender makes a
(pre-specified) profit on the transaction. The profit is then paid out on a pre-agreed deferred payment
basis, constituting the coupons and principal of a sukuk. From a cash flow perspective, sukuk and

                                       4
conventional bonds therefore only differ in their issuance structure. On the secondary market,
the issuance structure is irrelevant to an investor, and a non-Shariah conscious investor should be
indifferent between the two cash flows (Bank Negara Malaysia, 2014).

2.2 The Malaysian bond market

The Islamic financial sector in Malaysia operates in parallel with the conventional sector and has
grown steadily since the enactment of the Islamic Banking Act in 1983. The stated aim of the Islamic
sector, as outlined in the Financial Sector Masterplan (2001) and the Financial Sector Blueprint
(2011), is to contribute to the efficiency and effectiveness of the Malaysian financial sector.
    The government of Malaysia is committed to establishing an Islamic financial hub. As the largest
sukuk market in the world, it attracts many investors as well as drives the product innovation and
financial engineering that characterises the Islamic bond markets (Iqbal & Mirakhor, 2013). The
conventional sector still constitutes the majority of the Malaysian market and investors can participate
in both markets (Bank Negara Malaysia, 2012).

2.2.1 Bonds traded on the Malaysian Sovereign Debt Market

The government of Malaysia issues both conventional and Shariah compliant bonds and bills. Two
types of securities are issued on the conventional market and considered in this paper: Malaysian
Government Securities (MGS) and Malaysia Treasury Bills (MTB). On the Islamic market three types of
securities are considered: Government Investment Issues Profit based (GII Profit based), Government
Investment Issues Murabaha (GII Murabaha) and Malaysian Islamic Treasury Bills (MITB). Sukuk
issued before 2001 are based on the Quard al-Hasan principle which did not allow trading on the
secondary market and therefore not included in our analysis. The principles and issuance structures
of sukuk are detailed in appendix A. Income from sukuk and conventional bonds are treated equally
under Malaysian tax legislation. Information on specific issues is publicly available on the official
Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) and BNM Bond Info Hub websites.

   • Malaysian Treasury Bills (MTB) MTBs are bills traded on the conventional market. They
      always have short maturities, less than one year. MTBs are always zero coupon bonds. They
      trade on a discount basis.

   • Malaysian Islamic Treasury Bills (MITB) MITBs are the Islamic counterpart of an MTB. They
      are always issued as zero coupon bonds with short maturities. The majority of MITBs are issued
      with one year to maturity and a minority have 9 months to maturity at issuance. No other
      maturities are issued. MITBs are based on the Bai al-Inah principle and actively traded on the
      Islamic capital market on a discount basis.

                                       5
   • Malaysian Government Securities MGSs are conventional bonds issued with a variety of
      maturities. They are typically coupon bearing with some exceptions. MGS is the only bond
      type issued by the government of Malaysia eligible for short selling. Shorting MGS follows
                              1
       restrictive regulations.

   • Government Investment Issue: Profit-based (GII) Profit-based GIIs are Islamic bonds issued
      with a variety of maturities. All GIIs issued between 2001–2005 are zero-coupon bonds based
      solely on the Bai al-Inah principle. In 2005, a coupon bearing bond based on the Bai al-Inah
      and the Bai Bithaman-Ajil principles was introduced. A profit-based GII is asset-based and the
      transactions involved in the process are illustrated in fig. 1.

   • Government Investment Issue: Murabaha (GII Murabaha) Murabaha GIIs are bonds with a
      variety of maturities and typically coupon bearing but occasionally zero coupon. The Murabaha
     GIIs were introduced to the market in 2013. GIIs based on the Murabaha principle are always
      commodity-linked, typically to crude palm oil. The transaction structure is more complex than
      the profit-based structure and involves more parties. In addition to the investor and the issuer
      it includes a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) and the commodity market. Bank Negara Malaysia is
      the appointed SPV for all GII issues. Murabaha GIIs are by many scholars considered to be less
      Shariah-compliant than profit-based GIIs (Azmat et al., 2013).

2.2.2 Interpretation of Shariah law

Islamic finance follows Shariah law and frictions on the Islamic bond market arise from the different
interpretations of Quran and Sunnah. To overcome these frictions, BNM established a regulatory
body in 1997, the Shariah Advisory Council (SAC). The SAC is the only authorised body to ascertain
the Shariah compliance of the Islamic financial sector in Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia, 2014).
   Many Islamic scholars question the Shariah compliance of several products traded on the
Malaysian market. In February 2008, the Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial
Institutions (AAOIFF) announced that 85% of sukuk were not Shariah compliant, representing the
various levels of strictness across countries (Azmat et al., 2013). According to the stricter interpreta-
tions all trading of debt, Bay al-Dayn, is considered haram (Rosly & Sanusi, 1999), or not compliant
with Shariah law, thus excluding all bonds and bills traded on the secondary market. Murabaha
contracts are considered less Shariah compliant than profit based sukuk based on the Bai al-Inah
principle. It could affect the demand of sukuk if some Shariah conscious investors refrain from
investing in sukuk with features considered less Shariah compliant, as argued by Azmat et al. (2013).

    1
    No naked short positions are allowed, only members of the principal dealer network can undertake a short selling
position. Retail investors cannot take on short positions and all short selling transactions must be for own positions. Short
positions are restricted in time, relative amount and to a list of eligible securities (Bank Negara Malaysia, 2005).

                                       6
                                                                                               Asset Flow

                          Government
                                                                                         Cash Flow

                                                CPN CPN CPN  Principal
                               (1) (2*)

                                  Investor

                                         (Issuance)

Figure 1: Issuance structure of Bai Bithaman-Ajil sukuk. In the initial transaction (1), the investor purchases an
asset from the government for a spot payment. The investor immediately sells the asset back to the government
for a (pre-determined) profit (2*) that is paid out in installments (coupons) on a deferred basis to the holder of
the GII certificate. This certificate can subsequently be traded on the secondary market. The asterisk signifies
where the profit transaction takes place. Adapted from Bank Negara Malaysia (2013).

             Commodity Market  Commodity Market                 Asset Flow

                                                                                         Cash Flow

             (1) BNM                  (3) BNM

                                                                  CPN CPN CPN  Principal
                           Government
                                         (2*)

                  Investor          (Issuance)    Investor

Figure 2: Issuance structure of Murabaha sukuk. In the initial transaction (1), the investor appoints BNM
to purchase crude palm oil on the commodity market using funds provided. BNM then sells the commodity
to the government on a predetermined cost plus sale basis (2*) that is paid out in installments (coupons)
on a deferred basis to the certificate holder. The government in turn appoints BNM to immediately sell the
commodity on the commodity market (3) in order to raise funds from the transaction. The asterisk signifies
where the markup takes place. Adapted from Bank Negara Malaysia (2013).

                                       7
3 Literature review

The review of previous literature is divided into two sections. Initially it covers an overview of
previous research on Islamic finance and capital markets. As published research is limited, a second
subsection with a review of relevant research on bond market illiquidity is included.

3.1 Previous research on Islamic Finance

Previous literature on Islamic finance and sukuk markets is relatively limited and often confined
to niche publications. Research can generally be divided into two categories; research conducted
from a Shariah perspective focusing on the Shariah compliance of securities, and research comparing
sukuk and conventional bonds. The latter is often concerned with comparing performance, possible
diversification efforts and finding appropriate valuation models for sukuk.
    Godlewskic et al. (2013) conduct an event study on the Malaysian market to compare the stock
market’s reaction to announcements of conventional and Islamic bond issues. The research is thus
restricted to the corporate bond market. Fathurahman & Fitriati (2013) compare the yields of sukuk
and conventional bonds in Indonesia and find that the yields on sukuk on average are higher than
on conventional bonds. Ramasamy et al. (2011) investigate the convexity and duration of sukuk
compared to conventional corporate and treasury bonds. The authors conclude that corporate sukuk
are less risky than conventional bonds and carry higher risk than treasury bonds.
    The scope of this paper is limited to the sovereign debt market, comparing the yield of Islamic and
conventional government bonds. A paper written by Safari et al. (2013), and published in a variety of
smaller publications, conducts comparisons on sukuk and conventional bonds on the Malaysian bond
market. The study includes government and corporate issues, using monthly yield to maturities from
August 2001 to April 2012. The research question is similar to the focus of this paper but includes
corporate bonds and is not concerned with liquidity. The authors observe a positive yield spread and
conclude that sukuk and bonds should be regarded as different instruments.
    Azmat et al. (2013) use theoretical modelling to argue that sukuk should carry lower yield.
Shariah conscious investors should accept the lower yield and drive up prices to accommodate their
ethical preferences. The paper is however confined to theory and never applied to real data.
   Another study comparing the performance of sukuk and conventional bonds on the Malaysian
market was conducted by Mosaid & Boutti (2014). Comparing series of indices from Bond Pricing
Agency Malaysia, the study is not restricted to the treasury market. Observing significant correlation
between the return of bonds and sukuk and that sukuk generally outperform conventional bonds,
they argue sukuk and bonds are similar in nature. However, they do not attempt to explain the
differences in performance.
    Previous research, notably Safari et al. (2013), often suggests that sukuk and bonds are different

                                       8
types of securities. In this paper we argue that once a sukuk has reached the secondary market, a
non-Shariah conscious investor is indifferent between the issuance structures and only concerned
with the cash flows and risk (in line with views expressed on the BNM Bond Info Hub website).

3.2 Studies on illiquidity and bond yield spreads

Previous literature on sukuk is rarely concerned with liquidity issues. To our knowledge, the effect of
illiquidity on the Malaysian sukuk market has never been studied and little research on Malaysian
treasury market liquidity has been conducted. The importance of illiquidity in asset pricing is however
well recognised in academia. Previous research on liquidity premia and their relationship to the
pricing of bonds outside Malaysia is vast and thus the foundation of this paper, most notably Fleming
(2003) and Chen et al. (2007).
    Fleming (2003) investigated the treasury market liquidity in the US and tested a variety of
liquidity measures. The price impact coefficent was found marginally superior to the average bid-
ask spread. Three criteria for a good liquidity measure were proposed: simplicity of calculations,
availability of data, and high correlation with market participants’ view on liquidity as well as ability
to proxy transaction costs associated with illiquidity. By these criteria the bid-ask spread showed to
be a reasonable tool for tracking and measuring treasury market liquidity.
    Looking at the corporate bond market in the US, Chen et al. (2007) investigate how illiquidity
is priced in yield spreads by applying two model independent meaures: the bid-ask spread and
proportions of zero returns, as well as a measure estimated with a model proposed by Lesmond et al.
(1999). The authors find that all liquidity measures explain a significant part of the yield spread. Our
paper draws heavily on the statistical methods applied for assessing the illiquidity effect.
    Bao et al. (2011) investigate US corporate bond market illiquidity and particularly the implication
for asset pricing. They investigate the implication of illiquidity on an aggregate as well as issue-
specific level. The model applied is constructed to capture the transitory component of illiquidity and
its effect on the pricing of an asset. Despite its transitory nature, the liquidity measure can show a
degree of persistence depending on the time horizon studied. The authors argue that the bid-ask
spread fails to fully gauge the impact of illiquidity on asset pricing.

                                       9
4 Data

The time period investigated is from January 2004 till March 2014 and we consider all active
government bonds in this time period. Our data set covers 832 Malaysian government issues across
four classes: MTB, MITB, MGS and GII. The data is summarized in table 1.

Table 1: Aggregates of data collected, by bond type (and Islamic principle). Our data covers all active bonds
2004–2014. Price observations is the total number of daily price observations during this period (after filtering).
Coupon shows the minimum and maximum coupon rates observed over the time period.

Type Issues Price          Maturity       Coupon        Outstanding
                                                                                                             ∗∗
                             Observations   (Years)        (%)          (MMYR)

MGS 89 39130 2–30 2.51–9.03 31558

GII 62 12208 2–20 0.00–4.94 28400
                ∗
Quard al-Hasan   1 - 3 - -
Bai al-Inah 5 261 3–7 - -
Bai Bithaman Ajil 49 11462 3–15 3.08–4.64 25850
Murabaha 7 485 3–20 3.39–4.94 2550

MITB 189 2883 ≤ 1 - 200

MTB 492 3805 ≤ 1 - 232

Total 832 58026 60390

 ∗
  Not traded on the secondary market; matured on 2004-06-15.
 ∗∗
   Sum of amount outstanding on each issue as reported by Bloomberg, as of 2014-03-14.

    The data required to construct zero rate curves consists of issuance and maturity dates, coupon
payment dates, coupon rates and prices. Issuance and maturity dates as well as coupon rates are
downloaded from Bloomberg. The coupon payment dates are assumed to follow a semi-annual,
adjusted for end-of-month schedule. The day count basis for all coupon bearing bonds is actual/actual.
    Malaysia’s credit rating has not changed during the time period. While a miniscule minority of
bonds are rated, all observed ratings are either A (Fitch and S&P) or A3 (Moody’s) and do not change
over the time period.
    Approximately 62 000 daily prices were originally collected from three sources. The primary
source is Bloomberg, which accounts for 91.8% of the prices quoted. The Bloomberg dataset includes
daily open, close, high, low, bid and ask prices. Unfortunately, Bloomberg data is poor for many MITB
and MTB issues, especially before 2009. Therefore, we also use a robot script to download public
data from the websites of Bank Negara Malaysia (for early MGS and GII) and BNM Bond Info Hub

                                      10
(for MITB and MTB). These datasets lack bid- and ask prices.
    We drop price observations before the issue date (493 obs.), on or after the maturity date (15),
negative yields (75) and yields above 200% (1). All these outliers were clustered to a few dates and
issues.
    Bonds, especially Islamic issues, are thinly traded. We therefore consider data on a weekly basis.
If a closing yield is not available on Friday, we use the average of the bid-ask, if that is available. If
not, we instead use the Thursday equivalent. In this way, we may carry forward yields up to four
days (Monday). If the most recently available quote is older than four days, we treat the data as
missing. This problem is a lot more common in the 2004–2007 time period, and some implications of
doing this are discussed in section 8. This results in 12 512 conventional and 5 335 Islamic weekly
price observations.

4.1 Market quotes: Discount, Clean Price and Bond Equivalent Yield

All bonds are normalized to a face value of 100 Malaysian ringgit (MYR). MGS and GII are quoted in
clean prices, whereas discount bonds (MITB and MTB) are quoted by discount on an actual/360 basis
(by Bloomberg) or bond equivalent yield on an actual/actual basis (by BNM Bond Info). In some
cases, Bloomberg quotes the price directly. From the market quotes, we compute the semi-annually
compounding actual/actual yield as of the settlement date for the closing, bid and ask quotes.
   The conversions (as implemented by MATLAB) between discount and bond equivalent yield
adhere to the correction for maturities longer than 182 days in (McDonald, 2006, p. 245).

                                      11
5 Theory and Methodology

The presence of conventional investors in the Islamic market suggests that any cross-market arbitrage
opportunities should be eliminated. We therefore construct our hypotheses and method based on
typical no-arbitrage arguments. Our method is to construct yield curves from market data collected
on sukuk and conventional bonds, respectively. We then compare these over time to determine if
there are significant differences between the implied zero rates on the respective markets. Then, we
use a no-arbitrage pricing model and the conventional yield curve to derive “arbitrage-free” yields for
the Islamic issues, which we can directly compare with market data. Based on these comparisons –
between Islamic and conventional zero rates and between Islamic market and “arbitrage-free” yields
– we develop two regression models that utilize illiquidity as an explanatory variable for the observed
yield spread.
    This section begins with developing the two hypotheses that are investigated in this paper.
Following this, we explain the basic valuation concepts and notation used in the remainder of the
paper. Therefter, we detail how we construct yield curves using market data. We then outline how we
measure the yield spread and how it theoretically is related to market frictions. The last subsection
explains the construction of our regressions and liquidity measures.

5.1 Hypothesis development

Hypothesis 1: The yield of a sukuk should be equal to or lower than the yield of a comparable
conventional bond.
    Sukuk differ from conventional bonds in how they are issued and the more complex issuance
structure is likely to lead to larger transaction costs for the issuer. However, an investor trading at
the secondary market should not be affected by costs associated with issuance. Like conventional
bonds, sukuk can bear coupons, have a fixed term maturity and the regular yield-price relationship
prevails. Furthermore, the counterparty risk does not vary as all Malaysian government bonds are
ranked pari passu (Bank Negara Malaysia, 2014). Therefore, in an arbitrage-free setting, a sukuk
and a conventional bond with the same cash flows (and counterparty risk) should have the same
fundamental value.
    Sukuk should be preferred by Shariah conscious investors who might be willing to accept a lower
yield in return for Shariah compliance, thus exerting a downwards pressure on the yield of sukuk.
However, unconstrained investors should not value Shariah compliance and therefore be indifferent
between conventional and sukuk investments of equal yield. Since shorting of sukuk is prohibited,
arbitrageurs would not be able to finance a long position in conventional bonds using a short position
in higher yielding sukuk. However, shorting conventional Malaysian bonds (MGS) is possible so that
a positive yield spread on Islamic issues should be brought down by arbitrageurs. Therefore, sukuk

                                      12
should not have consistently higher yields than otherwise equal conventional issues, but may carry
lower yields.

Hypothesis 2: Illiquidity issues can cause a positive yield spread between Islamic and conventional
bonds.
    In contradiction to hypothesis 1, previous studies have observed a positive yield spread between
sukuk and conventional issues (Safari et al., 2013; Fathurahman & Fitriati, 2013). In our results, we
also find strong evidence against hypothesis 1. Previous literature suggests that this spread can be
explained by unfamiliarity with the concept of sukuk, interest rate risk, regulatory risks, “Shariah
compliance risk”, and/or illiquidity (Krichene, 2013). The presence of arbitrageurs across Islamic
and conventional markets means that the spread should be explained by differential frictions. These
frictions should be reflected in a liquidity premium, as they essentially relate to an investor’s ability
to realize the value of their investment before maturity. Sukuk markets are known to be plagued by
illiquidity issues (see, among others, Cakir & Raei (2007) and Jobst (2007)). We therefore argue that
illiquidity can have an explanatory effect on the yield spread between sukuk and conventional issues
with identical counterparty risk and similar duration.

5.2 Bond valuation, absence of arbitrage and the yield curve

We analyze discount (MITB and MTB) and semi-annual fixed coupon bonds (GII and MGS) in this
paper. Both sukuk and conventional bonds are fixed-interest securities with a definite maturity and
payment schedule. Thus, we apply the same basic valuation models to both types of securities.
Absence of arbitrage requires that the price of a coupon-bearing bond be equal to the price of a
portfolio of zeros reconstructing the cash flow of the coupon bond (Veronesi, 2011). At time t, we
discount all future cash flows using a τ-specific discount rate Zt (τ):

                    ∑T
                               Pt =     Zt (τ)C + Zt (T )M (5.1)
                                       τ=0.5

Where C is the semiannual coupon payment and M is the principal redeemed at maturitity.
    It follows from equation (5.1) that by finding Zt , we can determine the arbitrage-free price of
any coupon bond. Using continuously compounding rates, the functional form of Zt is:

                                                   
                                   Zt (τ) = exp −rt (τ)τ                               (5.2)

Where rt (τ) is the continuously compounding yield on a τ-year zero coupon bond at time t. The
yield curve formed by rt (τ) represents the term structure of the economy at time t. A complete

                                      13
description of the zero yield curve can therefore be used with eq. (5.1) to price any coupon bearing
bond. Typically upwards sloping, the yield curve reflects both expectations of future interest rates and
the “term premium” demanded by investors for investing in long rather than short term assets (Kim
& Orphanides, 2007).
    Two cash flows of equal risk and maturity T should have equal price. Equivalently, their yield to
maturity should be equal. Under hypothesis 1, the Islamic yield curve should therefore be equal to,
or below, the conventional equivalent.

5.3 Modelling the yield curve

Beyond short maturities, neither Zt (τ) nor rt (τ) are directly observable as Malaysia generally only
issues zero coupon bonds with maturities up to one year. The construction of the yield curve beyond
1 year maturities therefore requires estimation and modelling based on market data. In this paper,
we use the functional form of the yield curve introduced by Nelson & Siegel (1987), estimated using
both a non-linear least squares technique and a “hybrid” model based on bootstrapping and Diebold
& Li (2006).

5.3.1 Nelson-Siegel model

Introduced by Nelson & Siegel (1987), the Nelson-Siegel model is commonly used for modelling
the yield curve. The model generates smooth curves and can take on the shapes that are commonly
associated with yield curves. The model fits the yield curve using the functional form:
                        Ç      å   Ç           å
                                      −λτ            −λτ
                                 1 − e           1 − e      −λτ
                   rt (τ) = β0 + β1            + β2          − e                   (5.3)
                                λτ           λτ

Where rt (τ) is the continuously compounding zero yield with τ years to maturity. β0, β1, β2 and λ
are the estimated model parameters. The respective factors associated with each β parameter are
referred to as “factor loadings”. Nelson & Siegel (1987) introduced an intuitive interpretation of the
model parameters. The constant, β0, governs the long term yield level while the β1 factor governs the
short-term yield as it starts at one and thereafter monotonically decreases. β2 controls the medium
term yield as it reaches its maximum at the medium term. λ governs the decay rate – how quickly β1
and β2 “drop off” with increasing τ. As discussed by Diebold & Li (2006), the parameters β0, β1 and
β2 can also be interpreted as representing level, slope and curvature of the yield curve.
    A popular extension to the Nelson-Siegel model was introduced by Svensson (1995) using two
additional parameters (β3 and λ2) in order to better model highly non-linear yield curves. While
this improves the model’s ability to fit data, the cost of two additional parameters means that the

                                      14
model cannot be reliably estimated in situations with poor data – a situation which unfortunately
characterizes the Malaysian bond market quite well.

5.3.2 Non-linear least squares estimation of Nelson-Siegel parameters

A non-linear least squares estimation procedure attempts to minimise the objective function

                    ∑n
                                                                          2
                       Ω(β0, β1, β2, λ) =    (Actual pricei − Model pricei )                   (5.4)
                                              i=1

where Model pricei is the arbitrage-free price of bond i as determined by using eqs. (5.1) to (5.3)
and Actual pricei is the observed price of the bond. Technically, the β and λ parameters vary over
time and are therefore estimated for each week; we drop the time subscripts here for convenience.
    We refer to curves estimated in this manner as “Nelson-Siegel” curves throughout this paper. The
estimation procedure is performed using the IRFunctionCurve.fitNelsonSiegel procedure in MATLAB.

5.3.3 Bootstrapping and the Diebold-Li model

Bootstrapping of yield curves is an iterative process to obtain zero rates using market data and already
calculated zero yields. From a zero coupon bond actual price we can directly obtain the prevailing
zero rate:

                            M
                                     Zt (τ) =                                        (5.5)
                                                             Actual pricet

We can derive from equation (5.1) and (5.5) that the zero discount factor from time t to time T can
be estimated from a coupon bearing bond:
                                          ∑T −0.5
                                    Actual pricet −   τ Zt (τ)C
                             Zt (T ) =                                                      (5.6)
                                      MT + C

Curves are bootstrapped using an iterative solution algorithm implemented in IRDataCurve.bootstrap
in MATLAB. This process insists that all bonds used for the estimation are perfectly priced by the
yield curve while non-observable yields are calculated using simple linear interpolation (Hagan &
West, 2008).
    Bootstrapping does not guarantee that yield curves are “smooth” or are useful for extrapolation.
Therefore, we never use bootstrapped curves directly, but instead as inputs for estimating the
parameters of the Nelson-Siegel model using OLS as inspired by Diebold & Li (2006).
   By fixing λ at a specific value, Diebold & Li (2006) find that the “factor loadings” on each β
parameter is dependent only on the time to maturity τ. Given a sample of zero rates, the remaining

                                      15
three parameters of eq. (5.3) can be estimated using OLS. In their original article, the authors use
“unsmoothed Fama-Bliss forward rates” as the basis for their estimation. These are unfortunately
unavailable for the Malaysian market.
    We therefore regress zero rates obtained by bootstrapping onto the Nelson-Siegel model using
OLS. In practice, this generates β estimates that are typically less extreme and less varying over time
than the non-linear least squares method – making them more “meaningful” when interpreted as level,
curvature and slope. The “hybrid” curves are analogous to smoothed versions of the bootstrapped
curve. The bootstrapped curves are thus redundant for our analysis apart from their application in
estimating the hybrid curves. We refer to the “hybrid” curves as Diebold-Li curves for the remainder
of this paper.
    Diebold & Li (2006) propose fixing λ so that the loading on the β2 parameter, the medium term
factor, is maximized at 30 months. Our unit of τ is, however, years and we correspondingly fix λ so
as to maximize the loading at τ = 2.5 giving λ = 0.7573.

5.4 Determining the yield spread

5.4.1 The yield curve spread

The yield spread is simply the spread between the Islamic and conventional zero rate. This spread
represents the Islamic-conventional yield spread at the market level. The construction of the yield
curves returns an estimate of the prevailing zero rate at time t for any maturity T .

                          Yield Spreadt,T = rIslamic,t (T ) − rconventional,t (T ) (5.7)

Where rIslamic,t (T ) is the T -year zero rate on the Islamic market, and rconventional,t (T ) its conventional
counterpart. As argued in hypothesis 1, the yield on a sukuk should be equal to or lower than the
yield of a comparable conventional bond. We can test this hypothesis by doing a one-sided paired t
test on the yield spread.

5.4.2 Issue specific yield spread

When considering yield curves at the market level all issue-specific characteristics are lost. Zero
rates are also effectively “fictional” as non-coupon bonds beyond 1 year are generally unavailable in
the Malaysian bond market. Moreover, since sukuk are thinly traded, the estimation of yield curves
based on market data can easily result in unreliable estimates. In contrast, data on conventional
bonds is highly available. Ideally, we would like to compare pairs of otherwise identical Islamic
and conventional bonds. However, as few if any bonds match each other exactly in this regard, we
propose using comparisons based on arbitrage-free yields derived from the conventional yield curve.

                                      16
    Consider the yield curve generated from the conventional dataset. At any point in time we have
an estimated zero rate for each maturity. By discounting the promised cash flows of a sukuk using
the conventional curve and eq. (5.1), we can derive the arbitrage-free price of a conventional bond
with identical cash flows:

                    ∑T
               Arbitrage-free pricei t =     Zconventional,t (τ)C + Zconventional,t (T )M (5.8)
                                      τ=0.5

Zconventional,t (τ) is the zero discount factor from time t to time τ obtained from the estimated
conventional yield curve. This price should, in principle, represent the fair price of a conventional
bond with cash flows identical to the sukuk, assuming no-arbitrage and a perfect model of the yield
curve.
    The arbitrage-free price calculated using eq. (5.8) should therefore represent the price of a sukuk
absent frictions, relative to a conventional bond. Differencing the observed price of a sukuk with the
arbitrage-free price generates the magnitude of the price frictions associated with the sukuk market.
The price friction can conveniently be expressed in a yield spread:

                           Yield Spreadi,t = Observed Yieldi,t − Model Yieldi,t (5.9)

Where Observed Yieldi,t is the yield of sukuk i obtained from our dataset and Model Yieldi,t is the
yield derived from the arbitrage-free price.
    Note that the Nelson-Siegel model is not a perfect model of the yield curve. Therefore, the
no-arbitrage condition will be violated even when pricing conventional issues with the conventional
yield curve. Coroneo et al. (2008) test the “statistical” no-arbitrage properties of the Nelson-Siegel
model and find that it performs well in this regard. Analogously, as a form of model validation, we
first statistically test how well our estimated yield curves fit their own data. Then, we perform the
same tests of the deviations of Islamic market yields from the arbitrage-free yields of a conventional
bond with matching cash flows to determine whether the yield spread is statistically significant.

5.5 Liquidity and frictions

Our second hypothesis proposes that an observed yield spread should be explainable by illiquidity, or
frictional, factors in the Islamic market. The remainder of this subsection is concerned with specifying
these factors and the regression models used. The applicable liquidity measures are specified in the
final subsection.
    Illiquidity should by its nature be transitory, as argued by Bao et al. (2011). However, over a
limited time horizon, as in the case of this study, it is feasible to observe a persistent level of frictions.

                                      17
If a shock “pushes” the two interest rates apart, the presence of arbitrageurs should ensure that the
spread reverts to its average level as determined by the cross-market frictions (Wooldridge, 2009, see
p. 615). Basic economic intuition therefore requires that we can discard the existence of a unit root
in the yield spread time series. By performing a Dickey-Fuller test we can check this basic economic
requirement.

5.5.1 Market Liquidity

In principle, using ordinary least squares, we model the spread between Islamic and conventional
zero rates as a simple linear function of frictions:

       Yield Spreadt = Islamic Yieldt − Conventional Yieldt = β0 + β1Liquidityt + "t (5.10)

Interpreting the yield deviations as a function of frictions gives eq. (5.10) an intuitive interpretation:
                                                                                          2
β0 is the persistent element of frictions, while β1 is the transitory liquidity element.
    Zero rates at time t are highly likely to be correlated with the zero rates in the previous time period.
Serial correlation in the error term might therefore lead to biased estimates of eq. (5.10) (Wooldridge,
2009; Tsay, 2005). This issue should be largely circumvented by estimating the first differenced
equation instead:

                          ∆Yield Spreadt,t−1 = β1∆Liquidityt,t−1 + ut (5.11)

The β1 parameter should now capture the transitory liquidity component while the persistent element
is differenced away.
    This model is however likely to suffer from severe omitted variable bias. Particularly difficult for
its economic interpretation is the possible presence of negatively confounding variables omitted from
the equation. At the market level, we find it impossible to measure such factors with the available
data.
    In our results, we estimate eq. (5.11) for six maturities on a weekly basis: The 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and
10 year zero rates as obtained by the yield curves. The regressions are run week-to-week over the
time period where we have sufficiently reliable data.

    2
    A more formal treatment of the causal relationship between the conventional and the Islamic zero rates would be to
model both as endogenous variables in a vector autoregression (cf. Tsay (2005)), however, doing so falls outside the scope
of this paper.

                                      18
5.5.2 Issue-specific Liquidity

Consider the price frictions obtained from our pricing model in eqs. (5.8) and (5.9). Remember
that Yield Spreadi,t represents the spread between the observed yield of a sukuk and the arbitrage-
free yield on a conventional bond with matching cash flows. We estimate the following (pooled)
cross-sectional regression which is largely inspired by Chen et al. (2007).

                 Yield Spreadi,t = β0 + β1Liquidityi,t + β2Maturityi,t + β2Couponi (5.12)
                               + β3Slopet + "i,t

Where Liquidityi,t is a measure of liquidity (specified in section 5.6), Maturityi,t is the bond’s time to
maturity (in years) and Couponi is its coupon rate (in percentages). Slopet is calculated as the 10
year less the 2 year interest rate of the conventional yield curve. Chen et al. (2007) also control for
some other factor such as equity volatility and issuer-specific characteristics which are not applicable
to the government issues used in this paper.
    We estimate multiple versions of eq. (5.12): As a univariate regression solely on the liquidity
measure; with controls for the other determinants; and with annual time dummies.
    The choice of annual time dummies is a practical compromise. The purpose of time dummies is
to control for changes in the distribution between samples over time (Wooldridge, 2009). Besides the
econometrical issues with estimating a model with 500 parameters, there is little reason to believe
that such changes would be significant from one week to another. The choice of annual time dummies
                                                                                                        3
is admittedly also somewhat arbitrary (and coarse), but should allow us to control for some bias.
    Pooled OLS is preferred over a fixed effects or first difference estimation due to the presence of
serial correlation and the extremely unbalanced panel.

5.6 Choice of liquidity measure

The choice of liquidity measure is dependent on whether we look at market level or on specific
issues. At the market level we need a proxy of the prevailing aggregate liquidity. Looking at specific
issues, individual measurements of liquidity can be considered. However, from both a theoretical and
practical perspective, finding a good measure of liquidity is not straightforward.
    In all cases, our measures are more precisely described as “illiquidity” measures. The expected
effect is that these measures have a widening effect on the spread.
    At the aggregate level we apply the average bid-ask spread. Many argue for the inadequacy of
the spread as a measure for liquidity (Bao et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2007). Fleming (2003), however,

    3
    In our results, we find that using quarterly dummies produces more reliable estimates; however, using even more
frequent controls does not appear to improve the results markedly.

                                      19
argues that the simplicity of calculations and availability of data still make it a useful proxy for
tracking and measuring liquidity. The average (yield) bid-ask spread in a given time period for a
given market is given as:

                      ∑n
                                   1
                           Bid-Ask Spreadt =       Bid Yieldi,t − Ask Yieldi,t (5.13)
                                   n
                                                   i=1

For our purposes, we find the average bid-ask spread each week by averaging the end-of-week bid-ask
quotes. Note that because the ask price is practically always higher than the bid price, the reverse
is true for yields. We compute the average bid-ask spread both for Islamic and conventional issues
separately, as well as an aggregate measure across markets. Due to some obvious data errors, we
winsorize these values at the 1% and 99% levels.
    Chen et al. (2007) find that issue-specific liquidity measures have a significant explanatory effect
on corporate yield spreads. They measure liquidity using three different measures: The bid-ask
spread, the proportion of zero returns and a third measure introduced by Lesmond et al. (1999). We
restrict ourselves to using the first two.
    The bid-ask spread is simply the bid less the ask yield of bond i at time t:

                               Bid-Ask Spreadi,t = Bid Yieldi,t − Ask Yieldi,t (5.14)

The proportion of zero returns in a given period is the number of days without any price movements,
over the total number of trading days. Lesmond et al. (1999) consider days without trading (no
recorded price) and days with no change in price as zero returns. We follow this approach. For thinly
traded assets, the zero return measure becomes problematic. Chen et al. (2007) consider the measure
“inestimable” if more than 85% of daily returns are zero over a year. We measure the incidence of
zero returns per week, counting the number of days the price has changed since the last Friday (not
counting weekends).
    The link between liquidity and zero returns is typically made through transaction costs (Chen
et al., 2007; Lesmond et al., 1999). In essence, zero returns are theorized to occur when the value of
new information is less than the cost of trading. In the context of this paper, we use weekly data.
Therefore, the proportion of zero returns reflects an uncertainty in the current market price. The
weekly market quote of an Islamic issue with a high incidence of zero returns would therefore be
more likely to have “out-of-date” (stale) prices.

                                      20
6 Results

Our results are organized in four subsections. The respective figures and tables are collected at the
end of each section.
    First, we present the estimation, descriptives and difference testing of zero rate curves across
conventional and Islamic markets. Here, we find evidence of a small, but generally positive and
stable, yield spread for Islamic over conventional maturities up to about 7 years.
    Next, we discuss the fit of these curves to the market data, which serves both as a robustness
check of the results and as a basis for the arbitrage-free yield estimation. We show that, in general,
the yield curves accurately price their respective markets with a minor bias towards overpricing.
    Third, we present the results of estimating the implied arbitrage-free yields on the Islamic issues
from the conventional yield curves. We present descriptives for different maturities and types of sukuk.
Again, we run difference tests that verify the statistical significance of the mispricing, suggesting a
positive yield premium for Islamic issues with less than 7 years to maturity.
    The fourth section presents the results of our liquidity estimations and regressions. We find no
evidence of liquidity effects at the aggregate level, but the cross-sectional analysis suggests that the
incidence of zero returns has a statistically significant contribution to the yield spread.

6.1 Yield curves

The results of estimating yield curves are best seen graphically. The time series of yield curves forms
a surface over time (X), maturities (Y) and yields (Z). These surfaces are shown in fig. 4, with one
surface for each market and methodology. The most striking feature of these figures are the issues
with the Islamic market. Weeks with missing data, when number of quoted trades are less than 5,
show up as gaps (especially evident before 2009). Most notable are the extreme short-term outliers
even in cases where data is available. These do not reflect measurement errors but rather problems
with the estimation procedures in the face of thin data. The conventional curves are in stark contrast
to the Islamic ones. Notably, they are very similar in appearance and almost always upwards sloping.
    Overlooking the extreme outliers in the Islamic market, we note that, in general, the two markets
do seem to follow each other closely. The close correlation between Islamic and conventional markets
is made evident by comparing the yields for identical maturities for each week, as shown in fig. 5.
Regardless of maturity, the curves generally follow each other tightly.
    Figure 5 suggests a number of interesting patterns. In general, it appears that Islamic yields are
above conventional yields of equal maturity, for maturities up to 7 years. While the spread fluctuates
it appears to return to a persistent level over time. The common level of interest rates is also of note.
After having dropped sharply in the beginning of 2009, they have remained relatively stable until

                                      21
mid-2013 when both Islamic and conventional rates started rising. However, short-term Islamic rates
remained more stable than both conventional yields and long-term Islamic rates.
    The lack of data and resulting unreliable estimates for the Islamic market pose significant
issues for continued analysis. We consider a week as “lacking” data if it does not contain at
least five observations, or if the span between the longest and shortest maturity is less than five
years. This criterion is motivated by two considerations. First, the Diebold-Li OLS model estimates
three parameters, whereas Nelson-Siegel estimates four. Consequently, even five observations is
questionable from an econometrical perspective. Second, if observations are too clustered around
a single maturity, there is effectively too little variation in the x values for OLS to produce usable
estimates and likewise, non-linear least squares will adopt many different local minima.
    This restriction excludes nearly all Islamic curves in the period before 2007 (cf. fig. 5). However,
data is generally available since mid-2007 and forwards, with almost continuous data available since
2009. Accordingly, the remainder of the results in this subsection only considers the seven year period
2007–2014 which, while admittedly short, should cover approximately one business cycle.
    We can now present representative descriptives of the Islamic and conventional yields in table 2.
The close correlation between markets is shown in table 3. The extremely high correlations between
both parameters and interest rates supports a hypothesis that Islamic and conventional yields are
driven by similar underlying factors.
    The long-term β0 parameter, representing the level of the yield curve, is lower for Islamic issues
over the time period and the yield spread is generally positive up until 7 year maturities. Also,
it appears that the positive yield spread for shorter maturities is largely attributable to different
curvatures in the yield curve as captured by β2 (which, not surprisingly, is the parameter with the
smallest cross-market correlation).
    Nelson-Siegel descriptives are also shown in table 2. While the estimated yields are generally
close to Diebold-Li estimates, the parameters of the model fluctuate wildly. Having found that in
general, the Nelson-Siegel and Diebold-Li models produce similar fits to the data, we proceed mainly
with presenting results based on the Diebold-Li model. Besides typically producing more realistic
short term estimates with little data, it has the attractive property of having more consistent, and
therefore useful, β estimate values. Nelson-Siegel results can be found in appendix B. We also
perform more careful model validation in section 6.2.
    The “average yield” curves in fig. 3 is another illustration of how the markets relate to each other
(2007–2014). We see that the average Islamic yield is higher up to 7 years maturity, after which it
reverses. This is consistent with the descriptives in Table 2.

                                      22
6.1.1 Statistical yield curve tests

As outlined in section 5.5.1 we check the respective time series of interest rates and spread for unit
roots (see table 4). As is commonly seen in interest rate time series, we cannot disprove a unit root
for most maturities of both conventional and Islamic zero rates. Conversely, the same hypothesis
is strongly rejected for the spread of all maturities, which is necessary for the long-run absence of
arbitrage.
    We test statistically the significance of the differences between markets. The results are shown in
table 2. These tests suggest that the differences are highly significant. At virtually any significance,
both the one- and two-sided (that Islamic zero rates are less than or equal to conventional equivalents)
hypotheses are rejected.
    These results are very interesting. They suggest a statistically significant yield premium from
investing in Islamic bonds over conventional bonds, which goes against the first hypothesis of
this paper. At least for short to medium term investments, it appears that Islamic investors are
compensated for their choice of Shariah compliant investments. The differences seem to cluster
around 5-10 basis points – a difference which should be considered also economically significant
for zero rates of equivalent maturity and counter party risk. These findings, both in magnitude and
direction, generally agree with the findings of Safari et al. (2013).

                         4.5
                                                                                   Conventional
                                                                                           Islamic

                      4

                         3.5
                         Yield (%)

                      3

                         2.5
                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                                             Maturity (years)

Figure 3: Yield curves formed by taking the time averages of Diebold-Li β estimates for Islamic (solid green)
and conventional (dashed black) markets (2007–2014). Excludes weeks with less than five observations or too
few maturities.

                                      23
Islamic, Diebold-Li
                                              Islamic, Nelson-Siegel
(b)
                                              (d)




Conventional, Diebold-Li
                                             Conventional, Nelson-Siegel
(a)
                                                  (c)

                                                  Yield curve surfaces showing time 2004-2014 (X), 0-10 year maturities (Y) and yield (Z). Only shows weeks with at least five observations and minimum five years

                                                       Figure 4:between shortest and longest maturities but without any other filtering.

   24
      6

      5

    %4

      3

      2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
     50

   bp 0

    −50

                                          (a) 1 year

      6

      5

    %4

      3

      2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
     50

   bp 0

    −50

                                         (b) 2 year

      6

      5

    %4

      3

      2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
     50

   bp 0

    −50

                                           (c) 3 year

Figure 5: Time series of Diebold-Li yield curves at selected maturities. The upper panel shows Islamic
(green) and conventional (black) on top of each other. The bottom panel shows the spread, Islamic less
conventional, in basis points (bp). Only shows weeks with at least five observations and minimum five
years between shortest and longest maturities (missing weeks appear as gaps). Continued on next page.

                                    25
     6

     5

   %4

     3

     2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
    50

  bp 0

   −50

                                         (d) 5 year

     6

     5

   %4

     3

     2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
    50

  bp 0

   −50

                                          (e) 7 year

     6

     5

   %4

     3

     2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
    50

  bp 0

   −50

                                           (f) 10 year

Figure 5: Continued. Time series of Diebold-Li yield curves at selected maturities. The upper panel
shows Islamic (green) and conventional (black) on top of each other. The bottom panel shows the
spread, Islamic less conventional, in basis points (bp). Only shows weeks with at least five observations
and minimum five years between shortest and longest maturities (missing weeks appear as gaps).

                                    26
                          ∗∗∗  ∗∗   ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗        ∗                 ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗  ∗

              2-sided
                    0.0000.0010.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.3700.000   0.0170.2400.5600.0780.0000.0000.0000.0000.017




                          ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗    ∗∗     ∗   ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗ ∗∗
          T-test p-values

            1-sided 1.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.0000.1851.000   0.0080.8800.7200.0390.0000.0000.0000.0000.009


          S.D.
                    0.01050.02680.05570.01180.00600.00450.00340.00370.0051  5.0811    0.14080.00670.00580.00390.00390.0056


        DifferenceMean
                    -0.12770.09090.59050.07050.09350.08360.04080.0033-0.0331        -6.3108 10.80980.24910.06380.06510.05180.03180.0134
                                                      12.2445-13.1890 11.2018


          Max
                    5.8930.0990.2583.8373.9844.1584.5064.8205.124             3.9014.0304.1534.4064.7845.231
                                                     465.099175.708


           Min
                    3.244-3.729-6.8622.0522.3152.4642.7412.9613.156   0.001     1.6442.2102.5252.6372.7993.061
                                                           -462.249 2741.149

         ConventionalS.D.
                    0.5280.9020.8020.3910.3050.2610.2640.3050.359             0.4430.3300.2570.2690.3210.372
                                                      63.615


            Mean   4.520-1.571-2.1472.9143.0573.2433.5713.7984.004             2.9313.0913.2603.5413.7483.966
                                                       22.740-12.335 157.503-15.214 147.726 -2748.838


          Max
                    5.6560.6364.7363.7453.9204.1374.4184.7054.969                3.9114.1204.4514.7085.192
                                                                48.447
                                                     742.805654.948

  339 Islamic weeks. The one-sided t-test null hypothesis is that the Islamic value is less than or equal to the conventional one.           Min
  =       3.144     0.4591.9822.6882.8642.9703.065   0.001     0.8481.4501.7522.8522.9673.073
    i                           -6.919-5.529
  N
                                                           -739.378 1940.278

         Islamic
              S.D.
                     0.5401.1081.0500.4470.2970.2330.2400.2920.354             2.5710.3250.2440.2470.2960.3510.001
                                                      80.736
                                                                            <
                                                 p

                                                                                                                 ∗∗∗
            Mean   4.380-1.483-1.5602.9703.1363.3123.5993.7893.958             3.1653.1403.3113.5803.7663.966
                                                           33.465-23.403 135.711-20.701 124.549 -1977.2050.01,

                       0   1   2                               0   1   2                          <
                  β  β  β                       β  β  β                    p
                                                                                                                 ∗∗
Yield curve descriptives and difference tests. 2007–2014 after excluding weeks with less than five observations or less than five years between longest maturities. There   367 conventional weeks, and
  =                          1YR (%)2YR (%)3YR (%)5YR (%)7YR (%)             1YR (%)2YR (%)3YR (%)5YR (%)7YR (%)
   c                                                   10YR (%)                              10YR (%)0.05,
  N              Diebold-Li                                                       <
                                                                                               p
Table 2:are                                                           Nelson-Siegel                          ∗
Table 3: Correlation between selected conventional (rows) and Islamic (columns) zero rates and yield curve
parameter estimates (2007–2014, Diebold-Li model). Excludes weeks with less than five observations or too
few maturities.

          Islamic 1YR 2YR 3YR 5YR 7YR 10YR

          Conventional
           1YR 0.88 0.93 0.80 0.26 -0.04 -0.21
           2YR 0.78 0.93 0.92 0.52 0.25 0.07
           3YR 0.58 0.81 0.94 0.78 0.56 0.41
           5YR 0.11 0.40 0.73 0.97 0.92 0.84
           7YR -0.14 0.14 0.52 0.93 0.97 0.95
           10YR -0.28 -0.02 0.36 0.86 0.96 0.96

           Islamic β0 β1 β2

          Conventional
           β0 0.93 -0.79 -0.38
           β1 -0.86 0.90 0.39
           β2 -0.55 0.51 0.41

Table 4: Dickey-Fuller tests for unit roots in interest rates and the Islamic less conventional spread (2009–2014).
P-value refers to the MacKinnon approximate p-value.

          Islamic 1YR 2YR 3YR 5YR 7YR 10YR

           Z-statistic -6.036 -4.446 -4.196 -2.191 -1.510 -1.915
           p-value 0.000 0.000 0.007 0.210 0.529 0.325

          Conventional 1YR 2YR 3YR 5YR 7YR 10YR

           Z-statistic -1.816 -3.500 -4.429 -2.528 -1.855 -1.851
           p-value 0.372 0.008 0.000 0.109 0.354 0.356

          Spread 1YR 2YR 3YR 5YR 7YR 10YR

            Z-statistic -12.614 -8.920 -7.855 -8.764 -9.114 -10.029
           p-value 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000

                                      28
6.2 Model validation using arbitrage-free yields

A good model of the yield curve should be able to accurately price the bonds used to esitmate it
using eq. (5.1). The performance of the models in this regard is evaluated in table 5 and illustrated
in fig. 6. We compare the market yield with the arbitrage-free yield derived from each model’s yield
curve (as outlined in section 5.4.2). This table and figure also present the results of our “cross-market”
methodology, the results of which are discussed in the next subsection.
    A bond is called underpriced if its market yield is greater than the arbitrage-free yield derived
from the relevant yield curve. If the models are accurate, the no arbitrage condition stipulates that
this “excess yield” equal zero.
    The fit of the models to the data differs on a week to week basis, making it hard to give a measure
of the “overall” fit. While the mean excess yield is extremely small (less than -0.5 basis points) for all
curves, there is a considerable amount of variance. On a week-to-week basis, we can only in singular
cases reject the null hypothesis that the mean excess yield is non-zero (even at typically insignificant
confidence levels). All in all, it seems that both Diebold-Li and Nelson-Siegel fit the data quite well.
    Perhaps most important for the continued analysis in this paper is that the model deviations are
“unbiased”, so that the occurrence of under- and overpricing is roughly equal. We therefore count
the occurrences of under- and overpricing and find that the models perform well also in this regard.
The proportion of under- and overpricing is roughly 50/50, with a minor bias in the direction of
overpricing over time. The symmetric distribution around zero for each model is especially evident
by looking at fig. 6.
    One could evaluate many additional criteria for the model fit, for example setting a “tolerance
level” that no observed yield must differ by more than x basis points from the arbitrage-free yield. As
with the zero rate curves, the arbitrage-free models also suffer from outliers. Incidences of outliers
are however occasional and not biased in either direction.

                                      29
                        0  1      1  2
                5%                       222170


                        1  3      3  2
             Weeks rejected10%                        247202

                        than the Islamic curves because more
                                                       N
                   Over    51.4151.97   51.2150.76   24.2732.93

               Overpriced (%)
               /

               UnderUnder  48.5948.03   48.7949.24   75.7367.07



               Max

                 Min

                     S.D.


               Excess market yield (%)Mean                         0.050 0.118 -2.798 1.0540.040 0.134 -2.828 0.979
                             -0.004 0.123 -2.066 2.321-0.004 0.071 -0.682 0.823-0.002 0.103 -1.350 2.198-0.001 0.057 -0.735 0.507


          refers to the number of price observations.
                        501361    501361    498498
        N


                    N Valid Weeks
                           4905      4905   53355335
                        12512     12512


We measure the “fit” of our yield curve models to market data, as well as the cross-market pricing of Islamic issues using the conventional yield curve by


Table 5:comparing the market yield with model yield (2004–2014). Excess market yield is the market yield less the arbitrage-free yield. Underpricing measures occurrenceof positive excess market yields. Only yield curves based on at least 5 observations and minimum 5 years between the longest and shortest maturity are evaluated.Weeks rejected are the number of weeks where the null hypothesis (that average market yield is equal to average arbitrage-free yield) is rejected at 10% and 5%significance levels, respectively.Diebold-LiConventionalIslamicNelson-SiegelConventionalIslamicCross-MarketNelson-SiegelDiebold-LiCross-market has fewer valid weeks than the conventional curves because 3 conventional weeks completely lack Islamic trades, but largerobservations can be priced with valid conventional curves.
   100

    80

    60

    40

    20

 bp  0

   −20

   −40

   −60

   −80

  −100
            2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                                (a) Conventional (Diebold-Li)

   100

    80

    60

    40

    20

 bp  0

   −20

   −40

   −60

   −80

  −100
            2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                                   (b) Islamic (Diebold-Li)

   100

    80

    60

    40

    20

 bp  0

   −20

   −40

   −60

   −80

  −100
            2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                    (c) Cross-Market: Islamic using Conventional (Diebold-Li)

Figure 6: Week-by-week spread (in basis points) between market and arbitrage-free yield using Diebold-
Li zero curves, for conventional, Islamic and cross-market (Islamic issues priced with conventional zero
curve) issues, 2004–2014. Each point represents the yield spread of a specific bond issue at a point in
time. A positive yield (blue) suggests underpricing, a negative (red) overpricing. Excludes weeks where
the curve was constructed from less than five observations, or there was less than five years between
the shortest and longest maturity.

                                    31
6.3 Arbitrage-free yields

Having established that both Nelson-Siegel and Diebold-Li models produce generally unbiased fits,
we derive the arbitrage-free price of a bond with a given set of cash flows traded at the conventional
market. We restrict this method with our criterion of excluding yield curves based on less than
five observations or less than five years between the longest and shortest maturity. However, the
availability of conventional data means that we can effectively price almost every Islamic issue
between 2004 and 2014.
    Some aggregate results of this approach have already been shown in section 6.2, specifically in ta-
ble 5 and fig. 6c. Descriptives for the full sample of 5335 price observations together with divisions
into maturity buckets are shown in table 6 computed with the Diebold-Li model. Corresponding
statistics computed using Nelson-Siegel curves are found in appendix B. Statistics are shown both for
the entire time period and for 2007–2014. Note that a single issue will appear multiple times and in
multiple buckets as it changes throughout its lifetime.
    Again, the descriptives suggest a pattern of systematic price deviations for Islamic bonds compared
to conventional issues. Notably, the mean yield is generally higher, by as much as 10 basis points for
1–3 year maturities.
    Our sample includes discount, coupon and Murabaha sukuk. During transitional periods, two
different types of bonds are traded simultaneously on the secondary market. The descriptives for
these classes are also shown in table 6. While comparing the differences between different kinds of
sukuk is beyond the scope of this paper, there is some evidence that the most recent “version” of
sukuk introduced in 2013, Murabaha, suffers from greater mispricing than coupon-bearing sukuk
based on the Bai Bithaman-Ajil principles.
    Looking again at fig. 6c, there appears to be a change to the mispricings over time at the issue-
specific level. The incidence of possible overpriced outliers appears to sharply decrease after 2010
resulting in a strong bias towards underpricing that continues into 2014 with “clusters” of overpricing
in 2012 and mid-2013.
    Results from difference tests of arbitrage-free yields are shown in table 6. The results are highly
significant and consistent with findings from comparing yield curves for the respective markets.
Short-to-middle term sukuk suffer from greater mispricing than longer term issues. The yield spread
is significantly negative or insignificantly different from zero for maturities beyond 7 years (there is
similar convergence in the Nelson-Siegel model; the yield spread is still significantly above zero).
    All in all, there is strong evidence against the hypothesis that investing in sukuk is categorically
associated with equal, or lower, returns to investing in conventional bonds. While the differences are
small in an absolute sense, this is in principle after having controlled for differences in maturity and
coupon rates on securities with identical counter party risk.

                                      32
                             ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗                       ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗

               2-sided p0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0150.075   0.985  0.000  0.000



                            ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗ ∗∗∗         ∗        ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
             T-test
               1-sided p0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.9930.962   0.031  0.000  0.000




                t       21.65626.431 9.08610.972 25.10729.749 12.81417.672 -2.436-1.780  -2.188 22.207 5.881
     refers to the number of price observations.
    N

                S.D.
                       0.1340.124  0.1710.158  0.1300.115  0.1070.097  0.0950.095   0.204  0.125  0.101



          Difference (%-units)Mean   0.0400.047  0.0410.049  0.1000.109  0.0340.044  -0.007-0.005  -0.040 0.044  0.055


                S.D.
                       0.4760.464  0.3820.362  0.3320.280  0.2660.240  0.3240.319   0.488  0.447  0.447



          Model yield (%)Mean   3.3613.347  2.9842.954  3.0953.055  3.4853.461  3.8843.869   3.383  3.440  3.876


                S.D.
                       0.4610.450  0.4030.383  0.3450.308  0.2420.229  0.3290.325   0.470  0.419  0.465



          Market yield (%)Mean   3.4013.394  3.0253.003  3.1963.164  3.5193.505  3.8773.864   3.344  3.483  3.932


          N
                                         988                      126         114
                    53354874  14541233  1064     16051503  12121150         4032

                                                                      )
                                      +
                                                                                                       0.001
                            1 year)                                                    <
                          <                                                      p

                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                                                                             0.01,
                                                                                 <
                                      p
                                                                                                                        ∗∗
Islamic market and arbitrage-free yields as computed by the conventional Diebold-Li yield curve. Only arbitrage-free yields computed from curves with at least five
                                                                                                             0.05,
                                                                                 <
                                                                                                      p
Table 6:observations and at least five years between the longest and shortest maturity are included. Panels A-D shows the sample for 2004–2014 (entire period) and 2007–2014(restricted). Sukuk type panels show the respective “lifetime” periods. Yields are expressed on a semi-annual compounding basis.Entire sample2004–20142007–2014Panel A: Very short (2004–20142007–2014Panel B: Short maturity (1–3 years)2004–20142007–2014Panel C: Medium maturity (3–7 years)2004–20142007–2014Panel D: Long maturity (72004–20142007–2014Panel I: Discount GII2004–2011Panel II: Coupon-based GII2005–2014Panel III: Murabaha GII2013–2014∗
6.4 Liquidity regression results

The results of the yield curve and issue-specific regressions on liquidity are presented in table 8
and table 9, respectively.
    As described above, we only have (nearly) week-to-week data without gaps for the time period
2009–2014. Thus, in order to estimate the first differenced regression, eq. (5.10), we restrict the time
period. In the eight cases where the Islamic week fails the criterion of having at least five observations
or five years between the longest and shortest maturity we simply impute the Islamic zero rates.
    The results of estimating eq. (5.10) are rather disappointing (see table 8). Only in the case of the
                                                                                      2
ten year spread is the liquidity measure even significant, and even in that case, the R  is still very
low, showing that the average bid-ask spread has practically zero explanatory power on the spread
between Islamic and conventional interest rates. The results are in line with previous studies on
markets with thin trading data where other measures generally show higher significance.
    The pooled cross-sectional regressions, as outlined in eq. (5.12) and presented in table 9, suggest
that our measures of issue-specific liquidity could possibly have some explanatory power. Estimated as
univariate models (I), they are not significant and have virtually nil explanatory power measured by
  2
R . By controlling for bond-specific factors, the measures do become significant (II), and furthermore
adding time dummies increases the explanatory power further (III). While both measures are expected
to have positive signs (more illiquid instruments should be priced further away from the arbitrage-free
price) bid-ask is negative and the incidence of zero returns changes sign twice.
                                                                                              2
   The high significance of the time dummies (and their substantial contribution to R ) seems to
agree with the notion that mispricings occur in “clusters” and that controlling for time over cross-
sections is important. Furthermore, the fact that including bond-specific characteristics increases the
significance of both liquidity measures suggests that they might be negatively confounded with these
variables.
    From the earlier sections, it is natural to consider time to maturity significant, since we have
seen strong evidence that the yield spread diminishes for long-term bonds (consistent with its sign).
Liquidity is naturally negatively confounded with increasing maturity, since a bond is nothing more
than the promise of future money. Including maturity increases the significance of the liquidity
measures.
    With these results in mind, we reestimate eq. (5.12), controlling more precisely for time (using
quarterly dummies). We also include a “Murabaha dummy” since we have seen some evidence that
such issues are more mispriced than earlier GII issues (discount GII are implicitly controlled for by
the coupon rate).
    The results are shown in table 10. We estimate the regression both for all Islamic issues (MITB
and GII), as well as for GII only. We do not show the values of the time dummies, as the magnitude

                                      34
of their coefficients is not interesting in itself; virtually all are highly significant.
    Controlling for time more precisely further raises the explanatory power; these variations likely
reflect macroeconomic and “sentiment” factors in the market. Notably, by increasing the amount of
time dummies, the significance of the bid–ask spread disappears. Given its non-intuitive negative sign
in the previous regressions – suggesting that a wider bid-ask spread leads to a smaller yield spread
– this is a good result. Like other authors (e.g. Chen et al. (2007)), we find find that the bid-ask
spread is not a very useful measure. Emerging markets, such as Malaysia, generally have poor data.
In such markets the bid-ask spread is notorious for consequently misestimating liquidity (Bekaert
et al., 2007).
    However, the proportion of zero returns remains significant even after controlling more precisely
for time (and Murabaha). This suggests that transitory illiquidity can have explanatory power on the
mispricing of sukuk relative to a conventional “counter-part”. The Murabaha dummy is significant
at the 5% level only when comparing GII, suggesting a small but likely insignificant incremental
mispricing of these issues. The significance of these results should not be overstated as it is likely that
the regressions still suffer from omitted variable bias and potential endogeneity issues.

                                      35
Table 7: Descriptives of liquidity measures used in liquidity regressions. % Zeros is the proportion
of zero returns per week. Bid-Ask is the basis point spread between bid and ask yield. The average
bid-ask is the average of end-of-week basis point bid-ask spreads in a given week on the respective
market (only Islamic, only conventional and aggregate).

                          N Average Min Max

Issue-specific
% Zeros 5335 0.46 0.00 1.00
Bid-Ask 2281 4.64 0.00 185.87
Average Bid-Ask
Islamic 261 4.32 1.45 14.94
Conventional 263 6.85 3.56 10.89
Market 263 6.02 3.15 9.95

Table 8: Estimation of ∆Yield Spreadt,t−1 = β1∆Liquidityt,t−1 + ut for six zero rates (Diebold-Li
curve) and three different market liquidities (only Islamic, only Conventional and Market-wide),
2009–2014. Each row thus shows three univariate models for a single maturity.

Spread Islamic Conventional Market

1YR 1.593 (0.900) 2.472 (1.669) 3.595 (1.844)
 2
R                  0.012 0.008 0.014

2YR 0.037 (0.364) 0.364 (0.677) 0.334 (0.751)
 2
R                  0.000 0.001 0.001

3YR -0.415 (0.228) -0.383 (0.443) -0.698 (0.490)
 2
R                  0.013 0.003 0.008

5YR -0.277 (0.169) -0.454 (0.347) -0.511 (0.385)
 2
R                  0.007 0.007 0.007

7YR 0.214 (0.179) -0.110 (0.363) 0.251 (0.403)
 2
R                  0.005 0.000 0.001

10YR 0.714** (0.270) 0.331 (0.524) 1.15* (0.577)
 2
R                  0.026 0.002 0.015

N = 262 for market and conventional, N = 259 for Islamic (no bid-ask quotes were available in two weeks).
                               ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,   p < 0.01,   p < 0.001
Table 9: Yield spread (Islamic market yield less arbitrage-free yield, in basis points) determinants based on issue-
specific factors (annual coupon rate (in %); time to maturity (in years)), the slope of the conventional yield curve
(difference between 10- and 2-year zero rate (basis points)) and two different, issue-specific liquidity measures
(cf. Chen et al. (2007)): The bid–ask spread (in basis points) and the proportion of zero returns per week. Based on
weekly samples, 2004–2014, of 61 GII and 164 MITB issues.

                Bid-Ask (I) Bid-Ask (II) Bid-Ask (III) % Zeros (I) % Zeros (II) % Zeros (III)

                                            ∗         ∗
 Bid–Ask −0.060 −0.236      −0.238
                    (0.15) (0.11) (0.11)
                                                                                             ∗∗       ∗
 % Zeros 0.510 −1.354        1.195
                                                                 (0.52) (0.51) (0.49)
                                                                                             ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
 Coupon −7.063 0.663 145.118      109.136
                                 (22.07) (29.23) (17.31) (16.55)
                                           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Maturity −1.101     −1.103                −1.052     −1.004
                                   (0.10) (0.10) (0.08) (0.07)
                                            ∗∗∗                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Slope −3.244      −1.104 −3.431      −3.373
                                   (0.79) (1.31) (0.59) (0.86)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2005 26.536                                 23.407
                                                  (2.81) (5.31)
                                                                                                                        ∗∗
 2006 10.579 14.140
                                                  (5.69) (5.36)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2007 24.411                                 18.467
                                                  (3.27) (5.39)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2008 28.377                                 18.486
                                                  (2.94) (5.32)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2009 24.317                                 19.670
                                                  (2.53) (5.14)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2010 27.925                                 24.791
                                                  (2.56) (5.17)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2011 25.785                                 25.354
                                                  (2.62) (5.22)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2012 26.187                                 24.048
                                                  (2.74) (5.24)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2013 27.134                                 25.961
                                                  (2.57) (5.21)
                                                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 2014 29.196                                 29.290
                                                  (2.35) (5.14)
                           ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗          ∗∗
 Constant 3.553      12.866     −15.503       3.755       7.953     −15.832
                   (0.68) (1.14) (3.50) (0.25) (0.70) (5.44)

 Observations 2281 2281 2281 5335 5335 5335
           2
 Adjusted R        0.001 0.116 0.229 −0.000 0.062 0.149

                                      ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
 Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,   p < 0.01,   p < 0.001
Table 10: Reestimation of eq. (5.12) (see table 9 for variable specification) using 40 quarterly time dummies
(Q12004–Q12014, not shown) and Murabaha dummy (1 if the bond is issued under Murabaha principles). Shows
results using all Islamic issues (61 GII and 164 MITB), as well as GII only.

                                   GII and MITB GII Only
                              Bid-Ask % Zeros Bid-Ask % Zeros

             Bid–Ask −0.218 0.152
                                   (0.11) (0.14)
                                                             ∗∗       ∗∗∗
              % Zeros 1.522                      3.694
                                                  (0.48) (0.56)
                                                                                                       ∗
             Murabaha −1.042 1.202 −1.559 3.381
                                   (1.23) (1.24) (1.30) (1.33)
                                                          ∗∗∗
            Coupon −11.908 107.376    −204.101 −47.000
                                 (37.22) (16.47) (117.28) (51.74)
                                            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
            Maturity −1.112     −1.035     −0.929     −0.962
                                   (0.10) (0.07) (0.11) (0.08)
            Slope −1.322 −1.989 −1.331 −2.031
                                   (2.76) (1.88) (2.87) (1.87)
                                            ∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
            Constant −15.843    −18.818    −20.871    −20.561
                                   (5.20) (3.36) (5.30) (3.33)

              Observations 2281 5335 1838 4272
                           2
              Adjusted R        0.283 0.193 0.267 0.200

                                                        ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
               Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.05,   p < 0.01,   p < 0.001

                                         38
7 Conclusion

The dual capital market system in Malaysia constitutes an interesting study prospect. The establish-
ment of an Islamic financial market could potentially increase financial inclusion. The interaction
between the two markets are, however, subject to market frictions creating deviations from the
no-arbitrage condition. The existence of such frictions creates obstacles for increased participation
and market growth.
    This study has found a persistent spread disproving the hypothesis that yields on sukuk are equal
to or lower than those of conventional bonds, in line with previous studies (Safari et al., 2013;
Fathurahman & Fitriati, 2013). We have found that the yield of a sukuk over a conventional bond
is significantly different from zero and in general positive. This applies both when comparing zero
yield curves as well as when considering price deviations at the issue specific level. The yield spread
quantifies the cost of frictions associated with the government sukuk market.
    We have found that during the time period studied, the spread on zero rates has in general reverted
towards a persistent level with temporary fluctuations. We have argued that these fluctuations can,
at least in part, be explained by illiquidity issues on the Islamic market. We have found no evidence
at an aggregate level when measuring liquidity using the average bid-ask spread. At the issue-specific
level, the bid-ask spread also yielded no significant results.
    The percentage of zero-returns are arguably a better proxy for liquidity on markets with meager
data and better captures the illiquidity effect in our model. At the issue-specific level the regression
on zero returns showed significance when controlling for other bond characteristics and time.
    The positive influence of time dummies suggests the mispricings occurs in clusters. Many events
are likely to have an effect on the yield spread, however, the detailed impact of such events is beyond
the scope of this study.
    The most important result of this study is the existence of a persistent spread between the two
markets that is not supported by differences in fundamental value. We have found some support that
it can be partly explained by illiquidity issues. However, the driving factors of such illiquidity are yet
to be fully understood.

                                      39
8 Limitations and suggestions for future research

8.1 Limitations

Bonds are notoriously thinly traded. The Malaysian bond market is no exception and the sukuk
market has very poor trading data. Bloomberg, accounts for approximately 91.8% of our data. As
data was missing we complemented it with data from BNM and Bond Info. It is possible that this
introduces biases in the data.
    The most glaring data issue is the unavailability of daily quotes. As a result, we use “end-of-week”
yields which might not reflect the “true” yield on the asset. With this in mind, underpricing of
Islamic issues is still (very) prevalent in 2013 and 2014–the periods with the highest quality of
data–suggesting that this is not a major source of bias. Running tests using only Friday-quotes does
not qualitatively change the results but tends to suggest larger deviations (not shown). We argue
that carrying forward is defensible, since the information used is the most up-to-date on the market
in a given week, however, apparently not valuable enough for the market to adjust its prices. The
results still suggest that, at the end of each week, Islamic issues tend be underpriced using the most
recently available information. The study is limited in time to 2004–2014 and in practice often even
shorter time periods due to the lack of data which limits its applicability.
    The study fulfills its purpose as an explorative study of an emerging market. However, the models
might fail to capture important elements. Notably, a preferred approach to estimating the illiquidity
component at the aggregate level would be by constructing a vector autoregression (VAR) model.
A properly constructed VAR model should capture important elements of causality. In this paper it
is assumed that causality goes from the conventional to the Islamic market. Our linear regressions
likely do not properly control for all omitted variables, and their results should not be overstated.
Our comparisons are made on the basis of a three factor model of the yield curve estimated using
thin data and sometimes unsatisfactory procedures. The resulting yield curves’ inability to model the
true dynamics of the bond market can both exaggerate and undermine our results.

8.2 Suggestions for future research

What drives demand and who is investing in sukuk is currently not established. This paper assumes
the presence of arbitrageurs that are indifferent between the products on the respective markets. This
assumption is firmly established in theory but not verified in practice. Behavioural aspects are likely
to have an effect on the pricing of sukuk. Some aspects of the primary market are still ambiguous.
The implications of introducing Murabaha are not yet determined. Lastly, the derivatives market of
sukuk is today very limited and taking a short position is not possible. Investigating the consequences
of this void could constitute interesting research.

                                      40
References

Azmat, S., Skully, M., & Brown, K. (2013). The Shariah compliance challenge in Islamic bond
markets. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal. Article in press.

Bacha, O. I. & Mirakhor, A. (2013). Islamic Capital Markets: A Comparative Approach. Somerset, NJ,
USA: Wiley.

Bank Negara Malaysia (2001). Financial Sector Master Plan 2001–2010. Available online:
http://www.bnm.gov.my/index.php?ch=en_fsmp&pg=en_fsmp_book&ac=24&lang=en.

Bank Negara Malaysia (2005). Guidelines on regulated short selling of securities in the wholesale
money market. Published on 7th of October, 2005. Available online:
https://fast.bnm.gov.my/fastweb/public/files/Reg_ShortSell_Oct2005.pdf.

Bank Negara Malaysia (2011). Financial Sector Blueprint 2011–2020. Published on 21 December
2011. Available online:
http://www.bnm.gov.my/files/publication/fsbp/en/BNM_FSBP_FULL_en.pdf.

Bank Negara Malaysia (2012). Frequently Asked Question: Government Investment Issue. Available
online: http://iimm.bnm.gov.my/view.php?id=94&dbIndex=0&website_id=14&ex=
1381675757&md=%98%BDT!%08%D4%AAEU2J4)%F7%F2%D0.

Bank Negara Malaysia (2013). Information Note: Government Investment Issue. Available online:
http://iimm.bnm.gov.my/view.php?id=95&dbIndex=0&website_id=14&ex=
1395748510&md=%14Z2B%CF%9C%1C%26%C3V95O%22%BAC.

Bank Negara Malaysia (2014). Bank Negara Malaysia website. http://http://bnm.gov.my.

Bank Negara Malaysia & Securities Commission Malaysia (2009). Malaysian debt securities and
sukuk market: A guide for issuers and investors. Available online: http://www.sc.com.my.
Guidebook.

Bao, J., Pan, J., & Wang, J. (2011). The illiquidity of corporate bonds. The Journal of Finance, 66(3),
911–946.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., & Lundblad, C. (2007). Liquidity and expected returns: Lessons from
emerging markets. Review of Financial Studies, 20(6), 1783–1831.

BNM Bond Info (2014). Bond Info Hub website. http://http://bondinfo.bnm.gov.my.

Cakir, S. & Raei, F. (2007). Sukuk vs. eurobonds: Is there a difference in Value-at-Risk? IMF Working
Paper. October 2007. WP/07/237.

Chen, L., Lesmond, D. A., & Wei, J. (2007). Corporate yield spreads and bond liquidity. The Journal
of Finance, 62(1), 119–149.

Coroneo, L., Nyholm, K., & Vidova-Koleva, R. (2008). How arbitrage-free is the Nelson-Siegel model?
ECB Working Paper Series, (874). February 2008.

                                      41
Diebold, F. X. & Li, C. (2006). Forecasting the term structure of government bond yields. Journal of
Econometrics, 130, 337–364.

Fathurahman, H. & Fitriati, R. (2013). Comparative analysis of return on sukuk and conventional
bonds. The American Journal of Economics, 3(3), 159–163.

Fleming, M. J. (2003). Measuring treasury market liquidity. Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, September 2003, 83–108.

Godlewskic, C. J., Turk-Arissb, R., & Weilla, L. (2013). Sukuk vs. conventional bonds: A stock market
perspective. The Journal of Comparative Economics, 41(3), 745–761.

Hagan, P. S. & West, G. (2008). Methods for constructing a yield curve. WILMOTT magazine,
May/June, 78–81.

Iqbal, Z. & Mirakhor, A. (2013). Economic Development and Islamic Finance. Washington, DC:
Directions in Development: World Bank.

Jobst, A. A. (2007). The economics of Islamic finance and securitization. The Journal of Structured
Finance, 13(1), 6–27.

Kim, D. H. & Orphanides, A. (2007). The bond market term premium: what is it, and how can we
measure it? BIS Quarterly Review, June 2007.

Krichene, N. (2013). Islamic Capital Markets: Theory and Practice. John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte.
Ltd.

Lesmond, D. A., Ogden, J. P., & Trcinka, C. A. (1999). A new estimate of transaction costs. The
Review of Financial Studies, 12(5), 1113–1141.

McDonald, R. L. (2006). Derivatives Markets. Pearson Education, Inc., second edition.

Mosaid, F. E. & Boutti, R. (2014). Sukuk and bond performance in malaysia. International Journal of
Economics and Finance, 6(2).

Nelson, C. R. & Siegel, A. F. (1987). Parsimonious modelling of yield curves. Journal of Business,
60(4), 473–489.

Omar, M. A., Abduh, M., & Sukmana, R. (2013). Fundamentals of Islamic Money and Capital Markets.
John Wiley & Sons Singapore Pte. Ltd.

Ramasamy, R., Munisamy, S., & Helmi, M. H. M. (2011). Relative risk of Islamic sukuk over
government and conventional bonds. Global Journal of Management and Business Research, 11(6),
4–12.

Rosly, S. A. & Sanusi, M. M. (1999). The application of Bay’ Al-‘Inah and Bay’ Al-Dayn in malaysian
Islamic bonds: An Islamic analysis. International Journal of Islamic Financial Services, 1(2).

Safari, M., Ariff, M., & Mohamad, S. (2013). Do debt markets price sukuk and conventional bonds
differently? Journal of King Abdulaziz University Islamic Economies, 26(2), 113–149.

                                      42
Svensson, L. E. (1995). Estimating forward interest rates with the extended Nelson & Siegel method.
Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review, 3(1), 13–26.

Tsay, R. S. (2005). Analysis of Financial Time Series. Hoboken, New Jersey.: John Wiley & Sons, 2nd
edition.

Veronesi, P. (2011). Fixed Income Securities: Valuation, Risk, and Risk Management. Hoboken, New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1st edition.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Introductory Econometrics: A modern approach. South-Western, 4th edition.

                                      43
Appendices

Appendix A Sukuk principles

The below is based on information provided by Bank Negara Malaysia & Securities Commission
Malaysia (2009).

Quard al-Hasan prohibits any official compensation for the lending of money. A sukuk based
on this principle is issued and redeemed at par without any coupon payments. This principle is
compliant with the strictest interpretation of Shariah. The first sukuk issued by the government of
Malaysia was based on this principle. Quard al-Hasan sukuk are only used for short-term financing
and only in moderation as it relies on the benevolence of the investor. They are not traded on the
secondary market.

Bai al-Inah sukuk are asset-based and yield a profit. The issuer sells the investor an asset for
a direct cash payment and then the investor directly sells back the asset but on a pre-agreed deferred
payment basis. Sukuk solely based on Bai al-Inah have no coupon payments. The sukuk is asset-based
but not asset-backed as the asset does not constitute collateral.

Bai Bithaman Ajil allows for purchases on a deferred payment and instalment basis. A sukuk
based on the Bai Bithaman Ajil principle in conjunction with the Bai al-Inah principle is coupon-
bearing as it allows for instalments.

Murabaha sukuk are also asset-based but do not yield a profit like Bai al-Inah. Murabaha sukuk are
often based on the transaction of a commodity and the cash flows are set on a cost plus sale basis
instead of being profit-based. The transaction structure is more complex and engages more parties; in
addition to the issuer and the investor it includes a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) and the commodity
market or corresponding asset market.
    An investor appoints an agent, the SPV, to purchase the asset on their behalf. The SPV sells
the purchased asset to the government at a mark-up price to be paid on a deferred payment and
instalment basis. The sukuk issuer sells the assets to raise the funds.

Bay al-Dayn is simply the process of selling debt. The principle is the foundation of the secondary
bond market. Bay al-Dayn is considered Shariah compliant on the Malaysian market but not on all
Islamic financial markets. Elements of Bay al-Dayn are present if a transferrable sukuk certificate is
issued.

                                      44
Appendix B Complementing tables and figures using Nelson-Siegel

      6

      5

    %4

      3

      2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
     50

   bp 0

    −50

                                          (a) 1 year

      6

      5

    %4

      3

      2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
     50

   bp 0

    −50

                                         (b) 2 year

      6

      5

    %4

      3

      2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
     50

   bp 0

    −50

                                           (c) 3 year

Figure 7: Time series of Nelson-Siegel yield curves at selected maturities. The upper panel shows Islamic
(green) and conventional (black) on top of each other. The bottom panel shows the spread, Islamic less
conventional, in basis points (bp). Only shows weeks with at least five observations and minimum five
years between shortest and longest maturities (missing weeks are shown as gaps). Continued on next
page

                                    45
     6

     5

   %4

     3

     2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
    50

  bp 0

   −50

                                         (d) 5 year

     6

     5

   %4

     3

     2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
    50

  bp 0

   −50

                                          (e) 7 year

     6

     5

   %4

     3

     2
             2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
    50

  bp 0

   −50

                                           (f) 10 year

Figure 7: Continued Time series of Nelson-Siegel yield curves at selected maturities. The upper panel
shows Islamic (green) and conventional (black) on top of each other. The bottom panel shows the
spread, Islamic less conventional, in basis points (bp). Only shows weeks with at least five observations
and minimum five years between shortest and longest maturities (missing weeks are shown as gaps).

                                    46
    100

     80

     60

     40

     20

  bp  0

   −20

   −40

   −60

   −80

  −100
            2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                               (a) Conventional (Nelson-Siegel)

    100

     80

     60

     40

     20

  bp  0

   −20

   −40

   −60

   −80

  −100
            2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                                  (b) Islamic (Nelson-Siegel)

    100

     80

     60

     40

     20

  bp  0

   −20

   −40

   −60

   −80

  −100
            2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                   (c) Cross-Market: Islamic using Conventional (Nelson-siegel)

Figure 8: Week-by-week spread (in basis points) between market and arbitrage-free yield using Nelson-
Siegel zero curves, for conventional, Islamic and cross-market (Islamic issues priced with conventional
zero curve) issues, 2004–2014. Each point represents the yield spread of a specific bond issue at a point
in time. A positive yield (blue) suggests underpricing, a negative (red) overpricing. Excludes weeks
where the curve was constructed from less than five observations, or there was less than five years
between the shortest and longest maturity.

                                    47
                             ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗                 ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗

               2-sided p0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000   0.977  0.000  0.000



                             ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗  ∗∗∗        ∗        ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
             T-test
               1-sided p0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000  0.0000.000   0.046  0.000  0.000




                t       30.87236.988 10.30112.033 20.72826.779 23.13330.073 11.93412.633  -2.016 32.737 7.184
     refers to the number of price observations.
    N

                S.D.
                       0.1180.109  0.1510.147  0.1150.095  0.0970.085  0.0940.094   0.196  0.111  0.009



          Difference (%-units)Mean   0.0500.058  0.0410.050  0.0730.081  0.0560.066  0.0320.035   -0.035 0.057  0.064


                S.D.
                       0.4670.456  0.3880.372  0.3470.302  0.2620.236  0.3410.335   0.488  0.437  0.432



          Model yield (%)Mean   3.3513.336  2.9842.953  3.1233.083  3.4633.440  3.8453.829   3.379  3.426  3.868


                S.D.
                       0.4610.450  0.4030.383  0.3450.308  0.2420.229  0.3290.325   0.470  0.419  0.465



          Market yield (%)Mean   3.4013.394  3.0253.003  3.1963.164  3.5193.505  3.8773.864   3.344  3.483  3.932


          N
                                         988                      126         114
                    53354874  14541233  1064     16051503  12121150         4032

                                                                      )
                                      +
                                                                                                       0.001
                            1 year)                                                    <
                          <                                                      p

                                                                                                                        ∗∗∗

                                                                                                             0.01,
                                                                                 <
                                      p
Islamic market and arbitrage-free yields as computed by the conventional Nelson-Siegel yield curve. Only arbitrage-free yields computed from curves with at least∗∗


                                                                                                             0.05,
                                                                                 <
                                                                                                      p
Table 11:five observations and at least five years between the longest and shortest maturity are included. Panels A-D shows the sample for 2004–2014 (entire period) and 2007–2014(restricted). Sukuk type panels show the respective “lifetime” periods. Yields are expressed on a semi-annual compounding basis.Entire sample2004–20142009–2014Panel A: Very short (2004–20142009–2014Panel B: Short maturity (1–3 years)2004–20142009–2014Panel C: Medium maturity (3–7 years)2004–20142009–2014Panel D: Long maturity (72004–20142009–2014Panel I: Discount GII2004–2011Panel II: Coupon-based GII2005–2014Panel III: Murabaha GII2014–2014∗