            Fund Flow Risk and
         Cross-Sectional Asset Prices

                                      ∗                          †
       Ludwig Bergenstr˚ahle     Johannes Nordqvist

                      May 2015

                       Bachelor Thesis in Finance
                    Stockholm School of Economics

                            Abstract
   This paper documents that stocks whose historical excess returns have co-
   moved more with mutual fund flows—have a higher fund flow beta (FFB)—
   earn higher future excess returns than otherwise similar stocks. We propose
   two hypotheses to explain this finding: First, funds may hedge the variance
   in their AUM by underweighing stocks with a high FFB, hence reducing the
   price of those stocks in equilibrium. Second, flow-induced trading in funds
   may give rise to a price pressure effect. Thus, stocks with a higher FFB
   have been differentially exposed to this price pressure. If the price pressure
   is asymmetric, the higher future excess return on these stocks may be a
   reversal effect. We find empirical support for our second hypothesis. Based
   on these findings, we construct a simple long-short strategy that earns an
   average monthly four-factor alpha of 0.5%.

   Keywords: Asset pricing, mutual fund flows, price pressure, institutional
   trading

   Tutor: Bige Kahraman, Assistant Professor

   Acknowledgements: We would like to thank our tutor, Bige Kahraman,
   for all her help and support in the writing of this thesis.

∗
 22202@student.hhs.se
†
 22920@student.hhs.se
1 Introduction

Classical asset pricing theories, like the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM, assume that all
trades in the financial markets are carried out by investors who strive to maximize
the expected mean-variance return of their investment portfolios. This is a strong
assumption. While it may be valid—at least in a normative sense—with regard to
retail investors, the same cannot be said about institutional investors; the latter
type of investor does not have a utility function mapped over its own wealth and
hence may face a very different maximization problem.
   Consider the potential impact of institutional trading on asset prices. As of
2014, no less than 47% of the total outstanding equity in all US firms is held by
US financial institutions. In comparison, only 37% of the equity is held by US
             1
households.  Under these circumstances, and considering the fact that there is
                                                                           2
ample evidence that the demand curves for stocks slope downward,  it is easy to
see that we will never fully understand asset prices unless we also have a clear
grasp of the incentives that drive institutional trading patterns.
   In spirit of the above, this paper investigates the pricing of fund flow risk.
Specifically, using a Fama-Macbeth regression procedure and controlling for the
four Fama-French-Carhart factors, we find that stocks that have comoved more
with historical, economy-wide fluctuations in fund flows earn higher abnormal
returns. We propose two hypotheses to explain this finding:

Hypothesis 1 (the hedging hypothesis). Our first hypothesis is derived from
      the literature on agency-based asset pricing. A common belief in this field is
      that fund managers face a utility function that can be expressed as the return
                                                                            3
      on their fund’s portfolio relative to the fund’s benchmark index. We suggest
      an alternative utility function that accounts for flow-based considerations.
      More concretely, under this hypothesis, fund managers hedge the variance in
     their assets under management by underweighing stocks that comove with
      fund flows, hence reducing the price of those stocks in equilibrium.

Hypothesis 2 (the price pressure hypothesis). Our second hypothesis is de-
      rived from the literature on flow-induced price pressure. This literature sug-
      gests that stocks held by open-end funds may be exposed to price pressure
      as funds scale up (down) their positions in response to sales (redemptions).

   1
    These figures are based on Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds data. Most of the remaining
balance is held by non-US entities.
   2
    For example, Shleifer (1986) finds that stocks experience a persistent price increase upon
being included in the S&P500 index. He attributes this effect to an outward shift in the stocks’
demand curves from purchases by index funds.
   3
    See, for example, Brennan (1993), Cornell and Roll (2005), and Basak and Pavlova (2013).

                                   1
      Thus, under this hypothesis, we propose that stocks that have comoved more
      with historical fund flows have been differentially exposed to this price pres-
      sure. Further, given that the price pressure is asymmetric, the higher future
      abnormal return on these stocks may be a reversal effect.

   Taking both hypotheses to the data, we reject the first but find strong support
for the second hypothesis; First, controlling for common stock characteristics pre-
ferred by mutual funds, we find that mutual funds overweigh stocks that comove
more with fund flows. This finding directly contradicts the hedging hypothesis.
Second, consistent with the price pressure hypothesis, we show that funds hold
relatively less (more) of stocks that have comoved more with past flows when
those flows were negative (positive). Third, lending additional support for the
price pressure hypothesis, we find that the premium on the fund flow factor is
negatively correlated with lagged flows. This finding suggests that the price im-
pact from historical comovements follows a reversal pattern. Moreover, we show
that this effect is stronger when past flows have been negative, indicating that
funds exert a larger price pressure when they are forced to sell off stocks due to
redemptions than when they scale up their positions in response to positive flows.
As a result, positive reversals dominate negative reversals, thus explaining why
the risk premium on the fund flow factor is positively priced on average.
    The contribution of this paper is threefold. First, it shows that stocks that have
experienced larger comovements with economy-wide fluctuations in fund flows earn
higher future excess returns, ceteris paribus. In doing so, it identifies a new risk
factor that appears to have a significant explanatory power on asset prices.
   Second, it shows that the pricing of fund flow risk cannot be explained by a
desire from fund managers to underweigh stocks that are differentially exposed to
fund flow risk. While this result runs counter to what one would expect from an
agency-based perspective, it does lend some support for the supposition that the
utility function that is most commonly assigned to fund managers within this area
of research—the return on the fund portfolio in excess of the fund’s benchmark
index—is well-specified.
   Last, it shows that the pricing of fund flow risk is mainly the result of a
reversal effect that arises due to flow-induced trading from mutual funds. This
result corroborates a number of recent papers that find evidence of a price impact
from liquidity-based trading in open-end funds, most notably Coval and Stafford
(2007) and Lou (2012). Further, it augments the results from these papers by
showing that the price impact is highly asymmetric along the axis of positive and

                                   2
negative flows; specifically, reversals are bigger and more lagged following extreme
negative flows.
   This paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes our data and our method-
ology to estimate the stock betas and factor risk premia. Section 3 investigates
the premium on the fund flow factor. Section 4 develops and tests our two main
hypotheses; section 4.1 explores the hedging hypothesis, while section 4.2 explores
the price pressure hypothesis. Section 5 concludes.

2 Data and Methodology

2.1 Data

Our fund flow data comes from the Investment Company Institute (ICI), which
covers the majority of mutual funds on the US market. We use the data for funds
classified as either hybrid funds or equity funds, since we are primarily interested
in the behavior of fund managers that trade in equity. The data covers the period
January 1984 to December 2014 and consequently includes a total of 374 monthly
observations.
   We use stock data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP),
which covers the entire US equity market. The data includes closing prices, shares
outstanding, and monthly returns. The return variable is adjusted for stock splits
and dividends. We use only stocks that are listed on either NYSE, AMEX, or
NASDAQ. In total, the number of firms in our sample period amounts to 19,338.
The four Fama-French-Carhart factors are downloaded from the Kenneth French’s
website at Dartmouth. The data covers the period January 1984 to December 2014.
   Fund holdings data is collected from the Thomson-Reuters s12 master file,
                                                                                                 4
which covers all US mutual funds and the majority of their US equity holdings.
We use quarterly data and the sample period stretches from January 2000 through
September 2014.

2.2 Estimation of beta coefficients

To standardize the fund flow data, for each month t, we compute the fund flow
percentage (FFP) as aggregate flow, divided by the total market capitalization of

   4
    The potential exclusions include, for example, small holdings (typically under 10,000 shares
or $200,000) and cases where there may be confidentiality issues.

                                   3
all stocks in our sample, as in Warther (1995). Mathematically, for each month t:

                                                      f lowt
                       F F Pt = ∑                               (1)
                                              marketcapi,t
                                                                    i

. . . where f lowt is the aggregate fund flow to all hybrid and equity mutual funds
in month t and marketcapi,t is the market capitalization of stock i in month t.
    We use a rolling regression with time-varying betas to estimate the coefficients
on the market, size, and value factors from Fama and French (1993), the momen-
tum factor from Carhart (1997), and the fund flow percentage, defined as in (1).
We estimate the coefficients for each stock i in every month t using the stock’s
                                                                               5
past four years of monthly excess returns, i.e., from month t − 47 to t.  Thus, at
the end of each month t, we run the following regression for stock i and define the
stock’s fund flow beta (FFB) as the coefficient on F F P :

                 M           S           H           U
 Ri,s − Rf,s = αi + βi,t × M KTs + βi,t × SM Bs + βi,t × HM Ls + βi,t × U M Ds

                  F
              + βi,t × F F Ps + εi,s, s = t − 47, . . . , t (2)

. . . where Ri,s is the return of stock i in month s, Rf,s is the risk-free rate (1 month
treasury bill) in month s, M KT is the stock market excess return over the risk
free rate, and SM B, HM L, and U M D are spreads between portfolios sorted by
market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and prior 12-month average return,
respectively.
   To increase comparability, the resulting betas from (2) are scaled by their
respective standard deviations. Furthermore, since we believe that market par-
ticipants base their predictions of future betas on historical betas, we move each
observation one month ahead for each coefficient for each stock i. This means
that the beta estimated at the end of month t will be the grounds for investment
decisions in the beginning of month t + 1.

2.3 Estimation of risk premia

We use a Fama-Macbeth regression (Fama and MacBeth 1973) to estimate the
                                      M    S    H    U        F
risk premia of the coefficients from (2): β  , β , β  , β  , and β . Specifically, for
each month t, we run cross-sectional regressions of the stocks’ excess returns on
their beta coefficients. In so doing, the resulting regression coefficients represent
the pricing of risk for the corresponding risk factor. Mathematically, the regression

   5
    To reduce noise in estimating F F B, we require that stocks have at least 36 non-missing
traded returns during the 48-month estimation period.

                                   4
we run is the following:

                 M    M    S    S    H    H    U    U    F    F
 Ri,t − Rf,t = λi + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + εi,t
                                                                                (3)

. . . where Ri,t is the return of stock i in month t, Rf,t is the risk-free rate (1 month
                     M                                       S
treasury bill) in month t, βi,t is the market coefficient for stock i in month t, βi,t
                                  H
is the size coefficient for stock i in month t, βi,t is the value coefficient for stock i
            U                                                      F
in month t, βi,t is the momentum coefficient for stock i in month t, and βi,t is the
FFB for stock i in month t.

3 Results

The first row in Table 1 reports results from (3) for the whole sample period. Most
                                                 F
notably, the premium on the fund flow factor, γ , is positive and significant at
the 5% level. The coefficient suggests that a one standard deviation increase in
the fund flow beta of a stock increases its excess return by 0.23 percentage points
per month, all else equal.
   Rows two through six report results for the same regression for five smaller
time periods. Notice that the period 2006–2010 is the only period that shows a
significant coefficient on FFB. Similarly, while insignificant, the period 2001–2005
shows a positive coefficient that is notably larger than in the other periods, except
2006–2010. These two periods have in common that the stock market experienced
large crashes: the bursting of the dot-com bubble in 2000 and the financial crisis
of 2007–2008. Ergo, these results indicate that the risk premium on the fund flow
factor is higher after extreme downturns in the market.
   Interestingly, we find no support for a positive risk premium on either the
market factor, the size factor, or the value factor, which goes against previous re-
search. Similarly, the pricing of the momentum factor is significantly negative, on
the 5% level, which is not consistent with previous findings. However, this finding
can perhaps be explained by our estimation methodology, where we look at the
historical betas under a four-year period for each stock. Thus, stocks that load
highly on the momentum factor have likely experienced a positive price develop-
ment for a rather long time. Therefore, it is possible that the negative premium
on the momentum factor in fact captures long-term price reversals, similar to the
findings in De Bondt and Thaler (1985).
   Figure 1 plots the cumulative premium on the fund flow factor during the
sample period. Again, we clearly see that the risk premium is positive and that

                                   5
                       Table 1: Cumulative risk premia

For six different periods, this table reports results for (3):

                    M   M   S   S    H   H   U   U   F   F
      Ri,t − Rf,t = λi + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + εi,t

. . . where Ri,t is the return of stock i in month t, Rf,t is the risk-free rate (1 month treasury bill)
         M                                  S
in month t, βi,t is the market coefficient for stock i in month t, βi,t is the size coefficient for stock
           H                                   U
i in month t, βi,t is the value coefficient for stock i in month t, βi,t is the momentum coefficient
                         F
for stock i in month t, and βi,t is the FFB for stock i in month t. Betas have been normalized
by their standard deviations. Returns are denoted in percent. The reported coefficients are the
means of the coefficients during the corresponding periods. t-stats are reported in parentheses.

                F  M  S  H  U
                γ¯          γ¯           γ¯          γ¯           γ¯        Constant

 1987-2015 0.231** 0.111 -0.001 0.130 -0.177** 0.738***
                 (2.12) (0.84) (-0.01) (0.85) (-2.28) (3.95)

 1987-1995 -0.055 0.039 0.057 0.099 -0.050 0.570*
                (-0.51) (0.23) (0.44) (0.75) (-0.47) (1.72)
 1996-2000 0.086 -0.038 -0.019 0.030 -0.176 0.770*
                 (0.48) (-0.16) (-0.04) (0.06) (-1.06) (1.74)
 2001-2005 0.348 -0.050 0.001 0.114 -0.293 1.552***
                 (1.32) (-0.12) (0.01) (0.18) (-1.31) (4.05)
 2006-2010 0.976** 0.864** -0.030 0.394 -0.411 -0.491
                 (2.23) (2.26) (-0.19) (1.56) (-1.56) (-0.91)
 2011-2015 -0.041 -0.288 -0.069 0.016 -0.019 1.581***
                (-0.20) (-1.00) (-0.45) (0.13) (-0.23) (4.83)

                                   6
there is a significant jump after the financial crisis of 2007–2008. In fact, this
jump represents more than 50% of the cumulative premium on the fund flow
                                       6
factor during the sample period.
   Overall, these results strongly support that there is a positive risk premium
on the fund flow factor. As a—to the best of our knowledge—previously undocu-
mented fact in the literature, this finding warrants further investigation. Thus, in
the following section, we propose two hypotheses that try to explain the positive
risk premium on the fund flow factor.

                  80


                  60
                        F
                   γ
                  40


                  20
                  Cumulative

                  0


                     -20
                   1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                          Year

           Figure 1: Cumulative risk premium on the fund flow factor

This figure plots the cumulative risk premium on the fund flow factor for the full sample period.
                                               F
The cumulative premium is the sum of the monthly γt in (3):

                    M   M   S   S    H   H   U   U   F   F
      Ri,t − Rf,t = λi + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + γt × βi,t + εi,t

. . . where Ri,t is the return of stock i in month t, Rf,t is the risk-free rate (1 month treasury bill)
         M                                  S
in month t, βi,t is the market coefficient for stock i in month t, βi,t is the size coefficient for stock
           H                                   U
i in month t, βi,t is the value coefficient for stock i in month t, βi,t is the momentum coefficient
                        F
for stock i in month t, and βi,t is the FFB for stock i in month t. Betas have been normalized by
                                                           F
their standard deviations. Returns are denoted in percent. Thus, γt is the estimated increase
in a stock’s excess return, denoted in percent, for every one standard deviation increase in its
FFB, holding the loadings on the other factors constant.

4 Hypotheses

4.1 The hedging hypothesis

The effect of institutional trading on classical asset pricing models has been dis-
cussed in a number of previous works. One of the earliest models that describes

   6
    Section 4.2 specifically investigates this response to large downturns in the market.

                                   7
the effect is presented in Brennan (1993). He proposes a model where institutional
investors have absolute risk aversion with respect to their performance relative to
some benchmark. Under this assumption, he shows that institutional investors will
tilt their holdings toward stocks that comove more with the benchmark. Therefore,
in equilibrium, those stocks will have higher prices and lower expected returns.
   To test his model, Brennan uses the S&P500 index as a proxy for the bench-
mark index and finds only limited support. However, in a follow-up article, Bren-
nan and Li (2008) find strong support for this model and conclude that “stocks
whose returns covary more with the idiosyncratic part of the S&P500 return have
significantly lower returns”.
   Basak and Pavlova (2013) build upon Brennan’s results by introducing a sim-
ilar model, but where agents have relative risk aversion. Their model has similar
implications and explains phenomena such as index inclusion effects and asset
class effects.
   Finally, Cornell and Roll (2005) propose a model for an economy with only in-
stitutional investors. These investors are either active or passive and, like Brennan,
they assume that the active managers are concerned with their return relative to a
benchmark index. Using this model, they show that the CAPM is not a sufficient
model in a world where investors delegate their investment decisions to institu-
tional investors. Neither Basak and Pavlova nor Cornell and Roll test their models
empirically.
   In this section, we test if the positive premium on the fund flow factor is
related to the utility function of fund managers and the hedging motives this
utility function entails.

Fund managers’ utility function

The implied utility function in Brennan (1993) is:
                
                                       −ai(Rp,i−Rb,i)
                                    (1 − e            )/ai ai  6= 0
              U (Rp,i − Rb,i) =                                       (4)
                     R  − R          a = 0
                                               p,i      b,i   i

. . . where Rp,i is the return on fund i’s portfolio, Rb,i is the return on the fund’s
benchmark portfolio, and ai is the agent’s risk aversion. We customize this utility
function to include fund managers’ consideration of fund flow.
   Assume that managers are concerned with maximizing their assets under man-
agement (AUM). This is a reasonable proposition since compensation to managers
is largely dependent on the value of their portfolio. Furthermore, more AUM is
likely positive for the reputation of a fund manager. Now, consider that AUM

                                   8
increases due to two factors: a positive fund return and a positive fund flow. This
implies that managers are concerned with their portfolio return and the fund flow
to their fund.
   With the above considerations in mind, we propose the following utility func-
tion for fund managers:
                
                                         −ai(Rp,i+gf f,i)
                                    (1 − e            )/ai ai  6= 0
              U (Rp,i + gf f,i) =                                          (5)
                       R  + g           a = 0
                                               p,i     f f,i   i

. . . where Rp,i is the return on fund i’s portfolio, gf f,i is the growth in AUM related
to fund flow for fund i, and ai is the agent’s risk aversion.
   The asset pricing implications of (5) are developed in the same manner as for
(4) in Brennan (1993). We consider a single period economy with two types of
investors: individual investors who are mean-variance optimizers, and fund man-
agers with a utility function as in (5). Asset returns are multivariate normal and
agents are constrained to hold all of their wealth in equities. Under these assump-
tions, and given that we use F F P from (1) as the aggregate proxy for gf f,i (just
as Brennan uses S&P500 as the aggregate benchmark proxy), Brennan shows that
solving the maximization problem for fund managers provides the following asset
pricing model:

                         M      F
             E(Ri) = a + b × βi + c × βi b > 0 and c > 0 (6)

                                M
. . . where E(Ri) is the expected return of stock i, βi is the market beta of stock
        F
i, and βi is the FFB of stock i.
                                                         7
   Since the coefficient on FFB is positive in (6),  this model explains the ob-
served positive risk premium on the fund flow factor. This result is intuitive. A
stock’s comovement with F F P is captured by its FFB. Since managers want to
maximize AUM but are risk averse, they naturally want to maximize their return,
while minimizing their exposure to FFB. Per definition, having a high exposure
to FFB leads to large downturns in AUM when fund flows are negative and vice
versa when they are positive. Consequently, a high exposure to FFB increases the
variance of AUM and is thus not desirable for fund managers from a mean-variance
optimization perspective. This leads to the following proposition:

Fund holdings Fund managers underweigh (overweigh) investments in high (low)
      FFB stocks. Thus, stocks with a high (low) FFB will be underpriced (over-

   7
    Notice that in Brennan (1993) this coefficient is negative. The reason for this is easily
observed if we compare (4) with (5): The sign is positive for gf f,i while it is negative for Rp,i.

                                   9
      priced) in equilibrium, explaining the positive risk premium on the fund flow
      factor.

    In the following section, we empirically test this proposition.

4.1.1 Fund holdings

To investigate the hedging hypothesis, we look directly at the holdings of mutual
funds and how they are affected by FFB, with a slightly modified approach from
Falkenstein (1996). Using quarterly fund holdings data, we construct a variable
that represents the share ownership of stock outstanding held by the entire sample
of mutual funds. Mathematically, for each quarter t and each stock i:

          ∑M
                           shares owned by fund m at time t
               owni,t =                                               (7)
                                   shares outstanding at time t
                     m=1

. . . where M is the total number of mutual funds in our sample.
    If all asset-demanders held similar portfolios, then the mutual fund industry as
a whole would own equal proportions of each stock. That being the case, if owni,t
takes on a lower value for a particular stock than the industry average, the mutual
fund industry in aggregate is averse to holding that stock. Using this variable, we
can therefore test if mutual funds are averse to holding high FFB stocks.
   To focus solely on the effect of FFB on mutual funds’ holdings could lead
to false conclusions, however. Falkenstein (ibid.) documents a number of stock
characteristics that affect mutual funds’ investment decisions. If FFB is correlated
with any of these characteristics, our results will likely be confounded by the fact
that other characteristics than FFB affect the holdings of mutual funds. Because
of this, we control for a number of stock characteristics that have previously been
showed to affect mutual funds’ stock preferences. These characteristics are listed
in Table 2 along with the result from the regression of the form:

 yi,t = β1×x1,i,t+β2×x2,i,t+. . .+βn×xn,i,t+at+εi,t yi,t = ln(1+owni,t) (8)

. . . where owni,t is defined as in (7), x1,i,t, . . . , xn,i,t are stock characteristics, specif-
ically: FFB, standard deviation, variance, previous quarter return, liquidity, price,
market capitalization, market coefficient, size coefficient, value coefficient, and
momentum coefficient, and at captures time fixed effects. Control variables and
the dependent variable are logarithmized to avoid outliers dominating the results.
We use robust standard errors to account for heteroscedasticity and cluster stock
identifiers to account for intra-cluster correlation.

                                  10
    Table 2 reports results for two versions of (8), with different control variables.
Both regressions show a significantly positive coefficient on FFB, on the 1% level.
Specifically, for each one standard deviation increase in FFB, mutual funds seem
to increase their holdings of that particular stock by 0.4%–0.6%. Granted, that’s
not a large increase. It is, however, significant enough for us to conclude that fund
managers do not underweigh stocks with a high FFB, contrary to what we would
expect under our first hypothesis. These results therefore completely contradict
our first hypothesis, and we find no support for fund managers’ hedging behavior
explaining the positive risk premium on the fund flow factor.

                                  11
      Table 2: Regression analysis: test of fund managers’ hedging motives

This table presents results for the regression analysis testing the effect of fund flow beta on
mutual fund holdings. The regression is of the form:

   yi,t = β1 × x1,i,t + β2 × x2,i,t + . . . + βn × xn,i,t + at + εi,t yi,t = ln(1 + owni,t)

. . . where owni,t is defined as

             ∑M
                               shares owned by fund m at time t
                   owni,t =
                                        shares outstanding at time t
                        m=1
. . . where M is the total number of mutual funds in our sample. x1,i,t, . . . , xn,i,t are stock char-
acteristics, specifically: Stdev and variance are the standard deviation and variance of monthly
returns for the prior 36 months. Ret(-1) is the return during the previous quarter. Liq is liquidity
defined as the previous month’s volume divided by shares outstanding at end of month. Size is the
market capitalization. CAPM beta is the market beta. Column 2 presents the results including
controls for stock correlation with the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB, HML, and UMD. at
captures time fixed effects. The sample period stretches from Jan 2000 through Sep 2014. Coeffi-
cients are denoted in percent. Robust standard errors were used to adjust for heteroscedasticity
and observations were clustered based on stock identifiers to account for intra-cluster correlation.
t-stats are reported in parentheses.

                                            Dependent variable: ln(1 + owni,t)
                                             (1) (2)

 Fund flow beta 0.392*** 0.647***
                                           (5.56) (8.40)
 Stdev 0.221 -6.996**
                                            (0.09) (-2.50)
 Variance -5.645 -0.701
                                            (-1.64) (-0.18)
 Ret(-1) -2.074*** -2.011***
                                           (-23.51) (-22.93)
 ln(liq+1) 10.476*** 10.217***
                                          (16.97) (16.58)
 ln(prc+1) 2.421*** 2.498***
                                           (9.65) (9.73)
 ln(size) 12.792*** 11.666***
                                          (18.09) (16.27)
          2
 [ln(size)]                                -0.273*** -0.246***
                                           (-15.79) (-14.04)
 CAPM beta 0.565*** 0.905***
                                           (7.29) (10.24)
 SMB beta 0.944***
                                                                            (12.75)
 HML beta -0.157**
                                                                                 (-2.15)
 UMD beta -0.130*
                                                                                 (-1.91)

 Observations 228,289 228,289
 R-squared 0.404 0.408

                                  12
4.2 The price pressure hypothesis

Flow-driven price pressure has been studied to some extent in previous works.
Interestingly, the earliest research on this topic only finds weak support for the
existence of price pressure. Notably, Warther (1995) and Edelen and Warner (2001)
both find evidence of a positive relationship between market returns and contem-
poraneous flows. However, they do not find any evidence of a negative relationship
between market returns and lagged flows, as would be expected from price rever-
sals if flows indeed are causative of (temporary) price shocks.
   Nevertheless, recent papers have been more supportive of the existence of price
pressure. For example, Teo and Woo (2004) group funds by their investment objec-
tive (e.g., one group consisting of all growth stock funds, etc.) and find that flows
to such groups negatively predict future returns on the stocks held by the group.
On the stock level, Coval and Stafford (2007) construct a measure that captures
the degree to which a stock has been exposed to flow-constrained buys minus flow-
constrained sells and find that it is negatively associated with subsequent returns.
Similar results are achieved by Lou (2012) using a somewhat different measure of
the amount of constrained trades in the stock.
    Having rejected the hedging hypothesis in section 4.1, this section tests if the
positive premium on the fund flow factor instead is related to a price pressure effect
from flow-induced trading. The proposed mechanism and its testable implications
(proposition 1–3) will be described in the next section. Section 4.2.1 to 4.2.3 show
that the propositions hold in the data, and section 4.2.4 develops a trading strategy
that takes advantage of these findings in order to demonstrate their economic
significance.

Propositions

Our tests of the hedging hypothesis in section 4.1.1 showed that mutual funds
have a preference for stocks that load highly on the fund flow factor. This finding
suggests a positive relationship between fund flow betas and the extent to which a
stock is traded by mutual funds. Therefore, it is conceivable that a higher loading
on the fund flow factor may entail a higher exposure to price pressures from flow-
                                                                                                 8
induced trading in mutual funds. Indeed, if the price impact occurs immediately
in response to flows (or if flows are autocorrelated), it may well be the case that
the comovement does not capture a specific preference of stocks in mutual funds

   8
    As we are looking at monthly data, ‘immediately’ is in this context identical to ‘within the
same month.’

                                  13
per se but is itself a direct result of flow-induced price pressures. This argument
leads to our first proposition:

Proposition 1 (fund holdings). High fund flow beta stocks are stocks that have
      been heavily sold (bought) by funds in response to negative (positive) flows.
      Thus, funds hold relatively less (more) of high fund flow beta stocks when
      past flows have been negative (positive).

    Contemplate the implication of the above proposition. If stocks that load highly
on the fund flow factor have been heavily sold or bought by open-end funds and,
for this reason, have been exposed to price pressure, such stocks will, on average,
be underpriced (overpriced) following periods of negative (positive) flows. Hence,
presuming that stock prices revert to their fundamentals in the long run, high
fund flow beta stocks should outperform low fund flow beta stocks following pe-
riods of negative flows while the opposite should be the case following periods of
positive flows. This dynamic is illustrated in Figure 2.A, and it leads to our second
proposition:

Proposition 2 (relationship to lagged flows). High fund flow beta stocks earn
      higher (lower) abnormal returns following periods of negative (positive) flows.
      In other words, the premium on the fund flow factor is negatively related to
      lagged flows.

   However, the mere existence of price pressure from flow-induced trading is not
a sufficient criterion for the risk premium on the fund flow factor to be positively
priced on average. Specifically, in order for the price pressure hypothesis to hold,
high fund flow beta stocks must, on average, be underpriced. In other words, the
price pressure must be asymmetric—that is, the absolute price impact from all
negative past flows must be greater than the price impact from all positive past
flows. This dynamic is illustrated in Figure 2.B, and it leads to our third—and
last—proposition:

Proposition 3 (asymmetric price pressure). High fund flow beta stocks are,
      on average, underpriced. Thus, the absolute value of the risk premium on the
      fund flow factor is greater when past flows have been negative compared to
      when past flows have been positive.

   There are at least two good reasons to expect proposition 3 to hold: First,
funds are likely much less constrained in their trading activities when they face
positive flows compared to when they face negative flows. In particular, when a

                                  14
                A. Symmetric price pressure                          B. Asymmetric price pressure
     1                                                  1


      .5                                                                  .5


     0                                                  0


    Relative price-.5                                                               Relative price-.5


      -1                                                              -1
     -48 -36 -24 -12 0 12      -48 -36 -24 -12 0 12
                                                       t                                                                                                     t

                    Negative past flows Positive past flows                           Negative past flows Positive past flows
                  Average Fundamental value                         Average Fundamental value

         Figure 2: Schematic illustration of the price pressure hypothesis

This figure demonstrates the mechanisms of the price pressure hypothesis schematically. The
dashed and dotted lines illustrate the price development of a representative stock that has been
exposed to price pressure from either positive or negative flows during the estimation period
of the betas (and thus load highly on the fund flow factor). The arrows indicate the expected
reversal patterns (unconditioned on post–estimation-period flows). The x-axes show the month
relative to the end of the estimation period of the betas. Precisely, t = −47 to t = 0 is the
estimation period of the betas, and t = 1 is the estimation period of the risk premia. The y-axes
show the price of the stock relative to its fundamental value. For illustrative clarity, the figure
assumes that the stock is neither under- nor overpriced at the beginning of the estimation period.
Furthermore, reversals are assumed to be linear and to take a constant amount of time.
     In panel A, it is assumed that positive flows cause as much price pressure upward as negative
flows cause price pressure downward. As a result, presuming that negative flows are of the same
magnitude and frequency as positive flows, the stock will, on average, neither be over- nor
underpriced at t = 0. Therefore, we would expect the average reversal at t = 1—and hence the
premium on the fund flow factor—to be zero.
    In panel B, it is assumed that the price pressure from negative flows dominates the price
pressure from positive flows. Thus, in contrast to panel A, the stock will, on average, be under-
priced at t = 0. Consequently, we would expect the average reversal at t = 1—and hence the
premium on the fund flow factor—to be positive.

                                  15
fund receives money, it need not invest it immediately or in any particular set
of securities. Thus, if it perceives some securities to be overpriced, it has some
leeway in choosing not to invest in those securities. In contrast, when a fund
faces redemptions, it may be forced to sell a particular set of securities (its current
                                                           9
holdings), even when those securities are underpriced.  Adding to this effect, many
funds only hold highly correlated, category-specific assets; for example, some funds
only invest in stocks within a limited set of industry classes. Consequently, when
such funds face severe outflows, the flow-induced price pressure is likely to be
systemic to the entire fund portfolio, making it impossible to meet redemptions
by only selling off assets that have not been exposed to any price pressure.
    Second, as illustrated in Figure 3, the distribution of flows has a long negative
tail. This observation is important because flow-induced price pressures should,
realistically, chiefly be an outlier phenomenon. Specifically, because flow-based
constraints sometimes impel funds to accept loss-making trades, they will seek
to develop strategies to mitigate these constraints. However, such strategies will
likely break down in the face of extreme flows, thus giving rise to price pressure.
Consequently, since the distribution of flows is negatively skewed, negative price
pressures should dominate positive dittos.
   For example, one common strategy employed by funds in order to mitigate
the impact of flows on their trading activities is to keep a cash reserve (see, for
example, Coval and Stafford (2007)). Thus, when a fund faces redemptions (sales),
it simply contracts (expands) the cash reserve to meet investor demands instead
of adjusting any of its stock holdings. However, when the fund faces extreme,
negative flows, the cash reserve will get depleted, and the fund may be forced
to sell off underpriced assets, thus producing negative price pressure. Conversely,
when the fund faces extreme, positive flows, the low-yielding cash reserve will get
too big, and the fund may feel compelled to buy overpriced assets so as to match
the equity share in peer funds or benchmark indices. Critically, then, because of
the distribution of flows, the former scenario appears to be much more likely than
the latter scenario.
   In sum, considering the two reasons for asymmetry suggested above, it seems
as if the price pressure hypothesis implies that the risk premium on the fund flow
factor should respond favorably and be sensitive only to extreme negative flows.
We will investigate this supposition in some further depth in section 4.2.3. For
now, however, we note that the leftmost observations in Figure 3 closely preceded

   9
    Note that, because of short selling constraints, it is not possible for mutual funds to raise
capital by short selling stocks that they perceive to be less underpriced than any of the securities
that they currently hold.

                                  16
                  30


                  20

                  Percent
                  10


                  0
                     −1 −.5 0 .5
                                  Fund flows (monthly, normalized)

                  Figure 3: Distribution of monthly fund flows

This figure shows the distribution of fund flows to US hybrid and equity funds during the sample
period, 1984–2015. The data source is the same as in section 2.1. The flows have been normalized
by first subtracting the mean of flows and then dividing the resultant variable by its absolute
max. The two leftmost clusters of observations occurred in connection to the 2007–2008 financial
crisis and the dot-com bubble.

the two major jumps in the cumulative risk premium on the fund flow factor—
the first jump occurred in the aftermath of the dot-com bubble and the second
occurred following the 2007–2008 financial crisis (refer back to Figure 1).
   Moving forward, the following sections examine the validity of the price pres-
sure hypothesis by testing its main ramifications, proposition 1–3, empirically.

Unexpected fund flows

                                                                       10
We base our tests of proposition 1–3 on unexpected fund flows.   The reason for
this is as follows: Since fund flows are highly autocorrelated, we expect that fund
managers are, to some extent, able to predict future flows. Furthermore, it seems
likely that fund managers can accommodate some amount of redemptions and
sales by adjusting their cash reserves in anticipation of flows in order to mitigate
price impacts. Because of this, we believe the effects of price pressure are more
prominent when we look at unexpected flows—the part of fund flows that managers
cannot predict based on previous flows.
   To construct a variable that captures the unexpected part of fund flows, we
adopt a similar approach to Warther (1995). We use an autoregressive model with
three lags to predict future fund flows based on previous fund flows and define the

  10
    The results are similar but somewhat less significant if we consider total (i.e., the sum of
expected and unexpected) fund flows instead.

                                  17
residual as the unexpected fund flow. The model is specified as follows:

                                               3
           ∑
                        F F Pt = c +    ϕiF F Pt−i + εt (9)
                                               i=1

              U
We define F F P t (unexpected fund flow) as εt in (9).

4.2.1 Test of proposition 1 (fund holdings)

To test proposition one, we again look at mutual funds’ holdings and how they
are affected by FFB. However, unlike our earlier test, we take previous flows into
consideration.
                                                         U
                    U                                   F F P
   Based on F F P t , we create a dummy variable, Dt , that takes on the value
one when unexpected flows have been positive on average the past three months
and zero otherwise. That is:
                
                         ∑t      U
                        F F P U      0 if   s=t−2 F F P s < 0
                  Dt =                                    (10)
                         1 otherwise

    Finally, we create an interaction term that captures the effect of FFB on mutual
funds’ holdings, when the 3-month previous unexpected fund flows have been
positive. This variable is simply the previously constructed dummy variable times
FFB:
                               U              U
                                F F P  F F B      F F P
                       Ii,t = Dt × F F Bi,t (11)

   Using these variables, we can test our hypothesis by regressing the share of
shares outstanding owned by mutual funds on fund flow beta, the dummy variable
and the interaction term. The coefficient on the interaction term will then capture
the isolated effect of mutual fund trading in high FFB stocks when previous flows
                                                               11
have been positive. We run the following regression:

                                                        U
                                                              F F P  F F B
          ln(1 + owni,t) = β1,i × F F Bi,t + β2,i × Ii,t + at + εi,t (12)

                                                                           U
                                                                                     F F P  F F B
. . . where owni,t is defined as in (7), F F Bi,t is defined as in (2), Ii,t is
defined as in (11), and at captures time fixed effects. We use robust standard
errors to account for heteroscedasticity and cluster stock identifiers to account for
intra-cluster correlation.

  11
    Note that we do not include the dummy variable in the regression since its effect is captured
in full by the time fixed effects.

                                  18
   Table 3 reports results from (12). Under this hypothesis, we would expect the
coefficient on the interaction term to be positive, since that would indicate that
mutual funds indeed hold more (less) high FFB stocks when previous unexpected
flows have been positive (negative). As we can see, the coefficient is significantly
positive on the 1% level. Specifically, if previous unexpected flows have been pos-
itive, mutual funds will hold 0.24 percentage points more of a stock for each one
standard deviation increase in FFB for that stock, compared to if previous flows
had been negative. While this is not a large increase, it does indicate that there
might be some truth to our price pressure hypothesis.

 Table 3: Regression analysis with interaction term: test of price pressure effect

This table presents results for the regression analysis testing the effect of fund flow beta, condi-
tioned on previous unexpected fund flows:

                                                        U
                                                              F F P  F F B
               ln(1 + owni,t) = β1,i × F F Bi,t + β2,i × Ii,t + at + εi,t

. . . where owni,t, fund holdings, is defined as the share ownership of stock outstanding held by
the entire sample of mutual funds. F F Bi,t, fund flow beta, measures the comovement between
                                                    U
                                                          F F P  F F B
a stock’s excess returns and flows to mutual funds. Ii,t , the past flow-FFB interaction
term, captures the effect of FFB when unexpected fund flows have been positive the past three
months. at captures time fixed effects. The sample period stretches from Jan 2000 through
Sep 2014. Coefficients are denoted in percent. Robust standard errors were used to adjust for
heteroscedasticity and observations were clustered based on stock identifiers to account for intra-
cluster correlation. t-stats are reported in parentheses.

                                                    Dependent variable: ln(1 + owni,t)

 Fund flow beta -1.599***
                                                                      (-18.70)
 Past flow-FFB interaction term 0.242***
                                                                      (6.40)

 Observations 228,289
 R-squared 0.094

   The cautious reader may notice that the coefficient on FFB is negative in
this regression, which would support our previously rejected hedging hypothesis.
However, note that this is due to us not including the control variables for stock
characteristics in this regression. The rationale behind that decision is that we here
want to focus solely on the interaction between FFB, previous unexpected flows,
and fund holdings. In results not shown, we find that these results hold when we
include the stock characteristics from (8) and that the coefficient on FFB then
is positive. Furthermore, these results hold when we control for firm fixed effects.
Overall, these results support proposition one.

                                  19
4.2.2 Test of proposition 2 (relationship to lagged flows)

Our second proposition states that the risk premium on the fund flow factor is
negatively correlated with unexpected fund flows in preceding periods. This is an
easily testable proposition. To test it, we regress the fund flow risk premium on
contemporaneous and lagged unexpected fund flows:

                                     t−1                         t−16
          ∑       ∑
   F                 U                 U                       U
  γt = β0 + β1 × F F P t + β2 ×     F F P s + . . . + β6 ×      F F P s + εt (13)
                                  s=t−3                      s=t−18

          F                                                             U
. . . where γt is the risk premium on the fund flow factor in month t and F F P t is
the unexpected fund flow, defined as in (9), in month t.
   Table 4 column 1 estimates (13) on the entire sample of time periods, while
columns 2 and 3 estimate (13) on two collectively exhaustive subsamples: one
in which the cumulative unexpected fund flows over the prior 18 months were
negative, and one in which they were positive.
    Three things are of note here. First, we see a clear pattern in all three columns:
The fund flow risk premium is negatively correlated with lagged unexpected fund
flows. In the full sample and the negative past flow sample, there is a significant
negative correlation between the fund flow risk premium and unexpected flows in
the five preceding quarters, except the first preceding quarter. For the positive
past flow sample, there is significant negative correlation between the fund flow
risk premium and unexpected flows in the previous quarter, but not any other
quarters. These results align with our second proposition.
   Second, the fund flow risk premium is positively correlated with contempora-
neous unexpected flows. This indicates that the fund flow risk premium follows
the trading pattern in mutual funds—if mutual funds face redemptions (sales) due
to negative (positive) unexpected flows, they are forced to sell off (buy) stocks and
the contemporaneous fund flow risk premium is thus negative (positive)—lending
more support to the price pressure hypothesis.
   Third, the price pressure is larger and is exerted during a longer period when
unexpected flows have been negative, compared to when they have been positive.
These results relates to our third proposition, which we discuss in the following
section.

                                  20
                    is denoted
                   F t                         (6)                                                153
                   γ                                                                   -0.021(-0.20)  0.000
                        .
                    t
                                          Pos. Past Flows






                   t
            ε                                 (5)
                                                                                           1620.000
          +                                                            0.472**(2.39)
          U
             s
                                         Neg. Past Flows
            F F P
                 18
        16   −
         −    t
     t∑ =
               s

          ×
            6                        F
           β                        γ     (4)                                           315
                                                                                         (2.04)  0.000
         +                                                           0.233**
                . . .                                    Full Sample

       +
          U
             s

            F F P
               6
        4    −
         −    t
     t∑ =
                s                         Dependent variable:(3)
                                                                      0.043     0.139 0.115   1530.172
            ×                                         (5.08)(-2.41)-0.100(-0.46)-0.159(-0.81)(0.23)-0.169(-0.70)(0.58)(0.56)
             3                                      0.516***-0.649**
          β
         +                     Pos. Past Flows
          U
             s

            F F P  is the unexpected fund flow to hybrid and equity mutual funds in month
             3
         1    −  U t
         −    t
     t∑ =
                  s
                   F F P                     (2)                                               162
            ×                                         (3.91)-0.026(-0.07)-0.961*(-1.79)-1.197*(-1.88)(-2.28)(-2.29)-0.448(-1.45)-0.257(-0.96)  0.345
             2                                      1.059***             -1.091**-0.977**
Table 4: Relationship to lagged flowsβ
         +    and
                    t                        Neg. Past Flows
           U  t
                        has been normalized by its standard deviation. Columns 2 and 3 report results only for periods when the
           F F P           U
                         t
           ×
            1
          β
                        F F P
          +                           (1)                                       315
             0                                          (4.66)-0.058(-0.27)-0.542*(-1.79)-0.643*(-1.86)-0.420*(-1.78)(-1.97)0.055(0.36)(2.38)  0.263
           β                                  0.905***                 -0.340**  0.256**
                                        Full Sample
       =
            F t
           γ


                                                                   10)      13)      16)
                                                      1)      4)      7)
                                                   −    −    −
                                               −     −     −     t     t     t
                                                           t      t      t

                                                      3 to      6 to      9 to      12 to      15 to      18 to
                                     (unexpected)−     −     −     −     −     −
                       is the fund flow risk premium in month      t     t     t     t     t     t
                                                     t
                   Ft
                 γ

                                                     Lagged (Lagged (Lagged (Lagged (Lagged (Lagged (
                                               Fund flows                         ConstantObservationsR-squared
      Columns 1 to 3 in Table 4 reports results for the following regression:. . . whereas the expected increase in a stock’s excess return (in percentage points) for every one standard deviation increase in its FFB, holding the loadings on theFama-French-Carhart factors constant.cumulative unexpected flow over the previous 18 months were negative and positive, respectively. Columns 4–6 report the average risk premium on the fundflow factor for the full sample, when unexpected flows the previous 18 months have been negative, and when unexpected flows the previous 18 months havebeen positive, respectively. Robust standard errors were used to adjust for heteroscedasticity. t-stats are reported in parentheses.

                                     21
4.2.3 Test of proposition 3 (asymmetric price pressure)

Let us elaborate on the findings reported in Table 4. As we saw above, the risk
premium on the fund flow factor is negatively correlated with previous flows,
and this result is stronger when flows have been negative. In fact, if we look at
columns 5 and 6, we see that the average fund flow risk premium is significantly
positive when past flows have been negative, while it is negative but insignificant
for periods where past flows have been positive. Furthermore, the reversal effect
seems to be much more prominent when past flows have been negative, as indicated
by the higher coefficient on contemporaneous unexpected flows in that scenario.
The reversal is also slower when past flows have been negative, since we observe
a negative correlation as far back as five quarters before the observation date,
compared to only one quarter back when flows have been positive. Finally, the
explanatory power of lagged and contemporaneous flows on the fund flow risk
premium is higher when past flows have been negative. This all aligns with our
third proposition: The price pressure is asymmetric.
   Figure 4 sheds more light on the reversal patterns in response to different
degrees of flow. The graphs plot the risk premium on the fund flow factor for
each month relative to the observation date. Each observation is grouped into
one of six groups depending on the unexpected flows in the quarter preceding the
observation date. For example, the bottom 10% graph only includes observations
where the unexpected flows in the preceding quarter are among the lowest 10% in
the sample.
   As we can see, the reversal pattern only exists for the bottom 10% group.
Interestingly, the top 10% group shows a positive risk premium leading up to the
observation date, but no reversal afterwards. The middle groups all show little or
no reversal patterns, indicating that it is the extreme fund flows that are affecting
the pricing of fund flow risk the most.
   Compare the bottom 10% and the top 10% graphs in Figure 4 to the schematic
overview in Figure 2.B. We then see that these patterns correspond relatively well
to the lower and upper plots respectively—when flows have been negative we
observe a negative risk premium followed by a reversal and when flows have been
positive we observe the opposite, but the effect is lower in magnitude.
   In sum, these findings strongly support our third proposition and we have thus
found an explanation to the positive risk premium on the fund flow factor. In the
next section, we illustrate how these findings can be used to construct a trading
strategy based on fund flows.

                                  22
                   Bottom 50-25%                                   Top 50-25%
     3                                                  3


     2                                                  2


    F 1                                                           F 1
    γ                                                                    γ


     0                                                  0


      -1                                                              -1

      -5 0 5 10 15 20       -5 0 5 10 15 20
                         Relative month                                             Relative month

                   Bottom 25-10%                                   Top 25-10%
     3                                                  3


     2                                                  2


    F 1                                                           F 1
    γ                                                                    γ


     0                                                  0


      -1                                                              -1

      -5 0 5 10 15 20       -5 0 5 10 15 20
                         Relative month                                             Relative month

                   Bottom 10%                                    Top 10%
     3                                                  3


     2                                                  2


    F 1                                                           F 1
    γ                                                                    γ


     0                                                  0


      -1                                                              -1

      -5 0 5 10 15 20       -5 0 5 10 15 20
                         Relative month                                             Relative month

        Figure 4: Reversal patterns in response to different degrees of flow

The graphs plot the risk premium on the fund flow factor and its 90% confidence interval for each
month relative to the observation date. Each observation is grouped into one of six groups, based
on the unexpected fund flow in the preceding quarter: bottom 10%, bottom 10–25%, bottom
25–50%, top 50–25%, top 25–10% and top 10%. The unexpected fund flow is the residual in an
                                                        F
AR(3) model predicting fund flows based on lagged fund flows. γt is the expected increase in a
stock’s excess return, denoted in percent, for every one standard deviation increase in its FFB,
holding the loadings on the Fama-French-Carhart factors constant.

                                  23
4.2.4 Trading strategy

Section 3 showed that the premium on the fund flow factor is positively priced
on average, and Section 4.2.2 showed that it is negatively related to past flows.
What has yet to be demonstrated is the economic significance of these findings.
To this end, this section tests a simple, long-short strategy that takes directional
bets on the fund flow factor based on the pattern of past flows. The specification
and performance of the strategy are detailed below.

Specification

Each month, we sort stocks into equal-weighted decile portfolios based on their
fund flow beta. These portfolios are referred to below as portfolio 1 (comprising of
the lowest-FFB stocks) through 10 (comprising of the highest-FFB stocks). The
strategy has two phases:

Phase 1, “Active”: The strategy is long portfolio 10 and short portfolio 1.

Phase 2, “Passive”: The strategy is passive; it is not long or short in any port-
      folio (thus yielding a return of zero).

    The phase at month t is determined by the following ruleset:
             
                             ∑t−1      U
                             “Active” if   s=t−18 F F P s < 0
                phaset =
                     “Passive” otherwise

   This ruleset is motivated by the results from Section 4.2.3 and, specifically,
columns 5–6 of Table 4, which demonstrated that the premium on the fund flow
                                                                           12
factor is negatively associated with the direction of past flows.

Performance

Consider the following (generalized) multi-factor model:

                                            0           0             j           j
            Ri,t − Rf,t = αi + βi × F CTt  + . . . + βi × F CTt  + εi,t

. . . where Ri,t is the return of stock i in month t, Rf,t is the risk-free rate in month
                0              j
t, and F CTt  , . . . , F CT t are the return on j + 1 factor portfolios in month t.

  12
    The rules have deliberately been made very simple in order to increase the robustness of our
results. Alternatively, we could have based the rules on more precise prediction models, similar
to those in columns 2–3 of Table 4. However, it is impossible to do so without either introducing
look-ahead bias or severely limiting the sample period of the performance tests.

                                  24
   Let Rl be the return on the portfolio that the strategy is long and Rs be the
return on the portfolio that the strategy is short. Then, the population model of
the excess return on the strategy is:

                                          (  0     0)         0
           Rl,t − Rs,t = (αl − αs) +  βl − βs  × F CTt  + . . .
                                  (  j     j)          j
                         +  βl − βs  × F CTt  + (εl,t − εs,t)

                                 ?     ?0          0            ?j          j     ?
                   = α + β  × F CTt  + . . . + β  × F CTt  + εt (14)

    Table 5 reports the estimated parameter values of (14) for three different return
models: the CAPM, the Fama-French three-factor model, and the Fama-French-
                                                                           ?
Carhart four-factor model. As can be seen from columns 1–3, the ˆα are positive
and significantly different from zero on at least the 10% significance level across all
three specifications when we run the regressions on both phases simultaneously.
Thus, we can tentatively reject the null hypothesis that the strategy does not
                                                       ?
generate abnormal returns, i.e., that αl = αs ⇔ α = 0.
   The coefficients in columns 1–3 should be interpreted with some care, however,
as the betas are phase-dependent. In other words, the expected return on the
                                                                            ?
strategy need not be linear in factor returns, which could make the ˆα in columns
1–3 somewhat difficult to interpret. Therefore, to make sure that we do not make
any false inferences, columns 4–6 reruns the regressions on only the Active phase of
                     ?                                               13
the strategy. The ˆα  in these columns are of similar magnitude  and significance
         ?
as the ˆα in columns 1–3, thus confirming our previous results.
   As an additional performance appraisal, Figure 5 plots the excess return and
realized alpha of the strategy over time. Referring back to Figure 1, we note
two things: First, not surprisingly, the payoff of the strategy closely tracked the
premium on the fund flow factor over the sample period. Second, the strategy was
in its passive phase for most of the 1990s, indicating that fund flows followed an
upward trend during these years. Consequently, flow-induced price pressures were
presumably only very marginal throughout this period, which might explain why
the premium on the fund flow factor averaged close to zero at the time.
   In sum, we conclude that it is possible to construct a very simple long-short
strategy that capitalizes on the premium on the fund flow factor and thus yields
abnormal returns. Further, the abnormal returns appear to be of quite large eco-
nomic significance, with predicted monthly alphas ranging from 0.33% to 0.54%
depending on which return model that is used.

  13                           ?                   162
    The average four-factor ˆα  is now 0.911% × 332 ≈ 0.48%. It is thus marginally lower than
     ?
the ˆα  in column 3, suggesting that the return on the strategy is slightly convex with respect to
factor returns.

                                  25
        Table 5: Performance and risk exposures of the trading strategy

This table shows the performance and risk exposures of the strategy using three different return
models: the CAPM, the Fama-French three-factor model, and the Fama-French-Carhart four-
factor model. The strategy is as follows: Stocks are sorted into equal-weighted decile portfolios
based on their fund flow beta each month. The strategy has two phases: (1) “Active” and (2)
“Passive”. In the Active phase, the portfolio is long the 10th decile portfolio and short the 1st
decile portfolio. In the passive phase, the strategy is not long or short in any portfolio (and
thus yields a return of zero). The phase at month t is determined by the following ruleset: The
strategy is in the Active phase if the cumulative unexpected fund flow over the prior 18 months
has been negative. Otherwise, it is in the Passive phase. The unexpected fund flow is the residual
in an AR(3) model predicting fund flows based on lagged fund flows. Coefficients are denoted in
percent. Robust standard errors were used to adjust for heteroscedasticity. t-stats are reported
in parentheses.

                                Dependent variable: Rl − Rs
                    Phase: Active or Passive Phase: Active
                  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

 M 0.101* 0.097 0.024 0.181* 0.176* -0.022
                 (1.80) (1.42) (0.38) (1.82) (1.69) (-0.20)
 SMB 0.011 0.033 0.033 -0.063
                              (0.19) (0.59) (0.21) (-0.49)
 HML -0.014 -0.101 -0.104 -0.313
                              (-0.12) (-0.86) (-0.40) (-1.41)
 UMD -0.261*** -0.457***
                                            (-4.03) (-5.20)
 Constant 0.327* 0.332* 0.538** 0.662* 0.631* 0.911***
                 (1.87) (1.69) (2.50) (1.85) (1.91) (2.76)

 Observations 332 332 332 162 162 162
 R-squared 0.022 0.022 0.173 0.039 0.043 0.284

                                  26
                       A. Cumulative Rl−Rs                                   B. Cumulative realized alpha
     150                                                150

     100                                                100

     50                                                 50
   Percent                                                  Percent

     0                                                  0


     −50                                               −50
    1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015     1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                           Year                                                  Year

                            Active Passive                                            Active Passive

             Figure 5: Performance of the trading strategy over time

This figure plots the performance of the trading strategy over time. The strategy is as follows:
Stocks are sorted into equal-weighted decile portfolios based on their fund flow beta each month.
The strategy has two phases: (1) “Active” and (2) “Passive”. In the Active phase, the portfolio is
long the 10th decile portfolio and short the 1st decile portfolio. In the passive phase, the strategy
is not long or short in any portfolio (and thus yields a return of zero). The phase at month t
is determined by the following ruleset: The strategy is in the Active phase if the cumulative
unexpected fund flow over the prior 18 months has been negative. Otherwise, it is in the Passive
phase. The unexpected fund flow is the residual in an AR(3) model predicting fund flows based
on lagged fund flows. Panel A plots the cumulative excess return of the strategy. Panel B plots the
cumulative realized alpha of the strategy. The realized alpha is defined as the difference between
the strategy’s realized return and its expected return based on the Fama-French-Carhart four-
factor model using phase-dependent betas. The y-axes are denoted in percent.

Relationship to UMD

While outside the scope of this paper, one interesting observation with regard
to the risk characteristics of the strategy deserves mention: From column 6 in
Table 5, high-FFB stocks appear to load very negatively on the UMD factor.
This observation suggests that the fund flow factor and the momentum factor
may be related. This is, to some extent, expected: In the Active phase, high-FFB
stocks have been exposed to negative price pressures, therefore lowering their
prior 12-month return. As a result, they are more likely to be sorted into—and
thus correlate with—the “Down” portfolio (which the UMD factor is short) than
the “Up” portfolio (which the UMD factor is long), hence giving them a negative
loading on the UMD factor. Interestingly, this implies that the UMD factor should
perform relatively poorly following downturns in flow, as the Down portfolio then
may include underpriced, high-FFB stocks, whose prices are at risk of reverting.
This also appears to be the case: In results not shown, the return on the UMD
factor and its three-factor alpha are significantly lower (and insignificantly different
from zero) when the cumulative unexpected fund flow over the prior 18 months is
negative.

                                  27
   Taking the analysis one step further, these observations may offer a candidate
explanation for the pricing of the UMD factor: The UMD factor may—at least
in part—capture the momentum in price reversals of stocks that have previously
been exposed to negative, flow-induced price pressures. Thus, whereas such stocks
will load highly on the fund flow factor immediately following said price pressure,
they will load highly on the UMD factor when flows have been non-negative in the
                                                                          14
previous 12 months and their prices hence have started to revert.   As a result,
high-FFB stocks will perform well following negative past flows whereas high-
UMD stocks will perform well following positive past flows, which is exactly what
we observe in the data.

5 Conclusions

This study set out to investigate the pricing of fund flow risk in order to de-
velop the existing literature regarding the effect of institutional trading on asset
prices. Our main result is that stocks that comove with mutual fund flows earn
higher abnormal returns. In trying to explain this finding, we find that the ratio-
nal hypothesis—that mutual fund managers underweigh stocks with exposure to
fund flow risk—is not supported by the data. Instead, this phenomenon can be
explained by a hypothesis based on assumptions of an inefficient market. Specif-
ically, the positive risk premium on the fund flow factor comes from a reversal
effect that arises due to flow-induced price pressure from mutual funds. Finally,
this reversal effect is largest when there has been large unexpected shocks to the
economy.
   Some implications from our findings follow. Most important, our study, like the
works from e.g. Brennan (1993) and Cornell and Roll (2005), shows the importance
of taking institutional trading into account when developing asset pricing models.
Second, unlike their works, it shows that a fully rational view is not sufficient
when modeling the effect of institutional investors. Instead, care must be taken
to implement the fact that institutional traders are subject to constraints, such
as the risk of sudden redemptions, that may force them to act irrationally. As we
have seen, an investor that exploits this irrationality will earn an average monthly
alpha of 0.5%, which further emphasizes the economic importance of our findings.
   On a grander scale, this paper is about the pricing of different sources of
risk in the economy. Critically, our results suggest that fund flow risk is not a
priced risk factor in the sense that fund flows are partially correlated with the

  14
    Since reversals take longer than 12 months, as suggested in Sections 4.2.2–4.2.3, the premium
on the UMD factor will still be positive.

                                  28
marginal utility of any market participant. Rather, it is an expression of market
inefficiencies stemming from flow-induced price pressures. Consequently, it differs
from traditional risk factors, like market risk, in the critical sense that an asset
that loads highly on the fund flow factor should not be discounted at a higher
rate than an otherwise identical asset that has a lower loading on the fund flow
factor. Instead, rational investors should value both assets at the same dollar value.
Hence, while it would be possible to augment current multi-factor models with a
factor portfolio that proxies for “fund flow risk” (e.g., the return on the fund
flow strategy described in Section 4.2.4), it would be inappropriate to do so if the
purpose of the model is to estimate the required rate of return on an investment
               15
opportunity.
   The importance of understanding which risk factors that we should care about
cannot be overstated. Surely, one would allocate one’s wealth very differently if
cash streams were discounted using required rates of return that were derived from
the CAPM compared to if they were derived from a multi-factor model. Therefore,
the welfare consequences of mistaking a pattern in mispricings (e.g., that high-
FFB stocks on average are underpriced because of flow-induced price pressures)
for a priced risk factor (e.g., that high-FFB stocks have a lower price than other
stocks because open-end funds rationally underweigh stocks that comove with fund
flows) are tremendous—not only for individual investors but also for the economy
as a whole.
   Thus, we believe that future research should aim to continue to improve our
understanding of, and untangle the precise relationships between, the many pro-
posed but yet to be explained risk factors in the economy. For example, we saw in
Section 4.2.4 some evidence that the momentum factor could be related to fund
          16
flow risk.   Further, it is also conceivable that liquidity risk could be related to
fund flow risk, as fund flows should correlate well with changes in market-wide
liquidity. Curiously, P´astor and Stambaugh (2003) suggest that the liquidity and
momentum risk premia may be related. In extension, it could be that fund flow
risk, momentum risk, and liquidity risk all proxy for the same basic phenomenon.
If this is the case, and if the price pressure hypothesis holds, it could imply that
neither liquidity nor momentum risk—similar to fund flow risk—should be priced
risk factors to rational investors.

  15
    On the other hand, if the purpose is to evaluate the performance of an investment portfolio,
the argument becomes less clear-cut; given that it would be trivial to implement a fund flow
strategy—similar to the one described in Section 4.2.4—as a part of the portfolio, it may seem
appropriate to also control for the additional performance that such a strategy would yield.
  16
    We are not the first to suggest this connection; a relationship between flow-induced price
pressure and momentum has previously been proposed by, for example, Lou (2012).

                                  29
   To conclude, we hope that this paper has not only introduced yet another risk
factor but also offered a viable explanation for why it appears to be priced—and
why rational investors should not let it affect their investment decisions.

                                  30
References

Basak, Suleyman and Anna Pavlova (2013). “Asset Prices and Institutional In-
vestors”. American Economic Review 103.5, pp. 1728–1758.

Brennan, Michael J. (1993). “Agency and Asset Pricing”. Working Paper, Univer-
sity of California, Los Angeles.

Brennan, Michael J. and Feifei Li (2008). “Agency and Asset Pricing”. Working
Paper, University of California, Los Angeles.

Carhart, Mark M. (1997). “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance”. Journal
of Finance 52.1, pp. 57–82.

Cornell, Bradford and Richard Roll (2005). “A Delegated-Agent Asset-Pricing
Model”. Financial Analysts Journal 61.1, pp. 57–69.

Coval, Joshua and Erik Stafford (2007). “Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in
Equity Markets”. Journal of Financial Economics 86.2, pp. 479–512.

De Bondt, Werner F.M. and Richard Thaler (1985). “Does the Stock Market
Overreact?” Journal of Finance 40.3, pp. 793–805.

Edelen, Roger M and Jerold B Warner (2001). “Aggregate Price Effects of Insti-
tutional Trading: a Study of Mutual Fund Flow and Market Returns”. Journal of
Financial Economics 59.2, pp. 195–220.

Falkenstein, Eric G. (1996). “Preferences for Stock Characteristics as Revealed by
Mutual Fund Portfolio Holdings”. Journal of Finance 51.1, pp. 111–135.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1993). “Common Risk Factors in the
Returns on Stocks and Bonds”. Journal of Financial Economics 33.1, pp. 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth (1973). “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium:
Empirical Tests”. Journal of Political Economy 81.3, pp. 607–636.

Lou, Dong (2012). “A Flow-Based Explanation for Return Predictability”. Review
of Financial Studies 25.12, pp. 3457–3489.

P´astor, Luboˇs and Robert F. Stambaugh (2003). “Liquidity Risk and Expected
Stock Returns”. Journal of Political Economy 111.3, pp. 642–685.

                                  31
Shleifer, Andrei (1986). “Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?” The Journal
of Finance 41.3, pp. 579–590.

Teo, Melvyn and Sung-Jun Woo (2004). “Style Effects in the Cross-Section of
Stock Returns”. Journal of Financial Economics 74.2, pp. 367–398.

Warther, Vincent A. (1995). “Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows and Security Re-
turns”. Journal of Financial Economics 39.2-3, pp. 209–235.

                                  32