   Intermediary Asset Pricing and the
         Swedish Equity Market

          JAKOB BARKETORP DIRKE and CHARLES YE

                              May 2016

                          ABSTRACT

      Increasingly, the focus of asset pricing research has shifted from the average household
      to the more sophisticated financial intermediaries. Our paper is the first to introduce this
     notion to the Swedish equity market by testing two intermediary asset pricing models,
     one based on shocks to broker-dealer leverage, and the other based on the return on
     aggregate wealth together with shocks to the primary dealer capital ratio. While both
     these models outperform standard benchmark models on US financial markets, applied
     to the Swedish equity market, only the model based on broker-dealer leverage
     outperforms the benchmarks, with a total mean absolute pricing error of 6.8% per
      annum. Our results do not prove the validity of the model, but rather bring into question
     the validity of the standard benchmarks.

      Keywords: Financial intermediaries, Swedish equity market, asset pricing, leverage ratio

First and foremost, we would like to thank our thesis supervisor, Assistant Professor Francesco Sangiorgi at the
Department of Finance at the Stockholm School of Economics, for his support throughout the writing of this
thesis. We would also like to thank Thomas Olofsson at the Swedish National Debt Office, Jens Viklund at
Statistics Sweden, and their respective agencies for providing us with the data needed for our research.
Furthermore, we wish to thank Pehr Wissén at the Institute for Financial Research for offering valuable
insights into the Swedish financial intermediary sector. This paper was written as a bachelor thesis at the
Department of Finance at the Stockholm School of Economics.
Correspondence to: Jakob Barketorp Dirke: 23097@student.hhs.se; Charles Ye: 23005@student.hhs.se
                                    I. Introduction
In finance theory, asset pricing models are based on the representative investor’s marginal
value of wealth as a driver of asset prices. This is since the expected payoff of assets tomorrow
should be reflected in their prices today, and the payoffs will be discounted using a discount
factor that accounts for the representative investor’s marginal utility gained from the
uncertain payoffs in the future. Thus, assets which are expected to pay off well in future bad
states of the world, say in a recession (where the marginal value of wealth is high), should be
expensive today, whereas assets expected to pay off well only when the economy is good (and
the marginal value of wealth is low), should be cheap today. Historically, the representative
investor has been assumed to be the average household, and measuring their marginal value
of wealth should therefore provide us with the information to price any type of asset.
However, households have been presumed to fulfill a number of assumptions, for instance
that they do not face transaction costs, or that they are able to engage in complicated trading
strategies. When examining the households, it cannot be said that they live up to these
assumptions, and therefore, they may not prove to be the representative investor on which to
base the discount factor.
     Recently, financial research has suggested that, instead of regarding the average
household as the representative investor, one should start looking at financial intermediaries
and try to measure their marginal value of wealth instead, since the intermediaries live up to
these assumptions. Financial intermediaries include banks, stock-brokers, and even hedge
funds. We have decided to base our research on intermediary asset pricing in Sweden on two
papers: one by Adrian et al. (2014a), who use broker-dealers registered at the Federal Reserve
as the representative investor, and the other one is by He et al. (2016), who use primary
dealers to the Federal Reserve as representative investors. These two models represent two
different frameworks within intermediary asset pricing, the debt constraint and equity
constraint frameworks, respectively. The debt constraint framework entails falling levels of
leverage in bad times, whereas the equity constraint framework suggests the opposite.
     Our analysis is performed by running full sample, two-pass regressions as suggested in
traditional asset pricing literature. 21 portfolios are used as test assets, including portfolios
sorted on size and book-to-market (6), momentum (10), and industry (5). The objective of
including different portfolio sorts other than size and book-to-market is to increase power and
to address contemporary critique of traditional empirical methods. The performance of the
models are evaluated based on their total mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) on an annual
basis compared with standard CAPM and Fama-French three-factor benchmarks.
Benchmarks are matched in time with the two models for comparability. The total MAPE is

                                      1
used instead of adjusted R2 as our main tool of evaluation in order to address the large average

pricing errors across portfolio sorts. Our results suggest that an asset pricing model based on
shocks to intermediary leverage performs better than the traditional benchmarks with a total
annual MAPE of 6.8%, compared with 22.0% for the CAPM and 27.0% for the Fama-French
three-factor model, on the Swedish equity market. Reversely, a model based on the return on
aggregate wealth and shocks to the intermediary capital ratio performs in line with a total
annual MAPE of 26.9%, compared with 26.9% for the CAPM and 31.9% for the Fama-French
three-factor model. It should be emphasized that the performance of the two intermediary
asset pricing models cannot be compared with each other, since the sample periods do not
match. While statistically insignificant, our results seems to give credence to the debt
constraint framework within intermediary asset pricing theory. Since we are, to the best of
our knowledge, the first to test any intermediary asset pricing model on the Swedish market,
we do not have any previous research to directly compare our findings with.
     The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II outlines our research question,
Section III provides an introduction to the field of intermediary asset pricing, Section IV gives
a detailed overview of the data used in our analysis, including factor and portfolio
construction, the sources used, and descriptions of potential bias in our data, Section V
contains the empirical methods used and descriptions of the diagnostics, Section VI contains
the results from the cross-sectional and time-series regressions, Section VII discusses the
analysis and directions for further research, and finally, Section VIII concludes the paper.

                                II. Research question
The aim of this paper is to investigate the pricing power of two asset pricing models based on
financial intermediaries on a cross-section of Swedish stock returns. The first model is based
on shocks to intermediary leverage, and the second one on the return on aggregate wealth and
shocks to the intermediary capital ratio. Both models are separately tested against the CAPM
and the Fama-French three-factor model to measure their performance relative to these
benchmarks.

                          III. Theory & Previous Literature
Asset pricing models, such as the CAPM and the Fama-French three-factor model (henceforth
FF3), are based on the notion of investors’ marginal value of wealth being able to correctly
price assets. These investors are further assumed to fulfill a number of conditions, including
that they do not face transaction costs, have the competence to implement complicated
investment strategies, are continuously updating these strategies using estimations of the

                                      2
future, and that they are active in all markets. The typical representative investor used for
the calculation of the marginal value of wealth has been the average household, imposing the
aforementioned assumptions on them. This represents a problem, since the assumptions do
not even remotely hold up to scrutiny in the case of households. They do certainly face
transaction costs, in general do not have the competence to implement complicated trading
strategies, that are updated continuously and based on forward-looking estimates, and they
do not participate in all markets. This implies that the average household should not be the
representative investor, and their marginal value of wealth should not be the driver of asset
prices. Due to this mismatch between assumptions and reality, according to Adrian et al.
(2014a), another representative set of investors has been proposed; the financial intermediary.
Financial intermediaries are firms who serve as the middleman in financial transactions,
taking orders from investors to buy or sell securities, then finding a counterpart to the trade,
and finally executing the trade. The proposition of financial intermediaries as a more
representative investor is based on the fact that financial intermediaries fulfill the
assumptions of investors postulated by finance theory, and their marginal value of wealth
should therefore possess greater pricing power than the average household’s marginal value
of wealth. If financial intermediaries do in fact possess this ability, the question arises; what
aspect of the intermediary will capture the potential pricing power best? This question has
given rise to two separate sets of theories: the debt constraint and the equity constraint
frameworks.
     The debt constraint framework is based on the assumption that leverage levels of
intermediaries are constrained by either value-at-risk limits, which is proposed by Adrian &
Shin (2014), or by endogenous haircuts, which is proposed by Brunnermeier & Pedersen
(2009). For both of these suggested theories, in bad times, the leverage constraints tighten,
and the leverage levels are brought down by the fire-sales of assets, selling assets at a lower
equilibrium price. This indicates that leverage is pro-cyclical, and rises (falls) in good (bad)
times, and if this framework holds, will correspond to a positive price of leverage risk, since
assets that co-vary with intermediary leverage will pay off poorly in states where the marginal
value of wealth is high. The equity constraint framework, which is formalized in He &
Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013) and Brunnermeier & Sannikov (2014), works by taking into
consideration two effects arising from financial intermediaries being hit by adverse shocks in
their equity capital and reductions in their risk bearing capacity. The first effect is an increase
in the intermediaries’ leverage – when holding debt constant – due to a fall in asset value, and
the second is a subsequent fall in leverage due to intermediaries endogenously reducing their
debt. According to this framework, the first effect should outweigh the second one in

                                      3
equilibrium, yielding a net effect of increasing leverage ratios. Leverage should subsequently
be counter-cyclical, increasing in times of financial distress, and the price of capital ratio risk
positive, with a positive price of capital ratio risk being equivalent to a negative price of
leverage risk, and as such, the two frameworks stand in stark contrast to each other. On one
point, however, the two frameworks converge; the intermediaries should be engaging in active
balance sheet management, actively reducing debt in bad times, and while this is the only
effect on the intermediaries in the debt constraint framework, the equity constraint
framework, as mentioned previously, allows for an even larger relative reduction in equity
financing.
     Intermediary asset pricing was first empirically tested by Adrian et al. (2014a). The
authors derive a one-factor pricing model focusing on shocks to financial intermediaries’
leverage ratio (see Section IV for details), with US broker-dealers included in the Federal
Reserve Flow of Funds as intermediaries (the model will be denoted AEM henceforth, from
the authors: Adrian, Etula and Muir). The test of the AEM model’s pricing power is conducted
on the cross-section of returns on 25 size and book-to-market, 10 momentum, and 6 Treasury
bond portfolios over the sample period of 1968Q1 to 2009Q4. The results of the cross-sectional

analysis shows an adjusted R2 of 77% and a yearly total MAPE1 of 1.3% across all portfolios,

very much in line with four and five factor benchmarks. Moreover, the AEM model performs
better than the FF3 model when solely tested on size and book-to-market portfolios. The price
of risk is determined as positive, supporting the debt constraint framework and pro-cyclical
leverage, as discussed earlier. The model is further tested across a wider range of asset classes
in He et al. (2016). Additionally, this paper suggest an alternative two-factor pricing model
using the return on aggregate wealth, (equivalent to the market excess return, as shown in He
et al. (2016)), and shocks to the intermediary capital ratio (see Section IV for details) as
explanatory factors (the model will be denoted HKM henceforth, from the authors: He, Kelly
and Manela). These two factors should, together, capture the returns on intermediary wealth.
The intermediaries used for testing the HKM model are US primary dealers, which are the
trading counterparties of the New York Federal Reserve, over the sample period 1970Q1 to

2012Q4. The results show that the HKM model has an adjusted R2 of 45% and quarterly total

MAPE of 0.9% across asset classes, compared with an adjusted R2 of 38% and quarterly total

MAPE of 0.9% for the AEM model. However, the AEM model performs better than the HKM
model when only equity portfolios are used as test assets. The paper also finds a positive price
of capital ratio risk suggesting, contrary to Adrian et al. (2014a), that intermediary leverage

1
 MAPE is the mean absolute pricing error, see Section V for definition.

                                      4
is counter-cyclical. The puzzling results regarding prices of risk are attributed to the different
data sources and the different sets of financial intermediaries used in the analyses.
     A clear distinction exists between the two studies in terms of intermediary data used.
While Adrian et al. (2014a) rely on the balance sheet data of broker-dealers, which to a large
extent are subsidiaries of international bank holding companies, He et al. (2016) rely on the
balance sheet data of the entire holding companies as such. The decision to use the data of the
holding companies is motived by the notion of internal capital markets from corporate finance
literature. As suggested by Stein (1997) and Scharfstein & Stein (2000), financial shocks are
supposed to be diversified and transmitted across divisions within a conglomerate. Since
Swedish bank holding companies tend to be organized as one legal entity with several
divisions, rather than with subsidiaries for the different business units as in the US, the theory
is more likely to hold true in a Swedish setting. Even though de Haas & van Lelyveld (2010)
show that the internal capital markets exist for multinational banking corporations across
country borders, Cetorelli & Goldberg (2012) identifies a “home bias” in the activities of these
companies, towards domestic operations of the head office, suggesting that the Swedish bank
holding companies would provide a representative sample for factor construction in a Swedish
study.

                                    IV. Data
1. Broker-Dealer Leverage Factor
We define the leverage ratio of broker-dealers in accordance with Adrian et al. (2014a) as the
aggregate book value of assets divided by the aggregate book value of assets minus the
aggregate book value of liabilities:

                                                                                                             ∑ 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖                                𝑖,𝑡
               𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡 =
                                                          ∑ (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖 𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑖,𝑡)

Adrian et al. (2014a) defines the leverage ratio using financial assets and financial liabilities,
however, the data they use include non-financial items on the asset side of the balance sheet.
We will therefore be using the entire balance sheet data to construct our leverage ratio, with
another reason for using the entire balance sheet values being that we do not have access to
decomposed data over the entire sample period. We construct the variable by merging two
quarterly datasets collected from Statistics Sweden (Swe: Statistiska Centralbyrån), which in
turn receives its data from the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority (Swe:
Finansinspektionen). The full series is divided in two because the first series stopped being

                                      5
  4

  3

  2

  1

  0

  -1

  -2
                LevFac

                LogLev
  -3

  -4
  1985Q2 1988Q2 1991Q2 1994Q2 1997Q2 2000Q2 2003Q2 2006Q2 2009Q2
Figure 1. Leverage factor and log-leverage. We plot the leverage factor and the log-leverage of broker-
dealers over the timespan 1985Q2 to 2010Q2. The series are standardized to have zero mean and unit
variance. The shaded regions indicate OECD recessions in Sweden (downloaded from the St. Louis
Federal Reserve’s website).

published after 1996. One important thing to note is the translation of the concept broker-
dealer to Swedish, where in the past, the translation would be Fondkommissionär, whereas
today, there is a new legal term, Värdepappersbolag. This change of terms will, however, not
create any problems for our leverage factor, since the new term was introduced in the early
1990s, and this change occurs within our first dataset. The first dataset covers the period
1985Q1 – 1995Q4 and is collected from the quarterly publication “Statistiska Meddelanden –
Serie K, Kapitalmarknad del II” (published 1976-1997) from Statistics Sweden, whereas the
second dataset covers the period 1996Q1 – 2010Q2, and was provided to us directly by

Statistics Sweden due to confidentiality rules applying to the data2. This confidentiality

imposes a problem in that we are unable to observe which companies are included in the
sample. The dataset ends in 2010 due to the fact that after that point, there are no broker-
dealers required to report to the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority on a quarterly
basis, and there are therefore no more quarterly observations. Another important aspect with
our data in relation to the data used by Adrian et al. (2014a) is that our data do not contain
any securities divisions of banks, but rather only independent securities broker-dealers, since
in Sweden, the securities divisions of the banks are not separately identifiable entities.

2 The data provided only contain “Monetära Värdepappersbolag”. Another dataset containing “Icke-
Monetära Värdepappersbolag” exists from 2003 and forward, however, these companies will not be
included in our series due to them being very small and few in number.

                                      6
                                           Table I
   Broker-Dealer Leverage Growth is Uncorrelated with Other Explanatory Factors
This table presents the cross-correlation between a number of variables, namely the broker-dealer
leverage growth, the unadjusted leverage of broker-dealers, the excess market return (constructed using
the return on the OMXSPI and the return on 1-month Swedish Treasury bills), the Fama-French SMB
factor on the Swedish market (constructed from our size and book-to-market portfolios), and the Fama-
French HML factor on the Swedish market (constructed from our size and book-to-market portfolios),
see sub-section 4 for construction details. Data are from the period 1990Q3 to 2010Q2.

                                  Cross-Correlation AEM
                 LevFac Leverage RMkt SMB HML

LevFac 1
Leverage 0.62 1
RMkt 0.06 0.00 1
SMB -0.07 0.10 0.04 1
HML 0.01 -0.02 -0.28 0.25 1

     We construct the leverage factor (LevFac) which will be used in the model as the log
changes in the level of broker-dealer leverage:

                                         𝐿𝑒𝑣𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡 = Δln(𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡)

Note that we do not, as opposed to Adrian et al. (2014a), seasonally adjust the log changes in
leverage, simply because we do not find any seasonal component in our data. Quarterly
regression output and the seasonally adjusted leverage factor-series can be found in the
appendix, Table AI and Figure A1, for reference.
     In Figure 1, we show the time-series of broker-dealer leverage and the leverage factor,
where the shaded areas are OECD recessions. We can see large swings in leverage during the
2008 financial crisis and following the recession in the early 1990s, but no such movements
during the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000s. We can also observe a large drop
in leverage following the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which seems puzzling due to the limited
overall effect of this crisis on the Swedish market, however, it could potentially be due to
sector-specific contagion.
     In Table I, we show the cross-correlation between the leverage factor and the other
explanatory factors over the sample period used to evaluate the AEM model. We see that the
leverage factor is not highly correlated with any of the other explanatory factors, indicating
that the AEM model will explain different variation when we run our tests.

                                      7
2. Primary Dealer Market Capital Factor

The pricing model presented in He et al. (2016) is a two-factor model with a market factor of
excess market return and a market capital factor constructed from the market capital ratio of
primary dealers. We define the market capital ratio similarly to He et al. (2016) as follows:

                                                                                                 ∑ 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡
           𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡 =
                                                        ∑(𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡)

The ratio is constructed for the primary dealer sector by summing the market value of equity
and book value of liabilities (corresponding directly to the book value of debt used in He et
al. (2016)) for each holding company in the sector on a quarterly basis from 1998Q1 to 2015Q4,
with data collected from Compustat. Any missing values in the dataset are complemented
with raw data from the holding companies’ annual reports. All values are converted into
Swedish Kronor using exchange rate series from Thomson Reuters Datastream. The usage of
book value of liabilities is common in corporate finance as a proxy for the market value of
liabilities, which is unobserved. All data used are the most recent data available, thus book
values are collected at the end of each quarter and market values based on the share prices at
the last trading day in the quarter. The time series of market equity and book liabilities used
in the factor construction can be seen in the appendix, Figure A2. The set of primary dealers
used for the construction of the capital ratio are based on a list provided by the Swedish
National Debt Office (Swe: Riksgälden), which does not correspond to the publicly available
list published by the Swedish Riksbank. This second public list suffers heavily from inclusion
bias, since it classifies both primary and secondary dealers as “primary dealers”. Holding
companies are included based on a set of criteria including if the company has ever been listed,
and if the book and market values are available in the Compustat data. Moreover, the holding
companies’ country of domicile are taken into consideration to account for the “home bias”
of internal capital markets. Given these restrictions, we end up with a set of primary dealers

including the “Big 5” of Scandinavian banks: Danske Bank3, Nordea Bank, SEB, Svenska

Handelsbanken, and Swedbank. For the unadjusted list of primary dealers provided by the
Swedish National Debt Office, see the appendix, Table AII.

3 Danske Bank is not a Swedish bank, however, it is included due to the company’s very high
exposure to, and systemic importance in, the Swedish market.

                                      8
  5

  4

  3

  2

  1

  0

  -1

  -2

          MCFac
  -3
           CapRat

  -4
  1998Q1 2000Q1 2002Q1 2004Q1 2006Q1 2008Q1 2010Q1 2012Q1 2014Q1
Figure 2. Market capital factor and capital ratio. We plot the market capital factor and the capital ratio
of primary dealers over the timespan 1998Q1 to 2015Q4. The series are standardized to have zero mean
and unit variance. The shaded regions indicate OECD recessions in Sweden (taken from the St. Louis
Federal Reserve’s website).

     Using the market capital ratio previously defined, we construct the market capital factor
(MCFac), equivalent to the market capital ratio growth rate, which is used in our main
regressions. An AR (1) model is run to estimate the shock to the market capital ratio (u):

                 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡 = 𝜌0 + 𝜌𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡−1 + 𝑢𝑡

The estimated error term is then divided by the lagged market capital ratio to obtain the
market capital factor:

                                                                                               𝑢𝑡
                           𝑀𝐶𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡 =
                                                        𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑡−1

As theorized in Adrian et al. (2014a), this type of growth measure is more or less equivalent
to the log changes in market capital ratio, due to high persistence. This is supported by the
95% correlation between the market capital factor and the log change in market capital ratio,
which we find in our data.
     The capital ratio and the market capital factor are plotted for the entire time period from
1998Q1 to 2015Q4 in Figure 2, with OECD recessions as the shaded regions, and what we
observe is that the factor effectively captures the stock market boom and bust periods of the

                                      9
                                           Table II
    Primary Dealer Market Capital Factor is Correlated with Excess Market Return
This table presents the cross-correlation between a number of variables, namely the primary dealer
market capital factor, the unadjusted capital ratio of primary dealers, the excess market return
(constructed using the return on the OMXSPI and the return on 1-month Swedish Treasury bills), the
Fama-French SMB factor on the Swedish market (constructed from our size and book-to-market
portfolios), and the Fama-French HML factor on the Swedish market (constructed from our size and
book-to-market portfolios), see sub-section 4 for construction details. Data are from the period 1998Q1
to 2015Q4.

                                 Cross-Correlation HKM
                MCFac Capital Ratio RMkt SMB HML

MCFac 1
Capital Ratio 0.50 1
RMkt 0.47 -0.03 1
SMB 0.19 0.31 -0.09 1
HML -0.08 0.37 -0.51 0.08 1

dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, the 2008 financial crisis, and the European banking crisis in
2009-2012. However, this may be due to pure mechanics since the capital ratio is constructed
using the market value of equity.
     A cross-correlation analysis can be seen in Table II, which shows that the market capital
factor has a low correlation with the SMB and HML factors from the FF3 model, however,
we observe a relatively high correlation of 47% between the market factor and the market
capital factor. This may prove problematic since both variables are included as independent
variables in our main regression, following the model configuration suggested in He et al.
(2016). Specifically, the high correlation may result in multicollinearity in the time series
regression. While multicollinearity does not affect the consistency of the estimates per se, it
increases the standard errors and decreases the precision of the estimates, making them more
sensitive to the realization of error terms in the sample. The driving force behind this is the
weight of the market equity of the Swedish banks in the Swedish stock market index OMXSPI
used in our market factor construction. We can also observe a strong negative correlation of -
51% between the market factor and the HML factor. Similarly, a high correlation between
these factors is found in Fama & French (1993).

3. Comparison of the Two Types of Intermediaries
Both Adrian et al. (2014a) and He et al. (2016) discuss the cyclical nature of the leverage and
capital ratios of the different intermediaries, as in Section III. In Table III we present the
correlation between leverage growth and asset growth for broker-dealers, and the correlation
between capital ratio growth and asset growth for primary dealers. For the debt constraint
framework to be supported, the intermediaries should display a positive and significant

                                      10
                                           Table III
     Broker-Dealer Leverage is Pro-Cyclical, Primary Dealer Capital Ratio is not
This table presents the correlation between the broker-dealer leverage growth and broker-dealer asset
growth, as well as the correlation between the primary dealer market capital ratio growth and the
primary dealer market asset growth. Data are from the period 1985Q1 to 2010Q2 (broker-dealer) and
1998Q1 to 2015Q3 (primary dealer).

                                          Correlation
              Broker-Dealer Leverage Growth with    Primary Dealer Capital Ratio Growth
                       Asset Growth                      with Asset Growth
r                           0.83 0.20
p -value                      0.00                                    0.45

correlation between leverage growth and asset growth, indicating reductions in debt levels in
times of market contraction (implying a negative and significant value for the correlation
between capital ratio growth and asset growth). For the broker-dealers, this is exactly what
we observe, with a highly significant, positive correlation between leverage growth and asset
growth of 0.83, which indicates that they act within a debt constraint framework. For the
primary dealers, on the other hand, we observe a weak, positive correlation between capital
ratio growth and asset growth, and their relationship is far from significant, thus not allowing
us to draw any definite conclusions regarding the constraint framework in which the primary
dealers act. Another thing to notice is the fact that the capital ratio for the primary dealers is
calculated using the market value of equity, which is something that the companies have more
limited control over. For the graphical representation of the correlations, see the appendix,
Figure A3.
    Table IV presents the correlations between our two intermediary factors. What we
observe is that neither the two different intermediary factors, nor the unadjusted leverage
and capital ratios, are correlated with each other, indicating that they will not explain the
same variation.

4. Test Assets & Benchmark Factors
The assets used to test the models are 21 Swedish equity portfolios, of which 6 are size and
book-to-market sorted portfolios following Fama & French (1992), 10 momentum sorted
portfolios following Carhart (1997), and 5 industry sorted portfolios following Fama & French
(1997). We use momentum and industry sorted portfolios in addition to the size and book-to-
market portfolios to avoid the potential issues discussed in Lewellen et al. (2010). Further
discussion regarding the choice of portfolios is found in Section V. Our use of portfolios rather
than individual stocks are based on two aspects: first, we want to avoid the errors-in-variables

                                      11
                                        Table IV
                    AEM and HKM Factors are Uncorrelated
This table presents the correlation between the broker-dealer leverage factor and primary dealer market
capital factor, as well as the correlation between broker-dealer leverage and primary dealer market
capital ratio. Data are from the period 1998Q1 to 2010Q2.

                                          Correlation

              Broker-Dealer Leverage Factor with     Broker-Dealer Leverage with Primary
              Primary Dealer Market Capital Factor            Dealer Capital Ratio

r                           -0.17 -0.04
p -value                     0.35 0.80

problem, as suggested in Jagannathan et al. (2010), and second, we want to stay true to the
original tests of intermediary asset pricing.
     To construct our portfolios, we collect book and market data for all companies with
Sweden as the country of incorporation between 1987Q1 and 2016Q1 from Compustat, and
remove all financial companies following the approach of Fama & French (1992). We
construct the portfolios ourselves since no portfolio returns are publicly accessible for the
Swedish market. For all portfolios, any company with less than 24 months of consecutive
trading data is removed, in order to avoid any false returns being included in the portfolios
(we can observe several cases of clearly incorrect observations in the Compustat data).
Furthermore, all companies with negative book equity are removed due to the lack of
interpretive value of the book-to-market ratio if it is negative, and to avoid including
observations that contain errors made by Compustat. Additionally, for a company to be
included in a portfolio, we require it to have data observations for all values used to place the
company in a portfolio. For the size and book-to-market portfolios, we combine the values of
all different types of shares outstanding at all times, e.g. class A and B shares, in order to

achieve the most correct market value for the companies4. At the end of June of year t, we

form the portfolios by first dividing the companies into two equally large groups based on the
market capitalization as of the end of December of year t – 1, and then for each of the two size
groups, we divide the companies into three groups based on the ratio of the value of book
equity as of the end of December of year t – 1, and the market capitalization as of the end of
December of year t – 1. The three groups are formed of the 30% with the highest book-to-
market ratio, the middle 40%, and the lowest 30%, respectively.
    For the momentum portfolios, we follow the approach of Carhart (1997), ranking
companies each month based on the total return over the period 12 months to 1 month before

4
 For the minor inclusion bias effects of preferred shares on market capitalization in the portfolio
sorting, see the appendix, Table AIII.

                                      12
portfolio construction, and the companies are then divided into 10 equal groups based on their
return over the period. The industry portfolios are formed using the GICS classification
downloaded from Compustat. The GICS classification system includes 10 industry as the
topmost classification level, but we combine the different industries into 5 portfolios
(Consumer, Manufacturing, High-Tech, Health, and Other) following Fama & French (1997),
in order to ensure that there are return observations for each of the portfolios for every time
period in which we run our tests. The returns for the portfolios are calculated quarterly as the
sum of the market capitalization-weighted returns for the portfolio constituents. Only the
return of the main listed share class is used, in the case of several listings for the same
company. We adjust these into excess returns using the quarterly return on 1-month Swedish
Treasury bills, downloaded from the Swedish Riksbank’s website.
     It should be acknowledged that the Compustat data suffer from biases, especially
exclusion bias in the early periods of the sample, where the number of companies included is
only around 28, and heavily skewed towards big companies. This is not the correct number of
companies listed in Sweden, which we have confirmed with data from the Stockholm Stock
Exchange. The full time series of number of companies in our sample can be found in the
appendix, Figure A4. One thing to note, however, is the fact that the Compustat data do not
discriminate between the different stock markets that exist in Sweden, and therefore provide
complete data for the later part of our sample.
     We construct the benchmark factors as follows: The excess market return is based on the
quarterly return on the OMXSPI downloaded from the Nasdaq OMX Nordic website, which
is then adjusted using the quarterly return on 1-month Swedish Treasury bills, downloaded
from the Swedish Riksbank’s website. The SMB and HML factors are constructed in
accordance with Fama & French (1993) as follows:

                                      𝑅𝑆𝐻 + 𝑅𝑆𝑁 + 𝑅𝑆𝐿    𝑅𝐵𝐻 + 𝑅𝐵𝑁 + 𝑅𝐵𝐿
                       𝑆𝑀𝐵 =                  −
                               3         3

                                                 𝑅𝑆𝐻 + 𝑅𝐵𝐻    𝑅𝑆𝐿 + 𝑅𝐵𝐿
                             𝐻𝑀𝐿 =            −
                                   2      2

RSH, RSN, and RSL are the returns of the small portfolios, RBH, RBN, and RBL are the returns
of the big portfolios, and RSH and RBH are the returns of the portfolios with high book-to-
market ratio, and RSL and RBL are the returns of the portfolios with low book-to-market ratio.

                                      13
                             V. Empirical Approach
Similar to the approach suggested in Cochrane (2005) section 12.2, we test the models
proposed using a standard two-pass regression corresponding to formula 12.9 and 12.10, but
allowing for a free intercept, with a full sample time-series regression of portfolio returns for
each asset i = 1, …, N on the vector of risk factors (f) as our first regression:

                           𝑒            ′
                            𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑐𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖,𝑓𝐟𝑡 + ∈𝑖,𝑡 , 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁, 𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇

For the second stage cross-sectional regression, we regress the average portfolio returns on the
estimated factor betas from the time-series regression:

                                    𝑒              ′
                                    𝐸[𝑅𝑖,𝑡] = 𝑎 + 𝛽𝑖,𝑓𝜆𝑓 + 𝜉𝑖, 𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑁

The cross-sectional regression yields the prices of risk () and the zero beta excess returns (a)
or equivalently the average pricing error. The individual pricing errors are the error terms (𝜉i)
from the cross-sectional regression, corresponding to the residuals in the sample. While more
dynamic approaches exist, such as dynamic asset pricing models (as proposed by Adrian et al.
(2014b)), we follow the original approach employed by Adrian et al. (2014a) and He et al.
(2016) for comparability.
     According to Adrian et al. (2014a), “A good pricing model features an economically small
and statistically insignificant intercept (a), statistically significant and stable prices of risk (λ)
[…] and individual pricing errors (ξi) that are close to zero.” The sizes of the pricing errors are
captured by two measures, the total mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) across portfolios

                 1
defined as (|𝑎| +   Σ|ξ|) by Adrian et al. (2014a) and the adjusted R2 from the cross-sectional
                    𝑁

regression. While the total MAPE focuses less on outliers than the adjusted R2, it accounts for

the constant, or equivalently, the average pricing error across all portfolios. This adjustment
is economically important, since the intercept should, theoretically, be equal to zero. As we
wish to account for the potentially high constants, which are seen for equity portfolios in
Adrian et al. (2014a), we use the total MAPE as our main diagnostic of the models’ pricing

performances.5 A potential way to circumvent this issue would be to run the cross-sectional

regression with the restriction of no free intercept, i.e. formula 12.10 in Cochrane (2005).
However, this approach is only reasonable to pursue when the intercept is small and

5
 The issue seems to be mitigated in US data by adding more asset classes. This is not pursued in our
study since it would be a divergence from our research question and due to the lack of data. For
further detail, see Section VII.

                                      14
insignificant, as the constant is simply assumed away. Moreover, by forcing the regression to
draw a line through the origin, we would mechanically force the prices of risk to be positive
in most cases, which does not necessary have to hold true. For the analysis of the different

                                                                   1
sets of portfolio sorts, the constant is dropped, yielding a MAPE of (  Σ|ξ|). The evaluation of
                                                                             𝑁

the MAPE constitutes a minimization problem and adjusted R2 constitutes a maximization

problem, as the second measure decreases with the increasing sum of squared residuals (SSR).
To correct for cross-sectional correlation in the second stage regression we report the Fama-
MacBeth t-statistics, as developed in Fama & MacBeth (1973), in addition to the standard t-
statics, which are White-corrected for heteroscedasticity.
     The cross-sectional regressions for the different set of risk factor are run using equity
portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market (6), momentum (10) and industry (5) as test
assets. The regressions are run on all 21 equity portfolio returns at the same time over the
same time period, i.e. we are always dealing with balanced datasets. The more challenging
momentum and industry portfolios are included both to address the otherwise small sample

size and small variation in factor betas as well as to accommodate for the 1st prescription in

Lewellen et al. (2010). The authors claim that there exists a rationale in expanding the set of
test assets beyond size and book-to-market portfolios, in order to address the issue of
mechanically pushing up the pricing power of proposed factors, if they are highly correlated
with the Fama-French factors. Our different sets of risk factors for the AEM model
(f = LevFac) and HKM model (f = [RMkt, MCFac]) are tested against the CAPM (f = RMkt) and
the FF3 model (f = [RMkt, RSMB, RHML]) benchmarks. The time-series data used are quarterly
from 1990Q3 to 2010Q2 for the AEM model and from 1998Q1 to 2015Q4 for the HKM model.
Since both models are tested over the entire available time span, it should be emphasized that
the performance of the models cannot be compared with each other, but only with benchmark
models within the same sample periods.

                                VI. Empirical Results
In Table V, we present our main empirical results. For all of our models, we test them against
all of the 21 equity portfolios simultaneously. Panel I presents the cross-sectional prices of risk,
and Panel II presents test diagnostics for each of the models. We test the two models based
on financial intermediaries against the CAPM and FF3 benchmarks, matching the sample
periods for the regressions to ensure comparability with the benchmarks.
     Starting by looking at the first time period, we can see that both of the benchmark
models generate very large and statistically significant intercepts, with the CAPM at 18.9%
per annum and the FF3 model at 24.7% per annum, which can be contrasted with the

                                      15
intercept for the AEM model, which is at 2.9% per annum. These large intercepts for the
benchmark models are mainly due to the negative price of risk for the market factor in both
cases, which in turn suggests that investors should receive less return the more risk that they
bear, directly contradicting the theory behind the CAPM. Similar patterns with large
intercepts and negative prices of risk can be observed on the US equity markets, as in Adrian
et al. (2014a). The AEM model, on the other hand, generates a positive price of risk for the
leverage factor, which gives credence to the theory of debt constraints in financial
intermediaries, since the economic interpretation of this positive price of risk is that the assets
that broker-dealers will sell off in fire-sales carry higher risk, and on average will generate
higher returns. These results are found again in Panel II, where the total MAPE of the
benchmark models are 22.0% and 27.0% per annum for the CAPM and FF3 model,
respectively. Comparing these numbers with the total MAPE of the AEM model, which is at
6.8% per annum, we can see clearly that the AEM model outperforms the benchmark models
by yielding an approximately 3 – 4 times lower absolute pricing error. Important to note is
that while the AEM model outperforms the benchmark models by far, generating a total
annual MAPE of 6.8% represents a large mispricing. Subsequently, we cannot infer that the
AEM model performs well, but only that the benchmark models perform very poorly. The

adjusted R2 for the benchmark models are higher (52% and 66% for the CAPM and FF3

model, respectively) than the 32% achieved by the AEM model, however, as stated in Section

V, in the case of large cross-sectional intercepts, the adjusted R2 provides a less informative

measure of model performance.
     Moving to the second time period, we can see that all of the models, benchmarks and the
intermediary asset pricing model alike, generate very large cross-sectional intercepts, with the
CAPM and HKM at 23.9% per annum and the FF3 at 29.9% per annum. Once again, this is
driven by the negative prices of risk for the market factor, which is present in all three of the
models, indicating model misspecification. Furthermore, the price of risk for the market
capital factor in the HKM model is negative as well, and while it is not significantly so from
a statistical point of view, this still gives some further credence to the debt constraint
framework within financial intermediaries. This is due to the fact that capital ratio factors
and leverage factors should display opposite signs on the price of risk within this framework,
as is what can be observed, since the two measures are simply the inverse of each other. In
Panel II, we see that the total MAPEs of the three models are fairly equal, with the CAPM

                                     16
                                       Table V
                             Pricing the Equity Portfolios
This table presents the cross-sectional pricing results for the 6 size and book-to-market, 10 momentum
and 5 industry portfolios. The models are all estimated as E[Re ] = a + β'  λ + ξ . CAPM denotes the
                                                                                              i,t              i, f  f      i
capital asset pricing model, FF3 denotes the Fama-French three-factor model, AEM the intermediary
leverage pricing model from Adrian et al. (2014a) and HKM the intermediary capital pricing model
from He et al. (2016). Panel I reports the prices of risks with heteroscedasticity adjusted t-statistics
and Fama-MacBeth t-statistics from the estimations in both time samples. Panel II reports the test
diagnostics, including mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) by portfolio group, the total MAPE, as well
as the adjusted R2 for each model in both samples. Data are quarterly from the periods 1990Q3 to
2010Q2 in the first sample (AEM) and 1998Q1 to 2015Q4 in the second sample (HKM). Returns and
risk premia are reported in percent per annum i.e. quarterly percentages multiplied by four.

                                        Panel I: Prices of Risk
                             1990-2010                              1998-2015
              CAPM FF3 AEM CAPM FF3 HKM

Intercept 18.86 24.74 2.88 23.86 29.86 23.86
t -stat 7.79 10.02 2.67 12.23 11.50 11.96
t -FM 2.51 3.02 0.44 4.02 4.51 4.02
LevFac 95.15
t -stat 4.52
t -FM 1.54
MCFac -8.34
t -stat -1.56
t -FM -0.64
Market -14.92 -20.16 -17.32 -23.25 -17.33
t -stat -7.55 -10.75 -10.47 -9.22 -10.03
t -FM -1.61 -2.05 -2.08 -2.64 -2.08
SMB 5.07 8.04
t -stat 4.99 6.80
t -FM 1.34 2.07
HML -1.29 4.94
t -stat -0.77 2.95
t -FM -0.21 0.87

                                     Panel II: Test Diagnostics
                            1990-2010 1998-2015
MAPE CAPM FF3 AEM CAPM FF3 HKM

Size B/M 4.74 0.89 4.05 3.78 1.19 3.76
Mom 6.10 3.26 3.81 3.29 2.68 3.28
Industry 4.84 1.78 3.81 1.64 1.89 1.68
Intercept 18.86 24.74 2.88 23.86 29.86 23.86
Total 22.01 26.97 6.76 26.90 31.92 26.89
  2
R                0.52 0.66 0.32 0.68 0.85 0.67

                                      17
and HKM model generating a total MAPE of 26.9% per annum in both cases, and the FF3

model producing a total MAPE of 31.9% per annum. The adjusted R2 for the CAPM and

HKM model are very similar as well, with the CAPM at 68% and the HKM model at 67%,

and the FF3 model achieving an adjusted R2 of 85%. Despite the high adjusted R2 of the

models, the remarkably high total MAPEs will only allow us to conclude that none of the
three models in the second time period, benchmarks and the intermediary model alike, have

little explanatory power.6

     Looking at the individual MAPEs for the different types of portfolios in Panel II, we can
see that the FF3 model performs better than the AEM model, with the momentum portfolios
being the ones where the two models are most similar, only differing around 0.5% per annum,
and the size and book-to-market portfolios being the ones where the FF3 model performs the
best with a MAPE of only 0.9% compared with the leverage factor pricing model’s 4.1% per
annum. For the second time period, the FF3 model generates lower MAPEs for the size and
book-to-market portfolios as well as the momentum portfolios (1.2% and 2.7%, respectively),
than the CAPM and the HKM model do (3.8% and 3.3% for the size and book-to-market
portfolios and the momentum portfolios, respectively), with the CAPM and HKM model
producing almost identical average individual pricing errors for all portfolio sorts. For the
industry portfolios, on the other hand, the CAPM and HKM model produce slightly lower
MAPEs than the FF3 model (1.6% for the CAPM and HKM compared to 1.9% for the FF3
model).
    In Figures 3 and 4, we plot the realized mean returns versus the predicted expected
returns for the AEM and HKM models, and compare them with the FF3 benchmark. What
we can see in Figure 3 is that the AEM model is not able to capture the returns of the test
portfolios, with deviations from the 45-degree line. We can further see that FF3 model
performs much better, however, it has a hard time pricing some of the momentum portfolios,
especially Mom 8, just as the AEM has. Interestingly, this portfolio is a past relative winner,
however, the mean realized return is negative, going against the concept of momentum.
Looking at Figure 4, we see that the FF3 model generates a better fit around the 45-degree

line than does the HKM model, essentially corresponding to the difference in R2. No particular

portfolio stands out as hard to price for the FF3 model, whereas the HKM model seems to
have a hard time pricing Mom 4 & 8, as well as the small size and book-to-market portfolios.

6 Out of curiosity, we also create our own model using the two intermediary factors, and test it during
the overlapping period against the FF3 model. The results can be found in the appendix, Table AIV.

                                      18
      12
                     AEM
      10
                                                S1B1S1B2Mom 10
                                                      Health      Consumer
       8                                                             Mom 9Mom 6
                                                         S1B3
       6
                                                   S2B3
                                                         ManufacturingS2B2
       4                                                         Other

       2
                                                          S2B1Mom 5
                                                       Mom 7
       0
                                                                        High Tech
        -2
                                               Mom 3    Mom 8
        -4
    Realized Mean Return             Mom 2     Mom 4
        -6

        -8

      -10
                   Mom 1
      -12
        -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                                        Predicted Expected Return

      12
                           FF3
      10
                                                             Mom 10     S1B1S1B2
                                                                   Consumer Health
       8                                                 Mom 6    Mom 9
                                                             S1B3
       6
                                                   S2B3
                                                             ManufacturingS2B2
       4                                                     Other

       2
                                                S2B1 Mom 5
                                                     Mom 7
       0
                                    High Tech
        -2
                                                 Mom 3        Mom 8
        -4
    Realized Mean Return    Mom 2        Mom 4
        -6

        -8

      -10
          Mom 1
      -12
        -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
                                        Predicted Expected Return

Figure 3. Realized and predicted mean returns: AEM model vs Fama-French three-factor benchmark.
We plot the realized mean return for our 21 equity portfolios (6 size and book-to-market portfolios, 10
momentum sorted portfolios, and 6 industry portfolios) against the mean predicted expected returns
from the estimation (E[Re ] = a + '  + ξ ), using the AEM model (f = LevFac) and the Fama-French
                                      i,t             i, f  f      i
three-factor model (f = [RMkt, RSMB, RHML]), as well as a 45-degree reference line. Data are quarterly,
but the returns are expressed in percent per year (quarterly returns multiplied by four). The sample
period is 1990Q3 to 2010Q2.

                                      19
      18
                     HKM
      16                                                              S1B3
                                                           S1B2Mom 10
      14
                                               S1B1
      12                                                          S2B3
                                                        Mom 9
                                                                      Consumer
      10                                                       Mom 6Health
       8                                                           Other
                                                                      Manufacturing
                                                             S2B2
                                                            Mom 7
       6                                               Mom 5
       4                                                       Mom 8
                                        S2B1
       2
       0                     High Tech
       -2                                      Mom 3
    Realized Mean Return
       -4                     Mom 2
                                            Mom 4
        -6
        -8
      -10
           Mom 1
      -12
        -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
                                        Predicted Expected Return

      18
                           FF3
      16                                                                        S1B3
                                                                   Mom 10S1B2
      14
                                                                   S1B1
      12                                                    S2B3
                                                           Mom 9
                                                                       Consumer
      10                                                       Mom 6Health
        8                                              Other
                                                                Manufacturing
                                                         S2B2
                                                        Mom 7
       6                                          Mom 5
       4                                                   Mom 8
                                          S2B1
       2
        0                        High Tech
       -2                                 Mom 3
     Realized Mean Return
       -4           Mom 2
                                     Mom 4
        -6
        -8
      -10
               Mom 1
      -12
        -12 -10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18
                                        Predicted Expected Return

Figure 4. Realized and predicted mean returns: HKM model vs Fama-French three-factor benchmark.
We plot the realized mean return for our 21 equity portfolios (6 size and book-to-market portfolios, 10
momentum sorted portfolios, and 6 industry portfolios) against the mean predicted expected returns
from the estimation (E[Re ] = a + '   + ξ ), using the HKM model (f = [R  , MCFac]) and the
                                      i,t              i, f  f      i                                                Mkt
Fama-French three-factor model (f = [RMkt, RSMB, RHML]) , as well as a 45-degree reference line. Data
are quarterly, but the returns are expressed in percent per year (quarterly returns multiplied by four).
The sample period is 1998Q1 to 2015Q4.

                                      20
    In Table VI, we present the pricing errors for each of our test portfolios for the AEM,
HKM, and FF3 models. First of all, we can see that all of the models have a hard time pricing
the high tech and consumer portfolios, with no model having an absolute pricing error of less
than 2% per annum. Despite this, all models (except the AEM) perform remarkably well on
the industry portfolios, with low individual MAPEs, which is interesting considering the
statement made by Lewellen et al. (2010), claiming that asset pricing models generally
perform poorly on industry sorted portfolios. The HKM model especially stands out on the
industry portfolios, with the lowest average MAPE of 1.7%, compared with the FF3 model’s
1.9%. It is important to note, however, that the size of the intercepts are not taken into
account here, indicating that these pricing errors do not capture the entire mispricing the
models produce.
    Table VII presents the results of the time-series regressions of the AEM and HKM models
in their respective time samples on individual portfolios. We would like to emphasize that the
time-series results provide little relevant information. What may seem puzzling in terms of

low R2 in the range of 0% – 2% for the AEM model is actually expected, since the factor used

in our regression is not a return on a tradable asset. The low R2 is thus caused by noise, and

should not be interpreted as the actual explanatory power of the model. Reversely, since the

HKM model includes a return on a tradable asset, the market portfolio, its R2 in the time-

series regression lies in the range of 44% – 87%. The low significance of the estimated leverage
factor and market capital factor betas could potentially be problematic (further reduced by
multicollinearity in the case of the HKM model). Problems arise if the betas are wrongly
estimated and the wrongly estimated betas due to realization align perfectly in the cross-
sectional regression, thereby increasing the explanatory power of the model in the sample.
While the possibility of such a unique case exist, it is far from likely and should therefore not
affect our analysis.

                        VII. Discussion & Further Research
While our investigation fails to provide strong evidence in favor of intermediary asset pricing,
the results yields some empirical support for the debt constraint framework within the realm
of intermediary asset pricing. This calls for further investigations into alternative sets of
intermediaries. Interestingly, it is theorized in He et al. (2016) that the best set of
intermediaries within the debt framework, in terms of fitting the descriptions, is hedge funds.
However, constructing a testable factor of hedge fund leverage is associated with a major
difficulty in a Swedish setting, since no public data are accessible regarding the sector’s level
of leverage.

                                      21
                                        Table VI
                     Pricing Errors: Pricing the Equity Portfolios
This table presents the average realized excess returns and the sample version of cross-sectional pricing
errors, i.e. ξ = E[Re ] − a – β' λ , across portfolios in percent per annum for the Fama-French three-
                    i             i,t                i,f  f
factor benchmark and the AEM and HKM models in their respective samples. The table also includes
the mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) for the models in the different portfolio sorts. The information
corresponds directly with Table V. Returns and risk premia are reported in percent per annum i.e.
quarterly percentages multiplied by four.

                               Size and Book-to-Market Portfolios
                             1990-2010                              1998-2015
                 E[Re] FF3 AEM E[Re] FF3 HKM

S1B3 6.86 1.12 2.20 15.67 -0.75 3.13
S1B2 9.52 0.26 7.55 15.28 0.69 6.00
S1B1 9.61 0.43 8.00 13.05 0.31 8.35
S2B3 5.39 2.89 2.89 11.95 3.41 0.75
S2B2 4.45 -0.36 0.05 7.24 -1.53 -3.13
S2B1 1.37 -0.29 -3.59 2.79 0.46 1.18
MAPE 0.89 4.05 1.19 3.76

                                  Momentum Portfolios
                             1990-2010                              1998-2015
                 E[Re] FF3 AEM E[Re] FF3 HKM

Mom 10 9.62 3.69 6.46 15.18 2.38 4.88
Mom 9 8.38 1.46 0.78 11.29 1.79 2.78
Mom 8 -3.31 -9.45 -7.46 3.77 -4.60 -6.29
Mom 7 0.84 -2.63 -3.25 6.69 -1.78 -3.26
Mom 6 8.38 4.30 0.53 10.08 1.32 1.39
Mom 5 1.61 -1.66 -4.55 6.08 1.37 -0.87
Mom 4 -4.82 -3.21 -5.40 -5.18 -5.66 -8.57
Mom 3 -3.22 -5.20 -4.48 -1.77 -1.78 -3.74
Mom 2 -4.83 0.85 -2.09 -4.07 3.41 0.10
Mom 1 -10.94 -0.10 -3.09 -11.00 -2.67 -0.97
MAPE 3.26 3.81 2.68 3.28

                                       Industry Portfolios
                             1990-2010                              1998-2015
                 E[Re] FF3 AEM E[Re] FF3 HKM

Consumer 9.11 3.50 3.96 10.71 -2.91 -2.64
Manufacturing 4.54 -0.49 0.75 7.79 0.15 -1.82
High Tech -0.61 3.21 -6.57 -0.18 2.28 3.29
Health 8.85 0.80 7.54 9.99 0.18 0.05
Other 4.11 0.89 -0.25 8.50 3.92 -0.61
MAPE 1.78 3.81 1.89 1.68

                                      22
                                        Table VII
                              Time Series Regression

This table presents the results from time-series regressions Re = c +'  f +   of excess return on the
                                                                                i,t    i     i, f t     i,t
leverage factor, f = [LevFac] for the AEM model as well as excess return on the excess market return
and market capital factor, f = [RMkt, MCFac] for the HKM model. The t-stats are adjusted for
heteroscedasticity and the R2 for the two models unadjusted for degrees of freedom in both cases for
consistency. Data are quarterly from the periods 1990Q3 to 2010Q2 in the first sample (AEM) and
1998Q1 to 2015Q4 in the second sample (HKM). For convenience leverage betas (i, LevFac) and market
capital betas (i, MCFac) are multiplied by 100.

                                Size and Book-to-Market Portfolios
                        1990-2010 1998-2015

                                              2                                                 2
                LevFac t -stat R        MCFac t -stat Mkt t -stat R

S1B3 1.86 0.33 0.20% 15.66 1.74 0.58 5.50 44.00%
S1B2 -0.96 -0.23 0.06% 12.62 1.64 0.78 8.71 63.11%
S1B1 -1.34 -0.30 0.10% 4.59 0.55 1.08 11.21 71.00%
S2B3 -0.40 -0.10 0.01% 4.66 0.68 0.71 8.80 60.83%
S2B2 1.60 0.46 0.26% 0.73 0.13 0.78 11.45 71.11%
S2B1 2.19 0.59 0.26% -18.85 -3.22 1.37 20.16 86.87%

                                  Momentum Portfolios
                        1990-2010 1998-2015

                                              2                                                 2
                LevFac t -stat R        MCFac t -stat Mkt t -stat R

Mom 10 0.30 0.06 0.01% 3.10 0.03 0.78 6.52 44.25%
Mom 9 4.96 1.12 1.78% 1.98 -2.42 0.98 10.85 64.79%
Mom 8 1.33 0.40 0.13% 0.21 -1.37 0.84 10.42 64.35%
Mom 7 1.27 0.35 0.10% 0.94 -0.74 0.83 8.77 56.99%
Mom 6 5.22 1.25 2.07% 1.73 -0.89 0.90 13.82 77.01%
Mom 5 3.45 0.77 0.75% 0.64 -0.61 1.00 9.13 59.32%
Mom 4 -2.42 -0.41 0.25% -2.31 0.92 1.13 7.99 57.08%
Mom 3 -1.70 -0.33 0.13% -1.58 -0.50 1.29 10.48 66.14%
Mom 2 -5.90 -0.98 1.02% -2.38 1.51 1.51 9.24 65.19%
Mom 1 -11.27 -1.26 1.99% -4.44 0.59 1.90 7.84 55.16%

                                        Industry Portfolios
                        1990-2010 1998-2015

                                              2                                                 2
                LevFac t -stat R        MCFac t -stat Mkt t -stat R

Consumer 2.38 0.83 0.56% 2.10 -2.35 0.67 9.99 60.75%
Manufacturing 0.96 0.24 0.08% 1.24 1.53 0.78 11.86 74.83%
High Tech 3.23 0.58 0.31% -1.53 -3.01 1.72 15.37 78.96%
Health -1.66 -0.41 0.25% 1.86 2.91 0.69 7.67 62.11%
Other 1.55 0.28 0.17% 1.42 1.46 0.78 6.39 49.01%

                                      23
     Similar issues exist with the data of asset classes other than equity in Sweden. Since the
asset pricing models tested are supposed to be able to price all assets, the models should ideally
be tested across a wide range of asset classes similar to He et al. (2016). The lowest hanging
fruit would subsequently be to include government bond portfolios sorted in accordance with
Fama (1984), however, it has been indicated by the Swedish National Debt Office that such
data are hard to collect. Moreover, the trading volume of more sophisticated financial
instruments in Sweden has remained low until recent years. Another possible expansion of the
test would be to look at cross-country evidence, with possible candidates of inclusion being
the Eurozone and/or the United Kingdom. While the Eurozone lacks the agglomerated stock
exchange needed for the test configuration, we want to acknowledge the fact that the UK
remains a highly interesting setting for a similar test with its distinct stock market and
country-specific implementation of monetary policy, but such an analysis lies beyond the
scope of this paper.
     Looking past the standard econometric approach used in our analysis, more
sophisticated methods could be implemented both to address the potential weaknesses in the
assumptions made as well as to address the critique of standard approaches in asset pricing

stipulated in Lewellen et al. (2010). While we have taken the 1st prescription into

consideration, we do not include other suggestions, such as confidence intervals for R2, as

suggested in the 5th prescription, since the R2 fails to address the large average cross-sectional

pricing errors. Similarly, a 2-test of the individual pricing errors, as proposed in section 12.2

of Cochrane (2005), will not add explanatory value for the performance of the models.
Potential improvements of the analysis are adjusted standard errors in accordance with
Shanken (1992) to address for the fact that factor betas from the times-series regression are
estimated, or a horse race configuration, as suggested in section 13.3 of Cochrane (2005), to
test the different sets of factors against each other. It should however be noted that the main
objective of this paper is to provide, to the best of our knowledge, the first out-of-country
sample test of intermediary asset pricing and not a well performed exercise in econometrics
for its own sake.

                                  VIII. Conclusion
The overall conclusion of our analysis is that the AEM model, with its low total MAPE of
6.8%, performs better than the standard benchmark models in the Swedish equity market,
while the HKM model, with its high total MAPE of 26.9%, performs in line with the
benchmarks. However, bearing in mind the eloquent remark of Cochrane (2005) that "many
models are wrong, but still pretty darn good", the AEM model's outperformance does not

                                      24
suggest that the AEM model is correct in its configuration, but only that the CAPM and
Fama-French three factor models are questionable benchmarks. Furthermore, our analysis
contributes to the existing literature on intermediary asset pricing by adding new empirical
evidence, suggesting that the debt constraint framework, and thereby pro-cyclical leverage,
may hold true, as seen in the positive price of risk for the leverage factor and negative price
of risk for the market capital factor. We hope our results will provide some guidance for future
asset pricing research on the Swedish market, by shifting the focus from households to the
more sophisticated financial intermediaries.

                                      25
                             References

Adrian, T., Etula, E. & Muir, T., 2014a. Financial Intermediaries and the Cross-Section of
Asset Returns. Journal of Finance, LXIX(6), pp. 2557-2596.

Adrian, T., Moench, E. & Shin, H. S., 2014b. Dynamic Leverage Asset Pricing, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 625.

Adrian, T. & Shin, H. S., 2014. Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk. Review of Financial
Studies, 27(2), pp. 373-403.

Brunnermeier, M. K. & Pedersen, L. H., 2009. Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity.
Review of Financial Studies, 22(6), pp. 2201-2238.

Brunnermeier, M. K. & Sannikov, Y., 2014. A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial
Sector. American Economic Review, 104(2), pp. 379-421.

Carhart, M. M., 1997. On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of Finance,
LII(1), pp. 57-82.

Cetorelli, N. & Goldberg, L. S., 2012. Banking Globalization and Monetary Transmission.
Journal of Finance, LXVII(5), pp. 1811-1843.

Cochrane, J. H., 2005. Asset Pricing. Revised ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

de Haas, R. & van Lelyveld, I., 2010. Internal Capital Markets and Lending by
Multinational Bank Subsidiaries. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19(1), pp. 1-25.

Fama, E. F., 1984. Term Premiums in Bond Returns. Journal of Financial Economics,
Volume 13, pp. 529-546.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 1992. The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns. Journal
of Finance, XLVII(2), pp. 427-465.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 1993. Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 33, pp. 3-56.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 1997. Industry Costs of Equity. Journal of Financial
Economics, 43(2), pp. 153-193.

Fama, E. F. & MacBeth, J. D., 1973. Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests.
Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), pp. 607-636.

He, Z., Kelly, B. & Manela, A., 2016. Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence from Many
Asset Classes, Working Paper, NBER Working Paper no. 21920.

He, Z. & Krishnamurthy, A., 2012. A Model of Capital and Crises. Review of Economic
Studies, Volume 79, pp. 735-777.

He, Z. & Krishnamurthy, A., 2013. Intermediary Asset Pricing. American Economic Review,
103(2), pp. 732-770.

Jagannathan, R., Skoulakis, G. & Wang, Z., 2010. The Analysis of the Cross-Section of
Security Returns. in: Y. Aït-Sahalia & L. P. Hansen, ed. Handbook of Financial
Econometrics: Applications. Amsterdam, North-Holland: Elsevier, pp. 73-134.

Lewellen, J., Nagel, S. & Shanken, J., 2010. A Skeptical Appraisal of Asset Pricing Tests.
Journal of Financial Economics, 96(2), pp. 175-194.

                                      26
Scharfstein, D. S. & Stein, J. C., 2000. The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets: Divisional
Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment. Journal of Finance, LV(6), pp. 2537-2564.

Shanken, J., 1992. On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models. Review of Financial Studies,
5(1), pp. 1-33.

Stein, J. C., 1997. Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources.
Journal of Finance, LII(1), pp. 111-133.

                                      27
                          Appendix

                I. Seasonal Adjustment of the Intermediary Leverage Factor
Table AI presents the results from performing a quarterly seasonal dummy regression on the
log changes in broker-dealer leverage, in accordance with the seasonal adjustment made by
Adrian et al. (2014a). What we can see is that the seasonal components do not provide any

explanatory value for the changes in leverage over our sample period, with the adjusted R2 at

0%, and none of the seasonal dummies provide significant results at the 10% level. In Figure
A1 we plot the leverage factor with and without seasonal adjustment. Here, we can see the

low R2 and non-significant estimates in action, where the seasonally adjusted series almost

perfectly follows the unadjusted series. Note that we do not use an expanding window
regression to estimate our regression coefficients, as in Adrian et al. (2014a), but since we do
not receive significant results using the full sample period, running an expanding window
regression will not change the interpretation of our results. Instead, it may even skew the
leverage factor series due to the model falsely identifying a seasonal pattern in the early data
simply due to realization of the error terms. Our results can be contrasted with the results
found by Adrian et al. (2014a), where we find no seasonal component, and they find strong
evidence for seasonal components in the data. While this may seem puzzling, there is no
theoretical rationale for broker-dealers displaying seasonal patterns in their leverage.

                                    II. Primary Dealers
Table AII presents a list of primary dealers provided to us by the Swedish National Debt
Office. As opposed to the list of primary dealers that He et al. (2016) uses, our list contains
quite a few non-listed companies, as well as a combination of Swedish, Nordic, and non-Nordic
companies of very varying size, which led us to making the adjustments to the list for the
factor construction outlined in Section IV. Figure A2 plots the market capitalization, book
liabilities, and the sum of the two series for the time period 1997Q4 to 2015Q4, for the primary
dealers included in our study. One interesting thing to note in the data is the development of
libailities over the sample period; between 1997 and 2008, there seems to be almost constant
growth, however, after the financial crisis, the growth stops, and liabilities stay more or less
the same up until 2015. This effect is most probably due to regulatory changes for the financial
sector following the financial crisis, and the companies included in our primary dealer sample
will have been affected by these regulatory changes. On the other hand, this should not affect
the viability of the pricing model, since this is the expected direction of causality.

                                      28
                            III. Intermediary Leverage Cyclicalilty
In Figure A3, we show the cyclicality of broker-dealer leverage and primary dealer capital
ratios. This is a graphical representation of Table III, and what we can see is that the broker-
dealer leverage growth and asset growth are closely and positively correlated, lining up very
neatly in an upward-sloping line. The primary dealers, however, do not display the same
relationship, with the observations scattered, indicating that the net of the two effects within
the equity constraint framework mentioned in Section III cannot be determined.

                                        IV. Test Assets
Figure A4 compares the number of companies included in our sample from which we construct
our test portfolios to the number of companies reported to be listed on the Stockholm Stock
Exchange, as well as the World Bank’s reported number of companies listed in Sweden in
total. In the beginning of the sample, our data suffer from clear exlcusion bias, with only ~28
companies included. However, in the later parts of the sample, our data contain more
companies than both of the other sources, which is due to our sample containing companies
listed on all different exchanges, including smaller, independent exchanges such as
Aktietorget and the Nordic Growth Market (NGM). Further, Table AIII shows the preferred
shares listed on Swedish exchanges as of 2015-05-01. We can see that the vast majority of
companies with preferred shares outstanding are real estate companies, which will be excluded
from our test portfolios. Due to this very small number of preferred shares in our sample, the
possibility of achieving skewed measures of market capitalization due to the relatively high
market value of a preferred share compared with a common share will be minimal.
Furthermore, there is no reliable way (except for manual adjustments) to remove the
preferred shares from the Compustat data, since no differentiation is made between common
and preferred shares.

                      V. Combining the AEM and HKM Models
Table AIV presents the results from combining the two intermediary factors in one model,
denoted LevCap, over the overlapping period 1998Q1 to 2010Q2. Tests are run in exactly the
same way as outlined in Section V, with the vector of risk factors being f = [LevFac, MCFac].
We run these tests to explore their combined exploratory value, since as we saw in Table IV,
the two factors are uncorrelated, and should therefore explain different variation. However,
since the method used is asymptotically valid in the time-series dimension, the short time-
series data is far from optimal. Here, just as in Table V, the CAPM and Fama-French three-

                                      29
factor models generate extremely large intercepts in the cross-sectional regression, which in
turn drives up the total MAPE (24.6% for the CAPM, and 29.7% for the Fama-French three-
factor model). While the performance of the LevCap model in terms of MAPE is better
compared to the two benchmark models, the total MAPE is still very large at 16.4% per

annum, indicating poor model performance. The adjusted R2 for the models also point in the

direction of poor performance of the LevCap model, with the model only achieving a result of
45%, compared to 69% for the CAPM and 86% for the Fama-French three-factor model. Once
again, just as in Table V, we can see that the price of risk is negative for the market capital
factor, at -16.9%, which will drive up the intercept. In the case of further research on this
topic, we would like to propose using the leverage ratio for the primary dealers, since our main
results support the debt constraint framework, which implies that the change in leverage
ratios is the correct measure of funding conditions, and thus what should correctly price
financial assets. However, as is discussed in Section VII, the most interesting area for future
research would be to identify the representative financial intermediary, rather than looking
across the sector.

                                      30
                                      Table AI
              Broker-Dealer Leverage Shows No Signs of Seasonality
This table presents the estimates, p-values, and R2, of a quarterly seasonal dummy regression of the
log changes in Broker-Dealer leverage. The model is estimated as ln(Leveraget) = 0 + Q2Q2 +
Q3Q3 + Q4Q4 + t. Data are quarterly over the period 1985Q1 to 2010Q2.

                              Quarterly Dummy Model

                           2
                   R         Constant Q2 Q3 Q4

Estimate 0.08 -0.15 -0.04 -0.14
p -value 0.38 0.13 0.74 0.31
  2
R               0.00

                                     31
  4

  3

  2

  1

  0

  -1

  -2

                 LevFac
  -3
                   Seasonally Adjusted LevFac

  -4
  1985Q2 1988Q2 1991Q2 1994Q2 1997Q2 2000Q2 2003Q2 2006Q2 2009Q2

Figure A1. Broker-Dealers: leverage factor and seasonally adjusted leverage factor. We plot
the leverage factor based on Adrian et al. (2014a), as well as the seasonally adjusted leverage factor.
The seasonally adjusted leverage factor is the sample correspondent of the error term, t = Leveraget
- (0 + Q2Q2 + Q3Q3 + Q4Q4). The series is standardized to display zero-mean and unit variance.
Data cover the period 1985Q2 to 2010Q2.

                                     32
                                      Table AII
                              List of Primary Dealers
This table presents the primary dealers to the Swedish National Debt Office in the auctions of
government bonds, the historical names as well as the current holding company. Furthermore, the
current domicile, whether or not the primary dealer was listed, and the time span in which the
company acted as a primary dealer is presented. The primary dealers listed in bold font are the ones
used to construct the market capital factor.

                                      Primary Dealers
                                              Current Holding
                          Historical Name                Domicile Listed Years
                                           Company
Aragon Aragon SWE No 1996
Barclays Capital Barclays Capital UK Yes 2007-Current
Calyon Bank Indosuez Crédit Agricole FR Yes 1996-1997
Danske Bank Markets Danske Bank Markets Danske Bank DK Yes 1996-Current
Handelsbanken Markets Handelsbanken Markets SHB SWE Yes 1996-Current
JP Bank JP Bank Ålandsbanken SWE No 1996-1999
JP Morgan JP Morgan US Yes 1998-2000
Midland Midland HSBC UK/HK Yes 1996-1998
Nordea Nordea SWE Yes 1996-Current
                       Nordbanken SWE
                        Unibank DK
Nykredit Bank Nykredit Bank DK No 2011-2015
Penser Penser SWE No 1996-1998
Royal Bank of Scotland Royal Bank of Scotland UK Yes 1996-Current
                       ABN Amro NL
                   Alfred Berg Transferator SWE
Salomon Smith Barney Salomon Smith Barney Citigroup US Yes 1999-2002
SEB SEB SWE Yes 1996-Current
Swedbank Swedbank SWE Yes 1996-Current
                    Föreningssparbanken SWE
United Securities United Securities HQ AB SWE Yes 1996
Öhman Öhman SWE No 1996-2008

                                     33
     25

      20                 Market Equity
                                   Liabilities
                           Market Assets
     15

    Value (SEKT)10

      5

      0
      1997Q4 1999Q4 2001Q4 2003Q4 2005Q4 2007Q4 2009Q4 2011Q4 2013Q4 2015Q4

Figure A2. Market equity, book liabilities and market assets for primary dealers. We plot the
market equity, book liabilities and market assets (defined as the sum of market equity and book
liabilities) for the primary dealers used to construct our market capital factor. Data are quarterly
and cover the period 1997Q4 to 2015Q4.

                                     34
       1,5

       1

       0,5

       0

    Leverage Growth
       -0,5
                                                                                                           First Series

                                                                                          Second Series
         -1

       -1,5
         -1 -0,5 0 0,5 1
                                                   Asset Growth
                                    a) Broker-Dealer
      6

      4

      2

      0

     Capital Ratio Growth
        - 2

        - 4

        - 6
       - 1 0 1 2 3 4
                                                  Asset Growth
                                 b) Primary Dealer

Figure A3. Broker-dealer leverage and primary dealer capital ratio cyclicality. We plot the
leverage growth versus the asset growth for broker-dealers, as well as the market capital ratio growth
versus the market asset growth for primary dealers. Broker-dealer data cover the period 1985Q2 to
2010Q2 (the first series cover 1985Q2 to 1995Q4, and the second series cover 1996Q1 to 2010Q2),
while primary dealer data cover the period 1998Q1 to 2015Q3. In b), both series are multiplied by
10 for convenience.

                                     35
     500

     400

     300

     200
    Number of Companies

                                                               Compustat
                                                                  World Bank
     100
                                                                   Stockholm Stock Exchange

       0
        1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

Figure A4. Number of companies in portfolios. We plot the number of companies listed in Sweden
at year-end according to Compustat, World Bank, and the Stockholm Stock Exchange. Data are
yearly over the period 1985-2015.

                                     36
                                         Table AIII
          List of Companies with Preferred Shares Outstanding as of 2015
This table presents the companies listed in Sweden which have preferred shares outstanding as of
2015-05-01. Bolded firms represent the ones which will be included in our portfolios. Data have been
collected from the Avanza Bank website.

          Companies with Preferred Shares Outstanding as of 2015-05-01
                                                    Industry

Fastighets AB Balder Real estate
Ratos Investment
Corem Property Group Real estate
Eniro Information
FastPartners Real estate
Hemfosa Fastigheter Real estate
Klövern Real estate
Sagax Real estate
SAS Airline
Victoria Park Real estate
Akelius Residential Real estate
ALM Equity Real estate
Amasten Holding Real estate
Ginger Oil Oil/Energy
K2A Knaust & Andersson Real estate
Prime Living Real estate
Tobin Properties Real estate

                                     37
                                  Table AIV
  Pricing the Equity Portfolios: Combining Leverage and the Market Capital Ratio
This table presents the cross-sectional pricing results for the 6 size and book-to-market, 10
momentum and 5 industry portfolios. The models are all estimated as E[Re ] = a + β'  λ + ξ . CAPM
                                                                                                             i,t             i, f  f      i
denotes the capital asset pricing model, FF3 denotes the Fama-French three-factor model, LevCap
a model combining the intermediary leverage factor from Adrian et al. (2014a) and the intermediary
market capital factor from He et al. (2016). Panel I reports the prices of risks with heteroscedasticity
adjusted t-statistics and Fama-MacBeth t-statistics from the estimations in both time samples.
Panel II reports the test diagnostics, including mean absolute pricing error (MAPE) by portfolio
group, the total MAPE, as well as the adjusted R2 for each model in both samples. Data are quarterly
from the periods 1998Q1 to 2010Q2. Returns and risk premia are reported in percent per annum i.e.
quarterly percentages multiplied by four.

                                  Panel I: Prices of Risk
                          CAPM FF3 LevCap

                    Intercept 21.34 27.65 11.63
                     t -stat 12.72 19.30 3.43
                    t -FM 2.97 3.15 1.81
                   LevFac 86.54
                      t -stat 1.42
                    t -FM 1.07
                  MCFac -16.90
                      t -stat -1.34
                    t -FM -1.03
                    Market -17.61 -23.02
                      t -stat -10.97 -15.86
                    t -FM -1.68 -1.98
                 SMB 8.21
                      t -stat 5.37
                    t -FM 1.75
                HML 5.06
                      t -stat 2.53
                    t -FM 0.63

                               Panel II: Test Diagnostics
                MAPE CAPM FF3 LevCap

                    Size B/M 3.07 1.34 6.03
                   Mom 4.20 2.64 4.38
                    Industry 1.58 1.87 3.81
                    Intercept 21.34 27.65 11.63
                    Total 24.59 29.74 16.35
                         2
                  R           0.69 0.86 0.45

                                     38