STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of Finance
649 Degree Project in Finance
Spring 2019

               The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters:
                     The Missing Piece of the Puzzle?

             Majed Habash, 23970 David Öhlund, 24020

                        ABSTRACT

This paper examines the value premium puzzle in Sweden for the period 2002 - 2016 and attempts to explain the
puzzle by accounting for time-varying risk exposure with the inclusion of a proxy for financial disasters risk. The
value premium is one of the most persistent financial anomalies and the reasons for its existence have been a hot
topic for debate over the past years, with more recent research suggesting that it is a form of compensation for
higher exposure to harsh economic downturns, or disasters. We elect to study this possibility empirically, through
the conditional CAPM framework using the method presented by Petkova & Zhang. Firstly, we show that the
value premium puzzle disappears around the time of the financial crisis and actually inverts post-crisis. We argue
that this inversion is mainly due to the effects of financial restrictions which emerged during the crisis and the
consequences to firms’ capital structures. Secondly, and more importantly, we show that the inclusion of a disaster
proxy in the conditional CAPM, the iTraxx credit default swap index, allows for the conclusion of disaster risk
being priced into the value premium with our results going in the right direction in capturing the HML portfolio
returns and explaining the movements in the portfolio beta.

                               Acknowledgements:
       We would like to extend our gratitude to Jungsuk Han for his guidance and input

Supervisor: Jungsuk Han
J.E.L CLASSIFICATION: G01, G12, G14
KEYWORDS: The Value Premium, Disasters, Time-varying Risk

Author contact information:
Majed Habash, 23970@student.hhs.se
David Öhlund, 24020@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents

1. Introduction 1
2. Literature Survey 3
             2.1 Factor Models 3
              2.2 International Applications of Factor Models 3
             2.3 The Value Premium 3
              2.4 Disasters 4
3. Data and Methodology 7
       3.1 Data 7
       3.2 Methodology 8
4. Results 13
       4.1 The Premium 13
              4.1.1 Pre-Recession 14
             4.1.2 Recession 14
              4.1.3 Post-Recession 15
       4.2 Expected Market Risk Premium 17
       4.3 Beta Sorting and Sensitivity 18
       4.4 Conditional Market Regressions 19
      4.5 HML Betas and Explanatory Power 20
5. Implications and Conclusions 23
Reference List
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

1. Introduction
Value stocks, or firms with high book to market values, comparatively outperform growth
stocks, or firms with low book to market values, (Rosenberg et. al., 1985; Fama & French,
1992) despite similar betas. This phenomenon, the value premium, has been one of the most
persistent anomalies in finance and was made famous by Fama & French through the HML
factor incorporated in their three-factor model (Fama & French, 1992; Fama & French, 1993).
We find that in the Swedish sample from 2002 to 2016, the monthly HML portfolio return is
0.41% (t = 1.59) and the monthly abnormal return, the CAPM alpha, is 0.22% (t = 3.08).
       The reason for the premiums existence remain subject to dispute among researchers,
where some believe that a viable explanation is time-varying risk exposure (Petkova & Zhang,
2005), the idea that risk of value-minus-growth strategies is high in bad times and low in good
times, while others argue from more behavioral standpoints (Lakonishok et. al., 1994; DeBondt
& Thaler, 1987). We adopt the first time-varying risk viewpoint, and add a proxy for disaster
risk, the iTraxx index, based on more recent research which suggests that incorporating the
probability of financial disasters goes in the right direction in explaining the risk premium, as
value stocks are more exposed to the disaster risk than growth stocks (Bai et. al, 2019).
        Our paper studies the value premium puzzle pre-, during, and post- the financial crisis
of 2008, where we find that the HML CAPM alpha is large and significant pre-crisis (α =
0.95%, t = 10.15), insignificantly different from 0 during the crisis (α = 0.06%, t = 1.70),
and in fact, negative post-crisis (α = −0.22%, t = −2.21). We attribute this variation in the
premium to the changes in firms’ capital structures during the subprime crisis (Bliss et. al.,
2015) with the more leveraged firms becoming financially distressed and thus failing to hoard
cash like their peers. This failure to internally finance, during the supply shock to the capital
markets, has strong negative effects on the returns of the HML portfolio (Lee et. al., 2014)
mainly due to the innate higher financial risk of value firms (Cao, 2015), which subsequently
leads to a lower premium. Investors receive lower risk compensation with the previously higher
financial leverage acting as a major driver of the premium (Cao, 2015). The investment
irreversibility factor, as laid out in Zhang’s fundamental model (Zhang, 2005), plays a role in
the variation seen within portfolio returns during the subprime crisis but through different
channels than previously suggested (Cao, 2015).
       We then continue to present our main finding, which is the fact that accounting for
disasters helps in explaining the value premium puzzle. Replicating Petkova and Zhang’s
framework (Petkova & Zhang, 2005), we find significant explanatory power when accounting

                                                                                 1
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

for time-varying risks with the conditional market regressions being able to capture a lot of
variability in the returns. This is seen both in the higher predicted market exposure (through the
higher beta values during periods of financial distress) and in the significant and positive beta
premium sensitivities produced in our tests. After adding the iTraxx variable, two results
emerge. First, we find that the HML portfolio has a significant and positive beta premium
sensitivity indicating a large time-varying risk exposure when accounting for the added disaster
risk and second, that the inclusion of our credit default swap index, acting as a disaster proxy,
improves both the variability captured in the conditional market regressions and in significantly
explaining the movements within the HML portfolio betas (t = −2.20). These results confirm
the theoretical framework that Bai et. al. presented in their paper in a practical manner and
indicate that disaster risk is, in fact, priced into the HML portfolio returns.
        This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the relevant previous literature
and our contributions, Section 3 discusses the data and our empirical methodology, Section 4
shows our results and analysis, and Section 5 concludes the paper and discusses the implications
of our findings.

                                                                                 2
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

2. Literature Review
2.1 Factor Models
When Kenneth French and Eugene Fama first quantified the HML factor and created their three-
factor model (Fama & French, 1992; Fama & French, 1993) they started with the simple
observation that two classes of stocks, small caps and stocks with high book-to-market values,
tend to outperform the market as a whole. Since their paper in 1992, the pair have continued
their studies with their three-factor model, as presented in their original paper, explaining over
90% of the diversified portfolio returns, with the CAPM average (within their sample) being
closer to 70% (Fama & French, 1993). Traditional models, such as the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM,
have often received criticism for failing to properly capture the variation in asset returns with
Fama and French (Fama & French, 1993) pointing out that the average return of US common
stocks show little relation to the beta of both the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM (Sharpe, 1964; Lintner,
1965) and the consumption CAPM (Breeden, 1979).

2.2 International Applications of Factor Models
The factor model approach that Fama and French established throughout their series of
published papers have been applied to multiple geographical datasets, including United
Kingdom (via University of Exeter), Germany (via The Technical University of Munich),
Switzerland (via The University of St. Gallen) as well as Sweden (via The Stockholm School
of Economics/Swedish House of Finance). Fama and French themselves contributed by
performing multiple tests on international (non-US) markets in order to study what drives
returns throughout different geographies (Fama & French, 1998; Fama & French, 2011). In
their international studies, Fama and French conclude that the value premium is size dependent
and decreases as firms get larger (Fama & French, 2011).

2.3 The Value Premium
Lu Zhang (Zhang, 2005) proposes that the costly reversibility, or at times even irreversibility,
of capital investments, acts as a main factor for the premium’s existence. He concludes that
value firms are characterized by larger capital stocks than growth firms and that during periods
of financial distress value firms are often forced to unwind their assets at large costs.
       Viet Nga Cao also touches upon the reason regarding the premium’s existence in her
2015 paper (Cao, 2015). Cao concludes that differences in financial leverage act as the main
driver behind the existence of the premium although investment irreversibility does, as

                                                                                 3
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

suggested by Zhang, play a role but through different channels than previously proposed. Her
findings also indicate that operating leverage, in itself, does not notably influence the premium.
The paper’s conclusion draws from the fact that value firms often have larger financial risk and
that in the absence of such differences in leverage there, instead, would exist a growth premium.
        Petkova and Zhang argue that one needs to consider the differing risk exposure of value
and growth firms and study their relative risk in order to properly understand the existence of
the premium (Petkova & Zhang, 2005). Using the conditional CAPM and conditional market
regressions, they find that value stocks possess larger time-varying risk exposure than growth
stocks. This is especially captured via the positive beta premium sensitivities of value stocks
that indicates higher risk during periods of financial distress. These results allow them to
explain the outperformance of value stocks compared to growth stocks.

2.4 Disasters
In economics, disasters are defined as “infrequently occurring events that have substantial
negative effects on the economy” (Rietz, 1988; Barro, 2006). Rietz coined the concept in his
explanation of the equity premium puzzle laid out in Mehra and Prescott’s 1985 paper (Mehra
& Prescott, 1985). Rietz’s original definition of a disaster is now considered extreme (Barro,
2006), and the contemporary definition is that a disaster is a rare event that has a substantial
impact on the state of an economy in terms of changes within that economy’s gross GDP and
aggregate consumption (Wachter, 2013).
       In a paper published in 2019 by Bai et. al. (Bai. et. al., 2019) a theoretical equilibrium
model incorporating disasters is used to test if, under these conditions, the Breeden’s
consumption CAPM (Breeden, 1979) can explain the difference in returns between value and
growth stocks. While the paper uses simulated models, it does shine light on how the returns of
value stocks act as compensation for the risk that holders of those assets take on. The authors
draw the conclusion that value stocks, or firms with high book-to-market values, have higher
volatility and lower returns during disaster periods as shown by their simulated general
equilibrium model rather than through real-world disasters.
       The conclusion of disasters impacting consumption, and via that passage equity returns,
had been suggested in a paper by Jessica Wachter. In her 2013 paper Wachter finds that
aggregate consumption is often quite stable, and thus the equity premium as well (Wachter,
2013). However, the possibility of market turmoil, via the negative effects on aggregate
consumption, increases the equity premium. Her discussion draws from earlier papers
discussing the equity premium including Rietz 1988 paper (Rietz, 1988) in which it was

                                                                                 4
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

proposed that the market return is at a higher level as a compensating factor for investor
exposure towards the risk of rare disasters. Rietz’s conclusion also draws from the fact that his
model (similarly to Barro’s disaster paper (Barro, 2006)) assumes that stock market returns
equal the variability, and fundamentally the volatility, in dividends. Although firms often limit
their distribution policies during periods of financial distress (Bliss et. al., 2015), other papers
have disproven the one variable relationship (Keim & Stambaugh, 1986; Wachter, 2013). They
show that the volatility of dividends alone does not provide sufficient explanatory power in
explaining the volatility of returns, meaning that additional metrics, such as those presented in
Petkova and Zhang’s 2005 paper, are needed in explaining the variation of portfolio returns. In
their 2005 paper Petkova and Zhang (Petkova & Zhang, 2005) incorporate the dividend yield
as one component in conjunction with the term premium (the spread between 1 and 10-year
treasury bond yields), the default spread (the yield premium between AAA and BAA-rated
bonds) and the risk-free rate. The variables act in cohesion in order to model the expected
market risk premium.
        The pair motivate their selection with references to several papers, including Fama and
French’s 1988 paper (Fama & French, 1988) for the dividend yield, Fama and Schwert (Fama
and Schwert, 1977) as well as Fama (Fama, 1981) for the inclusion of the risk-free (treasury
yield) rate, Keim and Stambaugh (Keim et. al., 1986) for the default premium, and Campbell
(Campbell, 1987) as well as Fama and French (Fama & French, 1989) for the term premium.
        The world has experienced multiple instances of financial disasters, including the panic
of 1907 and the Wall Street crash of 1929. More recent events include the Dot-Com Bubble of
the 2000s and the Subprime crash of 2008-2009. While the severity of the disasters varies, the
general consensus about the subprime crisis is that it was one of the worst financial disasters to
have happened.
        The value premium’s variation during periods of financial distress is studied in a paper
by Lee et. al. (Lee et. al., 2014). The authors find that value stocks actually underperform
growth stocks, meaning that the premium inverts, during the subprime crisis. The inversion of
the premium during the recession stands in contrast to the strong and positive premium that
existed prior to the recession. The authors view their results as having implications on both the
causes of the premium and the investment opportunity of it. The implications of the results
presented in Lee et. al. are in agreement with the conclusion and results of the disaster study by
Bai et. al. Both, although through different methods of study, conclude that value stocks are
more exposed towards periods of financial distress, i.e. disaster events.

                                                                                 5
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

       Several authors have performed disaster studies by attempting to quantify market
turbulence and volatility in different metrics, similarly to how Bai et. al. (Bai et. al, 2019) and
Wachter (Wachter, 2013) used consumption. Berkman et. al. report their creation of a crisis
index after conducting studies on 447 instances of international crises (between 1918 - 2006)
(Berkman et. al., 2011). They estimate that changes within their index, which they use as a
proxy for the disaster probability, can predict the volatility in global stock market returns. They
also find a correlation with the additional metrics such as earnings, price to earnings ratio, and
dividend yield but, perhaps most notably, that industries that are sensitive towards crisis risk
yield higher returns.
        The implication for our paper, and fundamentally the entire disaster risk explanation, is
whether the disaster risk exposure is actually priced into the returns of value stocks. Although
Rietz paper (Rietz, 1988) received a lot of criticism (Barro, 2006), the theoretical framework
laid out by Bai et. al. shines new light on the disaster risk explanation of the value premium
(Bai et. al., 2019). Even though the literature contains suggestions of several risk drivers of the
value premium through various passages (Cao, 2015; Zhang, 2005; Fama & French, 1992),
there exists little literature examining the possibility of disaster risk exposure being priced into
the value premium, as implied by the results laid out by Bai et. al. (Bai et. al., 2019).

                                                                                 6
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

3. Data and methodology
3.1 Data
In the study of the variation of the HML portfolios returns we retrieve the factor returns with
monthly frequencies via the Swedish House of Finance’s dataset for the Fama and French three-
factor model. The dataset is comprehensive and includes all Swedish firms on the Stockholm
Stock Exchange for our entire period. Firms that are delisted at any point in our period remain
in the historical sample, which eliminates any survivor biases.
       We use the same definitions for the conditioning variables as Petkova and Zhang, and
adapt the variables to the Swedish market using the relevant metrics collected from several
different sources including Bloomberg and Moody’s.
       We retrieve the 10 year and 1-year Swedish treasury yields via Bloomberg in order to
calculate the term premium. For this calculation, we elect to use zero-coupon bonds (coupon
stripped) in order to avoid the effects of mismatching coupon rates. The dividend yield of value-
weighted index (SIXGX) composed of all shares listed on the Stockholm Exchange is also
retrieved via Bloomberg. The yield is calculated, as in the original paper, on the dividends
received in the last 12 months. The short-term risk-free rate data is retrieved via the Swedish
House of Finance’s database. The relevant (European) spreads between AAA and BAA3 bonds
are retrieved via Moody’s in order to calculate the default premium. As Petkova & Zhang did
not explicitly specify which BAA rating they use, we made the decision to incorporate the
“bottom” of the investment grade spectrum with BAA3 rated bonds. This provides a relevant
metric in the default premium by capturing the entire range of investment grade credits.
       To study if the disaster risk exposure suggested by Bai et. al. is priced into the value
premium, we gather data on the iTraxx crossover index for the available period of 06/2004 -
12/2016. iTraxx is the collective name for several credit default swap indices covering a wide
range of regions including Europe, Australia, and Asia. The main index was formed in 2004
following the merger of two different indices, including the iBoxx CDS created by iBoxx and
the Trac-X index jointly created by JP Morgan and Morgan Stanley. The main index, the iTraxx
Europe Index, is retrieved via Bloomberg and covers the 125 most liquid credit default swaps
referencing European Investment Grade Credits with the rolling of the index constituents
occurring every six months. In our collection of the iTraxx index data, we note that it was
created in June 2004 and thus, in our tests, elect to focus the conditional market regressions
over the period of the index’s existence. There are several versions of the iTraxx index covering
sector-specific and lower-grade credits, but our motivation for selecting the main iTraxx index

                                                                                 7
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

for our study stems from the fact that it targets Europe, the geographical area most closely
correlated with the Swedish market, and from the fact that it dates back the furthest. We
motivate the usage of this variable and its ability in acting as a disaster proxy using the following
arguments: A credit crunch is often one of the first things to occur during a disaster event, and
many investors consider an inverting yield curve as a signal of weakening sentiment in the
market. The implication is that credit market-related instruments can provide valuable insight
into investors thoughts about the future which affects the prices of both equity and fixed income
securities today. As credit default swaps allow investors to exchange their credit risk exposure
with that of another investor, the pricing of such financial products is closely correlated to the
overall credit risk within an economy.
       Credit market characteristics are tightly linked to firm behavior which became
especially evident during the financial crisis of 2007/2008. During the subprime crisis, many
firms experienced liquidity problems due to the decreased credit supply. A study conducted by
Bliss et. al. (Bliss et. al., 2015) concluded that firms during the subprime crisis maintained
larger cash balance than they did previously. They also altered their payout policy, creating a
substitute form of financing in response to the negative supply shocks to financing from the
capital markets. This decrease in payout was most noticeable in firms with higher leverage but
also in firms with more valuable growth options and lower cash balances. Following Cao’s
(Cao, 2015) argument about value stocks having higher financial risk, the sensitivity towards
credit markets should play a role in firm behavior and asset returns as evident by Bliss. et. al.
and Lee et. al. driving our hypothesis of a credit default swap index capturing the differing risk
exposure of value and growth stocks.

3.2 Methodology
To begin our study, the existence of the value premium, and its variation across time, are
examined in our selected market. If the premium exists in our sample of 2002-2016, we would
expect to see positive returns for the long (value)/short (growth) HML portfolio as laid out by
Fama & French.
        In order to study the variation of the portfolio returns in our sample, the time-period is
divided into sub-periods. We elect to use a division that is in accordance with the literature
covering the crisis and other disaster studies, including the 2014 study by Lee et. al., in order
to be consistent with the previous research. The total period is therefore split into three sub-
periods defined as: pre-crisis (01/2002-04/2007), mid-crisis (04/2007-12/2008) and post-crisis
(12/2008-12/2016).

                                                                                 8
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

       In the examination of portfolio returns, we use the CAPM to study the model’s
explanatory ability over the returns and to examine if the value premium puzzle, or in other
words, the CAPM’s inability to capture the returns, exists. For these tests, different window
sizes for rolling betas, namely 12, 24, and 36 months, are tested. We find that they all yield
similar results (not reported) and elect to use the 24-month window as it is consistent with the
literature including Petkova & Zhang’s test on different windows for rolling beta (where they
test both 24, 36 and 60 months and find no significant difference between them). These results,
in conjunction with our shorter (~14 years) timespan compared to Petkova & Zhang’s more
substantial 74 years, motivate our selection of the shorter window size. The 24-month rolling
window is both used in the study of the premium’s variation (and the CAPM’s ability to capture
the returns) and in the sorting procedure Petkova & Zhang presented. We elect to also
incorporate the same window size, for consistency, in our tests of the disaster variables’
explanatory power over the movements in those betas.
       Having studied the premiums variation, we move onto studying time-varying risk. We
construct the dataset using monthly data, thereby replicating Petkova & Zhang’s method. The
dataset is merged together from the variables described in our data section.
      We then continue to study the expected market risk premium. We model the expected
risk premium both with and without the inclusion of our disaster variable in order to study the
variable’s explanatory power. As both the expected market risk premium and the conditional
betas are unobservable metrics, we need to estimate them from the conditioning variables. In
the calculations of the expected market risk premium, the realized market return is regressed on
the conditioning variables known at time 𝑡 using lagged values of those variables. This is
modeled by the following equation:

               𝑟𝑚𝑡+1 = 𝛿0 + 𝛿1𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝛿2𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝛿3𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑇𝐵𝑡 + 𝑒𝑚𝑡+1 (1)

        Afterwards, we strip out the realized return and incorporate the results of the regression
into the calculations of the estimated market risk premium:

                        𝛾̂ 𝑡 = 𝛿̂ 0 + 𝛿̂ 1 𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 2 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 3 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 4 𝑇𝐵𝑡 (2)

                                                                                 9
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

       The initial fit of the expected market risk premium is performed using Petkova and
Zhang’s suggested variables. Then, a modified fitting of the expected market risk premium is
performed with the inclusion of the iTraxx index, making the equation:

        𝑟𝑚𝑡+1 = 𝛿0 + 𝛿1𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝛿2𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝛿3𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑇𝐵𝑡 + 𝛿5𝑖𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑥𝑥𝑡 + 𝑒𝑚𝑡+1 (3)

       With the fitted equation of the expected market risk premium being:

                𝛾̂ 𝑡 = 𝛿̂ 0 + 𝛿̂ 1 𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 2 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 3 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 4 𝑇𝐵𝑡 + 𝛿̂ 5 𝑖𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑥𝑥𝑡 (4)

        Although studies have noted how the equity premium is at a higher level due to disaster
risk exposure (Rietz, 1988; Barro, 2006) the concept of disasters affecting the entire risk
premium has received criticism with other papers covering the topic stirring away from Rietz
original explanation (Wachter, 2013). Bai. et. al. (Bai et. al., 2019) instead focus their study on
the disaster exposure of a specific portfolio rather than the equity market premium as a whole.
Although our hypothesis, based on the implications from Bai et. al., is that disaster risk exposure
should capture the returns of the HML portfolio, it is not explicitly certain that the modified
fitting of the expected market risk premium deviates from the fitted premium incorporating
only the original metrics. The disaster variable is expected, as implied via the literature, to have
a stronger impact in explaining the movements within the HML betas or in capturing the returns
(and minimizing the alpha) when using conditional market regressions.
       Having specified the expected market risk premium, we examine the conditional betas
for value stocks. In our calculations of the conditional betas, we use the method presented in
Petkova & Zhang. Conditional betas are defined as:

                                𝛽𝑖𝑡 = 𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑡[𝑟𝑖𝑡+1, 𝑟𝑚𝑡+1]/𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑡[𝑟𝑚𝑡+1] (5)

       Both the expected market risk premium and the betas are calculated using lagged values
of the variables. Following Jagannathan and Wang (Jagannathan & Wang, 1996) and the
method presented in Petkova and Zhang the equation becomes:

                          𝐸[𝑟𝑖𝑡+1] = 𝛾̅ 𝛽𝑖̅  + 𝐶𝑜𝑣[𝛾𝑡 , 𝛽  ] = 𝛾̅ 𝛽𝑖̅  + 𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝛾𝑡]𝜑𝑖 (6)
                                                                                                                                             𝑖𝑡

                                                                                10
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

Where 𝛾𝑡 = Expected market risk premium, 𝛽𝑖 = conditional betas and 𝜑𝑖 = beta premium
sensitivity, defined as 𝜑𝑖 = 𝐶𝑜𝑣[𝛽𝑖𝑡, 𝛾𝑡]/𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝛾𝑡]. 𝛾̅ = 𝐸[𝛾𝑡] is the average market excess
return and 𝛽𝑖̅  = 𝐸[𝛽𝑖𝑡] is the average beta.

       The conditional betas are regressed on the expected market risk premium in order to
examine the beta premium sensitivities. As the conditional CAPM uses beta premium
sensitivity as a metric for the instability of an asset’s or portfolio’s beta over the business-cycle,
the results of the regressions indicate whether or not value stocks are exposed to high risks
during disaster periods - or in other words periods where the price of risk is high. If investors
holding value stocks or an HML portfolio are exposed to a larger risk during downturns than
they otherwise are, we would expect positive values of the beta premium sensitivities. The
regressions are run using both the “traditional fitted” betas and the fitted betas that include our
disaster proxy iTraxx. For the calculation of the fitted betas using the conditioning variables,
we first perform the conditional market regressions using the previously defined variables:

         𝑟𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑖 + (𝑏𝑖0 + 𝑏𝑖1𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖2𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖3𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖4𝑇𝐵𝑡)𝑟𝑚𝑡+1 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡+1 (7)

        And then fit the conditional betas from those results:

                       𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑡 = 𝑏̂ 𝑖0 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖1 𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖2 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖3 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖4 𝑇𝐵𝑡 (8)

       A second fitting is performed with the incorporation of the iTraxx index in the
conditional market regressions:

    𝑟𝑖𝑡+1 = 𝛼𝑖 + (𝑏𝑖0 + 𝑏𝑖1𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖2𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖3𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖4𝑇𝐵𝑡 + 𝑏𝑖5𝑖𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑥𝑥)𝑟𝑚𝑡+1 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡+1 (9)

        And with the fitting for the betas being based on those results

               𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑡 = 𝑏̂ 𝑖0 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖1 𝐷𝐼𝑉𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖2 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖3 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖4 𝑇𝐵𝑡 + 𝑏̂ 𝑖5 𝑖𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑥𝑥 (10)

       The equations for the conditional market regressions later performed is the same as
those used in fitting the conditional betas. We use these betas in the sorting procedure described
below. Throughout the paper, we use the iTraxx index divided by 1000, in order for it to have
a similar order of magnitude as the other variables in the regression.

                                                                                11
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

       The Petkova and Zhang sorting procedure is then performed in order to study the
variation of the betas with respect to the fluctuations in the expected market risk premium. The
procedure is performed in order to remove a large portion of the market noise and see how the
betas vary during the different market conditions. Sorting on the same classification as Petkova
and Zhang, i.e. Peak (Lowest 10% of the expected market risk premium), Expansion (Below
average), Recession (Above Average), Trough (Top 10% of the expected market risk
premium), we take the average of the conditional betas for each segment.
        To verify statistical robustness of the results in the calculations and sorting procedure
of the conditional and fitted betas, the generalized method of moments (GMM) is performed in
addition to the method described above (not reported). GMM is used in order to eliminate
estimation error and avoid biases and potential interferences in the calculations of the beta
premium sensitivities. We find that the betas of both tests move in the same direction. With the
betas of both tests going in the same direction, we consider the robustness of our initial results
to be sufficient and elect to use those results in our study rather than to include the GMM output.
       We then examine the conditional CAPM’s ability to capture the returns and to study if
alpha decreases in the conditional market regressions using the fitted betas. We perform two
runs of these test, both with and without the inclusion of disaster proxy. Although we elect to
use the conditional CAPM and not the consumption CAPM that Bai et. al. use in their paper,
the addition of our disaster proxy is motivated from the implications that can be drawn from
their paper. In short, we test if disaster sensitivity helps in explaining the variation in the
premium.
       Having replicated Petkova and Zhang’s method with the inclusion of our disaster
variable, the variable’s explanatory power in regard to the movements in the HML portfolio
betas is then tested. If the disaster variable has explanatory power, we would expect strong
significance, and with regards to how a credit default swap index typically react during
disasters, a positive coefficient for the index. This stems from how insurance contracts, like a
credit default swap, traditionally become more expensive during periods of financial turmoil.
This results in the index rising and leading to a positive coefficient as the portfolio betas also
increase during periods of financial turmoil.

                                                                                12
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

4. Results
4.1 The Premium
The value premium is first studied for the entire period of 2002 – 2016, and then divided into
smaller predefined intervals in order to examine the premium’s development under different
conditions. This decision is made with consideration to the fact that our overall time frame
captures a financial disaster, allowing for the study of the premium pre- (01/2002-04/2007),
mid- (04/2007-12/2008) and post-crisis (12/2008-12/2016). We then study the implications of
accounting for time-varying risks both with and without our disaster proxy and the ability of
the method in capturing portfolio returns. Finally, we test how well the disaster proxy performs
in capturing the movements happening in the HML portfolio betas. We find that the portfolio,
over the entire period of 2002-2016, has positive return of 0.41% (t = 1.59) per month. For
the total period, we find an alpha of 0.22% (t = 3.08) allowing us to reject the null hypothesis
that alpha is indifferent from 0. Graph 1 shows a graphical representation of the variation in
the HML portfolio returns.

    18%

    15%

    12%

    9%

    6%

    3%

    0%

     -3%

     -6%
   HML Portfolio Returns
     -9%

    -12%

    -15%

    -18%
       01/2002 01/2004 12/2005 12/2007 12/2009 12/2011 12/2013 12/2015
                   Graph 1: The graph above presents the returns of the HML Portfolio

                                                                                13
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

4.1.1 Pre-Recession
For the pre-recession period, defined as 01/01/2002 - 01/04/2007, the portfolio generates a
mean monthly return of 0.88% (t = 1.82) and an alpha of 0.95% (t = 10.16). These results
show that both the premium and the puzzle exist in Sweden for the period preceding the
subprime crisis. Our results, in this regard, are in line with most findings - including that of the
original papers on the topic (Fama & French, 1992; Rosenberg et. al., 1985). The existence of
the premium during expansive markets is rather expected and well documented within the
existing literature, and our results do not suggest anything different.

4.1.2 Recession
The recessionary period, 01/04/2007 - 31/12/2008, is then isolated in order to study the variation
of the premium during the crisis. The literature suggests that returns must act as a compensatory
factor for investors taking on additional risks in holding the assets (Fama, 1970). Although
Fama and French themselves did not argue explicitly to what risks investors are exposed to by
holding the HML portfolio (Fama & French, 1992), authors have proposed the idea that the
premium acts as a compensatory factor mainly for the disaster risk exposure of value stocks
(Bai et. al., 2019; Lee et. al., 2014) (although through several different suggested risk passages
(Zhang, 2005; Cao, 2015; Fama & French, 1992)). If value stocks are exposed to higher risks,
we should see a decrease in the premium during the subprime crisis.
       During this timeframe, the mean monthly HML portfolio return decreases to
0.34% (t = 0.59). The implication of the t-stat is that the null hypothesis (H0: R𝐻𝑀𝐿 = 0) can
not be rejected under a −2/+2 t-test and that the returns cannot be said to significantly differ
from zero. The monthly portfolio alpha is 0.06%, which shows that the alpha has decreased to
levels very close to 0. These results satisfy the disaster risk compensation explanation as we see
the previously positive and significant results revert to values not significantly different from
zero during the subprime crisis. In other words, investors are receiving higher returns during an
expansive market as compensation for taking on disaster risk. This provides further incentives
to study the effects of time-varying risks in explaining the returns.

                                                                                14
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

4.1.3 Post-Recession
Looking at the period post-recession, defined as 31/12/2008 - 31/12/2016, we find a smaller,
rather insignificant, premium of 0.11% (t = 0.32) and an alpha of −0.22 (t = −2.21). The
results during this period are in line with recent research suggesting that financial anomalies
generally, and the value premium specifically, have recently diminished in statistical
significance (Cotter et. al, 2018). The underlying factors for this decrease could be many but
the contemporary literature suggests that the risk hypothesis holds. Investors are receiving
lower risk compensation due to the assets being less exposed towards the risks compared to
what they previously were. The decreased risk compensation could portray itself due to the
riskiest firms going bankrupt, firms restructuring their overall business to be less exposed to the
costly reversibility of investments as suggested by Zhang (Zhang, 2005), or simply by taking
on less leverage (Cao, 2015). This argument for lower risk compensation is backed up by the
literature surrounding the capital structure effect of the recession (Bliss et. al., 2015).
Financially restricted firms were hit the hardest during the subprime crisis, and had their returns
decrease substantially compared to other less restricted firms (Lee et. al., 2014). The literature
suggests that, of the firms classified as value firms, the most restricted firms affected the
portfolio returns the hardest (Lee et. al., 2014). This indicates that Cao’s argument about capital
structure risk is a strong reason for the premium’s existence. Unlike their peers, financially
restricted firms would be unable to internally compensate by hoarding cash (Bliss et. al., 2015),
driving them to bankruptcy. If the value portfolio loses the riskiest firms that previously
produced the highest returns, then we would expect a shrinking premium due to lower risk
compensation being required by investors as the value portfolio now has a lower risk than it did
previously.
        The variation of the premium and the puzzle throughout our entire interval is best shown
graphically. In Graph 2 the overall alphas for the portfolio vary throughout the time-period
with the highest alpha being documented during the period preceding the recession. The
portfolio alpha then decreases during the subprime crisis, corresponding with the increased beta
values as shown graphically in Graph 2. The betas are indicating an increased market exposure
for the portfolio. The decreased alpha that is documented in the period after the recession is
also a product of increased beta values.

                                                                                15
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

  0.80                                                                                  3%

  0.60
                                                                        2%
  0.40                                                                                                 HML Portfolio Alpha
                                                                        1%
  0.20

  0.00                                                                                  0%

 -0.20
                                                                                      -1%
HML Portfolio Beta-0.40

                                                                                      -2%
 -0.60

 -0.80                                                                                             -3%
    01/2002 01/2004 12/2005 12/2007 12/2009 12/2011 12/2013 12/2015
        Graph 2: The graph above presents the alpha of the HML portfolio (Dashed) graphed versus
         the values of the rolling (24 month window) beta for the HML portfolio (Solid)

        To conclude our discussion of the variation in the premium we note that, in our sample,
the portfolio betas are initially low when the portfolio returns are high (in other words the
opposite of what the CAPM needs to capture the returns similar to what Fama and French found
in their 2006 paper (Fama & French, 2006)), which shows the value puzzle’s existence within
our region. Betas begin to indicate increased systemic exposures, through higher values, during
the subprime crisis. This increased systemic exposure is maintained even throughout the post-
recession period where the initially lower betas quickly turn upwards to positive values. These
results are supported by Andrea Frazzini and Lasse Pedersen’s paper, Betting Against Beta
(Frazzini & Pedersen, 2014). The negative correlation between the asset beta and its alpha
indicates that value stocks are more exposed to the market conditions during downturns, as it
has been established that value stock betas display a countercyclical pattern (Fama & French,
1992; Petkova & Zhang, 2005). This causes the portfolios to underperform during those
downturns.
        Overall, the entire period captures the known phenomenon of a strong and existing value
premium and the CAPM’s failure to explain it. Following John Cotter and Niall McGeever’s
process of interpreting anomalies (Cotter & McGeever, 2018), we determine the next steps
required in analyzing this premium. The value premium is a persistent financial anomaly that
is non-spurious, as it has been heavily studied over time and proven to be significant by many
researchers. The premium is also unlikely to be a result of market inefficiencies since market
restrictions and trading costs are generally equal between trading value and growth stocks. As
a result, we are left with one main option to investigate, which is this anomaly being
compensation for the carried risk that the CAPM does not account for.

                                                                                 16
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

4.2 Expected Market Risk Premium
Having drawn our conclusion about premiums existence and the Capital Asset Pricing Model’s
failure to explain it during portions of our defined interval, we then turn towards the possibility
of time-varying risk explaining the excess return. Petkova and Zhang’s paper proposes the idea
that the conditional betas may be a more suitable measure for a portfolios risk exposure
compared to the unconditional betas that the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM uses. As previously
mentioned, the realized market excess return is a noisy measure of the overall market conditions
which Petkova & Zhang argue makes for misleading conclusions. More precise measurement
of the aggregate economic condition, and thus the (expected) risk premium within the market,
is a function of the default spread, term spread, and short-term interest rate as well as the
dividend yield within the economy. These variables act as better predictors than the realized
market return, and are all commonly used factors in the modeling of the expected market risk
premium. The excess market return (rm − rf) is regressed on the lagged conditioning variables
with the expected risk premium being the fitted component retrieved from the regressions
performed, as shown in Equations 3 & 4. The two fittings of the expected market risk premium
are plotted together with the realized market excess return in Graph 3. As discussed in the
methodology, we do not expect the inclusion of the iTraxx to largely affect the expected equity
risk premium. This can be seen in how the two series overlap to a large extent.
       Our results indicate that the expected market risk premium rises during periods of
financial turmoil (such as the subprime crisis of 2008) confirming that the metric acts as a
countercyclical measure of the overall economic conditions - in other words, the expected
market risk premium is high when the price of risk is high. Our results are presented graphically
in Graph 3. Jessica Wachter concluded in her paper (Wachter, 2013) that increases in the
market risk premium flow via changes in the aggregate consumption within an economy.
Modeling the expected risk premium with the inclusion of our disaster variable should enable
the capturing of the implications of Bai et. al. even when using the conditional CAPM.

                                                                                17
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

   25%

   20%

   15%

   10%

    5%

    0%

    -5%

   -10%
  Expected Risk Premium-15%

   -20%

   -25%
      06/2004 06/2006 05/2008 05/2010 05/2012 05/2014 05/2016

           Graph 3: The graph above presents the two series of Expected Risk Premium (with (Solid
           Grey) and without (Dashed Dark Grey) our disaster proxy) graphed together with the market
           excess return (Grey Line)

4.3 Beta Sorting and Sensitivity
Having concluded that the equity risk premium acts as a countercyclical variable, the sorting
procedure is performed on both the fitted (conditional) betas and the 24-month rolling betas.
The results indicate that, when accounting for time-varying risk, the conditional model predicts
higher market exposure for the HML portfolio compared to the CAPM as shown in the higher
betas. In line with the results of Petkova and Zhang, we find that the HML betas are higher
during periods of financial distress when the equity risk premium is high. The rolling betas,
conditional betas, and the conditional betas calculated using GMM (not reported) all go in the
same direction with higher values during periods of turbulent conditions. Our beta values,
rounded to three decimals, are presented in Table 1.

                             Peak Expansion Recession Trough
 Fitted Beta 0.785 0.852 0.903 0.967
 𝐅𝐢𝐭𝐭𝐞𝐝 𝐁𝐞𝐭𝐚 𝐰/ 𝐃𝐢𝐬𝐚𝐬𝐭𝐞𝐫 0.579 0.629 0.710 0.709
 Rolling Betas -0.042 -0.020 0.235 0.211
Table 1: Conditional and rolling (24 month) betas sorted by the expected market risk premium into four states:
Peak (bottom 10% of premium), Expansion (below average), Recession (above average), Trough (top 10% of
values).

                                                                                18
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

        The main takeaway from the usage of the conditional CAPM is its ability to explain risk
exposure via beta premium sensitivity. After regressing the conditional betas on the expected
market risk premium, we find positive beta premium sensitivities similar to the results of
Petkova and Zhang. Following Petkova and Zhang’s method, our regressions show a beta
premium sensitivity of 3.56 (t = 5.67) for the overall timeline indicating that additional
downside exposure is a factor in the premium.
        The regressions are then re-run with the inclusion of the disaster proxy. In those
regressions, the beta premium sensitivity decreases compared to our initial regressions to
2.90 (t = 3.77). The fact that both of the calculated sensitivities are significantly positive is
the main takeaway as it indicates larger risk exposure for the HML portfolio when the price of
risk is high.

4.4 Conditional Market Regression
The possibility of time-varying risk capturing the premium, studied via regressing the excess
HML returns on the conditioning variables and the excess market return, is then finally
assessed. For the overall time-period, we note an alpha equal to zero. This stands in contrast to
the positive alpha component that was found using the CAPM with 24-month rolling betas. The
output from the regression is presented in Table 2 below.

 Excess HML Return Coefficient Standard Error t P>|t|
 𝒓𝒎 − 𝒓𝒇 -0.79 0.40 -1.97 0.05
 𝐃𝐄𝐅 ∗ -15.42 12.38 -1.25 0.22
 𝑫𝑰𝑽 ∗ 26.40 14.12 1.87 0.06
 𝐓𝐁 ∗ 52.07 76.36 0.68 0.50
 𝐓𝐄𝐑𝐌 ∗ 21.39 11.73 1.82 0.07
 Constant 0.00 0.00 -0.10 0.92

                                       𝟐                        𝟐
   𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒃 > 𝑭 = 𝟎. 𝟎𝟎𝟑𝟏 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟏𝟏𝟔 𝑨𝒅𝒋. 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟎𝟖𝟓
Table 2: The lagged values of the respective conditioning variables are multiplied with the excess market return
(indicated by a ∗) in order to provide the dataset for the conditional market regressions (Equation 7). We regress
the excess HML returns (returns over the risk-free rate) on the conditioning variables and the market excess return.
Where 𝒓𝒎 − 𝒓𝒇 = Excess market return, DEF = Default Spread, DIV = Dividend Yield, TB = Risk-free rate,
TERM = Term Spread,

The output of the second run of the regression, with the inclusion of the iTraxx index as another
variable in the fitted betas, is presented in Table 3. We find that the explanatory power of the

                                        2                        2
regression increases by around 11.2% (𝑅  = 0.129 compared to 𝑅  = 0.116) with the iTraxx
variable being significant (t = −1.47).

                                                                                19
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

 Excess HML Return Coefficient Standard Error t P>|t|
 𝒓𝒎 − 𝒓𝒇 -0.59 0.42 -1.39 0.17
 𝐃𝐄𝐅 ∗ -13.71 12.39 -1.11 0.27
 𝑫𝑰𝑽 ∗ 35.29 15.31 2.30 0.02
 𝐓𝐁 ∗ -17.24 89.48 -0.19 0.85
 𝐓𝐄𝐑𝐌 ∗ 15.43 12.37 1.25 0.21
 𝐢𝐓𝐫𝐚𝐱𝐱 ∗ -3.63 2.48 -1.47 0.14
 Constant 0.00 0.00 -0.01 0.99

                                       𝟐                        𝟐
   𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒃 > 𝑭 = 𝟎. 𝟎𝟎𝟐𝟕 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟏𝟐𝟗 𝑨𝒅𝒋. 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟎𝟗𝟑
Table 3: The lagged values of the respective conditioning variables (including our disaster variable) are multiplied
with the excess market return (indicated by a ∗) in order to provide the dataset for the conditional market
regressions (Equation 9). We regress the excess HML returns (returns over the risk-free rate) on the conditioning
variables and the market excess return. Where 𝒓𝒎 − 𝒓𝒇 = Excess market return, DEF = Default Spread, DIV =
Dividend Yield, TB = Risk-free rate, TERM = Term Spread, iTraxx = iTraxx Index

       The implication of these results is that the conditioning variables perform well in
capturing the returns but that more of the variation in excess HML returns is captured with the
inclusion of our disaster proxy. The iTraxx index achieves a higher significance in our test than
most of the traditionally used conditioning variables. This goes in agreement with our
hypothesis based on the paper by Bai et. al, where accounting for disaster risk is significant in
explaining excess HML returns.

4.5 HML Betas & Explanatory Power
The disaster variable’s explanatory power over the movements in the HML betas is tested by
regressing the betas on the conditioning variables. The output of those regressions is presented
in Tables 4 & 5 below.

 HML Betas Coefficient Standard Error t P>|t|
 DIV -12.20 3.37 -3.62 0.00
 DEF 10.42 2.58 4.04 0.00
 TERM -11.99 2.64 -4.54 0.00
 TB -156.85 16.88 -9.29 0.00
 Constant 0.63 0.10 6.17 0.00

                                       𝟐                        𝟐
   𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒃 > 𝑭 = 𝟎. 𝟎𝟎𝟎𝟎 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟒𝟎𝟎 𝑨𝒅𝒋. 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟑𝟖𝟒
Table 4: The 24-month rolling beta is regressed on the set of conditional variables. Where DIV = Dividend Yield,
DEF = Default Spread, TERM = Term Spread, TB = Risk-free rate

       As expected from Petkova and Zhang’s study, all the conditioning variables are highly
significant, with the regression explaining around 40% of the variation of HML Betas. The

                                                                                20
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

                                                      2
inclusion of the iTraxx in the regression increases the 𝑅  in our tests with the disaster variable
being significant (t = −2.2). Adding the iTraxx index, we initially expect that this disaster
proxy would have a positive coefficient, given how the pricing of insurance instruments, such
as a credit default swap index, reacts to periods of financial turmoil. However, the negative
coefficient we find in the regression gives incentives for further testing.

 HML Betas Coefficient Standard Error t P>|t|
 DIV -9.34 3.58 -2.61 0.01
 DEF 11.70 2.61 4.48 0.00
 TERM -13.74 2.73 -5.04 0.00
 TB -177.92 19.22 -9.26 0.00
 iTraxx -1.25 0.57 -2.20 0.03
 Constant 0.69 0.10 6.60 0.00

                                       𝟐                        𝟐
   𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒃 > 𝑭 = 𝟎. 𝟎𝟎𝟎𝟎 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟒𝟐𝟎 𝑨𝒅𝒋. 𝑹  = 𝟎. 𝟒𝟎𝟎
Table 5: The 24-month rolling beta are regressed on the set conditional variables including the addition of our
disaster variable. Where DIV = Dividend Yield, DEF = Default Spread, TB = Risk-free rate, TERM = Term
Spread, iTraxx = iTraxx Index

        The test is re-run using the iTraxx crossover index which incorporates additional high-
yield credit default swap prices in the calculations of the index levels. We run the test for the
iTraxx crossover index’s relatively short existence of 10/2011 - 12/2016 and rerun the test for
the main iTraxx index over the same time period. We find that the iTraxx Crossover index
yields a positive index coefficient (t = 1.61), while the main iTraxx index still produces a
negative coefficient. Finally, we run a regression with both the iTraxx main and the iTraxx
Crossover for the same time-period. We find that the coefficient signs remain intact and that
both proxies are very highly significant (𝑡 = −3.72, 𝑡 = 3.04 respectively), with the model
capturing around 73% of the variation in the HML Beta.
      Our initial argument about using the iTraxx main index, and why the high-yield index
was not used, to begin with, is the fact that the index captured our entire desired time-period
well and provided data on the insurance market of credits - a field sensitive to disasters. In other
words: The iTraxx high-yield credit default swap index did not exist during the subprime crash
meaning the disaster exposure for the period could not have been measured using that index.
Our conclusion from these results is that we capture the “flight to safety” aspect of the financial
markets. During periods of financial turmoil, or disaster events, investors often “flee to safety”
by purchasing both more liquid assets (flight to liquidity) but also to assets of higher quality
(flight to quality). Investors move funds from junk-level credits into investment grade credits

                                                                                21
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

due to the innate higher stability of such credits (Bethke et. al., 2017). The different coefficients
could thus capture the known “flight to quality” behavior of investors, meaning that the
differing coefficients between the indexes does not alter the overall conclusion of disaster risk
being priced into the premium. The “flight to quality” phenomenon was especially strong during
the subprime crisis and is heavily correlated with investor sentiment (Bethke et. al., 2017).
        Our results indicate the movements within the iTraxx index is highly correlated with the
portfolios market sensitivity, showing that the correlated movements between the portfolio
returns and the market returns can be predicted by the disaster proxy. This relationship gives
weight to the proposal that disaster risk is priced into the premium. The iTraxx index thus

                                                               2
significantly increases this model’s explanatory power by 5% (𝑅  = 0.420 compared to

  2
𝑅  = 0.400). Although this may seem like a small number, it is in fact economically important
as a step in explaining the value premium, one of the most persistent anomalies in finance.

                                                                                22
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

5. Implications and Conclusions
Incorporating the risk for disasters takes us a step closer towards explaining the value premium
puzzle. We start by finding a significant value premium over our desired interval, 2002 - 2016.
This premium varies during the interval, where we document a positive and significant value-
premium for the period preceding the subprime crisis that then shrunk to values not significantly
different from zero during the subprime crisis. We find similar variation in the alphas of the
HML portfolio, with a significantly positive alpha pre-crisis, a non-significant alpha during the
crisis, and a significantly negative alpha post-crisis. The Sharpe-Lintner CAPM found low
market sensitivities when looking at the rolling, unconditional, betas. These findings act as the
main reasons behind the high portfolio alphas that were documented and as an underlying
reason for the value premium puzzle’s existence during the expansive market conditions leading
up to the recession. Although low betas are to be expected of a long/short investment strategy
such as the HML portfolio, the comparatively low rolling beta during expansive market
conditions that shifted upwards during recessions adds weight to the disaster risk exposure
argument.
        In the study of time-varying risk, the fitted betas are sorted on the expected market risk
premium. We find larger (positive) fitted betas for all four different market conditions (Peak,
Expansion, Recession, and Trough). We find that the highest market sensitivity of the portfolio
is during periods of financial distress or, in other words, where the expected market risk
premium is the highest. The results using both unconditional and fitted betas, as well as our
robustness checks using GMM, all go in the same direction in explaining higher betas when the
expected market risk premium is the highest.
        Rising betas during “trough” periods indicate a larger exposure to the systematic risks
at a time when the price of risk is high. The implications from the movements of the betas are
backed up in the results surrounding the beta premium sensitivity as presented by the
conditional CAPM. The positive beta premium sensitivities are achieved both with and without
the inclusion of our disaster variables.
        In our test of the time-varying risk explanation, using conditional market regressions
both including and excluding our disaster proxy, we find strong explanatory power with an
alpha component that is not significantly different from zero. Our conclusion from these results
is that time-varying risk exposure plays a role in the returns and that we can capture the
premium’s variation during our defined time-interval. The inclusion of the iTraxx index in the

                                                                                23
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

tests shows that the variable has high significance, indicating that the disaster exposure is priced
into the value premium.
       The addition of the disaster variable decreases the alpha component for our tests: We
find a monthly alpha of −0.003% (t = −0.01) in our conditional market regression including
iTraxx and a slightly higher −0.02% (t = −0.1) using only the original conditioning
variables. Although both alphas are statistically insignificant and conclusions cannot be
completely drawn from them alone, we see that the inclusion of our disaster risk proxy goes in
the right direction in decreasing the constant. In the study of the variable’s explanatory power
over the movements in the HML portfolio betas, we find that the iTraxx main index is
significant (t = −2.2) and increases the explanatory power of the test. However, contrary to
what we had initially expected, the variable holds a negative coefficient. The test was re-run for
the period 10/2011 - 12/2016 with both the iTraxx Main index and the iTraxx Crossover index,
which includes more high-yield credit defaults swaps than the main index. The iTraxx Main
index maintains its negative coefficient while the iTraxx Crossover index produces a positive
and significant coefficient. We conclude that the differing coefficients are the results of
investors fleeing from high-yield credits to investment grade credits during periods of financial
distress. In other words, the differing coefficients can be attributed to the “flight to quality”
reaction of investors which was especially strong during the subprime crisis.
       Overall, we attribute our results to the arguments about the driving factors of the
premium. Viet Cao (Cao, 2015) argues that financial leverage acts as a main driver for the
premium, together with the investment irreversibility channel proposed by Lu Zhang (Zhang,
2005). With the more financially constrained firms being unable to internally compensate the
supply shock to the capital markets (Bliss et. al., 2015), it affects the returns of the value
portfolio more than that of the growth portfolio. With the premium being inversely related to
size (Fama & French, 2011) and the capital structure effect hitting smaller firms the hardest, we
argue that the smaller premium after the crisis reflects capital structure decisions and thus a
lower risk compensation to investors. Simply put, the disaster risk of value stocks has
decreased.
        Overall, our results regarding disaster risk being priced in has statistical significance
and has implications for investors attempting to take advantage of the value premium. Investors
are in fact being compensated for taking on additional risks, meaning that the HML factor as
laid out in Fama & French’s original paper, captures compensation for the added exposure.
       Although our results with regards to the disaster variable are statistically significant,
further research on the topic could be pursued on additional disaster proxies. Also, tests could

                                                                                24
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

be conducted over a longer period by leveraging indexes that date further back. For example,
Bank of America has multiple high-yield indexes with start-dates as long back as 1996 (e.g.
BofAML US High Yield B Total Return Index) allowing for a longer study in order to see if
the results are comparable and as significant. Additionally, since different countries’ capital
markets may have different sensitivities to worldwide disasters, a possible improvement of our
study can be to apply our tests on a wider number of countries to test if the results are as
significant.

                                                                                25
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

Reference List:

Below the sources are presented sorted in alphabetical order of the first named authors

Bai H, Hou K, Kung H, Li E.X.N, Zhang L (2019), “The CAPM strikes back? An equilibrium
model with disasters”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 131, no. 2, pp. 269-298

Barro R.J. (2006), “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century”, The Quarter
Journal of Economics, vol 121, no. 3, pp. 823-866

Berkman H, Jacobsen B, Lee J.B (2011), “Time-varying rare disaster risk and stock returns”,
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 313-332

Bethke S, Gehde-Trapp M, Kempf A (2017), “Investor sentiment, flight-to-quality, and
corporate bond comovement”, Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 82, pp 112-132

Bliss B, Cheng Y, Denis D.J. (2015), “Corporate payout, cash retention, and the supply of
credit: Evidence from the 2008–2009 credit crisis”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 115,
no. 3, pp. 521-540

Breeden, D (1979), “An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and
investment opportunities”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 265-296

Campbell, J.Y. (1987), “Stock returns and the term structure”, Journal of Financial
Economics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 373–399

Cao V.N (2015), “What explains the value premium? The case of adjustment costs,
operating leverage and financial leverage”, Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 59, pp. 350-
366

Cotter J, McGeever N (2018), “Are Equity Market Anomalies Disappearing? Evidence from
the U.K.”, Working Paper, University College Dublin

DeBondt, W.F.M., Thaler, R.H. (1987), “Further evidence on investor overreaction and Stock
Market Seasonality”, Journal of Finance, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 557–581

Fama E.F. (1970), “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work”,
Journal of Finance, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 383-417

Fama E.F. (1981), “Stock returns, real activity, inflation, and money”, American Economic
Review, vol. 71, pp. 545–565.

Fama E.F., French K.R., (1988), “Dividend yields and expected stock returns”, Journal of
Financial Economics, vol. 22, pp. 3–25

Fama E.F., French K.R. (1989), “Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and
bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 25, pp. 23–49

Fama, E.F., French, K.R. (1992), “The cross-section of expected stock returns”, Journal of
Finance, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 427–465.
The Swedish Value Premium and Disasters Habash & Öhlund

Fama, E.F., French, K.R. (1993), “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds”,
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 33, pp.3-56.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R. (1998), “Value versus Growth: The International Evidence”,
Journal of Finance, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1975-1999

Fama, E.F., French, K.R. (2006), “The Value Premium and the CAPM”, Journal of Finance,
vol. 61. no. 5, pp. 2163-2185

Fama, E.F., French, K.R. (2011), “Size, Value, and Momentum in International Stock
Returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 105, pp. 457-472

Frazzini A, Pedersen L.H (2014), “Betting against beta”, Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 111, no. 1, pp 1-25

Jagannathan R, Wang Z (1996), “The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected
returns”, Journal of Finance, vol. 51, pp. 3-53

Keim D.B., Stambaugh R.F. (1986), ”Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets”,
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 17, pp. 357–390

Lee E, Strong N, Zhu Z. (2014), “Did the value premium survive the subprime credit crisis?”,
The British Accounting Review, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 166-178

Lintner, J (1965), “The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
portfolios and capital budgets”, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 47, pp 13-37

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W. (1994), “Contrarian investment, extrapolation, and
risk”, Journal of Finance, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1541–1578

Mehra R, Prescott E (1985), “The equity premium: A puzzle”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 145-161

Petkova R, Zhang L (2005), “Is value riskier than growth?”, Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 78, pp. 187-202

Sharpe, W.F. (1964), “Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions
of risk,”, Journal of Finance, vol. 19, pp. 425-442

Rietz T.A (1988), “The equity risk premium a solution”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
22, no. 1, pp. 117-131

Rosenberg B, Reid K, Lanstein R (1985), “Persuasive evidence of market inefficiency”
Journal of Portfolio Management, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 9–16.

Wachter J.A (2013), “Can Time‐Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock
Market Volatility?”, Journal of Finance, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 987-1035

Zhang L (2005), “The Value Premium”, Journal of Finance, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 67-103