MARKET MICROSTRUCTURE
INVARIANCE, BID-ASK
SPREADS AND IMPACT COSTS
IN THE SWEDISH STOCK
MARKET

A TRANSACTION COST ANALYSIS FOR INTRADAY TRADING
IN SWEDISH STOCKS

JIM DOMEIJ

OSCAR KRIEG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Market Microstructure Invariance, Bid-Ask Spreads and Impact Costs in the
Swedish Stock Market  :  A Transaction Cost Analysis for Intraday Trading in
Swedish Stocks

Abstract:
   By studying high-frequency  trading  data for the Swedish stock market, as proxied by
   the OMXS30  index, we find that there exists an invariant relationship between
   transaction cost components and illiquidity. Specifically, we apply the notions of
   market microstructure and intraday trading invariance to confirm the existence of a
   proportional relationship between the relative bid-ask spread and an illiquidity
   measure comprised of observable financial market variables, such as trade volume,
   price and volatility. In addition, we conduct a case study for the Coronavirus Crash
   of 2020, through  which we gain empirical support for the superiority of invariance-
   implied market impact models over conventional wisdom in predicting large price
   declines.

Keywords:
   Market  microstructure,  invariance,  bid-ask spread,  liquidity, Swedish stock market,
   market impact,  high-frequency  trading,  crashes

Authors:

   Jim Domeij  (24262)
   Oscar Krieg  (24552)

Tutors:
   Olga Obizhaeva,  Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jim Domeij and Oscar Krieg, 2021

                                   1
Introduction

Hasbrouck (2017) describes how markets have changed. At the end of the last century,
financial markets started to become computerized and trading that had previously taken
place on physical trading floors on exchanges moved over to electronic trading. Today
the era of floor trading is over, and most markets are electronic. O’Hara (2015) calls this
the new “high frequency world”, where he defines High-Frequency Trading (HFT) as
computer-  and strategy-based trading performed at  very  high execution speeds.  There is
an ongoing arms race in the HFT industry. Firms invest billions just to gain an edge and
beat competitors by just a few milliseconds according to Budish et al. (2015).

Due to its inherent demand for speed, HFT must employ trading algorithms, which  are
essentially computer programs provided with predetermined schedules for order
execution. According to Aldridge (2013), the best HFT systems perform extensive
analysis and simulation of different transaction-relevant characteristics, such as trading
costs, based on high-frequency, tick-by-tick data. Intuitively, accurate quantitative
models of transaction costs are of great importance to finance professionals.

O’Hara (1995) defines market microstructure as the analysis of how specific trading
mechanisms affect the price formation process, while Harris (2002) explains it as:  “the
branch of financial economics that investigates trading and the organization of
markets.”  Centralized regulation, digitalized clearing systems and stock exchange
requirements can affect these trading mechanisms and can thus constitute explanatory
factors in the study of market microstructure.

Within market microstructure, a more recent theory called market microstructure
invariance has been postulated by Albert S. Kyle and Anna  A. Obizhaeva. The
definition of market microstructure invariance is based on the intuition that financial
markets transfer risk in business time, and Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) define it as:  “the
hypotheses that the distribution of risk transfers (‘bets’)  and transaction costs are
constant across assets when measured per unit of business time”. Andersen et al. (2018)
and Kyle et al. (2016) define bets as risk transfers and meta-orders, executed through
trades (alternatively a series of trades), and as part  of a more long-run strategy for
profiting on market development. The major benefit of this new invariance theory  is
that it can render accurate predictions of different quantities in market microstructure by
using empirically observable variables in financial markets, such as returns variance,
price and trade volume. However, for the market microstructure invariance theory to
hold, the invariance relation(s) must hold empirically across all assets and time periods.

As a manifestation of its usefulness, several of Kyle and Obizhaeva’s postulated
invariance assumptions and hypotheses have already been proven empirically. For
instance, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) and Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) introduce scaling

                                   2
laws with important implications for two transaction cost components. Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2017) confirm for Russian and US stocks that there exists a proportional
relationship between  relative  bid-ask spread costs and an illiquidity measure, where the
latter is proportional to the cube root of return variance  to  dollar volume. Secondly,
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) derive a market impact model and find it superior to
conventional wisdom in predicting price declines.

Given this promising new research, we want to test whether the proposed relationship
between the  relative  bid-ask spread and illiquidity, as well as the market impact model
holds for the Swedish stock market. In light of the increased demand for precise
transaction cost models in HFT, we are particularly interested to investigate if the bid-
ask spread model holds in intraday and high-frequency settings. Our first research
question is:

           Is the relative size of the bid-ask spread proportional to illiquidity, the latter
           defined as the cube root of the ratio of return variance to SEK volume, for
                           Swedish  stocks on a high frequency?

                                                                                                      1
We answer this question by using HFT data spanning the time period between 2010
and 2020, gathered on a millisecond frequency and then aggregated on a five-minute
                                           2
level. Since we obtain tick-by-tick data,  this involves processing roughly 375 million
rows of data. As a proxy for the Swedish stock market, we use OMXS30  index
constituents.

Interestingly, we find that the proportional relationship between the  relative  bid-ask
spread and illiquidity  statistically  holds for the full time period, although it only holds
for one year on a standalone basis. This result provides us with the insight that the
transaction cost model holds for several stock markets with different market structures,
as well for extremely  high frequencies. Prima facie, this should facilitate valuable
benchmarks for HFT models, since this concerns a quantifiable market microstructure
relationship based on empirically observable variables. The quantitative nature of this
relationship makes it suitable for processing by a computerized algorithm.

Our second research question concerns whether an invariance-implied market impact
formula renders more accurate predictions of price declines  during the Great
                             3
Coronavirus Crash of 2020 than conventional wisdom does. Here we compare the
predictive power of the invariance model to conventional wisdom, as outlined by Kyle

1
  2010-02-08.

2
  Tick-by-tick  data shows every trade that occurs.

3
 Coy (2020).

                                   3
and Obizhaeva (2019), on a more recent stock market crash. In this regard we
specifically answer the research question:

   Is invariance theory better to predict price declines during the Great Coronavirus
                     Crash of 2020 than conventional wisdom?

We obtain  millisecond  trading data for OMXS30  index futures  and stocks for  2019 and
the spring of 2020. Since we only have one  crash,  we, similar to Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2019), do not achieve statistically valid results  in regard to  this question, but this was
not our initial intention either. However, we manage to prove that the invariance-
implied market impact model generates predictions much closer in magnitude to actual
price declines during the Great Coronavirus Crash of 2020, as compared to conventional
wisdom.

The remaining paper is structured as follows. Section 1 defines fundamental concepts in
market microstructure invariance to help the reader better grasp the content of this
thesis. Section 2 touches upon previous research most adjacent to our research questions
and  illustrates  our sources of inspiration as well as our contribution. Section 3 provides
the theoretical market microstructure invariance framework which our research is based
on. Section 4 formally postulates our empirical hypotheses, research design and the
epistemological and theoretical motivation behind these. Section 5 describes our data
and empirical  variables;  section  6 presents our empirical findings and lastly section 7
gives our concluding remarks.

                                   4
1. Fundamental  Concepts

Due to the inherent complexity and quantitative nature of the research area of market
microstructure invariance, we here attach a brief explanation of a few central concepts.
Understanding of these concepts are vital in the further reading of this thesis,  and the
explanation of these therefore deserves its own section.

Market Microstructure Invariance
Market microstructure invariance is the name of a theory or a set of theories within the
research field market microstructure. Market microstructure is concerned with analysis
of dynamics and mechanisms of the price formation process, see Zovko (2008). In
general,  market microstructure invariance  is a theory hypothesizing that different
relationships between these trading mechanisms and components of the price formation
process are invariant across assets and time when certain transformations are made, see
Kyle et al.  (2016).  These transformations are further elaborated below, but they
essentially imply that one must adjust for security-specific risk transfer intensity by
transforming calendar time to  business time.

Bets
Kyle et al. (2016) defines a bet as  a transaction of assets “intended to produce an
idiosyncratic gain” in accordance with an institutional trader’s view on  market risk
development. Market microstructure invariance, as proposed by Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2016), implies viewing institutional trading in financial markets as trading games.
Executed trades are essentially risk transfers, through which taking on and unloading
risk are part of a more general and long-run profit-maximizing strategy. Due to the  more
long-run  and overall character of bets, a single bet is often executed through a series of
trades. The strategies underpinning bets are privately held information, and therefore
hard to observe empirically. Trades are therefore usually used as a proxy for bets in the
study of market microstructure invariance.

Business Time
Business time is another important concept within the study of market microstructure
invariance. Kyle et al. (2016) defines business time as the expected calendar time
between the arrival of bets in the market, with  calendar time measured in conventional
time units such as years, days, minutes etc. Stock-specific velocity is a related measure
and is defined as the expected arrival rate of bets, and thus the inverse of business time.
These definitions facilitate the economically relevant and illustrative interpretation that
more liquid stocks, i.e. stocks trading at a higher frequency, have a higher velocity and
consequently shorter business time than less liquid stocks. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019)
theorize that the length of business time is the only difference between different
financial markets, and Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) postulates that, in order for market

                                   5
microstructure invariance to hold, one must account for this difference by transforming
calendar time into business time.

Bid-Ask Spread
The bid-ask spread is one measure of transaction costs. It originates from the fact that
buyers and sellers in financial markets place orders at prices consistent with their view
on market development and risk. In order for a trade to  occur, traders in financial
markets must meet the counterparty’s price. The difference between the best (highest)
bid price and the best (lowest) ask price is called the bid-ask spread.

Liquidity and Illiquidity
Liquidity of a financial asset is a measurement for how easily the asset can be converted
to cash or cash equivalents. Illiquidity is simply the inverse of the chosen liquidity
measure. Kyle et. al (2016), however, use a slightly different definition for liquidity  and
illiquidity. They define illiquidity as the average dollar cost of executing an average bet
divided by the  dollar  value of the average bet. The illiquidity is a volume-weighted
transaction cost and Kyle et. al (2016) express this as a percentage of the value of the
average bet.

Tick  Size
As described by Harris (2002), tick size refers to the smallest allowed price movement
in  a  financial market. The bid-ask spread, measured in absolute terms, can never be
smaller than the tick size. Tick sizes are set by regulators and exchanges.  In. January
2018, the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) enacted the second
                                                           4
Markets in  Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID II), containing  harmonizing
regulation regarding securities markets in the EU. This regulation concerns, among
other things, tick sizes.

4
 Directive 2014/65/EU of The European Parliament and of The Council of 15 May 2014 On Markets In
Financial Instruments and Amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU.

                                   6
2. Literature Review

This thesis revolves around three main  articles, focusing on the derivation of key
variables and analysis methodology within market microstructure invariance, intraday
trading invariance, and transaction costs. The exhibited literature lays the theoretical
foundation for the thesis and provides  testable quantitative predictions for bid-ask
spreads and market impact costs.

2.1. Dimensional Analysis, Leverage Neutrality, and Market
Microstructure Invariance
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), applies dimensional analysis  –  an analytical method
originating  from physics, which simplifies scientific inferences by restricting the
analysis to a set of assumed explanatory fundamental variables. Their analysis is
supplemented by the financial equivalent of physics conservation laws, specifically the
no-arbitrage  principle of leverage neutrality. They ultimately pose invariance
assumptions implying that some quantities are constant across assets and time. Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2017) test their predictions empirically for US and Russian stocks. They
find that scaling  laws for bid-ask spreads and linear market impact costs, both
comprised of their defined illiquidity measure,  is consistent with  financial data.

This article provides us with the necessary derivations, methodology and quantitative
models. Our empirical analysis is performed for a different financial market, for a
different time period and for high-frequency data. Our thesis provides additional
empirical evidence for market microstructure invariance, in accordance with the central
notion that invariance should hold across all assets and  across time.

2.2. Intraday Trading Invariance in the S&P 500 Futures Market
Andersen et al. (2018) use tick-by-tick data on E-mini S&P 500 futures contracts to
study how different trading activity variables are related on  an intraday level. They
propose a new theory called Intraday Trading Invariance (ITI) as a high-frequency
extension of market microstructure invariance. This is new since market microstructure
invariance theory usually involves bets over longer execution horizons (e.g. months).
Andersen et. al (2018) test several invariance relationships by averaging tick-by-tick
data, aggregated on a one-minute level, across all trading days in their sample. Their
results confirm that the ITI hypothesis holds for the E-mini S&P 500 futures market.

We are most interested in the methodology from Andersen et al.  (2018) for measuring
variables, aggregating them and testing the above-mentioned ITI hypothesis.  By
applying the ITI analysis methodology on our own sample, we confirm that the specific
scaling laws derived in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) hold for high-frequency data.

                                   7
2.3. Large Bets and Stock Market Crashes
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) apply an invariance-implied model to predict market
impacts during stock market crashes, characterized by intense selling pressure and large
price declines. They compare their predictions with conventional wisdom, which
assumes that price elasticity in financial markets is such that selling 1% of market
capitalization has a market impact of  less than 1%. The main difference between
conventional wisdom and the invariance-implied model is that the latter accounts for
business time. The consideration of business time implies larger price impacts in more
liquid markets. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019)  contrast their model with conventional
wisdom to compare the relative accuracy of these models on five large  crash events
between 1929 and  2010 and  find their model superior.

This article provides us with a market microstructure invariance model for predicting
price movements induced by large sell orders. We also test the relative accuracy of the
invariance model for the more recent Coronavirus Crash of 2020.

                                   8
3. Theoretical Background

As one purpose of this thesis is to investigate the potentially proportional relationship
between the relative size of bid-ask spreads and illiquidity, we must formally derive a
consistent and logical measure of these market microstructure phenomena. The
computation of the bid-ask spread is generally accepted, and even though we transform
this to a relative measure by relating it to the  mid-price, this part of the theory is
relatively straight-forward.

Market impact costs are incurred for traders when prices move against them as a result
of their own trading activities. The result of buy and sell orders is that the trader will
face new adverse prices if he or she continues to trade in the same direction. The
difference between the previous execution price and the new one the trader would face,
is the market impact cost. Bid-ask spread is another transaction cost and can be
interpreted as the cost  that the trader would incur if he or she would simultaneously buy
and sell the same security at the best prevailing ask and bid price, respectively. The bid-
ask spread is defined as the difference between the best bid and ask prices.

The other purpose of this thesis is to test a market microstructure invariance model for
predicting price developments induced by intense selling pressure  during  stock market
crashes. The core premise and hypothesis presented in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) is
that market microstructure invariance can predict price declines in stock market crashes
more accurately than conventional wisdom. In this section we briefly derive the
invariance-implied market impact formula from Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019).

Section 3.1 presents the relevant theoretical background, relevant derivations and
necessary assumptions underpinning our used illiquidity measure and its proposed
relationship to the relative size of the bid-ask spread. This largely mimics Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2017). Section 3.2 includes a brief constructive presentation of the
invariance-implied market impact formula and the intuitive rationale behind its
superiority to conventional wisdom.

3.1. Dimensional Analysis, Leverage Neutrality, and Market
Microstructure Invariance
Kyle and  Obizhaeva (2017) use dimensional analysis, an analytical method which
originates from physics which facilitates inferences regarding complex relationships
between variables. The method simplifies these complicated relationships by imposing
certain restrictions, which reduces the number of explanatory variables to a restricted set
of fundamental variables.

                                   9
An illustrative example of dimensional analysis in physics is the case of the British
physicist G. I. Taylor’s estimation regarding the atomic bomb developed within the
Manhattan project (Trinity Test, 1945, New Mexico). More specifically, Taylor was
asked to estimate the developed bomb’s energy output, see Deakin (2011). The details
of the Manhattan Project were classified and thereby not available to Taylor, he had
only the press images from the test explosion to rely on. Taylor applied the fundamental
units of physics, such as length, mass, time and energy, along with assumed scaling
arguments, to formulate a proposed relationship between the radius of  the sphere,
elapsed time since the explosion and the energy of the explosion. Once the project
details were later exposed, Taylor was proven to have arrived at an estimate which was
very close to reality.

Analogously to G.I. Taylor, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) apply dimensional analysis in
finance to derive scaling laws for bid-ask spread and market impact costs. The financial
application of dimensional analysis initially requires deciding on (assuming) the right
set of explanatory variables, and identifying the relevant base dimensional quantities in
which these variables are measured. The financial equivalents of physics’ base
dimensions are by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) identified as value, measured in currency
(e.g. USD), asset quantity, measured in number of contracts or securities, and time,
measured in conventional time units such as years, days, minutes, milliseconds and so
forth.

3.1.1. Dimensional Analysis Application
When institutional traders execute bets through order placement in financial markets,
they move market prices. This occurs due to increased demand as well as information
                                      5
asymmetries and adverse selection. Buy orders of institutional sizes signal to the
market that a stock might be undervalued, while a sell order conversely signals that a
stock might be overvalued.  Buy bets puts upward pressure on prices while sell bets
work in the opposite direction, and we denote this market impact cost of a bet  G.
Specifically,  G  denotes the expected  price impact cost of executing a bet of a certain
size, expressed as a fraction of the unsigned value traded through the bet. This is,
however, a general notion of transaction costs and there are at least three special cases,
which G takes on in the form of a more specific transaction cost. For now we just
mention them here as bid-ask spread, linear market impact cost and square-root  market
impact cost, but below we show the specific derivation of the general transaction  cost
formula, as outlined by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017).

Market microstructure is concerned with trading mechanisms at work in financial
markets. The beauty of financial markets, and a fact that simplifies quantitative analysis
and derivation of relationships, is that there is a limited amount of observable,
quantitative variables at work. A lot of trading-relevant variables also consist of

5
  Ong et al. (2020) illustrates some of these effects by proving that institutional ownership has effects of
IPO pricing.

                                  10
combinations of more fundamental variables whose existence can be taken as given. By
deducing  the financial equivalents of the physics base dimensions, the isolation of
fundamental variables becomes even more intuitive.

Going forward, stock-  and time-specific variables are denoted with subscripts  j  and  t  to
indicate stock  j  at  time  t. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) assume that the market impact cost
𝐺!"  is a function of the fundamental financial variables asset quantity  𝑄!", asset price
                                 #
𝑃!", volume  𝑉!", return variance  𝜎!". We initially assume that the market impact cost  𝐺!"
is any function of these variables. For clarity, the difference between  𝑄!"  and  𝑉!"  is that
𝑄!"  represents asset quantity relating to an individual bet, and  𝑉!"  represents trading
activity in the market by measuring the amount of trading in a specific stock over a
specific time interval. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) also introduce the expected bet cost
as an explanatory variable for the market impact cost  𝐺!". They claim that the
assumption underpinning this inclusion is less intuitive than  the inclusion of the other
chosen variables.  The formula for the unconditional expected bet cost is:

                                   𝐶  ≔  𝐸)𝐺!"𝑃!"*𝑄!"*+                              (1)

As can be seen in  equation  (1),  𝐶  is the expected product of the stock-  and time-specific
market impact cost  𝐺!"  and price  𝑃!"  for executing a bet of the unsigned bet size  𝑄!".
The reason for the absence of subscripts with regards to  𝐶, is that it is assumed to be
constant across all stocks and time. This constitutes an additional market microstructure
invariance assumption. In summary, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), assume that these five
variables are explanatory with regards to  𝐺!", and thus constitute  arguments in the
function of  𝐺!", rendering us the assumed formal relationship:

                                                    #
                                  𝐺!"  ∶=  𝑔3𝑄!",  𝑃!", 𝑉!", 𝜎!", 𝐶5                            (2)

At this stage, we have yet to assume or conclude the exact composition of  function  g  in
equation  (2).  We initially restrict our analysis to this  set of five assumed explanatory
variables. This is a key step in dimensional  analysis. Kyle  and Obizhaeva (2017)
mention that due to the inherent procedure of dimensional analysis, some explanatory
variables might have been omitted. Since we also apply dimensional analysis, we  might
also suffer from  omitted variables and  misspecifications. This is,  however,  mitigated by
the fact that our intention is to essentially test their proposed market microstructure
invariance relationship. Therefore, despite our derivation of these relationships and
inherent variables, we take this specification as exogenously given, provided by existing
theory in the field of market microstructure invariance.

                                  11
The assumed explanatory variables are divided into (1) variables measured in base
dimensional quantities, and (2) those measured in dimensionless quantities.
Dimensionless quantities are quantities other than the base dimensional quantities, and
also includes constants. For clarification purposes, we here summarize the basic
dimensional quantities in which our variables are measured:

7𝐺!"8  =  1;                             7𝑄!"8  =  𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠;

7𝑃!"8  =  𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦/𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠;              7𝑉!"8  =  𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠/𝑑𝑎𝑦;

  #
[𝜎!"]  =  1/𝑑𝑎𝑦;                        [𝐶]  =  𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦.

The brackets indicate that what is stated on the  right  side of the equation is the basic
dimensional quantity in which the stated variables are measured in. The quantity of 1
mentioned in relation to  𝐺!"  indicates that this quantity is dimensionless, since it is a
fraction not consisting of basic dimensional quantities.
All variables  that are  not measured in the financial, basic dimensional quantities (i.e.,
currency, asset quantity or time), or combinations hereof, are considered dimensionless.
As can be seen in the notation above, in this setup,  𝐺!"  is the only dimensionless
variable. Through this exposition one key benefit of choosing these explanatory
variables begins to emerge. Most of these variables are accessible from financial
markets data and measured in easily comprehensible  and  generally accepted basic
dimensional quantities.

                                             #
The three dimensional variables  𝑄!",  𝑃!"  and  𝜎!" are dimensionally independent and span
the three basic dimensions. Further,  𝑉!"  and  𝐶  can be expressed by combining these
three variables. The fact that the basic dimensions in finance are three  –  currency,
quantity and time  –  and we have five variables, allows  us to replace  𝑉!"  and  𝐶  by
introducing two newly constructed dimensionless variables. The new dimensionless
                                                                                  #
variables  𝐿!"  and  𝑍!"  are constructed by adding a dimensionless scaling constant  𝑚 :

                                                    %
                                            #       &
                                                  𝑚 𝑃!"𝑉!"
                               𝐿!"  ∶= K   #     L                             (3)
                                                      𝜎!"𝐶

                                                       𝑃!"𝑄!"
                                  𝑍!"  ∶=                                        (4)
                                                        𝐿!"𝐶

For  the  general methodology (the Buckingham theorem), see Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2017). Following the subscript notation above,  𝐿!"  and  𝑍!"  represent the stock-  and

                                  12
time-specific liquidity measure and scaled bet size, respectively. More specifically,  𝑍!"
is the size of a bet expressed as a multiple of the mean of the unsigned bet size. Since
the  market impact cost  𝐺!"  is dimensionless, and for consistency in units on both sides
                                                       #
of equation  (2), the dimensional quantities  𝑄!",  𝑃!"  and  𝜎!" on the right hand-side must
be dropped as well.

                                             #
                         𝐺!"  ∶=  𝑔3𝑄!",  𝑃!", 𝑉!", 𝜎!", 𝐶5  =  𝑔3𝐿!", 𝑍!"5                     (5)

In  equation  (5)  we note that  𝐺!"  is expressed using only two dimensionless  quantities
and  thus independent of the units of measurement. This implication is based on the
assumption that rational investors are not confused by units of measurement. Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2017) claim that rational investors do not suffer from money illusion, and
thereby do not change their  behavior  when shares are split. Nor do rational investors
confuse calendar time with business time. Conclusively, it is irrelevant if transaction
costs are measured in different currencies, since these currencies are  interchangeable.

3.1.2. Leverage Neutrality
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) supplement their derivation with  a  universal, financial
equivalent of a physics conservation law, leverage neutrality. This principle is a
generally accepted sub-principle of the Modigliani and Miller principle of no-arbitrage.
In a transactional setting, this principle implies that adding a riskless asset, i.e. cash, to a
transaction in risky securities, will not alter the cost of such a transaction, since cash is a
riskless asset.  Leverage neutrality also involves the capital structure irrelevance theory
as outlined by  Modigliani and Miller (1958), which states that a firm’s undertaking of
riskless debt does not alter the cost of trading the firm’s securities.

Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) makes a supplementing interpretation of leverage neutrality,
from a macro perspective. This interpretation implies that margin requirements and repo
haircuts are irrelevant for the economics of trading, i.e. irrelevant for transaction costs.
To bring clarity to the terminology, repo haircuts and margin requirements are distinct
from each other but both concern collateralization. Repo haircuts, or repurchase
agreements haircuts, are the conservative valuation discount applied to collateral by, for
instance, a securities dealer. Margin requirements concern maintaining the value of
posted collateral, and if this drops too low in, for instance, a margin account, the
potential debtor is contractually forced to post additional collateral, see Dang et al.
(2013).

By invoking these implications of leverage neutrality, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) show
that, since liquidity  𝐿!"  scales proportionally with the cash included in a transaction and

                                  13
is thereby not leverage neutral,  impact cost  𝐺!"  scales inversely to liquidity  𝐿!"  in
equation (6).  𝑍!"  is leverage neutral since it represents the scaled bet size:

                                  #                    1
                 𝐺!"  ≔  𝑔3𝑄!", 𝑃!", 𝑉!", 𝜎!", 𝐶5  =  𝑔3𝐿!", 𝑍!" 5  =     𝑓3𝑍!"5              (6)
                                                                                    𝐿!"

3.1.3. Market  Microstructure Invariance Assumptions
The third step in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) is  formulating different invariance
hypotheses. They initially  assume that the  function  𝑓  in the  general transaction cost
formula  in equation  (6)  takes the form of a power function with exponent  𝑤:

                                          '
                                      𝑓3𝑍!" 5  =  𝜆̅ *𝑍!"*                                    (7)

By assuming different values for this exponent  in equation (7), they make predictions
about bid-ask spread costs, linear and square-root  market impact costs. For our thesis,
bid-ask spreads and linear market impact costs are most interesting.  Therefore,  we show
them below.

Bid-ask spread cost  (𝑤  =  0):

                                      1
                                 𝐺!"  =  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡  ∙                                  (8)
                                                                      𝐿!"

Linear market impact  (𝑤  =  1):

                                                           𝑃!" *𝑄!"*
                               𝐺!"  =  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡  ∙      #                            (9)
                                                                     𝐶𝐿!"

Bid-ask spreads are not dependent on bet size  𝑄!"  and the proportionality  constant
between bid-ask spreads and illiquidity  in equation (8)  should be constant  and
dimensionless  across all assets. On the other hand, we see that linear market impact
depends on bet size  in equation (9). Finally, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) proceed to set
the market impact cost  𝐺!"  in  equation  (8)  to the relative bid-ask spread  𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!", i.e. the
size of the bid-ask spread as a fraction of the mid-price. The mid-price is the price
located in the middle of the prevailing best bid and ask prices. Like  𝐺!",  the relative bid-

                                  14
ask spread  𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!" is a dimensionless  fraction. This relationship provides the theoretical
foundation for our first hypothesis.

3.2. Invariance-Implied Market Impact in Stock Market Crashes
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) build on the core premise that the only difference between
different financial markets is that business time passes faster in more liquid markets
than less liquid markets. They use the concepts of transformation of calendar time to
business time and the inversely correlated measure velocity to predict price impacts
observed  in financial markets during times of intense selling pressure, and contrasts this
to predictions according to so-called conventional wisdom.

3.2.1. Predicting Market Impact Through Conventional Wisdom
The rationale underpinning the conventional wisdom model for predicting market
impact, is by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) said to be the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM), as well as competitive and efficient financial markets.  Since the CAPM model
implies that all stocks included in the market portfolio contributes  to the level of
systematic risk, trading a certain quantity of a single stock for a limited time carries
significantly less rewardable risk than the entire market. According to PwC (2021),  the
market risk premium historically has varied around 5-7%.  In light of this, conventional
wisdom  states that price elasticity in financial markets is such that a sell order
corresponding to 1% of market capitalization generates a price impact of less than 1%.
The conventional wisdom is by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) interpreted mathematically
such that the expected unsigned market impact  ∆𝑃/𝑃, approximated logarithmically as
∆ln𝑃,  can be expressed as the fraction of average daily volume (ADV) traded, wherein
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) assume that a stock has an asset turnover of a 100% over
the course of a trading year (250 days):

                                        ∆𝑃      𝑄
                          ∆ln𝑃  ≈     =                               (10)
                                           𝑃     250  ∙  𝑉

Where  𝑉is the share volume over a certain interval (normally a calendar day). In
application, this leads to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) taking the currency volume  𝑃𝑉
over the total market cap of the relevant instrument(s).

3.2.2. Predicting  Market Impact Through Market Microstructure Invariance
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) emphasize the importance of accounting for the asset-
specific business time, which they mean is the only difference between different
financial markets. Henceforth we return to the conventional notation wherein we let  𝑃
denote price,  𝑉  denote daily share volume, and  𝜎  returns volatility. The derivation of
the invariance-implied market impact formula in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) rests upon

                                  15
the core premise within market microstructure invariance  -  the transformation of
calendar time to business time.

In our review of Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) we derive the market microstructure
conjecture that expected transaction costs of executing bets are constant across markets,
contingent on that the bets transfer the same  currency risk  (𝑃  ∙  𝜎)  per unit of business
time. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) pair this transaction cost invariance conjecture with
the invariance of returns volatility, given the transformation of calendar time to business
time. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) and Kyle et. al (2016) define trading activity  𝑊  as a
measure of the rate at which a market transfers risk:

                                    𝑊  =  𝑃  ∙ 𝑉  ∙ 𝜎                               (11)

                                                     3/2
Trading activity  𝑊  is measured in dollars/day   due to the fact that it is comprised of
currency volume  𝑃𝑉, measured in dollars/day, and volatility  𝜎  measured in units per
     1/2
day  . Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) further introduces a benchmark stock with business
time corresponding to one calendar day, and  is said to approximately correspond to a
stock at the bottom of the S&P 500 index. This stock is introduced to standardize units
in the step-by-step formula derivation, and is kept  throughout the derivation  of  the
                                                      ∗
linear price impact model. This stock has  a price  𝑃  =  $40/share, expected trading
           ∗                                                                   1/2
volume  𝑉  =  1,000,000 shares/day and daily volatility  𝜎  =  2%/day  .

Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) derive  the relationship between trading  activity  𝑊  and
variables observable in financial markets, and invoke  the deduced  proposition that
invariance holds  for the probability distribution of random bet sizes, contingent  upon
scaling by business time over one business day.  They  denote  the  used  scaling constant
  ∗
𝑍 . The introduction of this scaling constant “forces”  𝑄  to become invariant. This is
necessary when deriving an invariance-based price impact model, since this allows for
model application across markets. Once Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) derive  𝑄  as
invariant, the equated bets are said to render equivalent price impacts, denoted  ∆𝑃 ⁄ 𝑃,
contingent of them being expressed as a fraction of returns volatility over one business
day. In light of this, it becomes possible to estimate market impacts across markets with
different characteristics, by accounting for differences in business time.

Using a log-linear impact model  ∆𝑃 ⁄𝑃   ≈  ∆𝑙𝑛𝑃, the linear price impact formula, along
with the involvement of the benchmark stock constants, renders an invariance-implied
market impact formula  for empirical testing:

                                             %         )
                                       𝜆̅         𝑃𝑉     &      𝜎    &       𝑄
                   ∆ ln 𝑃  =    )  ∙ d        *e  ∙ f     g  ∙                        (12)
                           10    40 ∙ 10      0.02    (0.01)𝑉

                                  16
                                                               ̅     )
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) estimate  the term  𝜆 /10  to be five basis points (0.05%),
and is for the purpose of our application of this model, exogenously given. This
function takes unsigned bet size  𝑄, dollar volume  𝑃𝑉, and return volatility  𝜎  as
arguments. The result is the predicted invariance-implied market impact.

In summary, through their step-by-step derivation, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) derive
an invariance-implied market impact formula to be compared to conventional wisdom
in predicting price developments in stock market crashes. They hypothesize and confirm
that differences in business time constitutes an explanatory consideration necessary for
a higher level of accuracy in predicting price movements caused by large sell orders
preceding stock market crashes.

                                  17
4. Hypotheses and Research Design

This section includes our explicitly formulated hypotheses and the theoretical
motivation behind them. Further, this section presents our research design, which
includes a description of our practical approach, coupled with the theoretical
motivations behind it.

4.1. Hypotheses
We formulate two market microstructure invariance hypotheses about transaction costs
on the Swedish stock market. First, we formulate our invariance hypothesis regarding
the bid-ask spread on the Swedish stock market:

   The relative  size of the bid-ask spread has a proportional relationship to the asset-
  specific illiquidity measure, defined as the cube root of the ratio of return variance to
SEK volume, for Swedish stocks observed on a millisecond frequency (tick-by-tick data)
                       for the period of 2010-02-08 to 2020-12-31.

                                𝑆!"                           1
                      ln K  L  =  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 + 1 ∙ ln K   L                  (13)
                                        𝑃!"                                 𝐿!"

Where
                                                        %
                                            +
                                1                 𝑃 𝑉    &
                                                               !" !"
                                =  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡  ∙ i   #  j                           (14)
                                         𝐿!"                       𝜎!"

And

𝐿  =  Liquidity
𝑆  =  Absolute bid-ask spread
𝑃  =  Mid-price
𝑉  = Share volume
𝜎  =  Volatility

In order to statistically test  the  hypothesis  in equation (13), we choose the log relative
bid-ask spread as the dependent variable and the log illiquidity measure as the
independent variable.  Let  𝛽  denote the coefficient of the  log illiquidity measure. We
then formulate our null and alternative hypothesis as follows:

                                  18
𝐻,: 𝛽  =  1
𝐻%: 𝛽  ≠  1

Under the null hypothesis, the invariant relationship between the bid-ask spread and
illiquidity measure holds for the Swedish stock market, i.e. the slope is equal to 1. This
is similar to the manner in which Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) postulate their hypothesis.
In this setting, failure to reject the null hypothesis would confirm our market
microstructure invariance hypothesis. This hypothesis corresponds to the first special
case of the general transaction cost formula in  equation (8). The hypothesis above is
also coherent with the general market microstructure notion argued by Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2016), that for invariance to truly hold, the proposed relationship must hold
for all assets and across time. A successful outcome with regards to this hypothesis
would add yet another market and another time period to the area of applicability of this
transaction cost model.  Furthermore, this would also extend the applicability of this
transaction cost to an intraday setting, which would be particularly valuable due to the
importance of precise and granular transaction cost models in HFT.

Our second hypothesis concerns the invariance-implied linear impact cost in the
Swedish stock market, which is another type of transaction cost. It is also the second
special case of the general transaction cost formula in  equation (9). We hypothesize the
following:

 The invariance-implied market impact model  comes closer in magnitude to predicting
 price declines in the Swedish stock market during the Coronavirus Crash of 2020, than
                               conventional wisdom.

Here our null hypothesis is that the linear market impact model is able to predict the
magnitude of price declines during large stock market crashes more accurately than
conventional wisdom. The alternative hypothesis is that the magnitude of the price fall
suggested by conventional wisdom comes closer to the actual price impact. We are not
able to  statistically  test this second set of hypotheses for two reasons. First, these are the
same hypotheses as formulated in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) and they do not provide
an appropriate test statistic. Second, we have only looked at one stock market crash and
therefore, we do not have a sufficient amount of data to run statistical tests. However,
being able to  quantitatively  show  the relative superiority of this  impact  model would
provide future stock market crash stakeholders with a complementary model, which at
least historically has generated more accurate predictions than conventional wisdom.
Since risk models generally make use of sensitivity and scenario analyses,  this could
provide yet another simulation pattern and dimension to such models.

                                  19
4.2. Research Design
In the step-by-step dimensional analysis  in section 3,  we pose necessary assumptions
and show derivations of some formulas in a condensed manner to promote readability.
The attentive reader will notice that this step-by-step methodology in relevant parts
closely mimics Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), whose methodology in turn largely
originates from Barenblatt (1996) for non-financial applications. One reason  for the
conformity between our thesis and Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), is that Albert S. Kyle
and Anna A. Obizhaeva are the main proponents of invariance theories within market
microstructure. The second and dominant reason is that we wish for a potentially
successful empirical result of our research to add to the accumulated empirical findings
in this area, by adding another market and longer time period.

Cross-Sectional Analysis
A cross-sectional research method implies collecting data from different participants at
one point in time, see  Allen  (2017). The participants in our case are the different stocks
that are, at any point in time, included in the Swedish stock index OMXS30. We gather
stock-specific data on certain frequencies in order to construct a  proxy for the Swedish
stock market (the reason for us not to study the index directly is that it is not securitized
and data on the index lacks certain relevant trading variables). Since market
microstructure invariance theories say that supposedly invariant relationships should
hold across all assets and time,  we perform statistical analysis for both individual stocks
and on an aggregate level across all stocks as in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017). We also
choose to look at the aggregate sample of stocks in order to test if invariance holds for
our proxy for the Swedish stock market.

Intraday Analysis
Bets are inherently part of more general, long-run strategies, and in Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2017) the analysis is performed on a daily frequency and over the course of one year.
To test the durability of the invariance theory even more, we wish to see whether
invariance between the relative size of the bid-ask spread and illiquidity holds for an
intraday frequency as well. We do this by applying the adjusted invariance analysis
method of intraday trading invariance, a term coined by Andersen et al.  (2018).  We
aggregate our empirical variables by certain time intervals, e.g. five-minute intervals, to
study intraday trading patterns for Swedish stocks similarly as Andersen et. al (2018) do
for E-mini S&P 500 futures. With this approach we can capture the time-of-day effect
for  intraday trading. The considerations underpinning our chosen level of frequency
(length of time interval), entails balancing between a high enough level of granularity
and sufficient number of observations (trades) in each time interval. Longer intervals
gives a greater number of observations, but are less precise and less likely to capture
short-lived intraday patterns/fluctuations. On the other hand, shorter intervals may only
contain a few observations, leading to larger standard errors of arithmetic averages.

                                  20
Correlational Analysis
In general, our first and main research question implies investigating and empirically
testing a proposed relationship or correlation between two variables. Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2017) do not investigate causality between the two variables, and neither do
we. The results of this thesis can thus not facilitate inferences regarding whether the
bid-ask spread causes illiquidity or vice versa. However, it can provide normative
benchmarks and predictive transaction cost models.

Ordinary Least Squares Regression
The correlational character inherent in the bid-ask spread hypothesis renders regression
analysis as the  evident choice in determining whether there exists a statistical
relationship between them. The assumption of proportionality, also incorporated in our
research question and hypothesis, further facilitates the choice of methodology. The
proportionality,  wherein  the  illiquidity  measure  is multiplied with a constant,  renders
that this relationship regardless of intercept and thus the value of this constant, should
render a correlational, linear relationship. This motivates us to apply the ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression model. This regression model generates a  best fitted line
based on made observations, which in our case  are  the values of the relative size of the
bid-ask spread and the values of our computed illiquidity measure respectively, for each
time interval.

Confidence Intervals and Robustness Checks
As part of the empirical statistical testing of our hypothesis we also construct a
confidence interval, centered around our regression slope. This allows us to validate the
theory if the confidence interval spans a range which includes our desired slope of  1.
This confidence interval  could  also, upon failure to validate our postulated market
microstructure invariance  hypothesis, provide a quantitative basis for qualitative
statements regarding  economic closeness  to the slope 1.

We also  perform robustness  checks wherein we test the sensitivity of our obtained
results by making certain alterations to assumptions and inputs, without changing the
general methodology. These alterations are thus not made to the assumptions
underpinning the theoretical framework  or the derivations of our variables, but rather to
our testing procedure.  We  analyze different time periods, both in regard to our
hypothesis test but also in regard to our construction of confidence intervals,  where we
aggregate our data on different  time  periods.

Non-Statistical Test of Invariance-Implied Market Impact Model
For our second hypothesis, concerning the relative accuracy of the invariance-implied
market impact model we do not have sufficient data for performing a statistically valid
hypothesis test. Such a test is however not undertaken by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019)

                                  21
either, and this is probably due to the lack of a large enough data sample. We suffer
from the same problem. We can thus make quantitatively based statements regarding
the relative accuracy, or closeness in magnitude, of the invariance-implied market
impact model. We perform this test in the same way as Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019).

We compare our predictions according to the conventional wisdom model to the
predictions generated by the invariance-implied market impact model from Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2019).  The relative accuracy of these two methods are illustrated by
comparing them to the actual price decline. By accounting for which method renders the
prediction closest to the actual price decline, we are able to make quantitative, but not
statistically supported, statements regarding the relative accuracy of these predictive
models.

As a substitute for statistical robustness checks, and since we only have one stock
market crash in our sample, we will divide the period for this crash (later defined as the
time period between the all-time high listing and the bottom listing of 2020) into several
shorter sub-periods. We will also investigate how sensitive the invariance-implied
market impact model is to input estimates,  which is  why we gradually alter the
computation (“calibration”)  period for the average daily SEK volume and volatility used
as inputs in the model.

                                  22
5. Data
This section presents our data, outlined with regards to each of our respective
hypotheses. The disposition is motivated by the use of different data for different
hypotheses, and our first and main hypothesis require a lot more data processing. In
each subsection, we first present the data in general, then our cleaning, processing and
aggregating of this data. Lastly, we present identified and potential data issues as well
as summary statistics regarding each dataset.
The subsection regarding futures data  follows, despite the absence of subheadings, the
sequence outlined in this introduction. The absence of subheadings is motivated by the
simpler data processing undertaken in regard to the futures data.

5.1. Stock  Data
We use high-frequency trading data for the Swedish stock market to test the market
microstructure invariance between percentage bid-ask spread and the illiquidity measure
in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017). We use data from NASDAQ OMX Stockholm (formerly
known as the Stockholm Stock Exchange) from  February 2010 to December 2020,
which was obtained through the Swedish House of Finance National Research Data
Center. The reason for us to choose this period, and not include older periods, is that
NASDAQ changed their trading system from SAXXESS to the  more advanced Inet, and
data from SAXXESS is not freely available.

For this thesis we use a reconstructed limit order book for each stock included in the
OMXS30 index. A reconstructed limit order book includes the first and second level bid
price, bid volume, ask price, ask volume, volume traded, and trade price timestamped to
the  millisecond. For this thesis, we only look at the first level of the limit order book,
i.e. the top bid price, bid volume, ask price and ask volume. The top bid and top ask
prices are used to calculate the bid-ask spread and the trade price and trade volume are
used to compute the dollar volume (turnover).

The data covers all the historical constituents in the OMX Stockholm 30 Index
(OMXS30) between 2010-02-08 to 2020-12-31.  The index consists of the 30 most
traded stocks on NASDAQ OMX Stockholm and tracks the Swedish stock market. Its
composition is reviewed  semi-annually,  and it happens that incumbent constituents are
replaced by new stocks with a higher turnover in the market. We have adjusted the data
for all exclusions and inclusions that occurred during our time period of interest, to
include these new constituents. It deserves mentioning that the constituent companies
were largely the same for the entire time period, and  in total we have reviewed 35
companies.

                                  23
                                                              6
We only consider trades between 09:00 and 17:25 (CET), which corresponds to the
                                                                          7
continuous trading hours for equities on NASDAQ OMX Stockholm. We also exclude
51 trading days from our sample because of erroneous start and end times inconsistent
with official trading hours.

Since Sweden is a member of the EU, NASDAQ OMX Stockholm must follow certain
trading rules which apply to all stock exchanges in the EU. Since January 2018, the tick
size of all stocks listed on EU exchanges is regulated by MiFID II. The tick-size, the
minimum increment in bid or ask price, of each stock traded on NASDAQ OMX
Stockholm depends on both the price of the stock and its “liquidity band”, according to
MiFID II. The average daily number of trades (ADNT) in a stock on “the relevant
market in terms of liquidity” determines which liquidity band it belongs to. The
European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) decides what the relevant market is
and calculates the average daily number  of trades for each stock on an annual basis.
This information is then released to the public.

5.1.1. Data  Limitations
We do not have data on realized spread costs and use quoted bid-ask spreads instead.
However, according to Kyle  and  Obizhaeva (2017) the predictions about bid-ask
spreads from  dimensional analysis, leverage neutrality and market microstructure
invariance should still  hold for quoted bid-ask spreads as well.

Our choice of time period and frequency differs from Kyle  and  Obizhaeva (2017),
which  use minute-data from January to December 2015 aggregated on a daily basis. We
study a  longer period of time, more than 10 years of financial data on a millisecond
level, which we  then aggregate to five-minute intervals. In addition, since we use a
longer time period our  dataset is posed to contain more stocks split events, which in turn
change the price of our  selected stocks. Fortunately, neither stock splits nor different
frequencies of data have an  impact on these securities-specific measures, such as
liquidity, according to Kyle  and  Obizhaeva (2017).

Our granularity-induced purpose of intraday data would have been promoted by the use
of futures on the Swedish stock market as opposed to stocks, with  relevant necessary
adjustments to our hypothesis and research question.

6
 http://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/tradinghours

7
  NASDAQ OMX Stockholm is open between 09:00-17:30 CET, but there is no order-matching during
the last five minutes (17:25-17:30).

                                  24
                                             8
Index futures are more liquid than stocks, hence they would be beneficial to study,
especially with regards to the high level of granularity induced by our high-frequency
data. A possible motivation behind the usage of  E-mini futures in Andersen et. al (2018)
is that such financial instruments are highly liquid and trades intensively, which adds
value when gathering tick-by-tick data.

Futures on OMXS30 exist, but there are two  key reasons why we do not include these in
our sample. Futures can be divided into regular futures and mini-futures. Mini-futures,
like the ones studied in Andersen et. al (2018), is more easily accessible to the large
                                                                      9
masses of retail investors due to the  lower quantity of underlying, and thereby lower
trading thresholds, contained in each contract. Mini-futures on the OMXS30 index were
first issued in the summer of 2020, and to study these we would have had to settle for a
short time period. We deemed this time period as insufficient, and macroeconomically
significant events  during  this particular time period,  including the occurrence of both a
pandemic as well as  a  turbulent presidential  election  in the US, would likely not render
such a sample representative of normal market conditions.

Regular futures on the OMXS30 index do, to our knowledge, exist for our time period
of interest. However, the reason for not including these in our sample instead of the
shares constituting the index itself, is due to  limited access to a longer time series of
data. There are, however, benefits of studying individual stocks instead.  By studying
individual companies  on  the Swedish stock market, we  can gain  insights  about how the
regression slope  varies between  the different companies in the index.

Despite the fact that we constructed this index-like proxy ourselves in order to obtain
the necessary trading-related data, a large index is what generally is referred to as “the
market”. The OMXS30-included stocks make up approximately 60.5% of the market
                                                           10
capitalization of the entire Stockholm Stock Exchange.  Despite the fact that the
sample most coherent with the terms “Swedish stocks” or “Swedish stock market”
would  be a sample of all publicly traded Swedish stocks, our chosen sample strikes, in
our opinion, a good balance between feasibility, representation, data quality and
precision, respectively.

8
 Nasdaq OMXS30 statistics.

9
  Kurov and Lasser (2004) highlights the main differences between regular futures and mini futures.

10
  Data obtained through the FinBas database, accessed through Swedish House of Finance. Market
capitalization EOD per 2020-12-30 for OMXS30 stocks still included per 2021-05-12, and EOD data per
2020-12-30 for Stockholm Stock Market.

                                  25
5.1.2. Construction of Main Empirical Variables
In this thesis we mainly use variables similar to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017). This is
motivated by the fact that financial market microstructure variables usually have a
conventional and established composition, but also due to the fact that reproducing
certain assumptions  are necessary in order to test whether the bid-ask spread has a
proportional relationship to illiquidity for Swedish stocks  on an intraday level.

Let the  subscript  j  denote stock  j, and subscript  t  denote each five-minute intraday
interval during a full  trading day (only continuous trading), that starts at 09:00 and
closes at 17:25.  As our entire sample contains 35 Swedish stocks, subscript  j  ranges
from 1 to 35, and subscript  t  ranges from 1 to 101.  Our main empirical variables are
order size  𝑄!", SEK  volume  𝑃!"𝑉!", realized volatility  𝜎!", main illiquidity index  1⁄  𝐿!"
and the percentage bid-ask spread  𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!".

We use tick-by-tick data with timestamp to the millisecond. For each stock we
aggregate trades recorded on a  millisecond frequency for each consecutive five-minute
intraday interval for all trading days. More specifically, we calculate time-weighted
averages for the mid-price  𝑃!"  and the percentage bid-ask spread  𝑆!" ⁄𝑃  !" within each
five-minute intraday interval. However, time-weighting is not possible for trades that
are recorded  at the exact same timestamp  in our data sample. This happens when a
marketable order is executed against several standing limit orders. Our remedy for this
is to use a volume-weighting similar to the approach by Pohl et. al (2020), before the
time-weighting. When multiple trades  are recorded  at the exact same timestamp on the
millisecond  𝑡-, the  observed  mid-prices  𝑃!"!  and percentage bid-ask spreads
𝑆!"! ⁄𝑃  !"!are volume-weighted to give us one observation per variable for that timestamp
and stock. The time-weighting follows what is done by McInish and Wood (1992).  The
procedure for calculating these  volume-  and  time-weighted averages  is  explained in
more detail  in Appendix  C.

5.1.3. Summary Statistics
Our empirical variables of interest are the formula input variables for the measurements
whose relationships are tested. Apart from the directly computable mid-price  𝑃!", we
focus on volume  𝑉!"  and volatility  𝜎!"  as these are our main inputs for our illiquidity
measure  1 ⁄𝐿  !",  whose composition is further derived and elaborated as one of our
empirical variables in  Appendix C. For these variables, we divide each trading day in
101 five-minute intervals, assign them a chronological number based on their
occurrence during the trading day, so that the time interval 09:00-09:05 (CET) receives
the number 1 since this is the first five-minute interval of a trading day, 09:05-09:10
receives the number 2 since this is the second five-minute interval of a trading day, and
so on. Once this is done we group all variables by  each five-minute interval and average
them  across our entire time period (February 2010-December  2020), in order to obtain
average variable measurements  for each five-minute interval.

                                  26
           TABLE 1. Summary Statistics for OMXS30 Constituents

Table 1 – The summary statistics are reported for all OMXS30 stocks and the entire continuous trading
session. Relative bid-ask spread is the ratio between bid-ask spread and the quoted mid-price, and it is
                       -4
measured in 10 . Illiquidity is defined as the cube root  of the ratio of return variance to SEK volume, and
                             -5
it is measured in 10 . Volatility is realized volatility and is calculated by summing squared returns
between each quoted  mid-price  within every five-minute interval. Realized volatility is then averaged
across all five-minute intervals and stocks, and finally annualized by multiplying with 101  ∙  252. All other
variables are reported on a five-minute level.

This thesis focuses on share volume  𝑉!",  volatility  𝜎!", trade size  𝑄!",  bid-ask spreads
𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!" and illiquidity  1⁄   𝐿!". We plot these variables together with the number of trades
𝑁!"  =  𝑉!" ⁄ 𝑄!" in figure  1. All six trading variables show interesting intraday patterns.
Perhaps surprisingly, bid-ask spreads in our sample do not follow the U-shaped pattern
reported for NYSE stocks by Brock and Kleidon (1992) and Lee et. al (1993),  nor the
reversed J-shaped pattern for NYSE stocks documented by McInish and Wood (1992).
In figure  1  bid-ask spreads for OMXS30 constituents  drastically drop during the first
minutes after market open, slowly decrease through the rest of the trading day (except a
small jump around 15:30 when US markets open), and then begin to slightly fall around
16:00. This more closely matches the (weakly) reversed J-shape for bid-ask spreads in
DAX30 constituents that Hussain (2011) finds, with the main difference being that our
spreads decrease rather than increase near the close. Chan et. al (1995) also see intraday
bid-ask spreads for NASDAQ securities narrow near the close, in contrast to classical
U-shape observed for NYSE securities. Their explanation for these different patterns is
structural differences between the two markets (NASDAQ is a dealer market, while
NYSE is a specialist market). Traders’ inventory control of securities in dealer markets
is said to be consistent with narrow spreads preceding the close, while specialists’
market power is thought to contribute to wider spreads at the end of the day. However,
in figure  1  we can see a U-shaped pattern for share volume, similar to that of Brock and
Kleidon (1992) and Chan et. al (1995), as well as a U-shape for the number of trades,
matching the intraday curve in Chan et. al (1995). In our sample, realized volatility has
a reverse J-shaped pattern:  it falls significantly directly after the market opens and this
decreasing pattern continues until later in the afternoon when volatility suddenly jumps
up at 15:30.  It stays close to this new level for the rest of the day.  This is in line with
results found by Hussain (2011) and Chan et. al (1995).

                                  27
        FIGURE 1. Intraday Trading Patterns for OMXS30 Constituents

Figure 1 – The figure shows averages (per five minutes) across all stocks and days for volatility, share
volume, trade size, number of trades, illiquidity and percentage bid-ask spread. Illiquidity is defined as
the cube root of the ratio of return variance and SEK  volume. Percentage bid-ask spread is defined as the
dollar bid-ask spread divided by the mid-point price between the best bid and ask price. The figure shows
how these averages develop over the average trading day for the average stock. All times are in CET.

5.2. Futures  Data
To test the invariance-implied market impact formula  in equation  (12) we use three
datasets. The first dataset consists of tick-by-tick (millisecond) trade data on OMXS30
derivatives (futures and options) from January to March 2020 and is provided by
NASDAQ’s office in Vilnius. This sample covers  seven  different futures contracts with
maturities in January, February, March, April, May, June and September 2020, and
includes 62 trading days. The second dataset contains a time series of  the daily closing
value of the OMXS30  index between January and March 2020, and is provided by
NASDAQ. The third dataset is a time series of the continuous OMXS30 futures contract
and is retrieved directly from Refinitiv Eikon. This particular continuous contract
always gives the nearest month futures contract.

                                  28
Data cleaning procedures include what follows. The data contains trades in both futures
and options contracts. Since we are only interested in the futures market in order to
explain price change on  the stock market, we drop all option trades (191,432 trades) and
are left with 9,361,855 futures trades.  We only have futures trades data for the first
quarter of 2020.

The main empirical variables for our analysis of  the 2020 Coronavirus Crash are
average daily volume (ADV), daily volatility  𝜎  of futures prices, futures gross sales in
SEK, stock gross sales in SEK and the actual price impact of the OMXS30 index. For
the  alternative  conventional wisdom model we use the  same gross sales as for the
invariance-implied model, but for market capitalization we use the market capitalization
of the entire Stockholm Stock Exchange.

We construct average daily volume (ADV) by first summing the total SEK volume of
futures each day  and then taking the mean of daily SEK volumes (for x days preceding
18 February 2020). To calculate daily volatility  𝜎, we compute daily returns from the
price of the continuous nearest month OMXS30 futures contract (for x days preceding
17 February 2020). Then we take the standard deviation of the returns to get daily
volatility. We calculate futures (gross) sales for a specified time period as the total sales
in SEK during the same period. We calculate actual price impact for the same period as
for gross sales, by computing the percentage change between end-of-day (EOD) index
values of the OMXS30.

             TABLE 2. Summary Statistics for OMXS30 Futures

Table 2 – This table presents daily volatility, average daily number of trades, average daily volume, total
volume, total number of trades and average trade size for futures with the expiration dates stated in the
left column. Volatility is calculated by  taking the  standard  deviation  of  EOD futures  returns.  Total (daily)
volume is calculated for each futures series (based on expiration date) by summing (averaging) the
number of traded contracts for all trades within  the entire  time  period.

                                  29
6. Empirical Findings

This section is devoted to illustrating the empirical results that we obtain  through the
analysis of our sample data. The first subsection presents our results with regards to our
first hypothesis, proposing a proportional relationship between the relative size of the
bid-ask spread and illiquidity in the Swedish stock market. We  combine descriptive
statistics with illustrating plots and a written review of our results. This is concluded by
a brief statement concerning whether or not the hypothesis is statistically confirmed.

The second subsection concerns our second hypothesis,  whether or not the invariance-
implied market impact model is more accurate than conventional wisdom in predicting
sell order-induced price impacts in the Swedish  stock  and futures  market during the
Great Coronavirus Crash of 2020. As  aforementioned, we do not have large enough  data
samples to confirm or reject this hypothesis statistically, hence we merely validate the
results from Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) for another dataset, obtained from a more
recent crash.

6.1. The  Relative  Bid-Ask  Spread  vs.  Illiquidity
It deserves mentioning that the results presented here are the aggregated results for the
entire time series. We present  results  for individual years in Appendix B as an
indication of level of robustness. The reason behind this  disposition is that our
hypothesis concerns the Swedish stock market taken over the entire time period.  The
sampling of data for individual stocks is also a  necessary step in our compilation of the
stocks contained in the OMXS30 index,  but not particularly  relevant to the hypothesis
test.  Therefore  results for individual stocks  are  placed in Appendix A.  As a reminder,
the investigated and supposedly proportional relationship is  ln3𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!"5  =  𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡  +
1  ∙  ln (1⁄   𝐿!").  Illiquidity  1⁄   𝐿!" is in turn defined as the cube root of the ratio of return
          #
variance  𝜎!" to SEK volume  𝑃!"𝑉!".

Table 3 presents the results from the OLS regression for  ln(𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!") against  ln  (1 ⁄𝐿!")
on the aggregate sample, i.e. the entire time period (2010-02-08 to 2020-12-31) and
includes 35 different stocks. The number of stocks covered in this sample is greater than
30, because it includes all stocks that at some point during the time period of interest
have  been included in the OMXS30 index. Each  trading day contains 101 five-minute
intervals, which renders a total of  35  ∙  101  = 3535  data points.

                                  30
                        TABLE 3. OLS Regression

Table 3 – The table presents the OLS regression of  ln (𝑆"# ⁄ 𝑃"#)  =  𝑐  +  𝛽 ∙ ln (1 ⁄𝐿"#). For each of the 35
stocks  contained in the OMXS30 index over the  full  time period, 101 aggregated five-minute intervals are
used in the regression, corresponding to 3535 points. Coefficients  𝑐  and  𝛽, coefficient of determination
 $
𝑅  and 95 % confidence interval for the aggregate  slope  𝛽  are  estimated for the entire period (2010-
2020).
Figure 2 plots log bid-ask spread  ln(𝑆!" ⁄𝑃  !") against log illiquidity  ln  (1⁄   𝐿!").  Each
point represents each (non-overlapping) five-minute interval between 09:00 and 17:25
(CET), aggregated from our millisecond data, for each stock. Each color of the points
represents a different stock. A fitted line for each stock is also plotted in the same color
as the corresponding points. This graph is supposed to capture the time-of-day effect for
each stock on its average trading day. Hence, the number of trading days are aggregated
into five-minute intervals and do not contribute to the number of points plotted in the
graph. The blue fitted line for the aggregate data, which we obtain through our OLS
regression, is  ln (𝑆!" ⁄𝑃 !")  =  2.0908 + 0.9881 ∙ ln (1⁄  𝐿!"). Our confidence interval
                                                                     #
ranges from 0.9707 to 1.0054, while the coefficient of determination  𝑅  is 0.7786. As a
benchmark, we add a red line  with  a  slope of 1, with its exact equation being
ln (𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!")  =  2.2022 + 1 ∙ ln (1⁄  𝐿!") as predicted by the market microstructure
invariance  hypothesis.

                    FIGURE 2. Aggregate OLS Regression

Figure 2 – This figure plots log percentage bid-ask spread against log illiquidity for each of the 35 stocks
in the OMXS30 index from 2010-02-08 to 2020-12-31. Different colors represent different stocks. For
each stock, 101 points for all the five-minute intervals between 09:00 and 17:25 are plotted. Each point

                                  31
represents a five-minute bid-ask spread and illiquidity average of a particular stock. All stocks have been
averaged across all days. Dashed lines represent OLS regressions for individual stocks. The red line
ln (𝑆"# ⁄𝑃 "#)  =  2.2022 + 1 ∙ ln (1 ⁄𝐿"#) is added as a benchmark and represents the predicted regression
slope of one according to our hypothesis. The slope is fixed at exactly one and only its intercept is
estimated for the aggregate sample. The blue fitted line for the aggregate sample is  ln4𝑆"# ⁄ 𝑃"#5  =
2.0908 + 0.9881 ∙ ln (1⁄   𝐿"#).  The blue and red line almost overlap because our estimated blue line is
very close to the hypothetical red line.

As we can see, both by the aggregate slope  coefficient  𝛽  stated in Table 3 as well as by
the spread of the observations in Figure 2, the  estimated  slope is not exactly one.
However, if we instead turn our attention to our statistically constructed 95 %
confidence interval, which ranges from 0.9707  to 1.0054, we see that the value one is
contained in this interval. On a 95 % confidence level the invariance prediction that the
slope is one (null hypothesis) is not  statistically  rejected. Thus, we can confirm, with a
relatively high level of certainty, that invariance holds for our entire sample, i.e. the
                                                     11
Swedish stock market over the period 2010-2020,  when we aggregate trades on a five-
minute frequency. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) use daily averages for US and Russian
stocks in their log-linear regression. For the Russian stocks, their fitted line is
ln (𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!") =  2.093 + 0.998 ∙ ln (1 ⁄𝐿  !").  For the US sample, their fitted line is
ln (𝑆!" ⁄ 𝑃!")  =  1.011 + 0.961 ∙ ln (1 ⁄𝐿!").  Hence, our results are similar to the results
reported  by  Kyle and Obizhaeva  (2017), in particular their fitted line for the Russian
stocks.

For the 35 dashed lines in figure 2, which are fitted based on data on each of the 35
individual stocks, we can see that the slope estimates vary around and above one. In
table 4 we see that the slopes of individual stocks vary between 0.9867 and 1.5776, with
a mean slope of 1.1454.  See Appendix A for the slopes of all stocks.  These estimates
are higher than implied by invariance. For Russian stocks, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017)
get individual  slopes which are instead lower than one, and for both US and Russian
stocks they report larger spread in individual slopes.

            TABLE 4. OMXS30 Constituents Regression Statistics

Table 4 – The table presents the maximum, minimum and mean individual slopes across all OMXS30
constituents and days for the period 2010-02-08 to 2020-12-31.

As a  robustness  check  over subperiods, we perform yearly aggregate regressions across
all stocks. The results from these regressions can be  found  in Appendix  B. We

11
   2010-02-08 to 2020-12-31.

                                  32
statistically  reject the hypothesis that the slope is one for all individual years 2010-2020,
except  for  2017. However, for 2010, 2014, 2016 and 2018 the slope is economically
close to one. There are many explanations for these results since market microstructure
relationships are affected by a number of factors, such as regulation, clearing
mechanisms, digitized trading, tick sizes and so on.

This simple model does not account for these market frictions. Based on the regression
statistics presented in Appendix B, we notice, for instance, that a shift occurs 2017/2018
and the yearly slope  seems to  increase  thereafter. This shift interestingly coincides with
the EU’s introduction of MiFID II in January 2018, which harmonized tick sizes on
stock exchanges throughout the union. This causes  us to  suspect  that regulation
concerning minimum tick sizes could affect  bid-ask spreads.

Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) also  derive  a more general bid-ask spread formula that
                                  ./0              ./0
accounts for the  minimum  tick size  𝐾!"   and lot size  𝑄!"  ,  which may be theoretically
relevant  here:

                                      ./0      ./0  #  #
                                 𝑆!"     1     𝐾!"   𝐿!"  𝑄!"   𝜎!"𝐿!"
                           =    𝑠 K        ,           L                   (15)
                                   𝑃!"    𝐿!"        𝑃!"           𝑉!"

However, they do not test this extended formula empirically. We test this new
specification for the bid-ask spread by taking a naive approach, assuming that  𝑠(𝑥, 𝑦)  =
𝑥𝑦, and taking  the natural  logarithm  of  both sides  in equation (15). We get a log-linear
relationship with three explanatory variables: log illiquidity, log ratio between actual
and optimal tick size, and log ratio between actual and optimal lot size. Optimal tick and
lot size are derived from  invariance theory. We have been able to show that these two
                        #
new variables improve  𝑅  of our regression from 0.7786 to 0.8110.

Lastly, it deserves mentioning that although we manage to confirm our postulated
market microstructure invariance  hypothesis regarding the relationship between the
relative size of the bid-ask spread and our illiquidity measure, we are not able to make
any causal inferences. Similar to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) we are only able to state
that market microstructure invariance holds for the relationship between the relative size
of the bid-ask spread  and illiquidity,  when  empirically tested for the Swedish stock
                                 12
market between the years 2010  and 2020. Our research design does not allow for us to
make any inferences regarding whether the relative size of the bid-ask spread  causes
illiquidity, or vice versa.

12
   2010-02-08.

                                  33
6.2. Invariance  Predictions for the Coronavirus Crash of 2020
Our second hypothesis concerns the relative accuracy of the invariance-implied market
impact model developed by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019). They confirm their model’s
superiority to conventional wisdom in predicting price declines in previous stock market
crashes, by testing  it  empirically for five different market crashes, with the latest being
in 2008.

During the Great Coronavirus Crash of 2020 the OMXS30 index fell from 1  900.28
(2020-02-19) to 1  292.27 (2020-03-23) and thus experienced a price decline of 32%.
        rd
The 23  of March  represented the lowest mark of 2020 and by studying the  subsequent
development, it can be said that  the  recovery started after this date.

                 FIGURE  3. OMXS30 2020-02-10 to 2020-04-30

Figure 3  –  The figure plots the  crash  of the OMXS30  index during the outbreak of Covid-19 and the
beginning of  its  subsequent recovery. The graph includes dates between 2020-02-10 and 2020-04-30,
with the highest and lowest point being 1 900.28 (2020-02-19) and 1 292.27 (2020-03-23), respectively.
Specific dates are plotted along the x-axis, with corresponding  index  values along the y-axis.

Emergency Information from Swedish Authorities (2020) reported Sweden’s first
registered case of Covid-19, the disease caused by the Coronavirus, at the end of
January 2020. The OMXS30 index, however, continued to rise until the top listing on
       th                         th
the 19  of February. The 11  of March the World Health  Organization  (WHO) declared
                                                            th
Covid-19 a pandemic, and consequently, on the 12  of March the OMXS30 index
experienced a decline of 10.57%. Table  5  illustrates the development of the index
during the period between 2020-02-19 and 2020-03-23:

                                  34
                   TABLE 5. OMXS30 2020-02-19 to 2020-03-23

Table 5 – The table presents EOD values of the OMXS30 index for selected dates during the 2020
                                                                          th
Coronavirus Crash. The first date is the all-time-high listing on the 19  of February, and subsequent
values are obtained for the following Fridays, with the last value  being the bottom listing on Monday the
   rd
23  of March.

We apply the predictive models to three separate time periods during the Coronavirus
Crash of 2020.  First, we compare the models to the actual price decline for the entire
time period, from top to bottom listing, i.e. from 2020-02-19 to 2020-03-23. This is
motivated by a desire to capture the entire downward movement. Due to the
construction of the invariance-implied market impact model, wherein a longer
measurement period renders higher predicted price impacts (unless ADV is calculated
based on a rolling window), we also choose to divide this period into two sub-periods  as
well. The first sub-period begins on 2020-03-09 and ends on 2020-03-23. This period
contains a major price decline, as well as the  individual days with the steepest value
             th          rd                                                                          th
decline (12  and 23  of March). The second sub-period consists of a single day,  12  of
March, motivated by the fact that it was the largest  daily  decline (-10.57%) during the
Coronavirus Crash of 2020 for the Swedish market. Table 6 contains a summary of the
actual and predicted price declines for our selected time and sub-periods respectively:

         TABLE 6. Comparison of Predictive Market Impact Models

Table 6 – The table summarizes actual and predicted price declines during the Coronavirus Crash of
2020. The table compares actual price declines of the OMXS30 index during this period with predicted
price declines by market microstructure invariance theory and conventional wisdom, respectively. The
invariance predictions are based on the  first  model calibration period 2020-02-03 to 2020-02-18.

Below we present the invariance-implied market impact  predictions  for all three time
periods in tables 7-9. Each table includes the input variables we use for the invariance-
implied market impact formula. We make predictions for stocks and futures separately
as well as combined, with the combined impact as our main result. All currency values
are expressed in 2020 SEK, thus without the use of a GDP deflator. The model inputs
are calibrated for three different time periods, the first one covering the period from the
                                                                                          th
beginning of February 2020 up until the day before the top listing on the 19  of
February. The second calibration period is intended to correspond to trading days in
2020 preceding the crash, and is therefore measured from the first trading day of 2020,

                                  35
         nd
i.e. the 2  of January. The third and last calibration period contains an entire year,
                    th
starting at the 18  of February 2019.

     TABLE 7. Invariance-Implied  Market  Impact 2020-02-19 to 2020-03-23

Table 7  –  The table shows the invariance-predicted price impact of futures sales of SEK 52 372 466 565
and stock sales of SEK 5 900 397 707, combined as well as separately, between 2020-02-19 and 2020-03-
23 given average daily SEK volume and volatility between 2020-02-18 and 2020-02-03, 2020-01-02, and
2019-02-18 respectively. Conventional wisdom predicts a price impact of 0.75% for the same time
period. The actual price decline over this period was 32%. Note that all price impacts are unsigned values,
and all price  impacts stated represent price declines.

     TABLE 8. Invariance-Implied  Market  Impact 2020-03-09 to 2020-03-23

Table 8  –  The table shows the invariance-predicted price impact of futures sales of SEK 29 811 566 530
and stock sales of SEK 3 343 432 828, combined as well as separately, between 2020-03-09 and 2020-03-
23 given average daily SEK volume and volatility between 2020-02-18 and 2020-02-03, 2020-01-02, and
2019-02-18 respectively. Conventional wisdom predicts a price impact of 0.42% for the same time
period. The actual price decline over this period was 18.83%. Note that all price impacts are unsigned
values, and all price impacts stated represent price declines.

                                  36
            TABLE 9. Invariance-Implied Market Impact 2020-03-12

Table 9  –  The table shows the invariance-predicted price impact of futures sales of SEK 2 451 416 950
and stock sales of SEK 439 916 324, combined as well as separately, on 2020-03-12 given average daily
SEK volume and volatility between 2020-02-18 and 2020-02-03,  2020-01-02, and 2019-02-18
respectively. Conventional wisdom predicts a price impact of 0.04% for the same time period. The actual
price decline over this period was 10.57%. Note that all price impacts are unsigned values, and all price
impacts stated represent price declines.

As we can see from tables  6-9, the invariance-implied market impact model generates
predictions that are closer in magnitude to actual price declines than the conventional
wisdom model. This is in a general sense coherent with the findings of Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2019).

                                  37
7. Concluding Remarks

Market microstructure invariance theory provides several empirical hypotheses, many
of which are presented by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016), Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) and
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019).

In this thesis we use high-frequency trading data for Swedish stocks and index futures
to examine scaling laws for bid-ask spreads  and linear market impact costs derived
through dimensional analysis, leverage neutrality and from principles of market
microstructure invariance. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) finds that these scaling laws hold
for data on bid-ask spreads for US and Russian stocks, and Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019)
apply scaling laws to explain price declines during stock market crashes.

We examine the proportional relationship between the bid-ask spread and an  illiquidity
measure, the latter composed of observable financial market variables, and find that it
also holds for the Swedish stock market for more than a decade. In the spirit of
invariance, we thus add yet another time period and another financial market to the
discourse of market microstructure invariance.

We extend the daily analysis used by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) to  analyze  bid-ask
spreads in a high-frequency setting, similar to the intraday analysis of S&P 500 E-mini
futures performed by Andersen et al. (2018). We combine dimensional analysis with
intraday trading invariance, the high-frequency version of market microstructure
invariance, and the main finding of this thesis  is  that the proportional relationship
between bid-ask spreads and illiquidity holds  on  an intraday level  as well.

Furthermore, we show that the proportional bid-ask spread-illiquidity relationship still
holds for OMXS30, a proxy for the Swedish stock market, despite a different tick size
regime. Russian and US stock markets  are affected by different institutional
microstructure details or market frictions, such as minimum tick sizes, than the Swedish
stock market. This thesis provides additional statistical evidence of the explanatory
power of such details for bid-ask spreads  to the market microstructure literature.

In addition to bid-ask spread costs we investigate linear market impact, which is another
transaction cost component. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019) construct an invariance-implied
market impact model with the purpose  of predicting the  price  impact of order pressure.
This model accounts for  security-specific differences in the length of business time, the
inverse of bet frequency. When testing this model for the recent Coronavirus Crash of
2020, we find that it  predicts price declines more accurately than conventional wisdom.
However, we  as Kyle and Obizhaeva (2019), are not able to statistically validate the
general applicability of this model due to a small sample size.

                                  38
This thesis  uses  regression  analysis  and in light of our findings, we are  therefore  not
able to make statements regarding causality. We do however provide additional support
to a robust  and  universal transaction cost model for bid-ask spreads  that seems to hold
across different markets and time periods. This is desirable, since otherwise  a number of
different models will be needed for different markets and time periods. Market
microstructure invariance for bid-ask spread costs would effectively reduce the number
of transaction cost models needed. This is of course of great interest to risk managers
and traders, who according to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) want to measure and
minimize transaction costs. Moreover, the  relationship  between tick sizes and bid-ask
spreads found here can provide valuable insights to financial regulators and stock
exchanges.  Likewise, a  model for understanding how order flows move prices is
important from a financial stability perspective.

Conclusively, our findings can serve as  a  benchmark to which market concepts and
theories in behavioral finance can be compared. We hope that our thesis alone, as well
as paired with further studies, can facilitate normative implications of value to
academics, finance professionals and society at large.

                                  39
References

ALLEN, M., 2017. Cross-Sectional Design. The Sage Encyclopedia of Communication
Research Methods (Vols. 1-4). SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.

ANDERSEN, T.G., BONDARENKO, O., KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2018.
Intraday Trading  Invariance in the E-Mini S&P 500 Futures Market. Rochester, NY.

BARENBLATT, G. I., 1996. Scaling, Self-Similarity, and Intermediate Asymptotics.
Camebridge University Press.

BROCK, W.A. and KLEIDON, A.W., 1992. Periodic Market Closure and Trading
Volume: A model of Intraday Bids and Asks. Journal of Economic Dynamics &
Control, 16(3), pp. 451-489.

CHAN, K.C., CHRISTIE, W.G. and SCHULTZ, P.H., 1995. Market Structure and the
Intraday Pattern of Bid-Ask Spreads for NASDAQ Securities. The Journal of Business,
68(1), pp. 35-60.

COY, P., 2020-03-19, The Great Coronavirus Crash of 2020 Is Different. Available:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-19/the-great-coronavirus-crash-of-
                                            th
2020-is-different  [Retrieved:  May  16  2021].

DANG, T., GORTON, G. and HOLMSTRÖM, B., 2013, Haircuts and Repo Chains*,
Working Paper, Columbia University.

DEAKIN, M.A.B., 2011. G.I. Taylor and the Trinity test. International Journal of
Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 42(8), pp. 1069-1079.

HARRIS, LARRY, 2002, Trading and Exchanges: Market Microstructure for
Practitioners (Draft, Forthcoming Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK).

HASBROUCK, J., 2017. Securities Principles and Procedures, NYU, pp. 19-27.
http://people.stern.nyu.edu/jhasbrou/TeachingMaterials/STPPms12a.pdf  [Retrieved:
         th
May 16  2021].

HUSSAIN, S.M., 2011.  The Intraday  Behavior  of Bid-Ask Spreads, Trading Volume
and Return Volatility: Evidence from DAX30. International Journal of Economics and
Finance, 3(1), pp. p23

KYLE, A.S., OBIZHAEVA, A.A. and KRITZMAN, M., 2016. A Practitioner’s Guide
to Market Microstructure Invariance. Journal of portfolio management, 43(1), pp. 43-
53.

KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2017. Dimensional Analysis, Leverage
Neutrality, and Market Microstructure Invariance. Rochester, NY.

KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2019. Large Bets and Stock Market Crashes.
Working Paper. Rochester, NY.

                                  40
KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2016. Market Microstructure Invariance:
Empirical Hypotheses.  Econometrica,  84(4), pp. 1345-1404.

LEE, C.M.C., MUCKLOW, B. and READY, M.J., 1993. Spreads, Depths, and the
Impact of Earnings Information: An Intraday Analysis. The Review of Financial
Studies, 6(2), pp. 345-374.

MCINISH, T.H. and WOOD, R.A., 1992. An Analysis of Intraday Patterns in Bid/Ask
Spreads for NYSE Stocks. The Journal of Finance, 47(2), pp. 753-764.

MODIGLIANI, F. and MILLER, M.H., 1958. The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance
and the Theory of Investment. The American Economic Review, 48(3), pp. 261-297.

KUROV, A. and LASSER, D.J., 2004. Price Dynamics in the Regular and  E-Mini
Futures Markets. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39(2), pp. 365-
384.

POHL, M., RISTIG, A., SCHACHERMAYER, W. et al, 2020. Theoretical and
Empirical Analysis of Trading Activity. Math. Program. 181, 405–434.

O'HARA, M., Market Microstructure Theory, 1995, Blackwell, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

O’HARA, M., 2015. High Frequency Market Microstructure. Journal of Financial
Economics, 116(2), pp. 257-270.

ONG, C.Z., MOHD-RASHID, R. and TAUFIL-MOHD, K.N., 2020. Do  Institutional
Investors  Drive the IPO  Valuation? Borsa Istanbul Review, 20(4), pp. 307-321.

PWC, 2021, Riskpremiestudien 2021.  Available at:  https://www.pwc.se/sv/pdf-
reports/corporate-finance/riskpremiestudien-2021.pdf?fbclid=IwAR35A7bXn7Edlzj-
                                                                                               th
X6-HCm4wc-IK0qcQ-dVevm9kQ0S0X_9Kh3xqSR8LOg8  [Retrieved:  May 16  2021].

SWEDISH CIVIL CONTINGENCIES AGENCY (MSB), 2020, Emergency
Information from Swedish Authorities.  Available at:
https://www.krisinformation.se/en/news/2020/january/who-classes-the-outbreak-of-the-
                                                                                         th
corona-virus-as-an-international-threat-to-human-life2  [Retrieved:  May 16  2021].

ZOVKO, I.I., 2008. Topics in Market Microstructure. Amsterdam, Netherlands, The
Amsterdam University Press.

                                  41
Appendix  A  –  Cross-Sectional  Plots

    FIGURE  A1.  Individual OLS Regressions of Bid-Ask Spreads on Illiquidity

Figure A1 – plots individual OLS regressions for 35 OMXS30 constituents during the period 2010-02-08
to  2020-12-31. Each  subplot contains 101 points corresponding to the number of five-minute intervals
between 09:00-17:25 (CET).

                                  42
Appendix  B  -  Robustness  Check

     TABLE B1.  Aggregate OLS Regressions for Individual Years 2010-2020

Table B1 – The table shows  linear  regression statistics for intercept 𝑐  and slope 𝛽  across all stocks,  for
each individual year  between 2010 and 2020.

           TABLE B2. Individual Stock Regression Statistics 2010-2020

Table B2 – The table shows a statistical overview of the individual slopes in each yearly linear regression
between 2010 and 2020.

                                  43
Appendix  C  –  Construction of  Empirical  Variables  for
Stocks

Step 1: Volume-weighted aggregation
We drop  subscript  j  for stock  j  for simplification of all aggregation formulas below.
Furthermore, suppose that L  trades occur simultaneously at time  𝑡-  , so that the
timestamp is recorded L  times (𝑡-% , 𝑡-& , …  , 𝑡-'  ). First, these L  trades are counted as  one
trade.

                  1
First, let 𝑄"!  =  ∑ℓ  3% 𝑄"! denote the total number of shares traded at time  𝑡-, where
                                ℓ
𝑄"! is the trade size of limit order  ℓ.
    ℓ
            5)  6 7)
                !ℓ      !ℓ
Let  𝑃"!  =            denote the quoted mid-price at time  𝑡-  after limit order  ℓ,
       ℓ          #
where  𝐴"!  and  𝐵"! denote the best ask price and best bid price at time  𝑡-, after limit
           ℓ          ℓ
order  ℓ, respectively.
Finally let  𝑆"!  =  𝐴"!  −  𝐵"!  denote the bid-ask spread at time  𝑡-, after limit order  ℓ.
               ℓ        ℓ         ℓ
Then we can volume-weight our empirical variables as follows:

        %   1
𝑃"!  =     ∑ ℓ3% 𝑄"! 𝑃"! denotes  the volume-weighted mid-price  at time  𝑡-.
        8)            ℓ    ℓ
          !
9                     9)
 )!     %    1          !ℓ
   =     ∑ℓ  3% 𝑄"!      denotes the volume-weighted relative bid-ask spread  at time  𝑡-.
:)     8)           ℓ :)
  !      !              !ℓ
Each variable now has exactly one observation per timestamp. The steps in our time-
weighted aggregation are outlined below.

Step 2: Time-weighted aggregation
Temporarily let  i  denote intraday time interval  i  (replacing  t). Now let trade  𝑘  represent
the volume-weighted trade at  time  𝑡-  above. Suppose that  𝑁/  trades (marketable orders)
occur at irregularly spaced times  𝑡%, 𝑡#, …  , 𝑡;+   during each intraday interval  i  with a
fixed length  𝑇′  −  𝑇  = 5 minutes.
First,

        %   ;+
𝑄/  =    ∑-  3% 𝑄"! denote the average trade size in  five-minute interval  i,  and
       ;+

         ;+
𝑉/  =  ∑ -3% 𝑄"! denote the total share volume traded in  five-minute interval  i.

For the first intraday interval  i  each day (no preceding trades), the time-weighted mid-
price and relative bid-ask spread are:

                                  44
                                         ;+
                                          𝑃"! (𝑡-6%  −  𝑡-)
                       𝑃/  =  }
                                               𝑇′  −  𝑡%
                                  -3%

                                      ;+
                             𝑆/         3𝑆"! ⁄ 𝑃"!5(𝑡-6%  −  𝑡-)
                 =  }
                               𝑃/                 𝑇′  −  𝑡%
                               -3%

For each subsequent intraday interval  i, the time-weighted mid-price and relative bid-
ask spread are:

                                         ;+
                                          𝑃"! (𝑡-6%  −  𝑡-)
                       𝑃/  =  }
                                             𝑇′  −  𝑇
                                  -3,

                                      ;+
                             𝑆/         3𝑆"! ⁄ 𝑃"!5(𝑡-6%  −  𝑡-)
                 =  }
                              𝑃/                 𝑇′  −  𝑇
                               -3,

where  𝑡,  =  𝑇  is the start time of the interval and  𝑡;+ 6 %  =  𝑇′  is the end time of the
interval.  𝑃",  and  𝑆",  are the outstanding mid-price and bid-ask spread at the beginning
of the interval, respectively. The realized variance over interval  i  is calculated by
summing the squared returns between mid-prices at each time of trade:

                                     ;+
                            #                               #
                        𝜎/ =   }3ln3𝑃"! 5 − ln (𝑃"!-% )5
                              -3#

Finally, the illiquidity index over interval  i  can be computed from our time-weighted
mid-price, total volume and realized variance:

                                              +%/&
                                            1      𝑃/𝑉/
                              = K  #  L
                                                       𝐿/        𝜎/

                                  45