IN THE EYE OF A PANDEMIC

AN EVENT STUDY OF  THE SWEDISH STOCK MARKET
REACTIONS  TO  THE  COVID-19 PRESS CONFERENCES

JULIA KARNERMO

EMMA SEDOLIN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
In the Eye of a Pandemic: An Event Study of the Swedish Stock Market Reactions to the
Covid-19 Press Conferences

Abstract

   Using intraday trading data  for  the Swedish stock market, this paper examines the stock market
   reactions  to  The Public Health Agency of Sweden’s  daily press conferences  covering Covid-19.
   Our results indicate that  stock  returns  immediately  drop  at the 1%  significance  level  when
   negative  news are announced.  When  no  additional  restrictions are  introduced, the  stock returns
   steadily increase across  the press conference.  Trading volume  increases  at  the  1%  significance
   level,  independent by sentiment,  when the press conference ends.  Additional tests on  the
   industries in our sample show significant increases in stock returns, but no significant decreases.
   Moreover,  the industry analysis shows  that the “Health Care” industry  faces the largest change
   in trading volume  during the press conferences.  We relate these results to previous research on
   trading behaviors in times of uncertainty and theories within behavioral finance.  The discussion
   also covers the implications  of  the debated Swedish Covid-19 strategy of keeping society and
   businesses  running despite the ravaging pandemic.  Our results  suggest that investors  attribute
   value  to  the press conferences, in addition to the news presented, proposing that sentiment
   among investors is an important factor  when explaining the  trading behavior at this time.

Keywords

   Sweden,  Covid-19,  News Announcements,  Behavioral  Finance,  Sentiment

Authors

   Julia Karnermo (24426)
   Emma Sedolin (24561)

Tutor

   Marieke Bos,  Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance Researcher,  Swedish House of
   Finance

Examiner

   Adrien d’Avernas,  Assistant Professor,  Department of Finance

Acknowledgements

   We would like to direct our gratitude toward  Marieke Bos for guidance and valuable feedback,
   Olga Obizhaeva for enthusiasm  and insightful suggestions, Isak Hassbring for valuable help in
   the data crunching process, and  Nasdaq  for  providing the  primary  data.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Julia Karnermo & Emma Sedolin, 2021

                                        2
1.  Introduction

In late 2019,  a new virus  by the name  SARS-CoV-2, or simply Covid-19,  started to spread in the
city of Wuhan,  China.  In the beginning of 2020,  Covid-19  hit  countries at  a rapid pace, and by the
   th
11  of March 2020, the World Health Organization  labeled the  disease  a pandemic  (World Health
Organization, 2020).  The rapid spread and  lack of knowledge  regarding its  contagiousness  and
lethal  consequences  led  many counties  to  introduce  strict restrictions and  lockdowns in the urge to
stop the  virus  (Financial Times, 2020). As a result, businesses  found themselves without customers
and international trades were put on hold  (Statista, 2021). The  world  faced  the worst  recession
since the Great Depression in 1929  and stock markets dropped rapidly in the first months of 2020
(International Monetary Fund, 2020).  Consequently,  the  Covid-19 crisis imposes an interesting  and
important  new area of economic research.  In this study we  investigate if,  and how,  the Swedish
stock market reacted to  early  news about the virus. More specifically, we investigate the stock
market reactions  to the press conferences held by the Public Health Agency of Sweden (PHAS).
We use  the  event  study methodology  suggested by  Busse and  Green in  the  article  Market Efficiency
in Real Time  (2002).

    (Nasdaq, 2021)

                                                                                                          st                                th
Sweden reported its first case of  Covid-19 on January 31 , and by March 6 , just over a month
                                                           th
later,  nearly  90  cases had  been reported. March 6  marked the first day when a press conference
on the topic was held by PHAS  (Folkhälsomyndigheten, 2020). The Swedish strategy of tackling
the virus was early on seen as the outlier strategy. After recommendations from PHAS, the Swedish
regulatory authorities aspired to keep the society open with only few restrictions, in an attempt to
also  consider the broader  aspects of public health  and  the  economy.  This Swedish strategy  became
widely debated,  where some claim it to be a success while others  describe it as  a disaster  (Time
Magazine, 2021; Bloomberg, 2020; Reuters, 2020; Oxley, David, 2021).  The  way  in which  PHAS
influenced the spread of Covid-19 information, as well as the Swedish decision makers, was another
way in which Sweden stood  out  with  its  Covid-19 approach. Rather than politicians taking the lead
in informing the public on the situation,  experts  on communicable diseases  took an important role
in delivering facts and suggesting actions for the regulators to adopt  (Dagens Nyheter, 2021). One
of the most prevalent persons on this matter soon became Anders Tegnell, State Epidemiologist

                                        3
in Sweden and most frequent speaker during the PHAS press conferences. He quickly became a
lead figure in media and someone many relied on for facts and directives on how to handle the
crisis  (Svenska Dagbladet, 2020).
              Statistics by the public service television data indicates  that the number of viewers
during PHAS’s press conferences were high and increased in the early stages of the pandemic (SVT,
2021). Watching what Anders Tegnell  and his colleagues  had to say became an important
interruption  during  the day. In times of high news flows  and  with  an entire world covering the
latest updates  regarding the virus, the press conferences  became  a valuable source of up-to-date
and legitimate information in times of uncertainty  (Dagens Industri, 2020).  The press conferences
by PHAS  were held daily at  14.00  over  the first  three months  of the pandemic, and then  twice a
week  for the continuation of the year. Due to the press conferences being such a widely watched
event, as well as  the characteristics and impact of the news, these press conferences make  up  an
interesting  phenomenon  to study in relation  to market reactions.  In this paper  we  study  the  stock
returns and trading volume  of  the  30 stocks  with the largest turnover  on the  Stockholm  Stock
Exchange  around the time of these press conferences.  More specifically,  the paper aims  to answer
the  following research questions:

   i.    Does the volume and return of the OMXS30  stocks  significantly change in immediate response to the daily
         Covid-19 press conferences held by the Public Health Agency of Sweden?

  ii.     How much of the change in volume and  stock  return can be explained by the  increased  number of Covid-
        19 cases in  Sweden, the presenter during the press conference, number of viewers,  and  changes in  Swedish
          societal restrictions?

Previous research  regarding  news and trading behavior  has  either  studied the stock market effects
of macroeconomic news announcements, such  as interest rate announcements by the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC), or firm specific news announcements in  media.  Additionally,
research has been made on the topic of investor sentiment and risk attitudes in times of uncertainty
or  crises. This research extends on  these  findings by cross sectionally studying  the stock market
reactions in immediate relation to the  daily  PHAS press conferences held in the beginning of the
Covid-19 outbreak in Sweden. The Covid-19 pandemic is a new area of research and little has been
studied in the direct relation to  its  impact on the Swedish market. Furthermore, we  distinguish
ourselves  from previous areas of study by  investigating  news coverage in a crisis which is not  a
direct financial crisis, but nevertheless has  vast indirect economic implications.
            We study the  Nasdaq  OMX  Stockholm  30  (OMXS30)  stocks,  and their reaction  to
PHAS’s  press conferences held in March and April 2020. OMXS30 contains  the 30 most  actively
traded stocks  with the largest turnover  in Sweden,  and the composition of stocks is revised every
six months  (Nasdaq, 2021).  Due to this,  we expect to see a larger impact on  the trading  activity  of
these particular stocks.  Moreover, the reason for studying the  months  of  March  and April
particularly,  is due to the importance of these early press  conferences as little was known about the
behavior  and ramification  of the virus  during  this time,  resulting in  uncertainty,  fear, and  a spike in
directed attention,  in  this  early  phase  of the pandemic.
             Using intraday trading data from the Nasdaq  Data Administration,  we  perform  tests
on significant differences in trading volume and stock return  during and after the press
conferences.  Our results  show significant changes in  stock  returns over the course of the  press
conferences, as well as  significant increases in trading volume after the  governmental  authorities
have spoken. These findings are confirmed  by  the results from  our  difference-in-differences
robustness test.   Additionally,  our findings indicate that prices drop significantly  at the 1% level
when negative news are presented.  When the sentiment is neutral, returns  grow less and less
negative and is significantly larger after the conference  than beforehand. This is also significant at
the 1% level. Tests on specific industries indicate that the stock return significantly increases during

                                        4
the press conferences  for  50%  of the industries in OMXS30. None of our results  show that  stock
returns  significantly  decrease for any of the industries in our  study.  Furthermore, trading volume
significantly increases  after the  press conference for a majority of the  industries.  The findings open
up  for  interesting discussions  on how this type of information is perceived by the market
participants.  Due to the  high level of uncertainty and  flow of information at this time, we argue
that the trading behavior  can be explained by theories in the behavioral finance literature,  such as
sentiment  trading, herding behavior, and mortality beliefs. Our findings  deepen  the  understanding
of trading behavior  during  times of crisis  and how governmental announcements  with indirect
economic implications  impact the stock market.

2.  Theoretical  Framework &  Literature  Review

To study the impact of  the  PHAS  press conferences  on the  stock  market during  the  pandemic, we
have found  some  helpful  prior areas of research  to  relate to.  One  area of interest  covers  market
reactions to news reports.  Other relevant research covers  trader sentiment and market reactions in
times of financial instability,  uncertainty,  and crisis.  Other areas of study that is of much interest
are  recent studies made on the  Covid-19  pandemic and its economic implications.  Since  the crisis
is  still  ongoing  at the time this thesis is being written,  and the  consequences  on  the economy  and
health are not yet possible to evaluate in its entirety,  there is not much  research  published  on this
topic. However, the  few  financial  papers examining some of the early effects  of  Covid-19  are of
interest to this  study.

2.1 Economic Announcements and Trading Behavior

Economic announcements can be divided into two subgroups of firm-specific announcements and
macroeconomic announcements. Many studies have been conducted on the subject of firm specific
news. In their study, Mitchell and  Mulherin  (1994)  find a direct relation between the number of
news announcements by Dow Jones & Co. and market activity variables such as trading volume
and the absolute value of firm specific  stock  returns. Kim et al.  (1991)  and Chae  (2005)  also study
firm specific news announcements and the impact of information asymmetry on market activity
and price reactions. One of Chae’s findings is for example that cumulative trading volume decrease
before a scheduled earnings announcement.  Moreover, Kalev et al.  (2004)  study intraday trading
data from the Australian Stock Exchange and find a positive and significant impact of selected
corporate news on stock return volatility. Nofsinger  (2001) also finds that trading activity increases
around the time of firm specific news announcements and adds to the discussion by including that
the sentiment of the news impact the trading behavior differently for private and institutional
investors, suggesting that private investors tend to trade less on bad information.
             Nofsinger  (2001)  also conduct research on macroeconomic news announcements
and finds that both good and bad macroeconomic news are related to higher trading volume among
both private and institutional investors. Bessembinder et al  (1996)  find that macroeconomic news
announcements impact trading volume of large firms, but not of small firms. Ederington et al.
(1993)  conducts research on how volatility is affected by macroeconomic news and finds a
significant increase in volatility in the first 15 minutes after an announcement, which stays
moderately effective over several hours thereafter. Cieslak et al.  (2019), Zhu  (2021)  and Rigobon
and Sack  (2004)  have all conducted research on the stock market implications of the interest rates
announcements by FOMC and conclude that  these  announcements  impact  stock returns as well
as changing volume dynamics, suggesting lower volume prior to announcement and higher volume
post announcement.
              The vast majority of this paper  is  based on the article  Market Efficiency in Real  Time,
written by Busse and Green and published in The Journal of Financial Economics in 2002. The

                                        5
authors  investigate if and how the  financial  news,  during the “Morning Call” and “Midday Call”
on CNBC,  impact  the  price and trading volume of the  stocks  being  mentioned. During the time
of their  research, CNBC was one of the most watched  cable  TV  channels  for financial news. The
Morning and Midday Call segments provided analysts view of stocks and covered topics such as
rumors of earnings statements or  predictions  regarding upcoming company meetings, with  the
purpose to provide market participants  with  information on certain stock developments,  as well as
the market as a whole.  Busse and Green  wanted to  test the  Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH)
developed by Fama  (1970), in order to  see how fast  markets incorporate new information in prices.
Being  published in 2002,  this paper  was one of the first papers  testing the EMH on an intraday
level,  analyzing how stocks react  only  seconds after an announcement.  Today, it is still frequently
cited  as an influential paper on the topic.
             After determining  the sentiment of the announcements  and then measuring the
immediate price  and volume  response,  Busse and Green perform a sentiment analysis of the news
announcements and find a significant relationship between positive (negative) news regarding a
stock, and a positive (negative) return for the same stock. For negative news, they find that  stock
returns fall slow and steady, while returns spike within the first 15 seconds after a positive
announcement and then immediately drops back to a value equivalent to the fundamental value.
Additionally,  they find a significant increase in trading volume following the announcements. The
fundamental research question  in Busse and Green  contains  many similarities  to  the ones  in this
study, but several important differences as well. In the paper, the researchers study the immediate
impact on  stock  returns  and trading volume, directly following company specific news broadcasts.
Despite differences with regards to the nature of the announcements  themselves  and the way  that
the news  are being  presented,  the methodology of measuring the  impact  is nevertheless similar.
Furthermore, the research presented in the article is performed during a time where the stock
market faced few chocks and disturbances. This is an apparent contrast when comparing to our
research,  which in essence builds on the consequences of the global crisis imposed by the  Covid-
19  pandemic.  Due to this, we will also draw much inspiration and knowledge from papers
discussing trading activities during times of crisis and the impact of investor sentiment on the stock
market.

2.2 Indirect Economic Announcements and Trading Behavior

All news  announcements may not be as directly economic as earnings-  or FOMC announcements.
Other influential announcement, such as  announcements by  the Government or legal authorities,
may not have a directly economic purpose, but nevertheless have important indirect economic
implications.  Pástor and  Veronesi  (2012)  wrote the article  Uncertainty about Government Policy and
Stock Prices  published in the Journal of  Finance,  which covers  many topics of interest for our study.
Pástor and Veronesi  propose that governmental policy news contains two types of uncertainties,
namely  uncertainly of whether the policy will be imposed  (political uncertainly), and uncertainty of
what the  implications of the policy will be  (implication uncertainty).  They differentiate between
positive  and negative announcements and argue that positive announcements tend to  be  more
widely anticipated by the public and hence the stock price reactions tend to  be smaller. Negative
announcements,  on the other hand,  tend to come  with more surprise and  generate a larger price
reaction.  The direction and extent of the price jump, depends on the extent to which the
announcement was  unexpected by the public.  If there is no uncertainty  related to the  policy
announcement, there will be no price reaction.  Additionally, they also suggest  that if there is no
change in current policies at the announcement, then stock prices tend to jump up, and vice versa,
if the policy  does change, then there will be a downward price jump. This results from  the risk
premium of holding stocks at the time of the announcement. Do to the implied larger price reaction
from negative announcements, Pástor and Veronesi conclude that policy announcements will cause

                                        6
a negative price reaction on average.  Lastly, they suggest that some firms are more widely exposed
to the policy change, and hence  these firms  generally face larger reactions.
             Zhang  (2006)  also  published an article in the Journal of  Finance related to the topic
of  information  uncertainties  and stock returns.  He suggests that a greater level of information
uncertainty should generate higher expected returns following good news  and lower expected
returns following bad news.  Additionally, Zhang  concludes that there is a level of underreaction to
news announcements that  is  consistent with the level of uncertainty concerning the  firm value
implications,  stemming from the  announcement.  Just like  Hirshleifer  (2001), Zhang also suggest
that  a  greater  level  of  uncertainly  leaves  more  room  for  psychological  biases,  such  as
overconfidence, conservatism bias  or  underreaction  to new information,  when  valuing securities.

2.3  Sentiment and  Trading  Behavior in  Times of  Crises

Since the early work by Kahneman and Tversky  (1979), extensive research within the field of
behavioral finance has shed light on the relationship between investor sentiment and stock returns.
In  the  Prospect Theory and notion of Risk Aversion, Kahneman and Tversky show  how people
make decisions under  risk,  suggesting  that people tend  to behave irrational, based on the means of
the neoclassical model. Kahneman and Tversky suggest  that people  dislike  moving  away from
certainty (the  certainty  effect) and  place much more  weight  on losses, in terms of  utility, than they
do for gains.  Other  studies  on sentiment  investigate  stock returns across different types of firms
while controlling for sentiment  (Baker & Wurgler, 2006; Al-Awadhi, Alsaifi, Al-Awadhi, &
Alhammadi, 2020). Furthermore, sentiment caused by weather conditions has proven to impact
stock market  returns, implying that the actors on the market are not always acting rationally
(Hirshleifer &  Shumway, 2003; Loughran & Schultz, 2004).
              Sentiment caused by various crises  or other chocking events seem to evoke negative
emotions, change our perceptions of risk,  and impact our trading behavior. Such events could for
example be airplane crashes, financial crises,  or the discovery of new pernicious diseases. In their
study, Kaplanski  and Levy  (2010)  find that aviation disasters enhance the perceived risk and hence
the  volatility increases. This occurs  without  an actual  change  in  the  underlying  fundamental  value.
They  also  find a positive significant relationship between the event of an aviation disaster and a
drop in stock prices.  Furthermore, much research on trading behavior during times of financial
crises  has  shown that the investor sentiment highly impacts trading behavior,  e.g.,  pessimistic
sentiment among investors in times of crisis enhance the net-selling pressure on the market  (Chiu,
Chung, Ho, & Wu, 2018).  Moreover,  Christie and Huang  (1995)  suggest that individuals tend to
suppress their  personal  set of information in turbulent times on the market, and instead resemble
the investment behavior of other actors on the market, which augments the herding behavior.
               Some research on infectious diseases,  and in particular  the spread of disease-related
news and  their  market implications, suggest that sentiments induced by disease-related news
significantly   impacts   investment   decisions   among   investors   in   the   pharmaceutical   sector
(Donadelli, Kizys, & Riedel, 2017; Haroon & Rizvi, 2020). Additionally, Young et al.  (2013)  find
that diseases which  receive  more attention in popular media are perceived to be a greater threat to
the population, regardless of its actual severity. Despite novel,  some  research projects and papers
have been issued covering  the  Covid-19  pandemic and its economic implications. Haroon and
Rizvi  (2020)  find in their research on price volatility and sentiment generated by  Covid-19-related
news, that uncertainty and overwhelming panic caused by news are linked to the volatility seen on
the market. Suneson  (2020)  disclose which sectors have faced the largest loss in returns during the
pandemic, suggesting that the retail, travel,  and transportation sectors are the most affected. And
lastly, Al-Awadhi et al.  (2020)  find  a  significant negative correlation between the number of
confirmed cases and deaths in  Covid-19  and stock returns across all companies studied on the
Chinese stock market.

                                        7
              Finally, studies on mortality beliefs suggest that  optimism (pessimism) toward  one’s
longevity  has great impact on investment decisions, savings,  and stock market participation.  One
could  reason that an event like the Covid-19 pandemic makes  people question the probability
weighting  on rare events and re-evaluate their  own mortality  as a result of the increased death rates
across countries  (Heimer, Myrseth, & Schoenle, 2019).  Puri and Robinson  (2007)  construct a
measurement  of optimism based on people’s miscalibration of their life  expectancy and conclude
that more optimistic people tend to  show more self-control, invest more in individual stocks,  and
save more. If the outbreak of Covid-19 cases a more pessimistic  perspective  of  one’s  mortality,
then this  could also  impact the stock market  behavior.

2.4  Contribution

This study contributes  to the previously mentioned literature in several aspects. Using the
methodology  of  Busse and  Green, we investigate the market reaction to the  daily  announcements
held by  PHAS  in early 2020 on the topic of  Covid-19.  However, in contrast to  Busse and Green,
the  announcements of interest  are held by state authorities and have only indirect economic
purposes and implications. We therefore apply  and build  on the  conclusions covering policy
announcements by Pástor and Veronesi  (2012)  and Zhang  (2006)  for our analysis.  Furthermore,
these announcements are also taking place in the context of a global crisis. By combining these
fields of research,  our study becomes unique in a new dimension.  Much research has  previously
covered sentiment and trading behaviors  under risk and uncertainty during times of crisis.
However, due to the recency of the events around Covid-19, this specific crisis is a fairly unexplored
area  of research, which makes our  study  even more unique.  Lastly, the  study is conducted on
Swedish data,  which is of  particular  interest due to the well-renowned crisis strategy of the country.
To our knowledge, the connection between Covid-19 and trading behavior in Sweden has not been
studied before.

3.  Hypotheses

   i.     We expect the  stock  return to decrease in the intervals following the start of the press conferences.

Pástor  and Veronesi  (2012)  suggest that the  stock  return  is negative  on average  following a
government announcement. We expect to see a similar development when testing the return across
all conference days and all stocks.  Additionally, we  expect  the overall sentiment  of  fear and risk
related to the pandemic, to  further impact the negative returns. This argument is in line with  Chiu,
Chung, Ho and Wu  (2018).

  ii.     We expect to see a negative  stock  return  following press conferences  with a  negative sentiment  and a slight
          increase after press conferences with a neutral sentiment.

Following the  findings  by Zhang  (2006)  and  Pástor and Veronesi  (2012), the  uncertainty regarding
the negative information and the level to which it was unexpected,  would result in negative  stock
returns on average following a negative announcement.  Furthermore,  this prediction is in line with
the findings in our benchmark study by Busse and Green  (2002).  Additionally,  as  Chiu, Chung, Ho
and Wu (2018) suggests, the sentiments of fear, uncertainty, and pessimism during this crisis would
evoke a selling pressure on the market, pushing prices down.  Zhang, Pástor and Veronesi predicts
the reverse reaction following a positive announcement. Nevertheless, as much uncertainty prevails
at the time of the announcements,  we expect the price reaction following a neutral announcement
to be  only moderate.

                                        8
  iii.     We predict  to see  a  greater  decrease  in  stock  return  among firms in the industries “Industrial  Goods and
       Services”, “Automobiles and  Parts” and  “Retail”

This hypothesis is based on the findings by Pástor and Veronesi (2012), and Suneson (2020). Pástor
and Veronesi suggest that  firms that are  the most  impacted by the  policy announcement will
experience the greatest  change in  stock  return. The direction to which the  stock  return changes
depends, according to Pástor and Veronesi, to which extent the policy change was anticipated.
Suneson reports which  sector in the US market  that were  the  most impacted in the beginning of
the pandemic and  concluded that “Transportation”,  “Retail” and “Travel” faced the largest
downturns.  The OMXS30  industries  that are the  most similar to these  industries  are  “Industrial
Goods and  Services”, “Automobiles and  Parts”  and  “Retail”.  The “Travel and  Leisure”  industry
in the OMXS30 is slightly  contradicting as  it only contains the company Evolution Gaming AB.
Thus,  in contrast  to Suneson,  we  do not  expect  this industry  to perform  poorly  with  more
restrictions and time spent at home.

  iv.     We  anticipate trading volume  to  increase in the intervals  during and after the  press  conference. We expect
         this pattern to be consistent  also  when  controlling for sentiment and  industry.  More specifically,  we believe
        the “Health  Care” industry to  experience the highest trading activity  during and after the press conference.

This hypothesis is in line with the conclusions by Cieslak et al.  (2019), Zhu  (2021)  and Rigobon
and Sack (2004). They find a decrease in trading volume in anticipation to a FOMC announcement
followed by an increase in activity post announcement. Despite differences in announcement and
information characteristics between FOMC and PHAS announcements, we predict to see a similar
pattern. Additionally, we expect the volume pattern to be consistent when controlling for sentiment
and  industry  indications.  However,  based on the findings by Donadelli  et al.  (2017)  and Haroon
and Rizvi  (2020), we  predict that the  “Health  Care”  industry will  receive the most attention  and
hence have the largest  increase in trading volume during and after the press conference.

  v.     We hypothesize that the  independent  regression variables  “SVT viewers”,  “Change in  Covid-19  Cases”,
      and “New  Restrictions/Recommendations” will have a negative correlation with the dependent return
       variable. Furthermore, we hypothesize that the variable “Government Announcement” will weakly correlate
         with return, while the variable “Anders Tegnell” will have a stronger positive correlation with  return.

The  prediction for SVT viewers  is  based on the  studies by Pástor  and Veronesi  (2012)  and  Chiu,
Chung, Ho  and Wu  (2018). If  the  stock  return after a  public announcement  is negative on average,
we expect this effect to be more prominent  during  the events  which  receives much attention by
the public.  This  hypothesis also builds on  the  conclusions by Young et al.  (2013), which states that
diseases that attract more attention in media is perceived as a greater threat to the public,  regardless
of its  severity.  Al-Awadhi et al.  (2020)  suggests that  there is a correlation between conformed
Covid-19 cases and  stock returns when  conducting research on the Chinese market. We  believe to
find a similar effect.  An increase in recommendations  and restrictions  is  predicted  to negatively
correlate with  the  return  variable,  based on theories of negative sentiment.  An  increase in
restrictions  is a signal that  PHAS and the government perceives the  risk to be higher, and hence
project a negative sentiment on the  public.  As  suggested by  Chiu, Chang, Hu and Wu  (2018)  and
Zhang  (2006),  we expect this negative sentiment to  negatively  correlate with stock returns.  With
this in mind, we predict the government dummy coefficient to be close to zero.  Furthermore, in
the benchmark article by Busse and Green  (2002), they control for the  news  presenter  in the
regression and find that the person delivering the news significantly correlated with returns.
Similarly, we hypothesize that  Anders Tegnell is perceived as a knowledgeable and  trustworthy
presenter, and that the returns  therefore  will positively correlate with  him.

                                        9
  vi.    We  predict that the  independent variables “SVT viewers”, “Change in  Covid-19  Cases”,  “New
       Restrictions/Recommendations” and “Anders Tegnell” will  have a positive correlation  with  the dependent
        volume variable. Meanwhile, we predict the variable “Government  Announcement” to negatively correlate
        with  trading  volume.

Similar to the  hypothesis for the  return  variable,  the number  of SVT viewers is expected to
positively correlate with volume.  With more viewers, we predict more people to  engage on the
stock market based on the  information presented.  Like  the findings of  Donadelli, Kizys and Riedel
(2017)  and  Haroon and Rizvi  (2020),  sentiment induced by disease-related news significantly
impacts investment decisions.  Hence, with an increase in  number of  confirmed Covid-19 cases,
the  uncertainty and  pessimistic sentiment  is also expected to increase  which should  generate  more
activity and a selling pressure on the stock market  (Chiu, Chung, Ho, & Wu, 2018).  The similar is
expected for the variable  regarding  new recommendations  and  restrictions.  With more uncertainty
and fear  generated by the  implied  risk levels  caused  by  heavier  restrictions,  we expect more people
to  trade on the stock market.  The variable for  if  the  government  has held a  press  conference just
before PHAS  is expected to make the news on the PHAS conferences more anticipated and hence
less informative.  Based on the theory of EMH,  the press conferences should have little impact on
stock return if the information has already been disclosed.  When the news are more anticipated,
we expect the stock market activity to be lower and hence have a negative correlation. Lastly, when
Anders Tegnell is the presenter,  we  expect the  trading  volume to increase. Busse and Green  (2002)
found that one of the presenters  in  their research  was  perceived as more knowledgeable, which
correlated with higher trading  activity. Based on this finding, the  expertise that Anders Tegnell
possesses  is expected to  impact the trading volume positively.

4. Data

4.1 Press Conferences

The PHAS works to ensure that the Swedish population is protected against communicable
diseases and other threats against the national health. Thus, PHAS has the overall national
responsibility for public health issues, including the  Covid-19 pandemic  (Folkhälsomyndigheten,
2021). Due to their role  during  the pandemic, PHAS held 121 press conferences on the topic of
                                                th
Covid-19  during 2020, starting on the 6  of March 2020. The purpose of the press conferences
was  to communicate the latest and most important information about the virus to the Swedish
population in a  fact-based  and reliable way. The press conferences have been one of the most
important  information channels  during the  Covid-19 crisis  and has been  referred to as “one of the
largest information campaigns in modern time”.  While  press conferences  on Covid-19  were  not
unique  for Sweden  specifically, the Swedish strategy stood  out  among other countries,  since  most
information was delivered by experts on the subject, and not by politicians (Dagens Nyheter, 2021).
The Swedish government also held press conferences regarding Covid-19, but these were separated
from the conferences by PHAS.
             We follow the methodology used by Busse and Green in their article Market Efficiency
in Real Time  (2002),  but while they study  daily  financial news  on  CNBC,  this  study  investigates  the
                                                                                                       th
press conferences by PHAS. The press conferences were held every weekday from the 6  of March
                th
2020 to the 9  of June 2020. They were thereafter held twice a week during the remaining months
of the year, on Tuesdays and Thursdays. The press conferences always  started  at  14.00 and aired
live on Sveriges Television (SVT), which is the Swedish public service television company.  SVT is,
together with the Swedish public service radio, the most trusted Swedish media channel and enjoys
good support from the Swedish audience  (Sveriges Television, 2021). Additionally, the press
conferences could  be followed on various other media platforms such as YouTube, and

                                       10
information  could  be received through live updates and smartphone notifications by large
newspapers  and  other  information channels.
             Each press conference varied in length but were on average 35 minutes in total. They
were  generally  divided into three  distinguishable  parts. First, PHAS  held  a presentation where
updated information and recommendations  regarding the virus  are presented to the public. These
news  were  based on daily assessments  of the development of the  Covid-19 pandemic  with  input
from other responsible sources such as the World Health Organization  (Folkhälsomyndigheten,
2021). Generally, the presenter  started  with an update of  the global status. They then moved  on to
the domestic situation and presented  the number of  Covid-19 cases both in  Sweden  in total  and in
certain deviant counties, the  total  number of deaths,  and the number of hospitalized  patients. The
section ended  with a presentation of new restrictions and recommendations. This first part  was
either presented by Anders Tegnell, the Swedish State Epidemiologist, or by another representative
from PHAS. The second  part consisted  of presentations held by other Swedish  authorities,
generally by the National Board of Health and Welfare (NBHW) and by the Swedish Civil
Contingencies Agency (SCCA). The presenter from each  authority  provided  the public with
updated information from their own departments. Typically, NBHW explained the current capacity
in the intensive care system and the inventory of protective equipment for medical staff, and SCCA
reported  on various topics, usually regarding public safety and dissemination  of information. The
third and last part  was  allotted  to  questions from reporters.

Due to the  scope  of  the  study, we have  chosen to analyze the trading behavior during the press
conferences  the first two months of the pandemic  in Sweden;  March and April 2020. We excluded
                                      th     th,           th
the press conferences on  9 ,  10  and 13  of April 2020,  as  these were not  complete  trading days
due to the Easter holiday. In total we analyzed  36  press conferences.  The reason for choosing this
period  was  because of the large uncertainty in the very beginning of the pandemic and its
consequences on the stock market. In  their  article about the investor reaction to the 2008 financial
crisis,  Hoffman, Post and Joost  (2013)  find that the investors’  stock  return expectations and risk
tolerance decrease,  and  that  their risk perception increase,  during the first and worst months of a
crisis. This can be  linked  to  the stock market’s initial reaction to  Covid-19  where prices dropped
rapidly  (Nasdaq, 2021). Furthermore, the number  of viewers who  watched  the broadcasts  live on
SVT give us an indication of the overall interest in the press conferences and their potential impact
on the  stock market. The average number of  SVT  viewers  steadily increased in March and  April
and then decreased from May and  forward.  Thus, the interest for the press conferences increased
in  March and  April and started to decrease towards the summer  of  2020.  The viewers  then
increased again after the summer  and steadily increased from September to  November  (SVT,
2021). These viewer numbers are consistent with the reported number of Covid-19 cases in Sweden
(see Graph 3 in Appendix). Just as the number of viewers, the number of cases increased during
spring 2020 and fall 2020, representing two “waves” as the periods have been called by both experts
and media.  Taken together, the first  Covid-19 wave  is expected  to have the largest and most
significant impact on the Swedish stock market and thus we have chosen to analyze this period.

                                       11
  (SVT, 2021)

Although  this  study  covers  a similar  type of event  methodology  as Busse and  Green, our data set
differs from theirs  in  several  aspects.  The data set used by Busse and Green  (2002)  consisted  of
financial news segments that  were  usually less than two minutes.  During this short event, they
timed  the  exact  mentioning of a  specific  stock.  We do not have  any equivalent mentioning  or piece
of information  to study  in more detail.  The events in this study  are,  on the contrary,  35 minutes on
average  and consist of a  continuous  flow  of  information  about the virus  and its implications.  In an
ideal  scenario  we would  want to  study  an  event  that is more similar to the one  studied  by  Busse
and Green, where it is possible to  look at  the mentioning of  a more  precise piece of  information
for more comparable results.  This  implies  that the focus of our study will be slightly different  from
that  of  Busse  and  Green.  While  they  investigated  how  fast  the  market  reacted  to  the
announcements, we  study  if the market reacts to the announcement  at all.  Furthermore,  our data
differs from Busse and Green’s since they  actively chose to study a period where the market  was
relatively  flat. We, on the other hand, chose  to study  a period when the market is  unstable.  By also
choosing to analyze the beginning of the pandemic, we  study the  part  of the crisis  when stock
prices dropped the most rapidly. The risk of  performing an event study during financial turbulence
is that  one might end up  catching  noise  and that it is uncertain if the  identified  effect is  a result of
the event studied. However, due to the extensions of our study, and our aim to research the trading
behavior  during the most critical part of  the  Covid-19  crisis, it  becomes  inevitable  for us to  study
the  market  when  unstable.  In order to control for noise and to better analyze the effects  of the
press conferences, we have chosen to deviate from the data set of Busse and Green  by  also
including  the same period  for  2019. We hope that including this contrafactual data set in a
robustness test will  help to  determine whether there is  an effect.  Moreover,  during this  global crisis
there  has been  a  high  flow  of  information  and  many platforms  actively cover the latest updates
regarding the virus, which makes it difficult to  isolate the effect of the press conference.  In an ideal
dataset, there would be no other information regarding the Covid-19 situation globally. If that was
the case, we could  more accurately isolate  whether the effects could be derived from the

                                       12
information presented at the press conferences.  However,  our data differs from this ideal set of
data, as we  cannot  control for  all other news sources covering the topic of covid-19.

4.2  Trading Data

In order to  analyze the influence of the PHAS press conferences on the  Stockholm  stock market,
intraday trading data was collected from the Nasdaq Data Administration. The intraday trading
data, to the nano-second precision,  included  all  finalized  trades for the 388 stocks on the Swedish
stock market for each day, composing over 100 million trades for the chosen period. The data
included 36 columns with information about each trade, including date, timestamp in milliseconds,
instrument type, ISIN number, price, volume, turnover, participants,  and trade type. In a first
filtering of the data, we extracted  only the information that we considered  relevant for this study:
date, time, ISIN number, price,  and volume.
              While the trading data used in this study is very similar to the one used by Busse and
Green, the selection of stocks differs. In their paper, Busse and Green  (2002)  only analyze the
reaction of the stocks that are mentioned during the events. Since no stocks  are  mentioned during
our events, we study the reaction of  a chosen set of stocks.  Due to the  scope of the paper, we have
chosen to delimit our study to the  OMXS30  stocks. OMXS30 is an index of the 30 stocks on the
Stockholm stock exchange  that are traded  in the largest volume and total turnover  (Nasdaq, 2021)
and we have chosen this set of stocks since we believe that any effect of the press conferences will
be most  prominent  among  these.  We base this decision on the research by Bessembinder et al
(1996)  who conclude  that macroeconomic announcements  mainly  impact the trading volume of
large firms and not small.  While this is a natural delimitation of our study,  in an ideal scenario,  our
data set would include more stocks  as  more observations  would probably  improve our  results,
making them more accurate. In total, we analyze 30 stocks during 36 trading days in 2020, summing
up to 1080 observations.  Furthermore, we  include  similar trading data for  2019 for  our robustness
test.  For this test we include the same stocks and the same  trading days. However,  note that three
of the 30  OMXS30  stocks  were  excluded  in the  2019 data  due  to  data loss.  The stock  Swedbank A
was  not  traded during one of the days  in 2019  due to  suspended trading  (SVT Nyheter, 2019).

4.3 Variables

4.3.1 Dependent Variables

4.3.1.1 Return and Volume

Following the  article by Busse and Green  (2002),  we have chosen to analyze price change (return)
and volume as  the  two independent variables  of this paper.  Volume,  𝑉,  is simply  calculated as  the
aggregated volume per minute  for each stock. Return,  𝑅,  is calculated as the percentage change
over  each  minute interval  for all stocks, where  𝑃  is the  price  for a given  stock  𝑥,  and  𝑛  is  a specific
minute:

                                        𝑃!"  − 𝑃!"$%
                                𝑅!"  =                                       Eq. 1
                                              𝑃!"$%

4.3.1.2  Intervals

In order to  interpret the  dependent  variables  during the press conferences, we split the time frame
of the  press conferences  into smaller intervals. Due to the large event window of the press

                                       13
conferences and due to the fact that  all press conferences differ in their length of time, a regular
event study time-axis based on calendar times would not be sufficient for comparing reactions.
Thus, we chose to divide the press conference into customized sub-events and intervals,
corresponding to certain parts of the press conference and not specific times. For example, the
time  𝑡%  could some days be at 14.05 and other days at 14.13. The following comparable sub-events
have been specified in this study:

𝑡$%  = 13.30, 30 minutes before the press conference
𝑡&   = 14.00, the start of the press conference
𝑡%   = End of PHAS’s presentation, beginning of the other authorities’ presentations
𝑡'   = End of the other authorities’ presentations, beginning of the questionnaire
𝑡(   = End of the  entire press conference
𝑡)   = 30 minutes after the end of the press conference

Based on these six sub-events, we created five customized intervals shown in Figure 2. Additionally,
we created a sixth interval which is the sum of interval 2, 3 and 4,  representing  the entire press
conference.

In order to create these customized intervals, several steps had to be made.  As described  earlier in
the data section,  our variables  were prepared  by  aggregating the trades  from  nanoseconds  into
minute intervals,  where volume was calculated as the  aggregated volume per minute for each stock
and  return as the percentage change over each minute for  each  stock.  Next, we watched  all the
press conferences and noted  the exact time  of the predetermined  𝑡"  on each day  (see  Table  14  in
Appendix). With  30 stocks,  36  press conferences and six intervals during each  press conference,
there  were  6480  distinct intervals in total.  Lastly, we  sectioned our minute data  into intervals and
calculated the  average  return  per  minute  and  average  volume  per  minute for each interval and
stock, where  𝑅)!*  is the average  return  per minute in interval  𝑖   for stock  𝑥  and  𝑉)*  is the average
volume per minute in interval  𝑖  for stock  𝑥:

                                 𝑅!% + 𝑅!' + ⋯ + 𝑅!"
                             𝑅)!*  =                                             Eq.  2
                                                         𝑛

                                 𝑉!% + 𝑉!' + ⋯ + 𝑉!"
                              𝑉)!*  =                                            Eq.  3
                                                        𝑛

                                       14
4.3.2 Independent Variables

4.3.2.1  Sentiment

Similar to Busse and Green  (2002),  we perform a sentiment analysis on  the information of the
events.  Though  these  types  of  analyses  are  built on subjective interpretations, we perform the
analysis in several steps in order to debias the process from the most prevalent pitfalls.  Individual
and independent  analysis of the overall sentiment  of  each press conference was made before cross
checking the interpretations. The vast majority of  the  perceived  sentiments  were  interpreted in the
same way, which gave confidence  to  the analysis. However, for interpretations that were diverging,
we carried out additional analysis consisting of secondary viewing and the use of sentiment
algorithms trough the website FinSentim, which  works to  interpret the financial sentiment of a
written source. This analysis resulted in a total of 20 press conferences with negative sentiment and
16 with a neutral sentiment. The choice of labeling was a result of the severeness of the information
presented and the context and purpose of the  press  conferences. Due to society facing a
multifaceted crisis, we decided to not label any news  in the  first two months  of the pandemic  as
positive. At the same time some of them were not negative, hence  we labeled them as  neutral.
While  we consider  the chosen  labeling  of the sentiments  accurate  for our study  of the first two
months of the pandemic,  not having a clear distinction between negative and positive news can be
problematic and  can impose a limitation for our study.

4.3.2.2  Industries

With inspiration taken form the article by Suneson (2020), we add an industry analysis to our paper.
This  is  a deviation  from  Busse and Green  (2002), who do not include  industries  in  their analysis
except  for  when  having a dummy  variable  for technology or internet  stocks,  in one of their tests.
Because of  the nature of the Covid-19 crisis and how it has been  affecting different type of
businesses and  industries  (Deloitte, 2020;  Suneson, 2020), we believe that an industry  analysis will
positively  contribute to  our  paper  and add  valuable insights.  The OMXS30 stocks represent 14
different  industries  according to Nasdaq’s own  industry  classification  (see  Table  13  in  Appendix).

                                       15
As explained above,  the rather small sample of stocks  imply  a limitation  for our study.  With 30
stocks and 14  industries, some of the  industries  only constitutes of  one  stock.  In an ideal scenario
we would want to analyze more stocks within more  industries  and have more stocks within each
industry, as this would  make our  results more  informative and  credible.  However,  the analysis will
give insights to how the 30 largest  stocks have been impacted over these news events and if there
is any variation to be drawn  for different types  of industry.  Additionally,  one must acknowledge
that  the  “Travel and Leisure”  industry  is  rather contradictory. Travel and  leisure  are  being
combined  into  one  single  industry  by Nasdaq,  but one would believe that  pure travel companies
would be  affected  by Covid-19  in a different way  than  leisure companies, such as gaming
companies.  The  industry  classification  and the fact that this only includes the company Evolution
Gaming AB for OMXS30, could therefore potentially be  somewhat  misleading.

4.3.2.3 Regression Variables

Consistent with  the article by Busse and Green, we perform a regression  analysis where we
investigate the cross-sectional determinants of  the size of the  return and volume response  to
PHAS’s press conferences.  Busse and Green  (2002)  include  eight different independent variables
in their regression, of which  five  were  variables concerning the characteristics of the  stocks  being
mentioned  during  the  broadcasts,  and three  were  concerning  the characteristics of the event.  Since
the events studied in this paper are rather different from the ones  analyzed in the  article  by Busse
and Green, we  have chosen  other variables.  Furthermore, since  the analysis continuously covers
the same  set of  stocks, we chose  variables that  concern the characteristics of the events and not
characteristics of the stocks.  The  independent  variables are the following:

𝑆𝑉𝑇  = Number of SVT viewers
𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠  =  The percentage change in Swedish  Covid-19 cases
𝑅𝑒𝑐.  = Dummy variable for new restrictions or recommendations
𝐺𝑜𝑣.  = Dummy variable for  whether the Swedish government has held a press conferences  before
PHAS’s press conference
𝐴𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  = Dummy variable for whether Anders Tegnell  is  presenting  or not

The first variable  𝑆𝑉𝑇  is  simply the number of SVT viewers each press  conference.  Busse and
Green did not include a similar variable in their analysis,  but we  chose to add this  since we  believe
that it  would  be  interesting to analyze  as  the  press conferences were a new phenomenon and  the
number of viewers  steadily  increased as the virus spread during the first wave.  The second
regression variable  𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠  is the percentage change in  the  number of  Swedish Covid-19 cases,  and
it  is calculated as the absolute change  from  the previous press conference.  While the  information
on cases  is available  on PHAS website, it is  only  updated  once a day,  which is  in  connection  to  the
press conferences. Thus, the information regarding the number of Covid-19 cases presented during
PHAS press conference  was  the most  recent and accurate  information.  Next, we included  the
dummy  variable  𝑅𝑒𝑐.  for whether any new restrictions or recommendations  that  were presented
during the press conference. This is important to include since such information will not only affect
people’s  everyday behavior  but also the perceived uncertainty and severeness of the crisis.  Also
connected to the informativeness of the press conference  is  the fourth variable  𝐺𝑜𝑣., which is a
dummy for the press conferences by the Swedish government. While PHAS was among the leading
institutions  in the  work against the virus and can  issue  recommendations, the Swedish government
still  held  the  supreme  power to  impose  new restrictions and legislation.  As opposed to PHAS, the
Swedish government did not have reoccurring press conferences scheduled every day. Instead, they
held  them whenever  there  was  new information to present. Therefore,  one could expect  the  press
conferences by PHAS to not have the same news value when the Swedish government held a press
conference of their own just before.  We have thus  chosen  to include a dummy for whether the

                                       16
Swedish government held a press conference six hours or less  before PHAS  -  that is,  from 08.00
the same day.  The last variable,  𝐴𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠,  is a  dummy for whether Anders Tegnell  was  the presenter
of the press conference or not.  The reason for including this variable is because Anders Tegnell
was  highly debated in Swedish media, both praised and criticized, and thus it would be interesting
to see if he  had  a larger effect on  the dependent variables  than his colleagues.  The decision to
include this dummy is in line with  Busse and Green  (2002), who  also included  a dummy variable
for one of the presenters of the  news segment, who received  considerable attention in the media,
similarly  to  Anders Tegnell.  (For the  regression variable data  for  each press conference, see Table
15  in Appendix).

                                       17
We test our regression model and its independent variables for multicollinearity by calculating the
Variance Inflation Factors (VIF). No VIF value is above the standard threshold value of 10, and
we  thus conclude that multicollinearity is not a  problem for our regression model  (Pallant, 2013).

5. Methodology

5.1 Event  Study

Following the methodology of Busse and Green,  this  study is performed as a  traditional  event
study  in which  the dependent variables are  analyzed before and after a specific event.  The  event
study  is an empirical analysis tool  developed by Fama  et al.  (1969)  and it  is  used to examine the
impact of an event on a security in order to test the  EMH. An event study can be conducted in
two different ways. One can either analyze the dependent variables  through  a regression analysis,
or they can  simply  be directly interpreted  and compared  as  they are. In this study, we follow the
methodology of  Busse and Green, and thus use the direct interpretation method  and compare  the
constructed event  intervals by performing  several t-tests.

5.2  Statistical  T-tests

Like Busse and Green  (2002),  this  event study  is  conducted using Welch’s  t-tests for  unequal
variances, which is used to test  if  two  populations have equal means.  For  this  study, this implies  to
test if  the  equally  weighted  means of the  stocks,  in each  interval during and after the press
conference by PHAS  (interval 2-6),  are statistically different from  the interval before the press
conference (interval 1). We test this by calculating the test statistic and analyzing the corresponding
p-value.  The test statistics is given by  the calculation  laid out by Newbold et al  (2013), where  𝑥̅  and
𝑦)  are  the  sample means,  𝑠  is the  sample variance and  𝑛  is the sample size:

                                                 𝑥̅  −  𝑦)
                                    𝑡  =
                                                '   𝑠'                                 Eq.  4
                                                   𝑠!     +
                            =  +
                                                    𝑛!    𝑛+

In the  first part of the study,  we  test if the average  return  and volume per minute  for all 30 stocks
and all 36 trading days  in a given  interval is statistically different from that of the first interval.  The
tests  are  performed as two-tailed t-tests  with the following  null and alternative hypothesis for
average  return  differences  and  average  volume  differences:

                                       18
                                    𝐻&: 𝑅)*  − 𝑅)%  =  0
                                    𝐻%: 𝑅)*  − 𝑅)%  ≠  0

                                     𝐻&: 𝑉)*  − 𝑉)%  =  0
                                     𝐻%: 𝑉)*  − 𝑉)%  ≠  0

Next,  the tests are  perform  on  the  different subsets of data.  The first  test  is  on  sentiments, where
we perform  t-tests for differences in average return and volume per minute for both  neutral and
negative press conferences.  While the  t-tests  on volume  are  performed as  two-tailed  t-tests, the  t-
tests  on  return  are  here  performed  as  one-tailed  t-tests.  As  explained  in section  3,  the  hypothesize
is  that the return will decrease following a negative press conference,  and increase  following a
neutral press conference.

Negative sentiments:

                                    𝐻&: 𝑅)*  − 𝑅)%  ≥  0
                                    𝐻%: 𝑅)*  − 𝑅)%  <  0

Neutral sentiments:

                                    𝐻&: 𝑅)*  − 𝑅)%  ≤  0
                                    𝐻%: 𝑅)*  − 𝑅)%  >  0

The  last  t-tests  are  performed  on  industries, where we  test  for differences in average return and
volume per minute for all 14 industries represented in the OMXS30.  These t-tests on industries
are, just as the baseline t-tests on all  30  stocks and all  36 press conferences, performed as two-tailed
t-tests.

5.3  Cross-Sectional  Regression

Following the methodology of Busse and Green  (2002), we perform  a  cross-sectional regression
analysis  through which we  investigate  the  cross-sectional determinants of  the  dependent variables.
While  Busse and Green only  performed  such  regression analysis  on  their return variable, we  also
include  an identical  regression on  our  volume  variable.  As described in the  data  section, we test the
following  independent variables:

𝑆𝑉𝑇  = Number of SVT viewers
𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠  = The percentage change in Swedish Covid-19 cases
𝑅𝑒𝑐.  = Dummy variable for new restrictions or recommendations
𝐺𝑜𝑣.  = Dummy variable for whether the Swedish government has held a press conferences before
PHAS’s press conference
𝐴𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  = Dummy variable for whether Anders Tegnell is presenting or not

The regressions is performed as ordinary least squared (OLS) linear regressions. The first regression
tests  the  relationship  between average return per minute  and the independent variables for each
interval,  during and after the press conference. The second regression tests the relationship
between average volume per minute and the  independent variables for each interval,  during and
after the press conference.

                                       19
             𝑅  =  𝛽&  + 𝛽%𝑆𝑉𝑇  + 𝛽'𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠  + 𝛽(𝑅𝑒𝑐. +𝛽)𝐺𝑜𝑣. +𝛽,𝐴𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  + 𝜀       Reg. 1

             𝑉  =  𝛽&  + 𝛽%𝑆𝑉𝑇  + 𝛽'𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠  + 𝛽(𝑅𝑒𝑐. +𝛽)𝐺𝑜𝑣. +𝛽,𝐴𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  + 𝜀       Reg. 2

5.4  Difference-in-Differences

We have  additionally  included  a  difference-in-differences test  in  our study,  as a robustness test.
Busse and Green  (2002)  did not include such  test  in their study  since  the  relationship  between the
events  and stocks that they study  is  less  ambiguous.  The direct relationship between the news
announcement and the stock market reactions is much  vaguer  in our study than in Busse and
Green’s, as the  scope of  PHAS announcements are  much broader and are  not primarily economic.
To test  if our findings are a result of noise or actual changes in behavior at this specific time, we
perform this robustness test.
              Difference-in-differences is a  statistical method  through which  you  study the
differential effect of a treatment  on a treatment group compared to a control group  (Angrist &
Pischke, 2009).  In our study,  we compare the trading behavior of the  current  OMXS30 stocks in
2020 with the trading behavior of the same stocks in 2019. Within these two years, we also compare
the trading behavior  before the time of the press conferences  with  the time during and after the
press conferences.  Thus,  the  treatment  is  the time of  PHAS’s  press  conferences, the treatment
group is the year 2020 and our control group is the year 2019, before the Covid-19  outbreak.  As
explained in  the data  section, we study the same  trading days  and the same  stocks in 2019 with a
few exceptions due to missing data. The difference-in-differences method includes a parallel trends
assumption, which is  an  assumption  that  the  year 2019 provides an appropriate counterfactual
trend  that the  OMXS30 stocks in 2020 would have followed,  if it were not for  the  Covid-19  press
conferences.  Without  Covid-19 and  the corresponding press conferences,  we expect  the  trading
behavior of the  OMXS30 stocks  to be  parallel  before and after 14.00  in 2019 and 2020.  With
Covid-19  we, however, expect the  trading behavior to differ. We test for this differential effect
through a difference-in-difference regression analysis. We create one dummy  variable for  the  year,
one dummy variable for the  time of the press conference, and one difference-in-differences
variable which is the product of the two dummy variables. We  then  run the regression on both
dependent  variables.

𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  =  0 if 2019, 1 if 2020
𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  =  0 if interval 1, 1 if  interval 2-6
𝐷𝑖𝐷  =  𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  × I𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦

             𝑅  =  𝛽&  + 𝛽%𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  + 𝛽'𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  + 𝛽(𝐷𝑖𝐷  + 𝜀       Reg. 3

             𝑉  =  𝛽&  + 𝛽%𝐷𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  + 𝛽'𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  + 𝛽(𝐷𝑖𝐷  + 𝜀       Reg. 4

                                       20
6. Empirical Results

Table  4  shows  the  t-test results  from measuring how  stock return and trading volume  in  each
consecutive interval is different from interval 1.  When performing this test, all stocks  and all days
are included,  without controlling for sentiment or industry.  Starting with  return, we see that  stock
returns decrease in anticipation to the  press  conference and continues to fall in the second interval
when PHAS is  presenting. This decrease is significant at the 10% significance level.  The direction
of the  stock  returns  then  changes  back and forth throughout the continuation of the conference,
but overall,  it  becomes larger.  Intervals  3,  4  and 5  are  all  significant at the 1% level  but in different
directions.  Across  the  entire  press conference,  the  stock  return  is on average  negative, however,
not  significantly  different  from interval 1.  For volume,  we only  find  significant values in interval  4
and 5,  which is when  PHAS and  all  other authorities  have finished  their presentations.  The most
significant result is in interval 5,  that  is  after the  entire press conference. This value is significant at
1%.  Again,  there is no significant difference when  comparing the entire conference to the interval
before  the start of the event.

                                       21
Table 5 shows the results when  dividing the  conferences into  subgroups based on  sentiment.  The
one-tailed t-tests  for  the return and  the two-tailed t-tests for  volume  tests if  each consecutive
interval  is  significantly  different from the  value in  interval 1,  prior to the conference.  For negative
sentiment, the test  is constructed to  assess  if the values in intervals  2-6 are significantly  lower  than
that in interval 1. For neutral sentiments, the tests measures if the values  are significantly  higher
than  return prior to the  conference.
             Return is negative across all intervals for the neutral sentiment and does not become
significantly larger than interval 1  until after the press conference, in interval 5, where it is
significant at the 1% level.  We predicted  stock  return to increase in the neural sentiment. The
results  show that returns do not turn positive, but nevertheless,  becomes less negative  on  average,
and  has the smallest negative value is interval 5.  For negative sentiment, we  note  that  returns  in
interval 2  are  lower  than  in  interval 1 at the 1%  significance  level.  This result  matches our
hypothesis that returns would decrease following a negative announcement. However, returns then
become positive, which was not anticipated.
              For trading volume in the neutral sentiment, we note that the pattern is in line with
our hypothesis. However,  the values are significant first in interval  4, which is after PHAS and
other agencies have spoken. During interval 4, trading volume is significantly  higher  at the 1%
level, and  in interval  5, volume  is  significantly  higher  at the 5% level. When looking at the whole
conference in interval 6, we see that trading volume is significantly higher at the 5% level.  There
are no  significant results for volume in the intervals during the press conference,  for the negative
sentiment. However, in interval  5, which is after the conference, the volume is significantly higher
at the 1% level.  This is partly  aligned with our hypothesis,  where we assumed that volume would
increase both during and after the conference.

                                       22
23
24
In Table  6  and  7,  we provide the results from the industry analysis.  For  the  return  tests, we
hypothesized that  “Industrial  Goods and Services”,  “Automobiles and Parts”  and  “Retail”  would
have a  significantly  lower  stock  return  in the intervals  during and after the press conferences
compared to the interval before.  Our results show that all industries  indeed  have a negative  stock
return  in interval  2, which is the first part of the press  conference, and  all industries  except  the
“Food, Beverage and Tobacco”  industry  have a negative  stock  return  in interval 6, which is  the
entire press  conferences. However,  none of  these  results  are significant.  All  significant results are
in interval 3, 4  or  5, with most significant results in interval 5, that is after the press  conferences.
Half of  the  industries have  one or more significant  results  and among these are the  “Industrial
Goods and Services”, and “Retail” industries. However, note that all significant results in the return
test are for positive stock returns and not negative. This goes against our hypothesis. “Automobiles
and Parts”  did not have any significant results.
               For the volume variable,  significant results  are observed  toward the  end  of,  and after,
the conference.  The majority of the significant results are found  in interval 5  and no industry  show
significant results in intervals 2  and 3,  indicating that trading volume  does  not increase when the
agencies are  presenting. This partly  contradicts  what was  predicted  but is consistent with our
findings in the previous tests. Additionally, there are some industries that have no significant results
at all, namely  “Construction and  Materials”, “Consumer Products and Services”,  “Financial
Services” and “Technology”.  In our hypothesis  we explicitly predicted  that “Health  Care” would
be the industry that experienced the  most significant  increase in trading volume, which  also  is what
our results show. “Health  Care” is significant  in interval  4,  5  and 6  at the  5%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.  The highest significance levels are found in interval 5 for the industries;  “Industrial
Goods and Services”, “Automobiles and Parts” and “Basic Resources” where the volume increases
at the 1% level for all three industries.  All in all,  we find  very few  indications  that  volume increases
during the press conference. However, there are  significant increases for the majority of the
industries after the conference.

                                       25
Table  8  shows  the results from the  return regression.  Starting with SVT viewers,  we  see that the
direction of the coefficient is negative in the first two intervals, when the authorities are presenting,
and  then  turns  positive towards  the end of the press conference.  All intervals except interval 2 are
significant.  Results in  intervals  3, 4  and  5 are  significant at 1%  and for interval 6, that is  the entire
press conference,  we notice a positive  significant correlation at the 5% level, which  is contradicting
to  our hypothesis.  We predicted negative correlations,  which  we only see significant results for in
interval  3.  Next is the  variable for change in Covid-19 cases.  In the  part  of the conference where
the Covid-19 cases are  presented,  in interval 2,  the  coefficient  is  negative at the 10% level.  For the
continuation of the conference there are no significant results.  After the conference, in interval 5,
the change in cases  shows  a  significant negative correlation with  stock  returns  at the 1% level,
which is in line with the findings by Al-Awadhi et al. (2020). The results of the variable for increases
in recommendations and restrictions  indicate  a strong negative correlation with stock returns
across  all  intervals  except interval 4.  When observing the entire conference in interval 6, this
relationship holds true at the 1% level  and is  in line with our hypothesis.  For  the  government
variable, all intervals  are significant  at the 1% level,  except for interval  3,  which has a 5%
significance level. However, the coefficients for this variable change direction throughout the press
conference, but  the conference as a whole has  a negative correlation  which  is significant at 1%.
Our hypothesis  of a weak correlation between government  announcements  and  interval  returns
meant that we expected to see an unsignificant correlation coefficient close to zero. However, since
all intervals are significant at either  1% or 5%,  this  suggest that  the coefficient is significantly

                                       26
different from zero, which contradicts our hypothesis.  Lastly, the dummy variable for Anders
Tegnell  is  positively correlating with  stock  returns  and  all  intervals  except interval 4,  are significant
at  1%.  This result is also in line with our prediction in  hypothesis  6.
             Worthy to note is that  interval 4  has the fewest significant coefficients  throughout
the conference  of  all intervals. Here only  the variable for SVT viewers and government
                                                                            2
announcements are significant.  Furthermore, we  observe that  the  R is  very  low, meaning that the
model  covers  only a small fraction of the  variables necessary to explain the  entire variation.  This
can be  expected from  the  model that  only  includes five variables and  aspires to explain a complex
phenomenon  like the stock market movements in times of crisis. However,  the fact that  the
majority of the coefficients show significant coefficient tells us that the included variables add value
in explaining at least some of the variation in stock returns. Lastly, we perform Breusch-Pagan tests
for  heteroscedasticity for all regressions on stock returns. The tests  shows that we  reject the  null
hypothesis of  homoscedasticity in the error terms. Despite heteroscedasticity being a common
issue for cross-sectional  regressions due to the large variety  with  the  cross-sectional data, this still
imposes a  limitation for our regression results (see  Table 16  in  Appendix)  (Froot, 1989).

In the volume regression, fewer  coefficients are significant compared to the return regression.
Table 9 presents the results for all variables in the regression. The dummy variables for government
announcements and Anders Tegnell  indicate no significant results, suggesting that these two does

                                       27
not add value to the regression model for trading volume. For the remaining three variables, we do
note some  significant  results.  For  number of  SVT viewers, there is no significant correlation
coefficient  in the first three intervals of the conference. However,  after the conference is over,
there is a significant correlation with trading volume at the 1% level.  Looking at interval 6, we  also
see a significant coefficient at 10%.  The correlation coefficients  are negative for this variable,
indicating that  trading volume is  lower, when  the  number of viewers is high, which goes against
our hypothesis that  trading would increase  when more people  have watched the  announcement.
For change  in Covid-19 cases,  we  observe  highly significant  positive  correlations  in the  interval  2
and 5,  suggesting that  trading volume increases  when the number  of  cases are disclosed  as well as
after the conference.  This  confirms our hypothesis that an increase in cases would  negatively
correlate with trading volume  but is limited to  interval  2 and 5. The  variable with the strongest
correlation is the recommendations and restrictions variable.  All coefficients  have  positive
correlation coefficients  and are significant at the 1% level,  suggesting that  trading volume
significantly increases when  there are news  restrictions  or recommendations. This is completely in
line with our  hypothesis.
                                    2
            Once again, the R low. This indicates that our model explains quite little of the total
variation in trading volume. Furthermore,  the  dummy  variables  for government  announcements
and Anders Tegnell have no significant explanatory value.  However, the  other variables are
significant which suggest that they are valuable additions to the model, even if the impact they pose
is small in the context of the entire variation. Just like in the return regression, we perform Breusch-
Pagan tests  for heteroscedasticity. The results in these  tests  tell  us that we cannot reject the null
hypothesis of homoscedasticity  in  any  interval  except  interval 5 (see  Table 16 in  Appendix).  This
suggests that heteroscedasticity is less of an issue for the volume regression.

                                       28
We include the difference-in-differences  test  as  a robustness test to see whether the results we have
picked up from  year 2020 are significantly different from what was seen in the previous year.  The
variable  “Date Dummy”  shows if there is an overall  difference in returns/volume  between 2020
and 2019, and the  “Interval  Dummy” shows if there is a difference in return/volume  between
interval  1 and  the intervals  after 14.00. The difference-in-differences  method  combines these two
variables  to see if  the product of  the  differences  is  significant. If so, we can say that  the  trading
behavior after 14.00 in 2020  develops  differently  from that of 2019, and thus  the results from our
tests do not only pick up noise,  but is rather  a unique finding.
              For the  test on  return,  we  note that the DiD-variable is significant in  intervals  2, 3,
and  5.  Going back to the  primary results in  table  4, we note that these are the same as in the
difference-in-differences  regression, which strengthens our findings  that there is a significant
difference in  stock  returns between 2019 and 2020  during the time of the press conference.  We
cannot expect to find a significant DiD-variable for the intervals that were not significant in our
primary tests, which is also what we see in the  difference-in-differences  regression.  For interval  4,
the  results  differ  from our primary findings.  The  return was significantly different from interval 1
at the  1% level  in our t-tests, which  the  difference-in-differences  regression does not support.  In
the primary t-test for trading volume, we saw  significant increases in  interval 4  and  5.  We do not
register any significant results  for interval 4 in the DiD-variable, however, we note a significant
result at the 5% level for interval 5. This strengthens our initial finding that trading volume increases
after the press  conference  and  indicates that these  results are not merely noise  that could also  be
found in the benchmark year  of 2019.

                                       29
7.  Discussion

7.1  Analysis

Like presented in  the  results section, the findings from the  first  t-tests give somewhat mixed
indications. We note that the tests that control for sentiment give a better idea of what is occurring
with the return and volume. For the neutral sentiment we see that  stock  returns are continuously
negative,  but becomes less and less negative over time, and  are  significantly larger  than the first
interval in interval 5. This means that returns are gradually increasing for the neutral sentiment. For
the negative sentiment, we observe a deep dip in returns in the immediate start of the conference,
only to later turn positive in aa more stable manner. Interestingly, this finding is the precise opposite
of what Busse and Green  (2002)  finds. In their study, they find that positive announcements are
followed by an overreaction and spiking prices, while stock returns from negative sentiment slowly
but steadily decreased. A reason for this  difference  could be  because  PHAS’s  announcements  are
generally negative, while the majority of observed announcements in Busse and Green were
positive. Due to the characteristics of the announcement, as well as the overall sentiment in society
at this time, one could assume that different expectations for the news exists.  In the prospect
theory, Kahneman and Tversky (1979) argues that people evaluate outcomes relative to a reference
point before determining the relative gains and losses.  Based on expectations, certain news  can
hence be perceived as  positive, neutral,  or negative, depending on what reference point the market
participants have at the time. Therefore, one could explain the inverse results,  compared to Busse
and Green,  as a result of different reference points. Market participants at the may at this time
expect the news to  be  very bad,  for example that  more restrictions  would  come as many other
countries at the time  introduced  such. However, when there  was  no clear indication that more
restrictions were coming or the cases were not spiking (neutral sentiment), then based on the
reference point, this was perceived as quite good, and the market reacted slowly, but steadily,
upward. However, when negative news  was  presented, the market reacted quickly. The returns fell
fast, but quickly recovered which is the  equivalent but inverse pattern that Busse and Green found
in their research. Additional explanations for the steep fall in return following negative news can
be found in theories around herding behavior and mortality beliefs. As the perceived market risk
and risk for  one’s  own lives increases, market participants may move their assets from the stock
market, leading returns to decrease  (Heimer, Myrseth, & Schoenle, 2019; Puri & Robinson, 2007;
Chiu, Chung, Ho, & Wu,  2018). As more market participants behave in this way, this further
increases the perceived risk and return falls further and faster. Christie and Huang  (1995)  showed
that people tend to forego  one’s  own rationale and instead  follow the behaviors of others. The
drop comes  early on during the conference, when PHAS discloses the information of confirmed
cases and death rates. This result resembles the findings of Al-Awadhi et al.  (2020)  on the  Chinese
market. Which factor that plays the biggest role in causing the drop we  cannot  say, however, our
results resemble findings in research on herding behavior, mortality beliefs, increasing perceptions
of risk and pessimistic sentiment around crises,  and one could hence argue that the market
reactions to some extent can be attributed to these phenomena.
             When moving on to the volume results, we find that volume  only  increases in the
later part of the press conference. In our hypothesis we stated that  we expected to see this pattern,
but we also expected to notice an increase during the press conference, which is not the case. In
the literature, researchers find  that volume increases  after  the announcement  (Cieslak, Morse, &
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2019; Zhu, 2021; Rigobon & Sack, 2004). However, in this case, the event
window is substantially longer that most events in previous literature, which is an important
difference to note. Compared to the majority of previously studied announcements, the PHAS
conferences have no distinct announcement, but rather a continuous flow of news. Despite our
division of intervals, the time that should be defined as  after  can be quite  diffuse. One could say
that we in fact have three  afters; after PHAS have spoken, after other agencies have spoken and

                                       30
after the questionnaire. We can conclude that the increase in trading volume does not happen after
PHAS, but first after other agencies  has presented  and after the questionnaire for the neutral
sentiment. For negative sentiment, the increase happens only after the questionnaire. From this,
we could conclude that the trading volume for neutral  sentiment  increases before the entire
conference is finalized, indicating either that investors do not perceive the information from the
questionnaire to add any additional value to trade on, or it could be the exact opposite, that the
information of the questionnaire adds much valuable information to  trade on. However, the fact
that trading volume increases only after the questionnaire  for  the negative sentiment  indicates  that
the investors collect all information during the conference and trades first after it has been finalized.
With this line of reasoning, it would imply that investors do not expect more information of value
to come during the questionnaire when the sentiment of the press conference has been neutral and
no drastic information were disclosed in the previous sections.
             In our industry return analysis, we  found that  all industries, except the  “Food,
Beverage and Tobacco”  industry,  has a  negative  stock  return  on average during the press
conferences. While this is in line with our hypothesis and the results by Suneson  (2020), these
results are not significant.  Instead, all significant results are  for the positive  stock  returns, which  is
opposite to  what we hypothesized.  We believed that  three  industries would be more severely
affected by the Covid-19 news than the other industries, based on the findings of Suneson.  Two
of these  industries, namely  “Industrial Goods and Services”  and  “Retail”, did in fact have
significant results, but again, these were positive  and thus the opposite of what we  expected.  This
unexpected result  could be because  Suneson  simply disclosed  which  sectors faced the largest loss
during the pandemic  in general. He  did  not link the  negative  stock  returns  of these sectors to a
specific event or a certain time of the day. Our studies are very different in that sense. The industries
that we  hypothesized  would see a negative  stock  return  might have had a negative  stock  return on
average  during the  pandemic but  saw a small increase at the time of  the press conferences.  This
could indicate  that  the  information being presented during the press conferences  have a positive
impact on these  industries,  in contrast to  their  general downward trend.  The Swedish Covid-19
strategy  stands out from many other countries’  by  having a greater focus on general  public  health
and  on  the economy, with a  “business as usual” approach.  From a stock market perspective, this
approach is  probably  a good  thing for the Swedish companies  (Bloomberg, 2020; Oxley, David,
2021; Reuters, 2020).  Related to  the  discussion on the Swedish Covid-19 strategy is  the  prospect
theory  and the notion of  reference  dependence  (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).  With many other
countries  introducing  strict restrictions and  even  lockdowns  where  all non-essential businesses are
being closed,  one might assume that many expected  Sweden to  introduce  similar measures,
especially in the beginning of the pandemic when there was a lot of uncertainty.  Having other
countries and their Covid-19 strategies as a reference point, the press conferences by PHAS, during
which the  Swedish  Covid-19  strategy  is being laid out,  becomes  positive  news  for  the Swedish
companies.  For example,  when presenting  fewer restrictions than expected, the press conferences
by PHAS should become positive news for the “Retail” industry since people can continue visiting
stores as they please.  Therefore, it is reasonable that the  stock  return increases significantly for
some industries during certain parts of the press conferences.
             For the industry volume analysis, we get most significant results in interval 5,  which
is after the press conferences.  As mentioned in the previous volume discussion  on  the sentiment
results, this is both in line with our hypothesis and the literature on trading volume  around  news
announcements. According to the  previous research,  trading volume should  increase when the
news  are  disclosed. This makes intuitive sense  since one would want to  trade on relevant
information.  Knowing that  new  information is going to be disclosed, one would  postpone  trading
until that information has been published.  However, what is  interesting is that  the  “Health Care”
industry starts to trade sooner than the other industries. The trading volume of the  “Health Care”
industry increases already in interval 4, which is after the authorities have presented, during the
questionnaire.  Consequently, the increase  for the  “Health Care”  industry  is also  significant  in

                                       31
interval 6, which is the entire press conference.  This  result  is  consistent  with our hypothesis and
the  findings by  Donadelli et al.  (2017)  and Haroon and Rizvi  (2020).  While the news on Covid-19
assumably  have  widespread  effects on many  industries and parts of the society, the  “Health Care”
industry is  undoubtedly  in the center  of this disease-related crisis  and the  information presented
during the press conference has great implications for this industry.  Consequently, the  “Health
Care”  industry has a  larger increase in  trading activity  both during and after the press conferences
on Covid-19  than many other  industries and reacts more quickly to the news.
             For the return regression analysis, there are many significant results. For three of the
five dependent variables,  the return  coefficient  goes in opposite direction  throughout  the different
intervals, which makes these  results  more  difficult to interpret.  The  dummy variable for
government announcements  is one of them. However,  while it is difficult to interpret this  variable,
we still feel it is  worth discussing its significance.  This variable is 1 if the Swedish government has
held a press conference on Covid-19 six hours or less before the press conference of PHAS.  We
included this  dummy  since  we believed that the most important information would already be
disclosed if the Swedish government had just held a press conference.  This  should  imply  that the
information is already incorporated into the  prices  and therefore there should be no,  or only a
small,  reaction to PHAS’s press conference, according to  the  EMH  (Fama E. F., 1970).  Hence, we
hypothesized that the  government  announcement coefficient would be  close to  zero. However,
the  results  show that all  coefficients are significantly different from zero.  Therefore, the  return  is
affected during the press conferences by PHAS even though the Swedish government has disclosed
similar  information  just a couple of hours before.  One  plausible  explanation  for  this  unexpected
result  is that PHAS present additional information that the government  did  not present  during
their press conference, which  would be  consistent with  the  EMH.  Another  explanation  could be
that  the  stock market  reaction  to PHAS press conferences is  more emotional than rational.  As
discussed in section 2, the stock market can react strongly to sentiment caused by crises or chocking
events  without there being a change in underlying fundamental value.  An example of this can be
found in the study by  Kaplanski and Levy  (2010), where they find that  aviation disasters increase
the stock market volatility and lead to a significant drop in stock prices, without  the  disclosing  of
any new relevant information  about  fundamental value.  Based  on this, we could  also assume the
change in  stock  return  to be  an emotional reaction to  the sentiment of the press conferences.
             The   two   return   regression   variables   with   a   constant   direction   are   the
recommendation/restriction  variable and the Anders Tegnell variable. The dummy variable for
new recommendations  and  restrictions  has a negative coefficient in all intervals, meaning that the
stock  return decreases  throughout  the press conferences,  during those days when  new restrictions
and/or recommendations are being presented.  This is in line with what  was  hypothesized.  The
recommendations and restrictions have a clear  societal and economic impact  and  an increase in
these will  have a negative impact on most companies.  This does not have to be true for all
businesses.  Some businesses, for example online businesses, might thrive  when new  restrictions
are  introduced  and more people spend all their time at home  (Deloitte, 2020). However,  the vast
majority of the companies  will probably not benefit from  restrictions and recommendations  and
thus  we see  a negative correlation with  stock  return. The Anders Tegnell dummy variable  had a
positive coefficient in all intervals, meaning that Anders Tegnell has a positive impact on  stock
return.  In the article by Busse and Green  (2002)  they found that a presenter  who  is perceived to
have a greater ability to obtain relevant information has a positive impact on return. Being the State
Epidemiologist of Sweden and an expert on communicable diseases, it can be assumed that Anders
Tegnell, just like the  presenter in the article by Busse and Green, is  perceived  as a  trustworthy
person  with an ability to obtain  more  relevant  information than other presenters  (Svenska
Dagbladet, 2020).  Furthermore, we  believe  that he affects  the  stock  return  positively  since he has
a rather  laid-back  approach  and is  the personification of the Swedish Covid-19  strategy.  By  urging
people to continue as usual, we believe that the many investors would perceive Anders Tegnell and
the news that he is conveying in a positive manner (Bloomberg, 2020; Oxley, David, 2021; Reuters,

                                       32
2020).  Being  a person  to whom  many  turn  for guidance  and who deliver  positive  news,  Anders
Tegnell  symbolizes  stability in a time of crisis.  This  discussion  can be linked to previous studies on
mortality beliefs, which suggest that optimism and pessimism  have  a large impact  on investment
decisions  (Puri & Robinson, 2007). By  addressing the pandemic in the way that he does, it is
possible that Anders Tegnell contributes to  a reduced level of uncertainty and perceived risk,  and
thus  a  decreased pessimism.
              The regression results for volume are less significant than  for return,  similar to what
we found  for the t-tests.  SVT viewers, change in cases and new recommendations/  restrictions are
the three variables with a one or many significant results.  Once again, the most significant results
are found for  the  recommendations/restrictions  variable, where the  results are significant in all
intervals.  This implies that during the days when new  recommendations and restrictions  are  being
presented, the volume  is positively affected  in all intervals.  Just as with the regression analysis for
return, this can be linked to the fact that recommendations and restrictions have an obvious societal
and economic impact. The variable for changes in number of cases  affect volume in interval 2,
which is when  information about cases is  being presented, and in interval 5, which is after the press
conference.  The information about number of cases does not have the same direct  impact on
society and the stock market  as new  recommendations/restrictions.  However, the change in cases
will  most likely  affect  the policy making and therefore  has indirect societal and economic
implications.  With a large increase in the number of cases, one can probably expect more
restrictions in the future.  Furthermore,  the  information on number of cases will  also  affect the
perceived uncertainty and risk of the virus, and one’s mortality beliefs. With more people becoming
seriously ill in Covid-19,  people might re-evaluate their own mortality  (Heimer, Myrseth, &
Schoenle, 2019; Puri & Robinson, 2007).  Thus, the trading volume  is likely to  increase when  the
number of cases increases.

7.2  Limitations

There are some  apparent  challenges  with the  study-environment as a whole.  Despite performing a
difference-in-differences  robustness test, it is difficult to  completely  isolate the  effects  to the  press
conferences.  Countries, societies,  and stock markets are in  an  unstable state  during  this time and
much uncertainty prevails  in general.  One  must  therefore be aware that our significant results may
also be a caused by the  many fluctuations  in  the stock  market  all together.  The benchmark  of 2019
tells us that we do not pick up any noise that were to exist in a more stable time.  However, the
comparability between the years 2019 and 2020 is certainly debatable, as we do not control for
other events occurring at these times. This could impact our findings, and one could hence question
if 2019 provides an appropriate counterfactual trend.  Thus worth noting is  that the flow of
information at this time is problematic. Like mentioned in the data section, the ideal  environment
would be one where no other information about the topic was available. Then  we could isolate the
effects to this  specific event.  The reality is different. News  flow at  incredible speed  across  many
different platforms, which both decreases the news value of the information presented  during  the
press conference and makes it more difficult to isolate the effects. Furthermore,  as  the conferences
are held  every 24 hours,  it  makes the risk of information  drift more prevalent  and again makes  the
pure news value questionable and  causes  difficulties  in  isolating  the  effects  to the specific  event.
Despite  the  results  being  significant  in  many different tests and  in  our  robustness checks, these are
still important limitations to keep in mind.

                                       33
              There are decisions made regarding the method  that also  causes some limitations to
our study.  The  study is limited to the OMXS30 as these stocks  have the largest total turnover  on
the Swedish stock market. However, this  can potentially give a  skewed  perspective  of the stock
market in its entirety, as we do not include the impact on mid and small cap stocks in our analysis.
Hence, we cannot extrapolate the result onto the whole market. Lastly, in addition to the sentiment
analysis being a subjective  estimation,  it is important to note that the analysis  also  has been
constructed months after the actual events. Despite our efforts to debias the process of this
analysis,  the ideal would be to conduct a  widespread  survey of the perceived  sentiment among
viewers  right after watching the press conference.
                                                               2
              Lastly,  like mentioned in the results, the R in our regression analyses  were low. This
means that our model is far from  exhaustive.  In this complex  setting, many factors play a role in
explaining the return and volume, and our model captures only few of them. Nevertheless, the
variables included in the model are for the most part significant, implying that they add value to
the model, even if the effect size is rather small. Additionally, the tests for heteroscedasticity among
the error terms in our regressions  tell us that heteroscedasticity is a prevalent issue, especially for
the return regressions.  Nevertheless, heteroscedasticity is a common problem in cross-sectional
regressions as  the data often has very large variations, and hence  this was somewhat expected.
However, it  shows a  clear limitation to our regression results.

8.  Concluding Remarks

8.1  Conclusion

The early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic  brought  high levels of uncertainty and  fear  into our
societies.  The rapid spread of the virus and the lack of knowledge regarding its contagiousness and
lethal consequences led many counties to introduce strict restrictions and lockdowns in  desperate
attempts  to stop the virus. As a result,  the economy faced  the worst recession since the Great
Depression  and stock markets dropped rapidly in the first months of 2020.  Hence, the Covid-19
crisis imposes an interesting  and important new area of  economic  research  from which there is
much to learn.  In this study  we  investigate if and how the Swedish stock market reacted to early
news about the virus. More specifically, we  study the stock returns and trading volume of the
OMXS30  around the time of  the daily  press conferences  held by  PHAS.  Additionally, we include
a sentiment and industry analysis  for  more  insights.  We  also  include a regression analysis  to  test
the correlation between  a selection of independent variables and the return  and volume  variable
respectively.  With  few  previous  studies  on the topic, we base our  research  on  literature  covering
news announcement and  incorporate findings from studies on  trading behavior in times of crisis.
             We find significant results  for  both  changes in returns  over the course of the
conference,  and  increases in volume  after the  press  conference.  These findings are confirmed  by
our robustness test, giving us more confidence that the press conferences actually play an important
role in  explaining the  changes in returns and volume increases found in this  specific time.  The
sentiment analysis gives  a more  nuanced picture of  how the trading is influenced by the overall
sentiment in the press conferences. We find that  stock  returns  significantly drop initially, and  then
quickly bounces back when the sentiment is negative. During neutral press conferences,  stock
returns  develop  slowly  and becomes less and less negative over the course of the press conference.
These relationships are  the inverse of what Busse and Green find in the  benchmark study.  In all
conferences, trading volume significantly increases at the end, after all  agencies have spoken.
             When controlling for industries, we expected retail and industrial firms to experience
the largest  decreases in  stock  return. Our results show the opposite. All significant results in the
return test, imply that returns increase  for  the stocks in  theses industries.  The  finding suggests that
the renowned Swedish Covid-19 strategy has  been beneficial for  some  Swedish  stocks. As many

                                       34
societies  close down, PHAS has recommended  a  responsible  “business as usual” strategy, which
potentially  gives Swedish firms a better chance of surviving the crisis  (Bloomberg, 2020; Oxley,
David,  2021; Reuters, 2020).  Furthermore,  the  “Health Care”  industry  has  the most  significant
results  among all industries in the  volume  study, indicating that this  particular  industry is  at the
center if this crisis and that  investors  perceive  the information disclosed  to have  important
implications for  this industry.
             The regression results for volume show some significant results. The most significant
results are found for the recommendations/restrictions variable, where the volume has a positive
coefficient throughout the entire press conference. This implies that the volume is being positively
affected when new recommendations and/or restrictions is being presented. This can be linked  to
the clear societal and economic effect of the recommendations and restrictions. The regression
results for return show many significant results. In this analysis, the recommendation/restriction
variable negatively correlates with return. Once again, this variable has a clear societal and economic
impact and an increase in these will have a  negative impact on most companies. Another very
significant variable is the Anders Tegnell variable, which has a significant positive correlation with
stock  return. This implies that Anders Tegnell, the  State  Epidemiologist of Sweden, symbolized
stability in a time of crisis. As an expert on Covid-19 and as the personification of the Swedish
Covid-19 strategy, he contributes to a  stability and reassurance  (Svenska Dagbladet, 2020).  Lastly,
the government announcement variable indicates that the press conferences by PHAS still have an
impact on trading activity,  although the Swedish government has just held a press conference on
the same topic. This means that most information is already disclosed, but we still see a stock
market reaction. This goes against EMH and we  instead  relate  our  finding to literature within
behavioral finance. Our results resemble findings in research on herding behavior, mortality beliefs,
increasing perceptions of risk and pessimistic sentiment around crises, and one could hence argue
that the market reactions to some extent can be attributed to these phenomena.
              To conclude, this study finds that in times of much uncertainly and  incredibly high
flows of information,  people  require legitimate  information  sources to rely on.  Our results  suggest
that investors  attribute much value to the press conferences,  despite  much of  the information
already being disclosed, implying that sentiment  among investors plays an important  role  in
explaining the trading behavior at this time.

8.2  Future Research

Covid-19 is a new and consequently  largely  unexplored area and more research on  the topic is
needed. While the crisis is primarily a global health crisis, it has created the worst economic
recession since the Great Depression in 1929  (International Monetary Fund, 2020). It is therefore
of great  interest to understand the market behaviors during the pandemic, and its implications. For
future research within the field of Covid-19 and trading activity, we believe that it will be important
to obtain a larger data set where more stocks and more trading days are included. This will be
important in order to obtain more significant results and to validate the results of this study. A
more detailed analysis should not only include more companies but to also include more industries.
As previously discussed,  we believe that our study is lacking due to the few observations within
each industry and because of the few of industries. Due to the nature of the Covid-19 crisis, one
would expect different industries to be affected in different ways, and thus a more extensive
industry analysis would be useful. Additionally, it would be interesting to study a different part of
the crisis. We chose to analyze the first wave since the uncertainty regarding the virus was the
largest in the beginning of the pandemic, and thus we believed that the effect on the stock market
would be the most prevalent in this period. However, it could also be interesting to see how the
stock market has behaved as the pandemic has progressed, perhaps by also studying the second
wave or the time of the vaccination process. Furthermore, future research could focus on different
type of Covid-19 news, preferably announcements. While the daily press conferences by PHAS

                                       35
were an interesting and new phenomenon to study, a more traditional event study of specific
announcements could contribute with other important findings. Lastly, our first t-tests results
indicated that the stock return seemed to be somewhat fluctuating during the press conferences.
Therefore, it would be interesting to  include not  only return  and volume, but also volatility, in
future studies in Covid-19.

                                       36
Bibliography

(2021, April 1). Retrieved from Nasdaq:
      https://indexes.nasdaqomx.com/Index/Overview/OMXS30
(2021). Retrieved from Sveriges Television: https://omoss.svt.se/about-svt.html
Al-Awadhi, A. M., Alsaifi, K., Al-Awadhi, A., & Alhammadi, S. (2020, September). Death and
        contagious infectious diseases: Impact of the COVID-19 virus on stock market returns.
        Journal of experimental and behavioral finance, 27, pp. 100326-100326.
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2009).  Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist Companion.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2006, August). Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock
        Returns.  The Journal of Finance, 61(4), pp. 1645-1680.
Bessembinder, H., Chan, K., & Seguin, P. J. (1996, January). An empirical examination of
         information, differences of opinion, and trading activity.  Journal of financial economics, 40,
        pp. 105-134.
Bloomberg. (2020, November 1).  Sweden’s Top Banker Weighs In on Controversial Covid Plan.
        Retrieved from Bloomberg: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-11-
        01/sweden-s-top-banker-weighs-in-on-controversial-covid-strategy
Busse, J. A., & Green, T. C. (2002, September). Market efficiency in real time.  Journal of Finance,
        65(3), pp. 415-437.
Chae, J. (2005, February 1). Trading Volume, Information Asymmetry, and Timing Information.
        The Journal of finance, 60, pp. 413-442.
Chiang, T. C., & Zheng, D. (2010, August). An empirical analysis of herd behavior in global stock
        markets.  Jornal of banking and finance, 34(8), pp. 1911-1921.
Chiu, J., Chung, H., Ho, K.-Y., & Wu, C.-C. (2018, May). Investor sentiment and evaporating
        liquidity during the financial crisis.  International Review of Economics & Finance, 55, pp. 21-36.
Christie, W. G., & Huang, R. D. (1995, July 1). Following the pied piper: do individual returns
         herd around the market?  Financial analysts journal, 51.
Cieslak, A., Morse, A., & Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2019, October). Stock Returns over the FOMC
         Cycle.  The Journal of finance (New York), 2019-10, Vol.74 (5), p.2201-2248, 74, pp. 2201-
       2248.
Dagens Industri.  (2020, May 7).  Svenskarnas nya lägereld.  Retrieved from Dagens Industri:
        https://www.di.se/weekend/svenskarnas-nya-lagereld/
Dagens Nyheter. (2021, March 6).  Torra pressträffar har blivit svenska folkets nya lägereld.  Retrieved
         from Dagens Nyheter: https://www.dn.se/sverige/torra-presstraffar-har-blivit-svenska-
        folkets-nya-lagerled/
Dahl, A. (2021, March 6). Retrieved from Dagens Nyheter: https://www.dn.se/sverige/torra-
        presstraffar-har-blivit-svenska-folkets-nya-lagerled/?
David, Oxley. (2021).  Nordics set for shallowest recessions in Europe.  Capital economics.
Deloitte. (2020).  COVID-19 will permanently change e-commerce in Denmark.  Deloitte Denmark.
Donadelli, M., Kizys, R., & Riedel, M. (2017, September). Dangerous infectious diseases: Bad
        news for Main Street, good news for Wall Street?  Journal of Financial Markets, 35, pp. 84-
       103.
Ederington, L. H., & Lee, J. H. (1993, September 1). How Markets Process Information: News
        Releases and Volatility.  The Journal of finance, 48, pp. 1161-1191.
Fama, E. F. (1970, May 1). Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.
        The Journal of Finance, 25, pp. 383-417.
Fama, E. F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M. C., & Roll, R. (1969). The Adjustment of Stock Prices to New
        Information.  International Economic Review, 33(1), pp. 3-56.
Financial Times. (2020, March).  Lockdowns compared: tracking governments’ coronavirus responses.
        Retrieved from Financial Times: https://ig.ft.com/coronavirus-lockdowns/

                                       37
Folkhälsomyndigheten. (2020, March 6).  Pressträff om den nationella pandemigruppens möte.  Retrieved
        from Folkhälsomyndigheten: https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/nyheter-och-
       press/nyhetsarkiv/2020/mars/presstraff-om-den-nationella-pandemigruppens-mote/
Folkhälsomyndigheten. (2021).  The Public Health Agency of Sweden´s Work with COVID-19.
        Retrieved from Folkhälsomyndigheten: https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/the-
        public-health-agency-of-sweden/
Froot, K. A. (1989, September). Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with Cross-Sectional
        Dependence and Heteroskedasticity in Financial Data.  The Journal of Financial and
        Quantitative Analysis, 24, pp. 333-355.
Haroon, O., & Rizvi, S. A. (2020, September). COVID-19: Media coverage and financial markets
      behavior—A sectoral inquiry. Journal of behavioral and experimental finance, 27, pp. 100343-
       100343.
Heimer, R. Z., Myrseth, K. O., & Schoenle, R. S. (2019, December). YOLO: Mortality Beliefs
        and Household Finance Puzzles.  The Journal of finance, 74, pp. 2957-2996.
Hirshleifer, D. (2001, August). Investor Psychology and Asset Pricing.  The Journal of Finance, 56,
        pp. 1533-1597.
Hirshleifer, D., & Shumway, T. (2003, June 1). Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the
        Weather.  The Journal of finance, 58, pp. 1009-1032.
Hoffman, A. O., Post, T., & Joost, P. M. (2013, January). Individual investor perceptions and
        behavior during the financial crisis.  Journal of banking & finance, 37(1), pp. 60-74.
International Monetary Fund. (2020).  IMF Annual Report 2020.  Washington, D.C.: International
       Monetary Fund.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979, March 1).  Prospekt Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
        Risk.  Econometrica, pp. 263-291.
Kalev, P. S., Liu, W.-M., Pham, P. K., & Jarnecic, E. (2004, June). Public information arrival and
        volatility of intraday stock returns.  Journal of banking & finance, 28, pp. 1441-1467.
Kaplanski, G., & Levy, H. (2010, February). Sentiment and stock prices: The case of aviation
        disasters.  Journal of finanial economics, 95, pp. 174-201.
Kim, O., & Verrecchia, R. E. (1991, December). Market reaction to anticipated announcements.
        Journal of  financial economics, 30, pp. 273-309.
Loughran, T., & Schultz, P. (2004, June). Weather, Stock Returns, and the Impact of Localized
        Trading Behavior.  Journal of financial and quantitative analysis, 39, pp. 343-364.
Mitchell, M. L., & Mulherin, J. H. (1994, July 1). The Impact of Public Information on the Stock
        Market.  The Journal of Finance, 49, pp. 923-950.
Newbold, P., Carlson, W., & Thorne, B. (2013).  Statistics for Business and Economics: Eight Edition.
        United States: Pearson Education, Inc.
Nofsinger, J. R. (2001, July). The impact of public information on investors.  Journal of Banking &
        Finance, 25, pp. 1339-1366.
Pallant, J. (2013).  SPSS Survival Manual: A step by step guide to data analysis using SPSS.  Open
        University Press.
Pástor, L., & Veronesi, P. (2012, August). Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock
        Prices.  The Journal of Finance, 67, pp. 1219-1264.
Puri, M., & Robinson, D. T. (2007, October). Optimism and economic choice.  Journal of Financial
        Economics, 86, pp. 71-99.
Reuters. (2020, May 1).  As Sweden goes it alone, a COVID-19 survivor and trucking boss balances risk.
        Retrieved from Reuters: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-sweden-
      economy-idUSKBN22D4KN
Rigobon, R., &  Sack, B. (2004, November). The impact of monetary policy on asset prices.
        Journal of monetary economics, 51, pp. 1553-1575.

                                       38
Statista. (2021, March 22).  Month-on-month growth in global goods trade volume from January 2018 to
        December 2020.  Retrieved from Statista:
        https://www.statista.com/statistics/1032180/global-growth-goods-trade/
Suneson, G. (2020, March 20).  usatoday.com/money.  Retrieved from USA Today:
        https://eu.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/03/20/us-industries-being-devastated-by-
        the-coronavirus-travel-hotels-food/111431804/
Svenska Dagbladet. (2020, May 3).  Stort förtroende för Anders Tegnell. Retrieved from Svenska
        Dagbladet: https://www.svd.se/stort-fortroende-for-anders-tegnell
SVT Nyheter. (2019). Swedbank handelsstoppas på börsen.
SVT. (2021).  SVT. FHM Presstra ̈ffar 2020. Online och broadcast.
Time Magazine. (2021, February 5).  The Swedish COVID-19 Response Is a Disaster. It Shouldn’t Be a
        Model for the Rest of the World.  Retrieved from Time Magazine:
        https://time.com/5899432/sweden-coronovirus-disaster/
World Health Organization. (2020, March 11).  WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media
        briefing on COVID-19  -  11 March 2020.  Retrieved from World Health Organization:
        https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-
        remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
Young, M. E., King, N., Harper, S., & Humphreys, K. R. (2013, February 1). The influence of
        popular media on perceptions of personal and population risk in possible disease
        outbreaks.  Health, risk & society, 15, pp. 103-114.
Zhang, F. (2006, February). Information Uncertainty and Stock Returns.  The Journal of Finance, 61,
        pp. 105-137.
Zhu, X. (2021).  Volume dynamics around FOMC announcements.  Working Paper, Stockholm School
       of Economics , Swedish House of Finance.

                                       39
Appendix

                                       40
41
42
43
44