PREDICTING LIQUIDITY IN
THE  CRYPTOCURRENCY
MARKET

TESTING  THE  INVARIANCE THEORY  ON A  NEW
MARKET  STRUCTURE  AND ASSET  CLASS

CHARLES GYLLHAMN
JACOB WINBERG
Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022

Predicting Liquidity In  The  Cryptocurrency Market:  Testing The Invariance
Theory On  A New Market Structure And Asset Class

Abstract:

By integrating dimensional analysis and principles of market microstructure invariance,
this study documents a nearly invariant relationship between relative bid-ask spreads
and  illiquidity for the cryptocurrency market. The relationship is found by studying
cryptocurrency trading data in two dimensions; Along a time series dimension, where
data is aggregated on a daily level, and along an intraday dimension, where variables
are aggregated at five-minute intervals across all trading days. The examined illiquidity
measure is composed of directly observable asset characteristics such as price, trading
volume, and volatility, and the findings provide support for the use of this universal
transaction cost model for bid-ask spreads in the cryptocurrency market. Moreover, the
results also demonstrate the presence of market frictions in this supposedly more efficient
market structure.

Keywords:

Market microstructure, invariance, bid-ask spread, liquidity, Cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin,
Cryptocurrency  exchanges

Authors:

  Charles Gyllhamn (24680)

  Jacob Winberg (24774)

Tutor:

   Olga Obizhaeva, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor,  Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Charles Gyllhamn and Jacob Winberg, 2022

                                    2
                      I.    Introduction

Market microstructure is the branch of finance that studies how markets operate. The
central area of inquiry concerns the structure of exchanges and trading venues, intraday
trading behavior, the price formation process, and transaction costs  (Kissell, 2014).  A
recent theory called Market Microstructure Invariance (MMI), postulated by Albert S.
Kyle and Anna A. Obizhaeva  (2016), has cemented itself in microstructure literature. It
is based on the intuitive understanding that financial markets transfer risks in business
time and can, in contrast to existing literature,  be used to  render accurate predictions
of how different quantities in market microstructure vary across assets with different
levels  of  trading activity by only employing empirically observable variables in financial
markets such as returns variance, price, and trade volume.
    After its  publication, MMI theory has been supplemented and strengthened by
additional papers and is today providing several empirical invariance hypotheses. One
of them being derived from a paper published by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) where
dimensional analysis, leverage neutrality, and a principle of market microstructure
invariance is combined to ultimately introduce scaling laws, relevant for the creation of
transaction cost functions. More specifically, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) derive an
illiquidity measure, defined as the cube root of return variance to dollar volume, and
predict that it has  a  proportional relationship to the relative bid-ask spread.  This  theory
has received instant theoretical and practical acknowledgement in finance literature, and
so far,  it  has been tested and confirmed  empirically for  various  markets, e.g.  Russian
and  US  stock  exchanges.  To stretch and challenge the theory further, the predictions
ought to be tested on new and unconventional types of assets and markets where there
are reasons to believe that microstructure characteristics are unique.
    An emerging asset class, cryptocurrencies, is built on novel technology that enables
completely new market characteristics to take form.  This divergent structure has never
been seen in public markets before, and many believe it is paving the way for the
development of  financial  markets. Because this market employs continuous trading, peer-
to-peer transactions, and nearly instantaneous settlement,  liquidity formation may differ
from those of traditional asset markets  (Bruneis et  al.,  2021). The nationless character
of cryptocurrencies implies that they are completely decentralized from any organization,
leading to  autonomous pricing across cryptocurrency exchanges (Makarov and Schoar,
2020). A recent debate concerning the regulation of these exchanges has accelerated as
they are serving a similar function as established stock exchanges, but at the same time,
lack  the  appropriate regulations  (CNBC,  2022).
    The cryptocurrency market, which has previously been dominated by retail investors,
has grown in terms of global importance, echoed by a pattern of increased  engagement
from institutional investors  (Forbes,  2021). Cryptocurrencies are also becoming a larger
element of many investment portfolios, many of which are being managed under rigorous
trading philosophies, often based on High-Frequency Trading (HFT) data  (Chu et al.,

                                    3
2020). Naturally, an increasing emphasis has been placed on finding an accurate and
effective measurement for estimating  liquidity. In recent research, Bruneis et. al (2021)
investigate the efficacy of low-frequency liquidity measures to  describe  actual  liquidity
of  two  cryptocurrencies,  Bitcoin  and  Ethereum.  The  Kyle  and  Obizhaeva  (2016)
estimator is employed in their  study, and the authors claim that it outperforms other
low-frequency measures.
    The central contribution of this paper is twofold. First, prior studies have covered
the  market  microstructure  invariance theory,  however, to the best of our knowledge, the
theory has only been confirmed on equities, futures contracts, and portfolio transitions.
We extend the invariance and microstructure literature by testing if our postulated
invariance hypothesis holds for this unconventional, yet  increasingly important, asset
class and market. Second, by stretching Bruneis  et al.  (2021) work, we contribute to the
field of research that focuses on  liquidity measurement  in  cryptocurrency markets. By
empirically testing if the invariant relationship underpinning the used estimator actually
holds, we potentially confirm the performance of this generalizable transaction cost
measure for a new asset class and market structure. With this in consideration, the aim
of this paper is to answer to the following question:

     Does the relative size of the bid-ask spread have a proportional relationship to the
     asset-specific illiquidity measure, defined as the cube root of the ratio of return
    variance to USD volume, for cryptocurrencies trading  on the Kraken Exchange
                         between 2019-01-01  and  2020-01-01?

We intend to answer our research question  in  two  distinct  dimensions;  Along  a time
series dimension, where data is aggregated on a daily level, and  along  an intraday
dimension, where variables are aggregated at five-minute intervals  across all trading
days. For both dimensions, we follow a similar theoretical framework to Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2017) where scaling laws and transaction cost models are derived pursuant
to  the  invariance  assumptions.  For  the  latter  dimension,  a  method  for  variable
aggregation  described by Anderson et. al (2018) is used, allowing us to isolate  and test
the time-of-day effect.
    We obtain tick-by-tick data recorded on a millisecond resolution, spanning from
2019-01-01 to 2020-01-01, for 16 different cryptocurrencies trading on the  Kraken
exchange. Our main aim is to test the hypothesized  relationship  on a  cross-sectional
level, but we also conduct  individual  tests for all  cryptocurrencies to supplement our
analysis. All tests are performed using Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regressions.
    Along the time series dimension, we find that the relationship between relative bid-
ask spread and illiquidity is broadly consistent with invariance. Although we statistically
reject our hypothesis, the result is economically close to our predicted slope of one. On
the level of individual cryptocurrency, the invariance relationship holds statistically for
six out of the 16 cryptocurrencies in our sample.  For the  cross-sectional  regression  along

                                    4
an intraday dimension, we find that the relationship between relative bid-ask spread and
illiquidity is broadly consistent with invariance, with a result economically close to the
predicted slope of one.
    In further investigation  of the  intraday  plot, however, we observe a  puzzling result.
A  practically horizontal pattern for most cryptocurrencies  is found,  suggesting  that the
bid-ask   spread   may   be   mechanically   constrained.   To   investigate   this   seemingly
systematic issue, we inspect the regression of  all individual cryptocurrencies separately
and find that the invariant relationship holds statistically for zero out of the 16
cryptocurrencies in our sample. The slopes of the best fitted lines range from  -0.03 to
                                         2
0.46, with a mean of 0.08. The R ranges from 0.00 to 0.18, with a mean of 0.05. Kyle
and Obizhaeva (2016) state that the empirical invariance hypothesis is not expected to
hold exactly across all assets and time  -  if market frictions are high. If market makers
are competitive, tick sizes  are small, transaction fees and taxes are low, the invariance
predictions may hold particularly well.
    Our   empirical   results   yield   two   distinct   insights.   First,   that   the   examined
relationship between relative bid-ask spread and illiquidity broadly holds for this nascent
asset class and unique market structure, which supplements the findings of Bruneis et.
al (2021) and provide support for using the Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) transaction cost
model to estimate liquidity in the cryptocurrency market. Second,  along the intraday
dimension  and  on  the level of individual cryptocurrency, we overwhelmingly reject the
hypothesized  invariant  relationship,  indicating  the  existence  of  substantial  market
frictions. We therefore leave a recommendation to potential investors that trading should
be exercised with caution in this market.

                                    5
             II.   Fundamental  Concepts

Cryptocurrencies
The  whitepaper  "Bitcoin:  A  Peer-to-Peer  Electronic  Cash  System",  published  by
Nakamoto (2008), describes a digital currency system in which transactions are recorded
on a chain of connected blocks, hence “blockchain”, and electronically validated by a
decentralized network of users. The blockchain keeps track of all previous transactions
since its inception, and all information on the blockchain is  publicly available. Each
block of transactions is linked to the one before it, ensuring that no one can alter data
without it being visible to the other participants.
    These novel characteristics allow Bitcoin to be fully decentralized, escaping the  need
of centralized banks and clearing houses to control government-backed currencies. The
code upon which this is built is open source, which means that it is free to modify and
redistribute. As a result, multiple other cryptocurrencies, known as  altcoins, have been
created, each hosted on its own blockchain and with unique features and characteristics.
One of them  is  Ethereum, the world's first programmable blockchain, which builds on
the same fundamental technology as Bitcoin, but with the addition of  smart contracts
(Buterin, 2014). Smart contracts allow for, among other things, the creation of  tokens.
Tokens  are  similar  to  other  cryptocurrencies  in  the  sense  that  they  are  fungible
blockchain-based assets that can be sent and received. The main difference is that tokens
are issued on  another  blockchain  network, instead of running their own  (Cong et al.
2019). In our analysis, we will test our postulated invariance hypothesis on both coins
and tokens,  which collectively are referred to as  cryptocurrencies.

Cryptocurrency Exchanges
While cryptocurrency exchanges serve a similar function as a traditional stock exchange,
i.e. to facilitate trades between accounts, the distinct technology underpinning this asset
class have resulted in cryptocurrency exchanges being structured in a different way.
Traditional exchanges  execute trades through an order matching engine and they have
no custody over the assets. Cryptocurrency exchanges, on the other hand, must custody
their customers assets, match buyers and sellers, verify accounts, and finally process the
trades  (Forbes,  2019). The SEC has however expressed concerns that cryptocurrency
exchanges are failing to set up sufficient barriers between different components of their
businesses, such as custody, market-making, and providing a  trading venue  (Bloomberg,
2022).
    A   recent   debate   concerning   the   regulation   of   cryptocurrency   exchanges   has
accelerated. In  May 2022, the SEC declared initiatives to increase investor protection in
this market  (CNBC,  2022). Many of the major cryptocurrency exchanges are currently
registered as Money Services Businesses (MSB), which requires them to register with the
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) in the US. It does however not imply
that their trading activities are regulated and in reality, cryptocurrency exchanges lack

                                    6
a high level of transparency and operational resilience, among other requirements, when
compared to other Alternative Trading Systems (ATS) which are used in equity and
fixed income markets  (Walker, 2021).

Bets
When portfolio managers trade financial assets, risks are being transferred. Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2016) describes a bet as a portfolio decision which implements a trading idea
(a risk transfer). Practically speaking, it can be described as a decision to acquire or
divest a long-term position  of a specific size independent of other such decisions. A bet
is seldom easily observable for researchers as it theoretically can be placed in a series of
trades executed over several days due to its long-run and strategic characteristics, and
therefore,  individual orders are often  treated  as a proxy for larger bets.

Business time
Kyle et al. (2016) defines business time as the expected  calendar time  between the arrival
of bets in the market. The business time concept can be described through a simple
analogy where bets can be thought of as strategic moves in a game of chess. Then
business time can then be viewed as the time in between new moves being  executed. For
actively playing parties, or as in our case for actively traded assets, moves are being
made fast and business time passes quickly.

Liquidity and Illiquidity
In conventional terms,  liquidity  is described as the efficiency in which an asset  or security
can be converted into cash or cash equivalence without influencing its market price
(Investopedia, 2022). Illiquidity is simply the inverse of this measurement. Kyle el al.
(2016) introduces a new definition of illiquidity that distinguishes from the former
definition.  Their  measure  of  illiquidity  is  volume  weighted  and  is  defined  as  the
percentage dollar cost of executing an average bet, divided by the average dollar value
of the bet.

Market Microstructure Invariance
Market  microstructure studies how different trading mechanisms,  for instance,  tick size
and clearing systems, influence the price formation process in financial markets.  Market
microstructure characteristics, such as bet size, bid-ask spread, and market impact cost
vary   across   assets   and   time.   The   theory   of   market   microstructure   invariance
hypothesizes that these characteristics become constant (or microstructure invariant),
when converting calendar time into  business time.  Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) formulate
two invariance principles as empirical hypotheses, assumed to apply for all assets and
across time, which may be used to render accurate predictions on price formation
processes by utilizing easy-to-access data from exchanges.

                                    7
                  III.  Literature Review

The theory of measuring and estimating liquidity in markets is nothing new. Various
ways have been introduced and tested over many years of research. But it was not until
2016, when  Kyle and Obizhaeva  introduced  their  market  microstructure  invariance
hypothesis, that transaction costs could be measured through a generic model.  They
propose  two invariance principles,  Invariance of Bets  and  Invariance of Transaction
Costs,  conjectured to hold for all assets and across time.  They perform empirical tests
on portfolio transition orders,  viewed  as natural experiments for measuring transaction
costs. The empirical tests support  the postulated invariance hypothesis, which lay  the
foundation for further research in this exciting new field of financial study.
    One year later, Kyle and Obizhaeva  (2017)  follow  up their previous work on market
microstructure invariance by applying  dimensional analysis  to introduce scaling laws for
different financial variables such as bid-ask spread, bet sizes, and transaction cost.
Dimensional analysis is an analytical framework borrowed from physics, where the
number of explanatory variables are restricted to simplify scientific inferences. The
principle of leverage neutrality  is also  introduced as a financial analog to traditional
conservation  laws  in  physics.  In  isolation,  dimensional  analysis  does  not  provide
functional market microstructure predictions, as some of the quantities are not directly
observable. To generate empirically useful predictions, assumptions implying that some
quantities  are invariant across assets and time are introduced. Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2017)  use  data  from  the  US  and  Russian  stock  market  to  test  their  hypothesis
empirically. The introduced  scaling laws were found to  be consistent with the financial
data. The derivations, methods, and quantitative models which will be of essential use
in our thesis are all provided in this work.
    A  paper  published by Anderson et al. (2018)  propose  a  new theory called Intraday
Trading Invariance (ITI). In their study, they focus on how quantitative  relationships
between distinct market activity variables can be found on an intraday level, based on
the  invariance  intuition of turning calendar time into business time.  Anderson et al.
measure  and aggregate  variables at one-minute frequency  using tick-by-tick data, and
we  apply their proposed methodology when measuring  and aggregating  our variables.
    Although the microstructure invariance hypotheses should theoretically hold across
all assets and time, the theory has this far only been tested  on a few asset classes and
markets in actuality. Bruneis et al. (2021)  study  the efficiency of liquidity measures on
the two largest cryptocurrencies, Bitcoin and Ethereum. They compare high-frequency
measures of liquidity with easy to compute low-frequency measures, and one of their key
findings is that the Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) estimator outperform. It is however
important  to  note  that  the  market  microstructure  invariance  theory,  which  this
estimator is based on,  has only been confirmed empirically for equities, futures,  and
portfolio transitions, but not for cryptocurrencies.

                                    8
             IV.  Theoretical Background

The aim of our thesis is to test if there exists a proportional  relationship between bid-
ask spread and illiquidity. In order to test this relationship empirically, we must first
derive appropriate measures of these hypothesized microstructure characteristics. The
dimensional analysis process used by Kyle and Obizhaeva  (2017) will serve as the
structural backbone for this section. Additionally, we introduce the Intraday Trading
Hypothesis (ITI) by Andersen et al. (2018) as we intend to test our relationship on an
intraday level as opposed to the daily averages examined  by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017).

Dimensional analysis
Dimensional analysis is a physics-based practice that studies the links between physical
properties. The analysis begins by defining the base quantities (e.g. length, mass, and
time) and units of  measurement (e.g. kilometers and kilograms), which are then tracked
as you carry out calculations or comparisons between these dimensions  (Berenblatt,
1996). Dimensional analysis has been utilized for a variety of objectives in the past. From
inferring the size and number of  molecules in a mole of gas to determining the magnitude
of explosive energy in an atomic burst  (Kyle et al.,  2017). In this thesis, we  employ a
process established by Berenblatt (1996) that is similar to how dimensional analysis is
applied to problems in physics, but for analyzing economic problems instead. In finance,
the base dimensions are value  (measured in units of currency), asset quantity (measured
in units of shares), and time (measured in units of years, months, days, hours, minutes,
seconds,  milliseconds,  or microseconds).
    When creating our variables, we  use the subscripts  jt  to  refer to cryptocurrency  j  at
                                                                                                                            1
time  t.  Let  Gjt  denote the expected price impact cost of executing a bet of  Qjt coins . Let
                                                                                             2
Pjt  denote the cryptocurrency price,  Vjt  its volume in coins,  σ jt  its return variance,  and
Qjt as  the number of coins traded in  a bet. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) also introduce  C
as the unconditional expected dollar cost of executing a bet, which can be expressed as,

                                  C  :=E !GjtPjt|Qjt|" .                            (1)

The market microstructure hypothesis, which is explored in further detail below, allows
C  to be expressed without the subscript  jt. Using dimensional analysis properly includes
selecting the appropriate collection of variables to describe and explain the variables of
interest,  Gjt  in our case. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) assume that the five aforementioned
variables can be combined to a function explaining the market impact cost  Gjt  of
executing a bet of  Qjt  coins,

1
 One unit of cryptocurrency  is  defined as  a  coin  throughout  this  thesis,  being  analog to  a  share  in
traditional finance.

                                    9
                                                           2
                              Gjt  :=g #Qjt,  Pjt,  Vjt, σ ,  C% .                        (2)
                                                                                                      jt

Further, we provide a table below to  clarify in which dimensions our main variables are
measured in as dimensional analysis pays careful attention to maintaining consistency
of dimensions and units of measurement. The variables are divided into two distinct
groups,  those  measured  in  a  base  dimensional  quantity,  and  those  measured  in
dimensionless quantities.

                        &Gjt'  :=1,               &Vjt'  :=coins/day,

                                                         2
                        (Q )  :=coins,           &σjt'  :=1/day,
                                                  jt

                        &Pjt'  :=currency/coins,   [C]  :=currency.

The expected price impact cost,  Gjt,  is measured as a fraction of the value traded, and
can therefore be considered to be dimensionless. Using dimensional analysis in the finance
field, we observe the three basic dimensional quantities that are time, quantity, and
                                                2
value. We can see that  Pjt, Qjt, and  σjt  span these three independent dimensions since
                                                                                2
Qjt  has units of quantity,  Qjt  Pjt  has units of currency, and 1/σjt  has units of days. In
addition, the dimensions of these variables are complete in the sense that they can be
combined to express the dimensions of the remaining two variables,  C  and  Vjt. This
allows us to construct two new dimensionless quantities, denoted  Ljt  and  Zjt,

                                                                            1
                                            m2P V  3
                                                                                                             jt   jt
                                    Ljt≔ -  2    . ,                              (3)
                                                    σjtC

                                                        PjtQjt
                                    Zjt≔      .                               (4)
                                                  LjtC

                                             2
A dimensionless scaling constant  m is added when constructing these variables. The
dimensionless   nature   of   this   scaling   constant   will   be   motivated   in   the   market
microstructure  invariance section below. The exponent of one-third in the formulation
of  Ljt  is selected purposefully for key reasons linked to leverage neutrality, which will be
motivated in that section. Equation  (2)  can now be written as,

                                                      2
                              Gjt  := g #Qjt, Pjt, σjt, Ljt, Zjt% .                         (5)

                                    10
In accordance with dimensional analysis, we can simplify this model further by dropping
               2                                                                               2
Qjt,  Pjt,  σjt ,  motivated by the fact that the function  g(Qjt,  Pjt,  σjt ,  Ljt,  Zjt)  is dimensionless
in itself, implying that it cannot depend on any of the  dimensional quantities included
in the model. According to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), the logic for this reduction is
that physical laws do not depend on the units used to measure variables. We are now
left with the following model,

                                    Gjt  := g0Ljt, Zjt1.                              (6)

A  more intuitive rationale to why we end up with this greatly simplified dimensionless
model is that  informed  investors are not misled by different units of measure when
calculating transaction costs. Then, the transaction costs should stay constant regardless
of the currency in which the coin trades in, how it is divided, or what timescale (business
time or calendar time) is used for measurement.

Leverage neutrality
Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) continues by introducing leverage neutrality which is treated
as a financial proxy for traditional conservation laws in physics. They make three
different  assumptions  that  support  the  use  of  leverage  neutrality  to  simplify  the
transaction cost model further.  The first assumption  is that trading cash or cash-
equivalent assets incur no cost,  and hence, trading a bundle of cash and risky securities
will always result in the same economic cost regardless of the amount of cash included.
For a numerical example, suppose that cash worth  Pjt(A-1)  is bundled with each share
of stock for some number  A, which will result in a new share price of  PjtA.  The economic
risk transferred in a bet of  Qjt  remains unchanged, and hence, the number of shares  Qjt
and the trading volume  Vjt  remains unchanged as well. The dollar cost of executing a
bet  C  is also  intact since  the economic risk is unaltered and trading cash incurs no costs.
                                                                                         2
The dollar risk of each share  Pjtσjt  remains, but the return variance  σjt  and standard
                                  2    2
deviation  σjt  changes to  σjt /A and  σjt/A,  respectively. By incorporating the exponent of
one third into the definition of  Ljt,  it can scale proportionally with  A  when leverage
changes, just like price  Pjt. As a result,  Ljt  is dimensionless but not leverage neutral,
whereas  Zjt  is dimensionless  and  leverage neutral.
    The magnitude of the exponent has a straightforward notion that stems from the
heart of invariance. The invariance hypothesis’ implications may be explained using the
concept of  trading activity, which is defined as the product of dollar volume and return
volatility. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) proves that the number of bets per calendar day
is  proportional  to  two-thirds  power  of  the  trading  activity,  while  the  bet  size  is
proportional to one-thirds power. This relationship implies that the arrival rate of bets
must rise twice as rapidly as their size in order to maintain an invariant distribution.
This composition may be shown with an example: assume that the arrival rate of bets

                                    11
increases by a factor of four but volatility in calendar time remains constant. The
volatility per business time is then reduced by a factor of two, necessitating the trade
size to grow by a factor of two in order for the distribution to stay invariant. The
resulting increase in volume by a factor of eight is stemming from an increase of bets by
a factor of four (8⅔) and an increase in bet size of a factor of 2 (8⅓). Thus, if not
including the cube root in our illiquidity measure, the ratio of return variance to dollar
volume would increase by a factor of eight instead of doubling the percentage transaction
cost as required.
                                                                                              -1
    The percentage cost of executing a bet  Gjt  transforms to  GjtA  due to the fact that
the dollar cost of executing a bundled bet is invariant while the dollar value of the of
the bundled bet scales proportionally with price. The transformations are summarized
below,

                     Qjt → Qjt ,               Ljt→LjtA,

                    Vjt→Vjt                Zjt→Zjt,

                   Pjt→PjtA,              C →C,

                                 2      2    -2                                   -1
                     σjt→ σjtA ,              Gjt →GjtA .

The second assumption  incorporates Modigliani Miller’s equivalence of capital structure
to market microstructure in the sense that changing the firm's leverage ratio has no
influence on the economic cost of trading the firm's securities, assuming that the firm's
debt is riskless.
    The third assumption  relates to repo-haircuts and margin requirements. Margin
requirements state what percentage of cash or cash-equivalent assets is needed as
collateral in order to trade on margin. A repo (repurchase agreement) is the sale of a
security for cash in conjunction with the agreement to repurchase the security at a later
date. If the seller defaults, the buyer assumes the collateral as repayment. The more
volatile the collateral is, the more risk is assumed by the buyer. To compensate for  this
risk, the buyer applies a haircut to the valuation of the collateral. According to Kyle
and Obizhaeva (2017), changes in repo-haircuts and/or margin requirements should not
alter the economic cost of trading risky securities.
    Leverage neutrality imposes an additional restriction to the general transaction's
cost formula, which implies that for any A, the function g  should fulfill the following
condition,
                                                                   -1
                             g0ALjt,  Zjt1=A g0Ljt,  Zjt1.                          (7)

                                    12
                             -1
If we set  A  =  Ljt ,  the market impact cost function g  can be  written as,

                                                                  -1
                               g0Ljt,  Zjt1=A g01,  Zjt1.                          (8)

By defining the univariate function  f as  f(Zjt)  :=  g(1, Zjt), a more simple market impact
cost model now emerge,

                                                                -1
                                     Gjt= Ljt f0Zjt1.                               (9)

This illustrates that the market impact cost of executing a bet,  Gjt  that  scales  inversely
with our illiquidity measure  Ljt  as a consequence of the proportional relationship with
the  cash  included  in  the  transaction.  Moreover,  Zjt  is  leverage  neutral,  which  in
combination with above results in the following simplified function,

                                                                                 1
                     Gjt  := g #Qjt, Pjt, Vjt, σjt,  C% = g0Ljt, Zjt1 =    f0Zjt1.           (10)
                                                                                          Ljt

Market Microstructure Invariance
Dimensional analysis in itself will not suffice for testing our hypothesis empirically.  To
ultimately generate useful microstructure predictions, it is vital to understand how to
measure the appropriate quantities. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) point out three  of the
quantities,  return  volatility  σjt,  trading  volume  Vjt,  and  asset  price  Pjt,  as  asset
characteristics that are easy to observe from public data. It is less apparent, however,
                                                                                                          2
how to measure the cost of a bet  C  and the scaling parameter  m ,  and how these
quantities vary across different assets.  Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) make the invariance
                                2
assumption that  C  and  m are constant across all assets and time. This assumption on
invariance does not follow from dimensional analysis, nor leverage neutrality,  it is solely
motivated by Ockham’s razor: that it is the simplest possible empirical hypothesis.
   For simplicity in the exposition, the cost of a bet  C  and the dimensionless scaling
                   2
parameter  m , is dropped. Further, it is assumed that function  f  in equation  (10)  takes
                                                                    w
the form of a power function with exponent  w,  f(Zjt)  =  λ|Zjt| . By assuming that market
microstructure invariance hold, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) derive a distinct transaction
cost model used for the proportional bid-ask spread cost model by setting the exponent
w  to a value of zero,

                                                              1
                                   Gjt=  const  ∙     .                             (11)
                                                                !!"

The  model suggests that the transaction cost  Gjt  is a constant fraction of the asset value
and thus not dependent on the size of the bet  Qjt. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) predict
the bid-ask spreads to be inversely proportional to the illiquidity measure, and that the
proportionality constant is invariant across all assets. As a last step before testing the
model empirically, Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017) sets the market impact cost  Gjt  to the

                                    13
relative bid-ask spread  Sjt/Pjt. For clarification purposes, the relative bid-ask spread is
the size of the bid-ask spread divided by mid-price, the latter being defined as the average
of the current best bid and ask price. This is the relationship we will test empirically to
answer our  research question.

Intraday  Trading  Invariance
Andersen  et  al.  (2018)  develop  an  alternative  hypothesis  called  Intraday  Trading
Invariance  (ITI), which examines whether the same invariance relationships that apply
to bets also apply to individual transactions conducted over short horizons. Many
existing tests for  market  microstructure  invariance are conducted over longer time
horizons, typically monthly. Thus, the emphasis has naturally been on the variation of
these monthly aggregates on distinct assets, and tests have relied heavily on cross-stock
comparisons. Andersen et al. (2018), on the other hand, only test their hypothesis on
one  asset, the E-mini S&P 500 Futures, but analyze the variation in the distinct intraday
trading cycle to determine if invariant relationships still remain. This is conceivable
given today's nearly 24-hour-a-day global markets, where considerable variation in
trading volatility and volume can be examined between the European, North American,
and Asian trading hours. Conveniently, Andersen et al. (2018) confirm that the scaling
laws  introduced  through  dimensional  analysis  by  Kyle  and  Obizhaeva  (2017)  are
consistent with the  intraday  trading  invariance relationships investigated.
    The  intraday  trading  invariance  is  obtained  by  stipulating  that  the  invariant
relationships   of   transactions   conducted   over   short   horizons   are   similar   to   those
discovered when the market microstructure invariance theory was first developed,  when
invariance principles were applied on large speculative bets over longer time horizons.

                                    14
         V.   Hypotheses and  Research Design

Hypotheses
In this section, we  present our hypothesis concerning the invariant relationship between
bid-ask spread and our illiquidity measure.

     Does the relative size of the bid-ask spread have a proportional relationship to the
     asset-specific illiquidity measure, defined as the cube root of the ratio of return
    variance to USD volume, for cryptocurrencies trading  on the Kraken Exchange
                         between 2019-01-01  and  2020-01-01?

                                                Sjt                           1
                             ln  -  . =  const + 1⋅  ln -   .                       (12)
                                              Pjt                         Ljt

Where
                                                                                1
                                                                                                   -
                                              1              PjtVjt  3
                                   !   " = const∙ $  2  %                                (13)
                                                  Ljt                σjt

And

L  = Liquidity
S  =  Absolute  bid-ask spread
P  = Mid-price
V  = Share Volume
𝜎  = Volatility

The relationship in equation (13) is statistically tested by assigning the log relative bid-
ask spread as the dependent variable and the log illiquidity measure as the independent
variable. The log illiquidity measure's coefficient is denoted by  β.  The alternative
hypothesis and null hypothesis can now be developed.

H0:  β  = 1
H1:  β  ≠  1

This hypothesis is postulated in accordance with how Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017)
postulated their hypothesis. Under H0,  the slope coefficient is equal to one, confirming
the invariant relationship between relative bid-ask spread and illiquidity. Hence, failure
to reject H0  implies that our postulated market microstructure invariance hypothesis
holds for cryptocurrencies.

                                    15
Research Design
Our   research   question   entails   looking   into   and   empirically   testing   a   purported
proportional relation between the defined illiquidity measure and the percentage bid-ask
spread. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), like us, do not investigate causality between the
two variables. As a result, the findings of this thesis cannot be used to determine whether
the bid-ask spread causes illiquidity or vice versa.
   We collect data for 16 cryptocurrencies that were trading on Kraken from the
beginning to the end of our chosen time interval (2019-01-01 to 2020-01-01). We perform
both an individual statistical analysis for each cryptocurrency, and a cross sectional
analysis as in Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017). Cross sectional analysis involves obtaining
data from  multiple participants at one point in time Allen (2017), the participants being
different cryptocurrencies in this case. The cryptocurrencies trading on the Kraken
exchange are not cherry-picked based on the size of their market capitalization, implying
that   our   aggregation   could   potentially   include   smaller   and   less   representative
cryptocurrencies. However, the theory says that supposedly invariant relationships
should hold across all assets and time, meaning that our dataset still can be used as a
proxy to  draw conclusions if market microstructure invariance relationships hold for
cryptocurrencies.
    Our analysis will be performed along the time series dimension with daily averages
over the course of one year. We will then supplement our empirical testing with an
analysis performed along the intraday dimension, with variables aggregated at five-
minute intervals. When testing the invariance theory across the  intraday pattern we are
more likely to capture short-lived intraday fluctuations, and thus allow for a  more
granular check whether the invariance between the relative size of the bid-ask spread
and illiquidity holds. When aggregating our empirical variables, we will apply the proven
methodology that was used by Andersen et al. (2018) in which they aggregated their
data for E-mini S&P 500 futures at one-minute intervals.
    It is worth emphasizing that a short time interval can result in several setbacks, e.g.
statistically insufficient number of observations in each of our five-minute intervals,
making our data potentially subject to higher standard errors of arithmetic means.
Considering this, we perform an additional robustness check as part of the empirical
testing of our hypothesis, as well as constructing a confidence interval centered around
the regression slope, allowing us to confirm our postulated hypothesis if the predicted
slope of one is contained in the confidence interval. As part of the robustness check, we
also aggregate the data to a one-hour frequency. If the results remain quantitatively
similar, we can present our intraday analysis with a higher degree of certainty, thus
allowing for an as-granular-as-possible analysis without being too optimistic that there
will be a sufficient number of observations or any other microstructure limitations
interrupting our test.
    The hypothesis’ correlational nature makes regression analysis the obvious choice for
establishing   if   there   is   a   statistical   link   between   the   variables.   The   premise   of

                                    16
proportionality when multiplying the illiquidity measure with a constant provides further
support to use the ordinary least square (OLS) regression model as the connection should
provide a correlational, linear relationship regardless of the intercept and hence the value
of this constant. This regression model creates a  best-fit line for each time period based
on observations, which in our instance are the relative magnitude of the bid-ask spread
and the values of our calculated illiquidity measure.

                                    17
                     VI.  Data

Data  source
We  use  cryptocurrency  trading  data  from  the  Kraken  exchange,  which  has  been
purchased from CryptoTick, a well-reputed market data provider of cryptocurrency data.
The cost of obtaining data from CryptoTick is  relatively high, which is compensated for
by backtested, bias-free, and processed data. Furthermore, CryptoTick gives us access
to   the   Kraken   exchange,   which   is   one   of   the   most   reputable   and   established
cryptocurrency exchanges, accounting for more than 10% of global cryptocurrency
                                  2
trading volume in 2019 . According to a widely referenced article by Hougan et al. (2019),
up to 95% of exchange-reported Bitcoin trading activity may not represent economically
relevant transactions or may even be  blatantly fake. The authors put 83 cryptocurrency
exchanges through a series of tests. Ten exchanges passed and could be called “real-
volume exchanges”, one of them being the Kraken exchange.
    CryptoTick provides order book and trades data on intraday resolution. The order
book data is a snapshot representing the 50 best levels of bid price, ask price, bid volume,
and ask volume in  one-minute  intervals. The relevant trades data for this thesis is the
trade volume and trade price, which is provided on a millisecond resolution. We use data
from 2019-01-01 (BOD) to 2020-01-01 (EOD).

Data cleaning process
The exchange provides crossed books due to an internal matching engine that does not
match orders immediately by design. This causes negative bid-ask spreads when large
buy orders are placed and is purely a behavior that stems from how the matching engine
is built. In an ideal world, matching orders should be executed immediately and not
placed in the book. Therefore, we rigidly remove the order book updates where the bid-
ask spread is non-positive and thus avoid this undesired behavior. Furthermore, the
minimum tick size appears to be binding, with more than 10% of the bid-ask spread
equaling the minimum tick size. As a result, as part of the data cleaning process, we
filter out these observations. We filtered out approximately 10 million negative bid-ask
spread observations and nearly 30 million observations where the bid-ask spread matched
the minimum tick-size, meaning that we in total left out 16% of the order book data as
it did not display meaningful activity  (see Appendix C for details).
    Several   referenced   articles   discuss   the   remarkably   high   volatility   profile   of
cryptocurrencies and even the largest cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, can even during regular
market conditions be said to have over 2 times higher volatility than the average stock.
For smaller cryptocurrencies, this number is even higher and it is not uncommon that
the annualized volatility exceeds 100 percent. Even with these high oscillations in mind,
we   can   still   identify   datasets   with   a   few   short-lived   observations   that   deviate

2
 Average of 10 trading days in April, 2019.

                                    18
significantly from the rest. We suspect them originating from individuals behaving in
unpredictable and irrational ways, trading at low volumes, or flaws in the dataset caused
by the exchange. As we test  for invariance only when the market displays meaningful
activity, we also remove what is below and above the 0.1th and 99.9th percentiles as a
general outlier treatment.  This filter is applied to all variables as a process of removing
extraneous   microstructure   noise   while   retaining   a   high   number   of   economically
meaningful observations in our variables.

Methodology for measuring High-Frequency Trading data
When working with a hypothesis that requires a market microstructure scope, the
measurement  procedure  will  involve  variables  that  are  subject  to  high-frequency
expectations or real-time interactions among rapidly fluctuating variables. Therefore, we
must employ robust and powerful frameworks to explore the regressions.
First, we present the measurement procedure we use for testing the invariance hypothesis
on an intraday level. The systematic diurnal variation is captured by averaging the
observations for each intraday interval across all trading days which formally can be
described through the following scheme,

                             D              D
                          1               1
                      yt =    ∙  6 y7dt ≈  c  +    ∙  6 ydt ,           for  t=1,…,  T,
                      D             D
                                     d=1                d=1

The intraday dimension consists of five-minute intervals, implying that  t  is ranging from
1 to 288. The constructed  five-minute  intervals will serve as a foundation when testing
the invariance hypothesis on a daily level. The time series variation is obtained by
aggregating five-minute intervals each day, thus generating one data point per trading
day. The daily time series is formally obtained by performing the following aggregation
scheme,

                              T               T
                          1               1
                     yd =    ∙  6 y7dt ≈  c  +    ∙  6 ydt ,           for  d=1,…,  D,
                      T             T
                                           t=1                   t=1

Data processing
To obtain a consistent dataset, we exclude 16 of  32 cryptocurrencies trading on the
Kraken exchange as they either were introduced beyond the initiation of our time period,
ceased trading, or were trading against a currency other than the US dollar. The mix
between trading periods and trading conditions  would merely confuse and result in a
disproportionate comparison in the analysis of empirical results.
    As we aggregate our variables to five-minute intervals, it is critical to create
consistency in the periods when constructing our main empirical variables. Therefore,
we  construct  a dummy dataset that ticks one time every five minutes over the course of

                                    19
our chosen time-interval. This is then merged with our original datasets, which leaves
us with distinct five-minute trading periods in our data. The additional dummy rows are
filled with duplicated data from the previous trade. We are aware that this manipulated
dataset contains fictitious trades,  and therefore, we solely use it in the construction of
the empirical variables that are time-weighted inside five-minute intervals. For variables
that are summed in five-minute periods and not weighted, we use the original dataset
which contains no dummy data.

Data limitations
We collect data over a one year time span, similar to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017).
However, in  addition to testing the invariance hypothesis on a time series dimension, we
also perform tests on the intraday dimension with variables aggregated in  five-minute
intervals. Other studies that test the hypothesized intraday relationship often gather
data  over considerably longer time frames; for example, Anderson et al. (2018) collect
data over a four-year period.
    Our choice of time period has been restricted by three factors. First, considering the
research from Haugen et al. (2020) regarding fake  trading volume discussed above, our
set of exchanges to retrieve data from is considerably reduced. Second, most of the
remaining exchanges all have very strict processes and requirements in respect to which
cryptocurrencies are listed on the exchange,  and  hence, the further back we go in time,
the fewer coins are listed. For instance, Coinbase, which is one of the most reputable
exchanges in the industry, only supported trading of five cryptocurrencies in September
2018. Third, due to the highly unusual trading activity caused by Covid-19, we deem
the period from 2020  to  2022  as  unsatisfactory and unrepresentative of normal market
conditions. This leaves us with a period ranging from 2019-01-01 to 2020-01-01.
Our conviction is that  a  shorter  time horizon  is worth as a trade off  in order to get
trading under normal market conditions. We have to reserve, however, that previous
studies on the intraday dimension have had varying results when testing each year on a
standalone   basis,   with   many   of   the   regressions   statistically   rejecting   invariance.
Nevertheless, it should have no effect on the empirical tests performed on the time series
dimension.

Construction of main empirical variables
We rebase our trading data to five-minute intervals, leaving us with 288  trading periods
per day. Our main empirical variables are order  size  Qjt,  USD  volume  PjtVjt, realized
volatility  σjt, main illiquidity index 1⁄Ljt, and the percentage bid-ask spread  Sjt⁄Pjt*,
where subscript  j  denotes cryptocurrency  j, ranging from 1 to 16, and subscript  t  denotes
                                                                                      3
each five-minute interval per day, ranging from 1 to 288.

3
 Asterix implies that  the variable  is  calculated  using  order book data. Otherwise,  it is calculated using
trades data.

                                    20
    In  the  construction  of  our  empirical  variables,  the  time-matching  of  recorded
quantities is critical. Our order book data is time stamped at irregular  intervals which
has no connection or similarity to the timing of trades in the other data set, making a
direct matching procedure impossible. We are therefore left with two options. Either to
average the order book data set per  five-minute  intervals, to then duplicate the average
with the number of individual trades and timing from the other data set. This alternative
gives a direct comparison between the two data sets, but it relies on a significant
assumption when averaging the data. Instead, we construct the percentage bid-ask
spread variable from the order book data, and the illiquidity measure from the trades
data. The limitation of doing this is that we assume that the prevailing price is similar
to the average of the best bid and the best ask, which  intuitively makes a better estimate
than averaging the data on five-minute periods. In this thesis, we use the best bid and
offer when calculating the bid-ask spread. Further, it is worth emphasizing that we use
quoted order book data instead of realized.  It is not exactly similar, but it makes a
prediction about bid-ask spreads that should still hold according to Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2017).
     When creating our main empirical variables, we are first calculating  Vjt,  𝜎jt,  Pjt,  Sjt,
and  Pjt*  for each individual row in our datasets. The first two variables are calculated
from the original trades data set, the third is created from the trades data set, including
dummy trades, and the last two are calculated from the order book data set which also
includes dummy  data. Before we construct our main illiquidity index, 1⁄𝐿jt, and the
percentage bid-ask spread,   𝑆jt⁄𝑃jt*, we aggregate the aforementioned variables into
consecutive five-minute periods for all trading days. By doing this, we receive the same
number of rows in all our data sets and can then construct the rest of our empirical
variables.

Robustness test
We perform a robustness test where the intraday observations are aggregated at hourly
intervals. By allowing for less granularity, we obtain  periods consisting of more data
points which in turn reduces microstructure noise. The constructed hourly intervals
derive from the previously constructed five-minute periods, following the method Bruneis
et al. (2021) use  when they conduct  similar liquidity tests for the cryptocurrency market.
When forming their hourly time intervals, they require  80% of the subintervals to have
available data, implying that if more than two five-minute periods inside  one hour
contain no data, the corresponding hour  should be omitted from the analysis. We rigidly
mimic Bruneis et al. (2021) in the aggregation of trades data, causing 67.2% of the hourly
periods to be omitted from our one-hour robustness test (see appendix  B  for details).
    We discard the 80% rule when performing aggregations of the order book data as
the original order book data is updated at frequent time stamps, leaving no sub-periods
empty of data. Therefore, the rule would be meaningless. Instead, we form a new rule
that omits an hourly interval if trading is absent in at least one of the hour’s five-minute

                                    21
intervals.  The attentive reader may suggest that this would leave no effect as all sub-
intervals  should be filled with order book data, and therefore, we underline that we use
an outlier cleaning technique removing 0.2% of the most extreme observations based on
their bid-ask spread relationship. This implies that all data inside a five-minute interval
possibly could be removed if it is within an extremely divergent trading period. By
applying this filter, we remove  1,469 of 140,544 hourly periods.
    The fact that the two data sets have an  unmatching  number of remaining rows  is
not  an  issue  as  this  test  is  run  in  an  intraday  dimension,  with  data  for  each
cryptocurrency being averaged across 24 one-hour intervals after the date stamp is
removed.
    We find that the intraday robustness check produces similar results to our main
intraday test. Even though the slope of the cross sectional plot is broadly similar to our
main result, we observe that the individual plots of each cryptocurrency is displaying a
somewhat  more  vertical  pattern,  hinting  on  the  insight  that  depending  on  which
frequency our plots are presented on, mechanically constraining issues are more or less
apparent. We will expand on this result in section  VII. The specific  results of the
regression on the intraday robustness check can be observed in further detail in Appendix
B.

Summary statistics  –  Time  series dimension
The daily values for the activity variables are shown in figure  1  and summarized in table
1, which were obtained by averaging the data throughout each trading day in our sample.
Trading volume (dollar volume) and transaction intensity show a considerable degree of
covariation, as anticipated. Return volatility is high, although it is decreasing on average
throughout the year. Despite the fact that the volatility scheme does not  follow a similar
pattern as trading, we find that persistent volatility swings are paralleled by essentially
comparable movements in trading, even if the latter series appears more erratic.

              TABLE 1  –  Summary statistics for daily variables
                             Mean    Median     Min      Max      Ratio
               Q              361       621       244       964       3.9
                Dollar volume    18,802     14,412     2,984     116,198     38.9
                Volume          7,304      6,301      2,172     30,035      13.8
               N               14        12        5        55       10.4
              VAR          177%     165%      84%      398%      4.7
                1/L              3.36       3.19       2.25       7.13       3.2
                S/P             3.67       3.44       1.82       9.06       5.0

TABLE  1.  THIS SUMMARY STATISTICS ARE REPORTED FOR THE DAILY VARIABLES, FOLLOWING AVERAGES
OF THE FOLLOWING FIVE-MINUTE OBSERVATIONS FOR EACH TRADING DAY.  THE VOLATILITY MEASURE IS
PRESENTED ON ANNUAL BASIS AND IS REPRESENTING THE REALIZED VOLATILITY. THE PERCENTAGE BID-ASK
                                                                                                                                              -4
SPREAD AS WELL AS OUR ILLIQUIDITY MEASURE ARE PRESENTED IN 10 .

                                    22
       FIGURE 1  –  Trading  patterns  along the  time-series dimension

FIGURE  1.  THESE  FIGURES  PLOT  THE  TIME  SERIES  AVERAGES  OF  THE  FOLLOWING  FIVE-MINUTE
                                                                                                                                4
OBSERVATIONS  FOR EACH TRADING DAY  FOR  DOLLAR VOLUME  VdPd;  IN  10 ,  VOLATILITY  𝜎!  (ANNUALIZED),
                                                                                                                                                                         -3
NUMBER OF TRANSACTIONS Nd, TRADE SIZE Qd, OUR ILLIQUIDITY MEASURE 1/L; IN 10 , AND PERCENTAGE BID-
                                               -3
ASK SPREAD S/P;  IN 10 .  THE RED LINE INDICATES THE 2-WEEK MOVING AVERAGE. THE SAMPLE PERIOD
RANGES FROM  2019-01-01 TO 2020-01-01.

Summary statistics  -  Intraday  dimension
Our activity variables' intraday trends are  shown in figure  2  and summarized in table  2,
which were obtained by averaging the data for each five-minute intraday period for all
trading days in the sample. The noticeable shadowing defines three regional trading
zones. The green regime includes observations from 00:00 to 07:00, which corresponds to
Asian trading hours; the blue regime includes observations from 07:00 to 16:00, which
corresponds to European trading hours; and the red regime includes observations from
13:30 to 20:00, which corresponds to  American trading hours.
    Unlike Andersen et al. (2018), we will not devote as much attention to the different
trading regimes and how these reflect in the intraday variation. This is motivated by
three reasons. First, as cryptocurrency markets never open or  close, the typical intraday
patterns documented in stock markets will be difficult to observe. Second, we believe
that the trading activity will be heavily skewed to the US trading regime because we
gathered data from a US-based crypto exchange and only on USD trading pairs. Third,

                                    23
it has been shown by Dyhrberg et al. (2018) that most cryptocurrency trades are still
made by retail investors, implying that working hours should have less of an influence
on intraday trading patterns.

           TABLE  2  –  Summary  statistics for  intraday variables
                             Mean     Median     Min      Max      Ratio
              Q               679       680       534       836       1.6
               Dollar volume    32,414     31,978     21,659     56,448      2.6
               Volume          9,306      9,194      6,537      16,050      2.5
              N               20        20        15        33        2.2
             VAR           110%     109%      93%      158%      1.7
               1/L              2.24       2.23       2.01       2.65       1.3
               S/P              3.66       3.66       3.51       3.86       1.1

TABLE  2.  THIS  SUMMARY  STATISTICS  ARE  REPORTED  FOR  THE  INTRADAY  VARIABLES,  FOLLOWING
AVERAGES OF THE FOLLOWING FIVE-MINUTE OBSERVATIONS  ACROSS  ALL  TRADING DAYS.  THE VOLATILITY
MEASURE  IS  PRESENTED  ON  ANNUAL  BASIS  AND  IS  REPRESENTING  THE  REALIZED  VOLATILITY.  THE
                                                                                                                                                                                            -4
PERCENTAGE BID-ASK SPREAD AS WELL AS OUR ILLIQUIDITY MEASURE ARE PRESENTED IN 10 .

        FIGURE  2  –  Trading  patterns  along the  intraday  dimension

FIGURE 2.  THESE FIGURES PLOT THE AVERAGES OF THE FIVE-MINUTE INTERVALS ACROSS ALL TRADING
                                                                4
DAYS FOR DOLLAR VOLUME VdPd; IN 10 , VOLATILITY σd (ANNUALIZED), NUMBER OF TRANSACTIONS Nd, TRADE
                                                                                           -3                                                                                              -3
SIZE  Qd, OUR ILLIQUIDITY MEASURE 1/L; IN 10 , AND PERCENTAGE BID-ASK SPREAD S/P; IN 10 . THE RED LINE
INDICATES THE 2-WEEK MOVING AVERAGE.  THE GREEN ZONE HIGHLIGHTS ASIAN TRADING HOURS (00:00 TO
07:00),  THE  BLUE  ZONE  HIGHLIGHTS  EUROPEAN  TRADING  HOURS  (07:00  TO  16:00),  AND  THE  RED  ZONE

                                    24
HIGHLIGHTS AMERICAN TRADING HOURS (13:30 TO 20:00). THE SAMPLE PERIOD RANGES FROM 2019-01-01 TO 2020-
01-01.
Considering that cryptocurrency markets lack opening and closing times, the typical u-
shaped intraday pattern documented in stock market volume by Jain and Joh (1988),
and McInish and Wood (1985),  should in theory not emerge. However, as depicted above,
we still exhibit an interesting intraday pattern in which the number of trades and dollar
volume is at its lowest around 08:00, corresponding to the opening times of the European
markets. The trading activity then increases rapidly and reaches its peak around 16:00,
two and a half hours after the US market opened and approximately the same time
European markets close. This intraday pattern is similar to what Wang et al.  (2020)
found for Bitcoin, where volume and volatility are noticeably higher for periods that
dovetail with the European and US exchange trading hours. The trading volume and
number of trades decrease promptly following the 16:00 spike. A second, albeit smaller,
spike appears around 20:00, corresponding to the closing of US markets. Interestingly,
another spike in the trading activity appears around 00:00, as the Asian markets open.
This despite Kraken being an US based exchange and all currency pairs being in USD.
    The intraday pattern that emerges across our main empirical variables can to some
extent be compared to conventional intraday patterns, even though it cannot be drawn
from similar arguments. Despite the fact that cryptocurrency exchanges do not have
regular opening and closing hours, trading activity appears to occur during the same
hours as traditional stock  exchanges, which might be due to the fact that the average
trader is most active when his equivalent stock market is open. This might lead to a
correlation between cryptocurrencies' intraday variables and major international stock
exchanges' opening hours.  According to Wang et al. (2020), this relationship might
indicate that cryptocurrencies are being used as an alternative investment by market
participants. When trading conventional equities, investors may coordinate their trading
operations  and  change  their  cryptocurrency  positions  in  line  with  current  market
conditions.

                                    25
               VII.  Empirical findings

This section will present our empirical findings along with descriptive statistics. We will
first present the results for the daily cross sectional regression, followed by the intraday
cross-sectional regression with respective analysis.

Daily invariance
                      TABLE  3  - Daily OLS regressions       CI Limits (β)

                            β                                    2
  No. obs.       c                   Se(c)       Se(β)        R       95% LL    95% UL
    5,853      1.3161     1.1755       0.033        0.005       0.900       1.165       1.186
TABLE  3.  THIS TABLE DISPLAYS THE OLS REGRESSION OF OUR CROSS SECTIONAL TEST ALONG THE TIME
SERIES DIMENSION. 16 CRYPTOCURRENCIES ARE  INCLUDED  IN THE REGRESSION, CORRESPONDING TO 5,853
OBSERVATIONS  WHICH  ARE  FOUND  INSIDE  OUR  TIME  PERIOD  BETWEEN  2019-01-01  AND  2020-01-01.  THE
                                                                                            2
CONSTANT,  C,  AND  SLOPE,  β,  IS FOLLOWED BY THE  STANDARD  ERROR OF  EACH. R AND A 95% CONFIDENCE
INTERVAL ARE REPORTED AS AN INDICATION OF ROBUSTNESS OF THE EMPIRICAL RESULTS.

Table  3  presents results from the OLS regression for the cross sectional analysis along
the time series dimension.  Figure  3  plots the log percentage bid-ask spread, ln(Sjt/Pjt),
against log illiquidity, ln(1/Ljt), for all cryptocurrencies. Each point represents one daily
observation, with different colors representing different cryptocurrencies. The predicted
and empirical slopes are displayed in the figure by a dashed and solid line, respectively.
The empirical slope is broadly consistent with our predicted slope of one, displayed by
our fitted line which is represented by the function; ln(Sjt/Pjt) = 1.316 + 1.176  ∙  ln(1/Ljt).
The confidence interval spans from 1.166 to 1.186, on a 95% confidence level, and the
  2
R is 0.900. As  a result, we statistically reject the null hypothesis, that the slope is equal
to one. The slope of 1.176 is however economically close to the one predicted.

      FIGURE  3  -  Cross sectional plot along the time series dimension

                                    26
FIGURE 3.  THIS FIGURE PLOTS THE LOG PERCENTAGE BID-ASK SPREAD AGAINST THE LOG ILLIQUIDITY OF
THE  FOLLOWING  FIVE-MINUTE  OBSERVATION  FOR  EACH  DAY.  ALL  OF  THE  16  CRYPTOCURRENCIES  IS
REPRESENTED BY AN INDIVIDUAL COLOR, AND  EACH  POINT  REPRESENTS ONE DAY  BETWEEN 2019-01-01 AND
2020-01-01.  THE DASHED LINE IS ADDED AS A BENCHMARK  TO REPRESENT  THE PREDICTED REGRESSION SLOPE
OF ONE ACCORDING TO OUR HYPOTHESIS. THE RED LINE IS THE BEST FITTED LINE FOR OUR SAMPLE AND IS
GIVEN BY THE FOLLOWING EQUATION: LN(S/P) =  1.316  +  1.176  ∙  LN(1/L).

                                                                                                                                  2
As depicted above, the observations cluster around the benchmark line. In terms of R ,
we observe a higher number compared to those found by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017), of
0.450 and 0.876 for US and Russian stocks, respectively, indicating that, even though
the invariant relationship was statistically confirmed for both US and Russian stocks,
the almost invariant relationship can be better explained in our sample.
    The fitted lines of individual cryptocurrencies have varying slopes, ranging from 0.1
to 1.4, with a mean of 0.73. We statistically confirm the invariant relationship for six
out of the 16 cryptocurrencies, on a 95% confidence interval. Moreover, we obtain slopes
that are economically close to one for two more cryptocurrencies. For summary statistics
on all individual cryptocurrency regressions, see Appendix  A.

Intraday Invariance
                  TABLE  4  -  Intraday OLS regressions       CI Limits (β)

                            β                                    2
  No. obs.       c                   Se(c)       Se(β)        R       95% LL    95% UL
    4,608      0.7196     1.1216       0.040        0.007       0.865       1.109       1.134
TABLE  4.  THIS TABLE  DISPLAYS THE OLS REGRESSION OF  OUR CROSS SECTIONAL TEST ALONG THE
INTRADAY DIMENSION. 16 CRYPTOCURRENCIES ARE INCLUDED IN THE REGRESSION, CORRESPONDING TO 4,608
OBSERVATIONS  WHICH  ARE  FOUND  INSIDE  OUR  TIME  PERIOD  BETWEEN  2019-01-01  AND  2020-01-01.  THE
                                                                                            2
CONSTANT,  C,  AND  SLOPE,  β,  IS FOLLOWED BY THE  STANDARD  ERROR OF  EACH. R AND A 95% CONFIDENCE
INTERVAL ARE REPORTED AS AN INDICATION OF ROBUSTNESS OF THE EMPIRICAL RESULTS.

Table  4  presents results from the OLS regression for the cross sectional analysis along
the intraday dimension.  Figure  4  plots the log percentage bid-ask spread, ln(Sjt/Pjt),
against log illiquidity, ln(1/Ljt), for all cryptocurrencies. Each point  represents one five-
minute  interval,  with  different  colors  representing  different  cryptocurrencies.  The
predicted and empirical slopes are displayed in the figure by a dashed and solid line,
respectively.  Similar  to  the  daily  aggregation,  the  empirical  slope  is  also  broadly
consistent  with  our  predicted  slope  of  one,  displayed  by  our  fitted  line  which  is
represented by the function; ln(Sjt/Pjt) = 0.720 + 1.122  ∙  ln(1/Ljt). The confidence
                                                                                         2
interval spans from 1.109 to 1.134, on a 95% confidence level, and the  R is 0.865. As a
result, the null hypothesis that the slope is one is statistically rejected. However, the
slope of 1.122 is economically close to the one predicted.

                                    27
      FIGURE  4  -  Cross sectional plot along the intraday dimension

FIGURE 4.  THIS FIGURE PLOTS THE LOG PERCENTAGE BID-ASK SPREAD AGAINST THE LOG ILLIQUIDITY OF
THE  AVERAGES  OF  FIVE-MINUTE  OBSERVATIONS  ACROSS  ALL  TRADING  DAYS.  ALL  OF  THE  16
CRYPTOCURRENCIES IS REPRESENTED BY AN INDIVIDUAL COLOR, AND  288  POINTS FOR ALL  FIVE-MINUTE
INTERVALS  ACROSS THE DAY  ARE PLOTTED.  THE DASHED LINE IS ADDED AS A BENCHMARK  TO REPRESENT
THE PREDICTED REGRESSION SLOPE OF ONE ACCORDING TO OUR HYPOTHESIS. THE RED LINE IS THE BEST
FITTED LINE FOR OUR SAMPLE AND IS GIVEN BY THE FOLLOWING EQUATION: LN(S/P) =  0.720  +  1.122  ∙  LN(1/L).
THE SAMPLE PERIOD RANGES BETWEEN 2019-01-01 AND 2020-01-01.

Interestingly, even though the cross sectional intraday sample lines up  well in accordance
with invariance, we observe puzzling results at a level of individual cryptocurrency. The
slopes of the fitted lines are significantly lower compared to the cross sectional sample,
ranging between  -0.03 to 0.46. There seems to be a systematic issue binding the bid-ask
spread in a mechanical way, especially pronounced for more illiquid cryptocurrencies.
        2
The  R for the individual regressions is zero for five of the 16 cryptocurrencies, with the
mean being 0.05.

Discussion of  empirical findings
If market frictions are large, empirical invariance is unlikely to hold across all assets and
time, according to Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016). There are several factors that can
influence how well invariance holds, including tick size, fees,  taxes, market maker
competitiveness,   regulation,   and   clearing   systems.   Table   5   shows   that   tick-sizes
expressed in index points and notional values are reasonably normal for our sample.

                                    28
                   TABLE  5  -  Extensive tick-size statistics
                                  Minimum tick-size                Notional  tick-size
        ADA                     0.01                        0.18
         BCH                      1,000                        3.85
         BTC                      1,000                         0.14
        DASH                   10                         0.10
        ETC                    10                         1.78
        ETH                    100                        0.55
        EOS                     1                          0.25
        GNO                    100                        6.34
        LTC                     100                         1.45
        QTUM                   0.1                         0.04
        REP                     10                         0.75
        XLM                    0.01                        0.11
        XMR                    100                        1.51
        XRP                     0.1                          0.33
        XTZ                    1                          1.00
        ZEC                     100                         1.78

TABLE  5.  THIS TABLE DISPLAYS EXTENSIVE TICK-SIZE STATISTICS IN FORM OF MINIMUM AND  NOTIONAL
TICK-SIZES ACROSS ALL CURRENCIES. THE NOTIONAL TICK-SIZE  IS  CALCULATED  BY DIVIDING THE MINIMUM
TICK-SIZE WITH THE  CURRENCY’S  AVERAGE TRADING PRICE ACROSS THE  YEAR AND  IS  EXPRESSED IN BASIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                -4
POINTS. MINIMUM TICK IS OBTAINED DIRECTLY FROM THE EXCHANGE AND IS PRESENTED IN 10 .

Anderson et al. (2018)  find that the average bid-ask spread  in their sample  barely exceeds
the minimum value, indicating that their tick size is binding. Despite this, they obtain
almost perfect slopes in accordance with invariance, and therefore, we  do not believe our
striking results are attributable to the tick size. Another factor that could link to our
puzzling results are the fees on the exchange. Kraken uses a tiered  fee schedule, ranging
from 0.26% to 0%, which  results in no noteworthy difference  to traditional stock
exchanges. From a tax perspective, there are no dissimilarities to stocks either, as the
IRS treats cryptocurrencies as property.  Further, there are no reasons to believe that
the competitiveness of market makers should be lower compared to traditional markets.
    This   leaves   two   plausible   factors   to   explain   our   surprising   results,   clearing
mechanisms and regulation. As previously mentioned, we notice a large amount of
negative bid-ask spread observations. This is caused by Krakens internal matching
engine,  which  causes  the  book  to  be  crossed,  meaning  that  the  orders  are  not
instantaneously matched. This is far from ideal, and it leads us to believe that Kraken's
flawed matching engine is  affecting our  intraday plots  in a highly mechanical manner.
Additionally,  the  debate  of  regulation  has  heated  up  recently.  Traditional  stock
exchanges being regulated as Alternative Trading Systems (ATS) requires them to meet
stringent transparency, operational resilience, and trading dependability standards, while
cryptocurrency exchanges, such as Kraken, are evade these requirements. As a matter
of fact, Kraken’s poor matching engine might stem from these insufficient regulations.
But analyzing this further takes us beyond this thesis scope.

                                    29
             VIII.  Concluding remarks

In this paper we test if there exists a  proportional relationship between the relative bid-
ask spread and a specific illiquidity measure, predicated on assumptions  of market
microstructure invariance. This relationship is tested on tick-by-tick data from 16
cryptocurrencies trading on the Kraken exchange during the period from 2019-01-01 to
2020-01-01. We do this in large part by replicating the Kyle and Obizhaeva (2017)
process for applying dimensional analysis to finance, with the addition of testing the
relationship along an intraday dimension as well, inspired by Andersen et  al.  (2018).
    We discover that the proportional relationship between relative bid-ask spread and
illiquidity for cryptocurrencies is economically close to the predicted value along both
the time series and intraday dimensions. We validate the invariant relationship for six
out of 16 cryptocurrencies along the time series dimension at the level of individual
cryptocurrency.  Along  the  intraday  dimension  for  individual  cryptocurrencies,  we
strongly reject the invariant relationship. This puzzling result is moderately investigated
and discussed, with the most probable explanation being Krakens flawed  order matching
engine, which in turn might be linked to careless regulation of cryptocurrency exchanges.
We leave for further research to examine if this is an isolated event for the Kraken
exchange over this specific timespan, or a more systemic phenomenon present in the
broader cryptocurrency market.
    The illiquidity measure we test is composed of variables that are directly observed
or readily estimated from public data on securities transactions. Its supposedly universal
applicability to all assets and  time would intuitively be of high value to risk managers
and investors, who otherwise have to employ different transaction cost models depending
on which market is being traded. Despite being relatively nascent, the cryptocurrency
market has already reached a combined market capitalization of two trillion dollars,
which corresponds to roughly 2% of the global equities market. Our paper contributes
not only to the invariance literature by testing the hypothesized relationship on an
unconventional market structure, but also, provides clarity for risk managers and traders
seeking reliable transaction cost models applicable for this specific, albeit increasingly
influential, asset class. Furthermore, the discovered problem with the bid-ask spread
data can be of  useful insight for financial authorities and provide arguments for imposing
more stringent regulations for cryptocurrency exchanges.

                                    30
                   References

Literature
ANDERSEN, T.G., BONDARENKO, O., KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2018.
Intraday Trading Invariance in the E-Mini S&P 500 Futures Market. Rochester, NY.

BARENBLATT, G.  I., 1996. Scaling, Self-Similarity, and Intermediate Asymptotics.
Cambridge University Press.

BRAUNEIS, A., MESTEL, R., RIORDAN, R., THEISSEN, E. 2021.  How to measure the
liquidity of cryptocurrency markets?,  Journal of Banking & Finance

CHU, J., CHAN, S., ZHANG, Y. 2020, High frequency momentum trading with
cryptocurrencies,  Research in International Business and Finance

CONG, L.W and HE, Z., 2019. Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts,  The Review of
Financial Studies, pp. 1754–1797

DYHRBERG, A.H., FOLEY, S., SVEC, J., 2018.  How investible is Bitcoin? Analyzing the
liquidity and transaction costs of Bitcoin markets,  Economics Letters, pp. 140-143

JAIN, P. C., & JOH, G.-H, 1988. The Dependence between Hourly Prices and Trading
Volume.  The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 23(3), 269–283.

KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2017. Dimensional Analysis, Leverage Neutrality, and
Market Microstructure Invariance”. Rochester, NY.

KYLE, A.S. and OBIZHAEVA, A.A., 2016. Market Microstructure Invariance:
Empirical Hypotheses. Econometrica, 84(4), pp. 1345-1404.

MAKAROV, I., SCHOAR, A., 2020. Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency markets,
Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 135, Issue 2, 2020, pp. 293-319

MODIGLIANI, F. and MILLER, M.H., 1958. The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
the Theory of Investment. The American Economic Review, 48(3), pp. 261-297.

ROBERT KISSELL, Chapter 2  -  Market Microstructure, The Science of Algorithmic Trading
and Portfolio Management, Academic Press, 2014, Pages 47-85

WANG, J.N., LIU, H.C., HSU, YT., 2020. Time-of-day periodicities of trading volume and
volatility in Bitcoin exchange: Does the stock market matter?,  Finance Research Letters,

                                    31
WOOD, R.A., McINISH, T.H. and ORD, J.K. 1985,  An Investigation of Transactions Data for
NYSE Stocks.  The Journal of Finance, 40: 723-73

Electronic
ANKNEY, LESLIE. 2019, What's So Different About Cryptocurrency Exchanges?, Forbes,
Jan 4 Available:https://www.forbes.com/sites/leslieankney/2019/01/04/whats-so-
different-about-cryptocurrency-exchanges/  [Retrieved: March 16th 2022].

BLOOMBERG, 2022, SEC’s Gensler Says Crypto Exchanges Trading Against Clients, May
13. Available:  https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-10/sec-chief-
questions-whether-crypto-exchanges-bet-against-clients  [Retrieved: May 13th 2022].

BUTERIN., V. 2014. Ethereum: A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized
Application  Platform.
https://ethereum.org/669c9e2e2027310b6b3cdce6e1c52962/Ethereum_Whitepaper_-
_Buterin_2014.pdf

CNBC, 2022, SEC Chair Gensler says agency is planning greater oversight of crypto markets
to protect investors, April 4, Available:  https://www.cnbc.com/2022/04/04/sec-chairman-
proposes-expanded-protections-for-crypto-investors.html  [Retrieved: April 10th 2022].

NAKAMOTO, S. 2008. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

WALKER, C. W, MARTIN, 2021, Regulated cryptocurrency exchanges: sign of a maturing
market or oxymoron?, LSE Business review, April 13, Available:
https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2021/04/13/regulated-cryptocurrency-
exchanges-sign-of-a-maturing-market-or-oxymoron/  [Retrieved: March 28th 2022].

WINTERMEYER, LAWRENCE, 2021 Institutional Money Is Pouring Into The Crypto
Market And Its Only Going To Grow, August 12, Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/lawrencewintermeyer/2021/08/12/institutional-money-is-
pouring-into-the-crypto-market-and-its-only-going-to-grow/?sh=7cb4785c1459  [Retrieved:
March 10th 2022].

                                    32
                 Appendix  A

         FIGURE  A1  -  Daily plots for  individual  cryptocurrencies

FIGURE  A1.  DEPICTED ABOVE IS THE LOG PERCENTAGE BID-ASK SPREAD AGAINST THE LOG ILLIQUIDITY
FOR  EACH DAY  AND CRYPTOCURRENCY.  EACH  POINT  IS REPRESENTING A  SINGLE  DAY, RANGING  BETWEEN
2019-01-01 AND  2020-01-01.  THE RED LINES  REPRESENTS THE BEST FITTED SLOPE OF EACH REGRESSION.

            TABLE A1  -  Individual OLS regressions on a daily level       CI Limits (β)

                                     β                                  2
            No. obs.      c                 Se(c)       Se(β)       R      95% LL    95% UL
 ADA         365       -1.83      0.67        0.30        0.05       0.34       0.58       0.77
 BCH         366       -0.22      0.93        0.31        0.05       0.54       0.85       1.02
 BTC         366       0.45      1.10        0.60        0.07       0.37       0.93       1.21
 DASH        366       -3.85      0.28        0.34        0.06       0.06       0.17       0.39
 ETC         366       -1.14      0.79        0.38        0.07       0.29       0.66       0.92
 ETH         366       -4.53      0.41        0.58        0.10       0.07       0.26       0.56
 EOS         366       -3.82      0.39        0.34        0.05       0.14       0.30       0.50
 GNO         366       0.27      0.96        0.22        0.05       0.56       0.87       1.04
 LTC         366       -4.88      0.28        0.38        0.06       0.07       0.17       0.39
 QTUM       366       1.04      1.09        0.34        0.06       0.49       0.97       1.20
 REP         366       0.27      0.99        0.41        0.08       0.33       0.84       1.14
 XLM         366       -0.80      0.84        0.27        0.04       0.51       0.76       0.93
 XMR         366       -3.50      0.42        0.35        0.06       0.14       0.31       0.53
 XRP         365       -0.15      0.99        0.80        0.10       0.20       0.79       1.20
 XTZ         366       2.80      1.40        0.24        0.04       0.77       1.32       1.48
 ZEC         366       -5.28      0.10        0.24        0.04       0.02       0.02       0.19

                                    33
TABLE  A1.  THIS TABLE DISPLAY A STATISTICAL OVERVIEW OVER THE INDIVIDUAL REGRESSIONS ALONG
THE TIME SERIES  DIMENSION. THE CONSTANT,  C,  AND  SLOPE,  β, IS FOLLOWED BY THE  STANDARD  ERROR OF
         2
EACH. R AND A 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL  ARE REPORTED AS AN INDICATION OF ROBUSTNESS OF THE
EMPIRICAL  RESULTS.

        FIGURE A2  -  Intraday plots for individual cryptocurrencies

FIGURE  A2.  DEPICTED ABOVE IS THE LOG PERCENTAGE BID-ASK SPREAD AGAINST THE LOG ILLIQUIDITY
FOR EACH CRYPTOCURRENCY WHICH IS OBTAINED BY AVERAGING THE FIVE-MINUTE OBSERVATIONS ACROSS
ALL TRADING DAYS  BETWEEN 2019-01-01 AND 2020-01-01  ON AN INDIVIDUAL LEVEL.  288  POINTS FOR ALL  FIVE-
MINUTE INTERVALS  ACROSS THE DAY  ARE PLOTTED.  THE RED LINES REPRESENTS  THE  BEST FITTED  SLOPE
OF EACH REGRESSION.
        TABLE A2  -  Individual OLS regressions on a intraday level

                                                                                CI Limits (β)

                                     β                                2
            No. obs.      c                 Se(c)      Se(β)       R      95% LL    95% UL
 ADA         288       -6.11      -0.03       0.06       0.01       0.02       -0.05       0.00
 BCH         288       -6.60      -0.00       0.06       0.01       0.00       -0.02       0.02
 BTC         288       -4,38      0.46       0.57       0.07       0.13       0.33       0.60
 DASH        288       -5.18      0.06       0.06       0.01       0.10       0.04       0.08
 ETC         288       -5.43      0.05       0.11       0.02       0.02       0.01       0.09
 ETH         288       -7.84      -0.03       0.48       0.07       0.00       -0.16       0.10
 EOS         288       -4.87      0.24       0.19       0.03       0.18       0.18       0.30
 GNO         288       -4.14      0.00       0.06       0.01       0.00       -0.02       0.03
 LTC         288       -6.70      0.02       0.18       0.03       0.00       -0.04       0.07
 QTUM       288       -4.40      0.11       0.09       0.02       0.14       0.08       0.14
 REP         288       -4.47      0.10       0.11       0.02       0.07       0.06       0.14

                                    34
 XLM         288       -5.78      0.05       0.13       0.02       0.02       0.01       0.09
 XMR         288       -6.17      0.01       0.09       0.01       0.00       -0.02       0.03
 XRP         288       -6.57      0.10       0.27       0.04       0.02       0.03       0.18
 XTZ         288       -4.10      0.16       0.13       0.02       0.14       0.12       0.21
 ZEC         288       -5.72      0.03       0.07       0.01       0.02       0.01       0.06

TABLE  A2.  THIS TABLE DISPLAY A STATISTICAL OVERVIEW OVER THE INDIVIDUAL REGRESSIONS ALONG
THE  INTRADAY  DIMENSION. THE CONSTANT,  C,  AND  SLOPE,  β,  IS FOLLOWED BY THE  STANDARD  ERROR OF
         2
EACH. R AND A 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL  ARE REPORTED AS AN INDICATION OF ROBUSTNESS OF THE
EMPIRICAL  RESULTS.

                                    35
                Appendix B

          TABLE B1  -  Outliers for robustness check (trades data)

                  Initial  observations           Outliers detected and             % removed
                                               removed
 ADA                8,784                     7,449                   84.8%
 BCH                8,784                     3,063                   34.9%

 BTC                8,784                      59                     0.7%

 DASH               8,784                     8,400                    95.6%
 ETC                8,783                     7,862                    89.5%

 ETH                8,784                      272                    3.1%

 EOS                 8,784                     7,536                    85.8%
 GNO                8,782                     8,724                   99.3%

 LTC                8,784                     4,133                    47.1%

 QTUM              8,784                     5,467                   62.2%
 REP                8,783                     8,577                    97.7%

 XLM                8,781                     7,190                   81.9%

 XMR               8,784                     7,939                   90.4%
 XRP                8,784                     2,236                   25.5%

 XTZ                8,784                     7,067                    80.5%

 ZEC                 8,784                     8,427                    96.0%

 Total              140,537                   94,401                  67.2%

TABLE  B1.  THIS TABLE REPORTS THE OUTLIERS REMOVED FROM THE TRADES DATA FOR THE ONE HOUR
ROBUSTNESS CHECK. A ONE HOUR PERIOD IS OMITTED IF IT IS MISSING TWO OR MORE FIVE-MINUTE PERIODS
OF TRADING ACTIVITY WITHIN IT.  FOR THE TWO LARGEST CRYPTOCURRENCIES, BITCOIN AND ETHEREUM,
TRADING IS MORE FREQUENT AND THEREFORE ONLY  0.7  AND  3.1%  FIVE-MINUTE INTERVALS ARE OMITTED,
RESPECTIVELY, AND FOR THE SMALLER CRYPTOCURRENCIES, WE DELETE OVER 90% OF THE OBSERVATIONS.

        TABLE B2  -  Outliers for robustness check (order book data)

                  Initial  observations          Outliers detected and             % removed
                                               removed
 ADA               8,784                     110                    1.3%
 BCH                8,784                     102                    1.2%
 BTC                8,784                     147                    1.7%
 DASH               8,784                      91                    1.0%
 ETC                8,784                      79                    0.9%
 ETH                8,784                     102                    1.2%

                                    36
 EOS                8,784                      113                    1.3%
 GNO               8,784                     94                    1.1%
 LTC                8,784                      97                     1.1%
 QTUM              8,784                     68                    0.8%
 REP                8,784                      69                     0.8%
 XLM               8,784                     69                    0.8%

 XMR               8,784                     86                    1.0%
 XRP                8,784                      79                    0.9%
 XTZ                8,784                      76                     0.9%
 ZEC                8,784                      87                     1.0%
 Total             140,544                   1,469                   1.0%

TABLE  B2.  THIS TABLE REPORTS THE OUTLIERS REMOVED FROM THE ORDER BOOK DATA FOR THE ONE
HOUR ROBUSTNESS CHECK.  A ONE HOUR PERIOD IS  OMITTED IF IT IS MISSING  ONE  OR MORE  FIVE-MINUTE
PERIODS OF ORDER BOOK UPDATES WITHIN IT. AS WE HAVE REMOVED THE MOST EXTREME DAYS FROM OUR
SAMPLE, THIS RULE IS REMOVING THE MOST EXTREME INTERVALS FROM OUR ROBUSTNESS TEST.

          FIGURE B1  -  Cross  sectional plot for the robustness test

FIGURE  B1.  THIS FIGURE  IS  THE RESULT  OF OUR ONE HOUR ROBUSTNESS TEST  AND  PLOTS THE LOG
PERCENTAGE  BID-ASK  SPREAD  AGAINST  THE  LOG  ILLIQUIDITY  OF  THE  AVERAGES  OF  ONE-HOUR
OBSERVATIONS ACROSS ALL TRADING DAYS.  ALL OF THE 16 CRYPTOCURRENCIES IS REPRESENTED BY AN
INDIVIDUAL COLOR, AND  24  POINTS FOR ALL  ONE HOUR  INTERVALS  ACROSS THE DAY  ARE PLOTTED.  THE
DASHED LINE IS ADDED AS A BENCHMARK  TO REPRESENT THE PREDICTED REGRESSION SLOPE OF ONE
ACCORDING TO OUR HYPOTHESIS. THE RED LINE IS THE BEST FITTED LINE FOR OUR SAMPLE AND IS GIVEN
BY THE FOLLOWING EQUATION: LN(S/P) = 4.5188 + 1.2660 ∙ LN(1/L). THE OLS REGRESSION OF THIS SAMPLE GIVES
     2
AN R OF 0.936.  THE SAMPLE PERIOD RANGES BETWEEN 2019-01-01 AND 2020-01-01.

                                    37
                Appendix C

              TABLE C1  -  Outliers removal (based on tick-size)

                Negative        Equal to minimum     Total observations        % removed
                                                 tick-size
 ADA           643,652            193,650             14,799,986              6%
 BCH           690,282            7,803,473            16,631,565             51%
 BTC           715,553            6,721,055            20,052,584             37%
 DASH          664,229             123,322             15,966,830              5%
 ETC           622,077             436,885             14,555,249              7%
 ETH           705,155            5,502,487            18,512,424             34%
 EOS           588,878             360,534             15,243,666              6%
 GNO           191,637             83,314             4,019,522              7%
 LTC           626,413            2,733,812            15,874,329              21%
 QTUM         544,717             68,544             12,828,176              5%
 REP           495,109             207,512             12,262,771              6%
 XLM           691,596            381,691             15,144,778              7%
 XMR          536,128            566,950            12,545,375             9%
 XRP           835,929            2,906,114            17,612,230             21%
 XTZ           684,041             648,697             16,799,648              8%
 ZEC           450,582             218,622             12,162,470              6%
 Total         9,685,978          28,956,662          235,011,603            16%

TABLE  C1.  THIS  TABLE  REPORTS  THE  OBSERVATIONS REMOVED FROM THE ORDER BOOK DATA WHERE
THE  TICK-SIZE  EITHER  WAS  NEGATIVE  OR  EQUAL  TO  THE  MINIMUM  OF  RESPECTIVE  CURRENCY.  EVEN
THOUGH IT IS NOT FORMALLY INVESTIGATED, WE OBSERVE A PATTERN OF  % REMOVED AND  TRADING
ACTIVITY. THIS MIGHT BE EXPLAINED BY  THE LIMITATIONS  OF  KRAKEN’S MATCHING ENGINE’S  WHICH IS
MORE APPARENT WHEN LARGE ORDERS ARE PLACED.

                                    38
                Appendix  D

In this part of the appendix, we present the  construction of our empirical variables more
thoroughly.  We ignore the subscript  j  below for simplification purposes.  We  distinguish
the timing of  observations by defining  tn  as the timestamp  of  an  individual trade, where
n  ranges from  1 to  Ni  inside  the  five-minute interval  i.

Part  I  –  Variables constructed  using  trades data

Let  Qt  denote the  number of coins traded at time  tn,
        n

                   1   Ni
then, let  Qi  =   ∑n=1     Qt  denote the average trade size in the five-minute interval  i, and
                   Ni          n

         Ni
Vi  =  ∑ n=1 Qt  denote the total  trade volume inside the five-minute interval  i.
                  n

                           Ni  Ptn∙  (tn+1-  tn)
Further, let  Pi  =  ∑n=1         '      denote the volume-weighted price for the five-minute
                            T -T
interval  i.  where  t0  =  T  is the first trade,  and  TNi  =  T’  is the last trade,  inside  the
interval  i.  Ptn  is  given by the execution price  of  the corresponding trade  at  time  tn.

            N                    2
        2          i
Let  σi  =  ∑n=2     0ln(Ptn 1 -ln(Ptn-1 ))  denote realized variance over interval  i.

                                   -1
             1      PiVi  3
Then  let    =  - 2  .  denote our defined  illiquidity measure.
              Li        σi

Part  II  –  Variables constructed  using  order book  data

             Atn+  Btn
Let  Ptn  =  #       %  denote the quoted mid-price at time  tn,
                 2

where  Atn  and  Btn  is  representing the ask and bid,  respectively, and is  given by the  top-
of-book  at  time  tn.

Let  𝑆&#   =  Atn   -  Btn  denote the best bid-ask spread at time  tn,

                                                                                                       Stn
                                                                                           '   (  ∙ (tn+1- tn)
                                                                                Si         Ni    Ptn
then, we can compute  the  percentage bid-ask  variable,  # %  =  ∑n=1         '
                                                                  Pi                T -T

where  t0  =  T  is the first trade,  and  𝑇)$  =  T’  is the last trade,  inside  the  interval  i.

                                    39