THE DRIVERS OF WEALTH
INEQUALITY

THE CASE OF SWEDEN

ERIK LINDÉ

LUDVIG LJUNBERG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
The Drivers of Wealth Inequality: The Case of Sweden

Abstract:

   Wealth inequality is a defining feature of the global economy which gives rise to several
   societal issues. To investigate the driving factors behind wealth inequality in Sweden, a
   wealth model from Gabaix et al. (2016) is extended to include type dependency,
   differences in returns amongst individuals in the population. We construct this model to
   be calibrated with unique data on household market risk and idiosyncratic risk from
   Calvet et al. (2007). We accurately represent the distribution of Swedish wealth and use
   this model to consider insightful counterfactual scenarios. This model shows that
   idiosyncratic risk and return heterogeneity are strong drivers of wealth inequality.
   Additionally, we find that increased market participation and better investment strategies
   for low-wealth households have a limited impact on wealth inequality. Lastly, we find
   that adjustments to capital gains tax can strongly impact wealth inequality.

Keywords:

   Wealth inequality, Return heterogeneity, Type-dependency

Authors:

   Erik Lindé (24853)
   Ludvig Ljungberg (24933)

Tutors:

   Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Erik Lindé and Ludvig Ljungberg, 2023
1 Introduction

Wealth inequality is a defining feature of the global economy. Data from Chancel,
Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2022) show that globally, the wealthiest 10% of house-
holds own as much as 76% of total household wealth and account for little over 50%
of total income, while the poorest half of households hold only about 2% of total
wealth and less than 10% of income. Wealth and income inequality can be harmful to
economic growth as shown by Persson and Tabellini (1994). Furthermore, it can cre-
ate societal issues such as intergenerational persistence of poverty and reduced social
mobility as found in Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016). It has therefore attracted
significant academic interest.
   We add to the previous literature on the topic by examining if differences in
returns on wealth exacerbate wealth inequality in Sweden and the impact of capital
gains tax. To analyze these questions, we construct a model of wealth accumulation
in the population. We set model parameters reflecting the characteristics of the
Swedish economy and simulate different counterfactual scenarios to investigate how
heterogeneity in return rates and taxation affect wealth inequality.
   This paper builds further on the model constructed in Gabaix, Lasry, Lions,
and Moll (2016). They model income inequality using type dependency, letting
the population consist of individuals with either high or low income growth. Type
dependency is the assumption that there are different types of individuals in the
population that cannot be sampled from one distribution for the entire population.
Gabaix et al. (2016) also construct a simple model for explaining wealth inequality,
but find that without type dependency it cannot explain the development of wealth
inequality in the U.S.
   In our model, we expand upon their wealth model by introducing type depen-
dency and allowing for an arbitrary number of types so that we can more accurately
capture the wealth distribution in the economy. Uniquely for our work, we have a
methodology to calibrate the model using data from Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini
(2007). Calvet et al. (2007) accessed a detailed data set on Swedish household fi-
nances, down to the individual asset level, during a period of time when Sweden
enforced a wealth tax. They report returns on wealth as well as the systematic
and idiosyncratic risk in different percentiles of the Swedish population. Using their
measures of systematic and idiosyncratic risk of Swedish households, we set up our
type-dependent model with five types, each representing 20 percentiles of the pop-
ulation, but the model can easily be extended for an arbitrary number of types.
Additional data such as GDP growth, market performance, risk-free interest rates,
and tax rates for Sweden are also collected. We then estimate consumption and
transition parameters in our model by targeting the Swedish wealth inequality data
from Piketty (2014).
    After calibrating the model, we run a series of counterfactual scenarios to inves-
tigate key parameters. We investigate the role of return heterogeneity, caused by
both varying levels of idiosyncratic and market risk in the modeled economy. We
find that the idiosyncratic risk has a large impact on wealth inequality. In one of
our counterfactual scenarios, we cut idiosyncratic variance in half and the resulting
top 1% wealth share is reduced from 25.02% to 17.56%. We also study what effect
an increase in market exposure or a more diversified asset portfolio for low-wealth
households will have on wealth inequality, but find that this impact is very limited.
Finally, we investigate the effect of the capital gains tax in our model and find that
even small adjustments have a large impact. A capital gains tax increase from 30%
to 40% reduces the top 1% wealth share from 25.02% to 13.68%.
   The setup in Gabaix et al. (2016), as well as most of the prior literature and
research on this topic, is centered on U.S. data. In our paper, we focus on Sweden.
We believe that Sweden is an interesting case because of the unique data available
for household finances. Moreover, Sweden shares wealth and income characteristics
with many other European economies.
   To give some context for our work, we will provide a short description of the
Swedish economy as it relates to inequality. The Swedish economy is characterized by
its large export, high levels of innovation, and strong welfare state. The focus on trade
and business has allowed multiple successful entrepreneurs and large international
companies to emerge from Sweden. Sweden has one of the highest tax burdens
on income through its progressive tax system with a top marginal tax rate above

                                    2
55% and enforced a wealth tax up until 2007 (Skatteverket). In terms of income,
Sweden is one of the least unequal countries in Europe and the world. The top 10%
highest earners in Sweden receive 30.8% of the total income. To put into perspective,
the same statistic for France, Germany, and the US is 32.2%, 37.1%, and 45.5%
respectively. Despite the low income inequality, wealth inequality is high in Sweden.
In 2021, the top 10% wealthiest held 58% of the total wealth of the population while
the bottom 50% held only 5.8% (Chancel et al. 2022).
   In Section 2 we further break down related works to our paper. In Section 3
we introduce our wealth model and display key characteristics and mechanisms. In
Section 4 we discuss our data, present how the model parameters are calibrated and
estimated, and discuss the model fit. Next, we present the results of our counterfac-
tual scenarios in Section 5. Finally, we show the robustness of our results in Section
6 and conclude our paper in Section 7.

2 Related Works

The key previous work for our paper is Gabaix et al. (2016), which investigates the
subject of inequality and the recent increase in top income inequality in the U.S. By
using data from the United States, models with and without type-dependency are
constructed to try and explain the trends in income inequality data. The paper shows
that traditional models without type dependency are unable to explain the rapid
increase in income inequality and therefore proposes two developments to the simple
model. The improved models include scale dependence and type dependence. These
two additions are used to model the existence of high-growth types in the population,
whose earnings grow faster than the average. Gabaix et al. (2016) find that with
the addition of scale dependence and type dependence, their model can match the
observed developments of income inequality. This is in line with the theories that
top income inequality is driven by highly skilled managers or entrepreneurs with
exceptionally large earnings.
   Gabaix et al. (2016) mainly focuses on income inequality but has an appendix

                                    3
devoted to wealth inequality as well. In that section, a simple model of wealth
inequality and transition dynamics is constructed. However, type dependency is not
introduced to this wealth model. In our work, we further this model by introducing
type dependence. We also implement a return rate rooted in the CAPM framework,
and calibrate the model in a Swedish setting using data on market and idiosyncratic
risk for Swedish households found in Calvet et al. (2007). Calvet et al. (2007) focused
on finding heterogeneity in risk and returns across households, using unique data
which detailed household finances in the Swedish economy down to the individual
asset level.
   Xavier (2021) uses household data to study wealth and return heterogeneity in
the U.S. Xavier (2021) finds a correlation between wealth and returns in that richer
households have, on average, higher returns on wealth. By introducing return het-
erogeneity to a model of household saving behavior, Xavier finds that return hetero-
geneity can explain parts of the development of wealth inequality in the U.S. In our
paper, we take a similar approach. We introduce return heterogeneity in the form
of type dependency to the wealth model from Gabaix et al. (2016) and calibrate
it to a Swedish setting using household data from Calvet et al. (2007). Using our
model we find results that support the conclusion from Xavier (2021), that return
heterogeneity does have a large impact on wealth inequality, and could be a driving
factor also in the case of Sweden. Our main contribution is to then investigate the
effect of the capital gains tax, idiosyncratic risk, and improved investment behavior
in our model through our counterfactual scenarios.

3 Wealth Model

3.1 Wealth Equation

The wealth model we construct is built upon the wealth model constructed in Gabaix
et al. (2016), but includes type dependency. Ultimately, we have our final model as

                                    4
                  j                             j                2  j
          ∂p         −x        ∂p      2    ∂ p        j      j−1      j+1
            = −(ye  + μj,t)    + (σj /2)   2 − 2αp + αp   + αp   , (1)
          ∂t                ∂x         ∂x
   where

                                                               2
                                                    σj
                           μj,t = rj,t − gt − θ −                            (2)
                                                 2
   and

                            rj,t = (1 − τ )(rf,t + βj · re,t). (3)

              j
   where p (x, t) is the density of the logarithm of detrended wealth x at time t
for type j. We have type-dependent market risk βj and σj , consumption to wealth
ratio θ, transition intensity between types as α, and y as labor income to detrended
wealth (constant for all households). Furthermore, we have time series data for excess
market returns re,t, risk-free interest rates rf,t, and growth gt. This is used to find
time-dependent returns rj,t for type j in a given time step with CAPM. With all
parameters set, the system of partial differential equations (1) is solved with a finite
difference method. The wealth distribution can then be analyzed, and the top wealth
shares, among other statistics, can be discovered about the modeled economy.
   We now derive this model and state its assumptions. The derivation is similar
to that in Gabaix et al. (2016) for wealth inequality, but we include all steps for
completeness. In the model, as in Gabaix et al. (2016), time is continuous and there
is a continuum of individuals with different levels of wealth. Development in wealth
w˜ is modeled by

                       d w˜it = (1 − τ ) ˜witdRit + (yit − cit)dt. (4)

   This wealth model simply captures that every individual receives capital gain
dRit, taxed by capital gains tax τ , where dRit is stochastic. They also earn yit as
labor income and consume cit. Furthermore we assume dRit = ˜rdt + ˜vdZit where dZit
is a Standard Brownian Motion. Introducing this to (4), we arrive upon

                                    5
                      d w˜it = (r w˜it + yit − cit)dt + σ w˜itdZit. (5)

   Here we have included the tax effects by setting r = (1 − τ )˜r and σ = (1 − τ )˜v.
To further simplify the model, we assume that each individual consumes a constant
fraction θ of their wealth at each time step, meaning that cit = θd w˜it. Additionally,
we assume that labor income is equal across the population and grows at rate g,
                   gt                                                              −gt
such that yt = ye . In (5), we replace wealth with detrended wealth w = ˜we   and
incorporate these assumptions.

                    dwit = (y + (r − g − θ)wit)dt + σwitdZit. (6)

   Using Ito’s formula, the logarithm of detrended wealth xit = log(wit) in (6) yields

                                                                                2
                          −xit                                   σ
              dxit = (ye    + μ)dt + σdZit , μ := r − g − θ −   . (7)
                                                             2
   This derivation is the same as from Gabaix et al. (2016), but their model of
wealth does not include type dependency. We thus introduce type dependency to
(7) by setting type-dependent return rate rj and volatility σj for type j. The other
parameters remain homogeneous across the population.

                                                                                  2
                       −x                                      σj
                                   it
             dxit = (ye    + μj )dt + σj dZit , μj := rj − g − θ −   . (8)
                                                               2
   Given (8), we aim to find densities of each type as is done for income inequality
in Gabaix et al. (2016). However, they limit themselves to two types, one low and
one high, in their income inequality calculations. We opt for more generality and
allow for an arbitrary number of types J, ranging from high to low earners. Type 1
will have the highest average return, and type J will have the lowest average return.
    As is done in Gabaix et al. (2016) for income inequality, it is possible to switch
from one type to another with a certain transition intensity in our model. When
switching between types, we assume it is only possible to switch to the neighboring
types, and thus all other transition intensities are zero.
   We refer to ϕj as the transition intensity to the lower neighboring type (from

                                    6
          ϕ1         ϕ2         ϕ3        ϕJ−3       ϕJ−2       ϕJ−1
     1 2 3 . . . J − 2 J − 1 J

         ψ2        ψ3        ψ4       ψJ−2      ψJ−1       ψJ

Figure 1: Illustration of transition between types. ϕj is the transition intensity to switch to the
lower type and ψj is the transition intensity to switch to the higher type.

type j to j + 1) and ψj as the transition intensity to the higher neighboring type
(from j to j − 1). Naturally, ψ1 = ϕJ = 0 as there is no higher type above type 1
and no lower type below type J. This movement is illustrated in figure 1. Collecting
transition intensities in ϕ and ψ, we then have

                                                         T
                         ϕ = (ϕ1 ϕ2 · · · ϕJ−1 0) , (9)

                                                          T
                         ψ = (0 ψ2 · · · ψJ−1 ψJ ) . (10)

    With transition intensities in place, we aim to find the densities of log-detrended
                                                                           j
wealth x for type j and a certain time point t, written as p (x, t). As is done for
Gabaix et al. (2016) in income inequality, we use (8) which satisfies the system of
Kolmogorov Forward equations as

       j                           j                2  j
  ∂p         −x       ∂p      2    ∂ p              j         j−1         j+1
      = −(ye   + μj )    + (σj /2)   2 − (ϕj + ψj )p + ϕj−1p   + ψj+1p   , (11)
   ∂t               ∂x         ∂x

    For simplicity, we assume that the transition intensities to neighboring types are
equal and denoted α, such that ψj = ϕj = α for every type j. We then have simpler
expressions for (9) and (10) as (12), which we use to simplify (11) into our main
equation (1).

                                      T                            T
             ϕ = (α α α α 0)   , ψ = (0 α α α α) . (12)

                                    7
                  j                             j                2  j
          ∂p         −x        ∂p      2    ∂ p        j      j−1      j+1
            = −(ye  + μj,t)    + (σj /2)   2 − 2αp + αp   + αp   .
          ∂t                ∂x         ∂x
   Time dependency is captured by introducing time-dependence to μj , such that
we have μj,t. The time-dependence for μj,t is rooted in time-dependent growth gt
and return rj,t for each type, and we have (2).

                                                               2
                                                   σj
                           μj,t = rj,t − gt − θ −   .
                                                2
    Furthermore, we determine after-tax return rj,t for type j by introducing βj as
the market risk for type j and time-dependent risk-free interest rate rf,t and excess
market return re,t. We then have after-tax return rj,t determined by CAPM in Sharpe
(1964) and find (3).

                            rj,t = (1 − τ )(rf,t + βj · re,t).

   We are assuming excess returns, denoted α in CAPM, to be zero for each type
in the modeling of the Swedish population. Furthermore, we assume that both the
risk-free return rf,t and excess return re,t are taxed by capital gains tax τ , which
is consistent with the taxation policy in Sweden (Skatteverket). By introducing
time-dependent rj,t, decided by market movement with re,t, we have also introduced
market risk to our wealth model. The previously labeled σj should be considered
idiosyncratic risk for type j, which is one of two components of total risk for type j
alongside excess market return risk σe that affects rj .
    Solving for this system of partial differential equations (1) yields a distribution
                                   j
of wealth within each type p (x, t). These can be summed to find the distribution
of wealth for the economy as a whole. We solve (1) numerically as in Gabaix et al.
(2016) with a finite difference method. The wealth distribution can then be analyzed,
and the top 1% wealth, among other statistics, can be discovered about the modeled
economy.
   However, solving for (1) with time dependency requires an initial distribution.
To find an initial distribution to (1), a steady-state solution can be found where

                                    8
   j
∂p
 ∂t = 0 for all types, as is done in Gabaix et al. (2016). In essence, we find the initial
                   j      j
distributions p0 = p (x, t = 0) as those fulfilling a simplified set of partial differential
equations from (1) without time-dependency as

                                      j                2  j
                 −x       ∂p0      2    ∂ p0       j      j−1      j+1
           −(ye   + μj )    + (σj /2)   2 − 2αp0 + αp0 + αp0 = 0, (13)
                     ∂x         ∂x

                                             2
                                    σj
                 μj = rj − g − θ −    , rj = (1 − τ )(rf + βj · re). (14)
                                  2
    We find g, rf and re as the average growth, risk-free interest rate, and excess
market return respectively over the data period used. Thus, by setting the initial
distribution as a steady-state solution for certain input parameters, time-dependent
distributions of wealth can then be developed from the initial distribution and the
wealth inequality can be transitioned.
    To summarize, we in each time step use data for re,t and rf,t to determine rj,t
for each type as described in (3). This leads to μj,t being set in (2), based upon
βj and σj for each type j. This is then used to solve time-dependent (1), after an
initial distribution has been found. The initial distribution is found by finding the
steady-state solution where excess market return and growth as the average of the
entire data period according to (13) and (14).

3.2 Model Characteristics

In this section, we illustrate the mechanics of our model. We can observe the type-
composition of the top 10% richest in our baseline model in table 1. We observe that
there is a clear over-representation of the high-return types, and under-representation
of the low-return types, considering all types are equally common in the population.
This shows that our type construction with high and low types is working as intended.
   For our wealth model, we find that the modeled transition wealth inequality is
driven by a difference between excess market return re,t and growth gt. In figure 2,
we plot wealth inequality movement in our model alongside a cumulative metric for
excess market return re,t minus growth gt. More specifically, for starting year t0, we

                                    9
                 Table 1: Type-Composition of Wealthiest 10%

                               Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5
     Absolute share of top 10% 3.04% 2.43% 1.96% 1.51% 1.08%
     Relative share of top 10% 30.36% 24.25% 19.56% 15.08% 10.75%
Table 1 shows the type-composition of the wealthiest top 10% of the wealth distribution in our
model, in both absolute and relative shares. Type 1 is the type with the highest βj and σj while
type 5 has the lowest.

Figure 2: Relationship between wealth inequality movement in our model and a cumulative metric
for excess market return re,t minus growth gt, as shown in (15).

define market versus growth performance metric mt as

             X
     mt = (re,t − re) − (gt − g) + mt−1 =     (re,n + rf,n − r) − (gn − g) . (15)
                                             t0≤n≤t

   Essentially, (15) captures the cumulative market performance versus growth,
weighted against their average, since the start of the data period. Figure 2 shows
the relationship between this market performance metric mt and predicted levels of
wealth inequality with our model for Swedish data between 1945 to 2012. Thus r
is the average excess market performance and g is the average growth for Sweden
during the data period 1945 to 2012.

                                    10
Figure 3: The effect of a 20% parameter deviation from the baseline model on the top 1% and
top 10% share of total wealth. The parameters considered are the tax component (Tax), the labor
share of income (y), the βj and σj of the first type (β1 and σ1), third type (β3 and σ3), and fifth
type (β5 and σ5)

   We observe in figure 2 that the return minus growth strongly determines the
development in wealth inequality. Years of high performance in the market relative
to growth yields an increase in wealth inequality, whereas a period of low performance
will decrease wealth inequality. This is rooted in (1), where the only time-dependent
parameter is μj,t, which in itself is dependent upon market return minus growth.
   For our model, we also find some comparative statistics by changing the basic
input parameters, which is illustrated in figure 3. Considering 5 types in the economy,
we consider up to a 20% deviancy in the following input parameters: y (labor share
of income), τ (capital gains tax rate ), β1 (the market risk for type 1), σ1 (the
idiosyncratic risk for type 1), β3 (the market risk for the middle type), σ3 (the
idiosyncratic risk for type 3), β5 (the market risk for the lowest type, and σ5 (the
idiosyncratic risk for type 5).
   By increasing β1, we find that wealth inequality increases, as might be expected.
The top type then receives higher expected returns but also suffers from market
fluctuations further. This increase in wealth inequality is slightly stronger than an
increase in σ1, which also increases wealth inequality. Increasing τ , or raising capital
gains tax, significantly lowers wealth inequality. Changes to labor share of income

                                    11
y have a low impact, which could be explained by the whole population receiving
the same boost in income. Furthermore, perturbing the market or idiosyncratic risk
of the middle or lowest type has a limited impact, likely since their returns have a
limited impact on the wealth of the economy as a whole.

4 Model Estimation

4.1 Data

Data is collected from the year 1945, corresponding to 55 years before our measure-
ment year of 2000. This captures more than 80% explanatory power in our model,
as motivated in Appendix A. To summarize the findings in Appendix A, we use
our model to simulate multiple inequality outcomes over a long period for an econ-
omy with excess market return and economic growth sampled from a multivariate
log-normal distribution. By viewing excess market return and growth data τ years
                               2
back, we find an adjusted R over 80% when using 55 years of data in a multi-linear
regression. This regression uses excess market return minus growth each considered
year to predict the top 10% wealth share in the final period.
   For the 55-year data period of the Swedish economy, growth is taken from Sch¨on,
Krantz, et al. (2016). The capital gains tax is set to 30% for our entire period of
wealth inequality, consistent with the Swedish capital gains tax rate since the early
20th century (Skatteverket). In this model, labor share of income, or y in the model,
is calculated as the average monthly salary divided by average wealth, averaged over
2004-2007 when precise measurements were available from Statistics Sweden. This
leads to y = 4.87%, as calculated in Appendix B. The consumption-to-wealth ratio,
or θ in our model, is left for estimation as found in the next section. Data on Swedish
market performance is taken according to the Aff¨arsv¨arlden General Index (AFGX),
a Swedish market index available for many years back. The risk-free interest rates are
found as the reigning long-term policy rate from Riksbanken. The data for excess
market return is then simply found as the market performance subtracted by the
risk-free interest rate.

                                    12
   To set βj and σj for each type, the core components of the wealth model, an
interpolation from data in Calvet et al. (2007) is used. Their study uses a unique
data set on household wealth in Sweden during the years 1999-2002. At that time,
Sweden imposed a tax on wealth which made it necessary to keep careful measure-
ments and records of household assets and debts. The records of financial wealth
are in great detail, down to the individual security level. It also keeps records of real
estate holdings and income. With the data set, Calvet et al. (2007) finds the market
and idiosyncratic risk for the portfolio consisting of stocks and risky mutual funds
but excluding cash. The market and idiosyncratic risk are calculated at different per-
centiles sorted by total risk, which we then utilize when setting up the characteristics
of our types through the type-dependent parameters.
   The data on observed wealth inequality in Sweden is from Piketty (2014). This is
the same source used in calibrating the wealth model in Gabaix et al. (2016). Piketty
(2014) report estimates of the wealth shares of the wealthiest 1% and 10%. A com-
plimentary measure of the wealth share of the richest 5% in the year 2000 reported
in our results is given by Roine and Waldenstr¨om (2009), though this measure of the
top 5% wealth share is not available for all other years.
   In terms of limitations for data, our model requires input data for a long time
period. This makes the measures less accurate and reliable. For example, market
data and GDP growth can differ depending on the source. The same can be said
about the wealth share data from Piketty (2014). It is hard to estimate the exact
measures of how the wealth is distributed in the population. An advantage of using
Swedish data is that there are extensive records of household wealth due to the
previously enforced wealth tax. This makes the measure for the Swedish wealth
distribution more accurate than countries without this sort of data and who usually
have to rely on income statistics to estimate wealth distributions.

4.2 Calibrated Parameters

To determine the type-dependent parameters βj and σj , data from Calvet et al.
(2007) is used. The paper includes a table for percentile idiosyncratic risk and

                                    13
                                                                C
Figure 4: Illustration of the interpolated data from Calvet et al. (2007) on market βp and idiosyn-
         C
cratic risk σp for each percentile p. The dots show the data points we are interpolating. The dotted
line is the result of using a linear interpolation and the solid line is the result of using the PCHIP
method of interpolation.

market risk for certain percentile values, based on data from 1999-2002. However,
we must have more data than what the table offers, as it only includes idiosyncratic
risk and market risk at percentiles 1%, 5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 90%, 95%, and
99%, with percentiles sorted by total risk.
   We thus conduct an interpolation of the table in Calvet et al. (2007) for all
percentile points from 0% to 100%. The interpolation method used is Piecewise
Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP). figure 4 contains the interpolation
for idiosyncratic risk and market beta, plotted against the percentile sorted by total
risk.
   In setting the parameters for a type j, where we aim to capture households
between percentiles p1 and p2, we can then set βj and σj as the mean of their
percentile range. We thus have for a type j, to be set between percentiles p1 and p2
of figure 4, the type-dependent βj and idiosyncratic risk σj as

                 1   X
                                             C
                           βj =              βp , (16)
                               p2 − p1 + 1
                                                 p1≤p≤p2

                                    14
                 1   X
                                             C
                           σj =              σp . (17)
                               p2 − p1 + 1
                                                 p1≤p≤p2

         C      C
   Here βp and σp refer to the market beta and idiosyncratic risk at percentile p
from figure 4. Note that we have assumed a monotonic relationship of the market
and idiosyncratic risk as a function of total risk in this interpolation, and in setting
βj and σj according to (16) and (17).
   Though our model allows us to set an arbitrary number of types, we elect for J = 5
types. For simplicity, we set them as equal in size, which matches our assumption of
equal transition intensities between types in (1). With five types, each type should
therefore cover 20% of the population. Type 1 will cover P80-P100, type 2 will cover
P60-P80, type 3 will cover P40-P60, type 4 will cover P20-P40, and finally, type 5
will cover P0-P20. A comparison for a different number of types, all equal in size, is
found in table 6 in Appendix C. The table shows the worsening of model fit by using
more than five types, but that fewer than five types give similar performance.
   For five types, we now set the type-dependent parameters according to (16) and
(17). Collecting σj and βj into vectors β and σ, we have

                                                                          T
          σ = (σ1 . . . σ5) = (0.3651 0.1787 0.1442 0.1202 0.0777) , (18)

                                                                          T
          β = (β1 . . . β5) = (1.2747 0.9602 0.8884 0.7901 0.4555) . (19)

   However, in constructing the types across equal shares of the populations, we
must also assert that the construction of (12) assures that the types are of equal
size. For equal transition intensities, each type is receiving an equal amount of
inflow and outflow of households, ensuring the population sizes are the same. Types
1 and 5 on the edge receive inflow α and outflow α, netting zero flow. Types 2, 3
and 4 both have outflow 2α from ϕj + ψj = 2α, but have inflow ϕj−1 + ψj+1 = 2α.
The use of equal transition intensities in α resulting in equal type sizes in the model
can also be confirmed numerically.

                                    15
Figure 5: The effect of the estimated parameters α and θ on the top 1% and top 10% share of
wealth, in their range of feasible values. Dotted lines show the optimized value according to (20).
When changing α, θ is set as the optimized value, and vice versa.

4.3 Parameter Estimates

Ultimately, this leaves α and θ as the remaining parameters to be estimated. They
are without clear data calibration and sensitive parameters that have a strong impact
on wealth inequality as illustrated in 5. We estimate these parameters by targeting
two moments of wealth inequality in our measurement year of 2000.
   Estimation is therefore done to minimize the squared error for predicted 1% and
10% wealth inequality in the year 2000, denoted w˜1 and w˜10, versus the observed
values from Piketty (2014), denoted as w1 and w10. Thus, we seek the minimization

                                    16
                          ∗   ∗                         2                 2
                  (α , θ ) = argmin (w1 − w˜1) + (w10 − w˜10) . (20)
                                              (α,θ)

                                                                      ∗                  ∗
   Ultimately, the optimal values were found numerically as α = 0.2754 and θ  =
                                        ∗
5.51%. We consider the optimal α  to be feasible, as this can be interpreted as
expecting to transition to a different type every four years. It is higher than the α
set as 1/6 in Gabaix et al. (2016) for income inequality, but they only considered
two types. A model with fewer types could be expected to have lower transition
intensities so that flows between the very bottom and top are not disproportionately
                               ∗
quicker. We also consider θ  = 5.51% to be feasible, as it can be compared to the
θ = 6.81% used in Gabaix et al. (2016).
   With the optimal values for α, we can explicitly set ϕ and ψ from (12) to be
used in (1) as

                                                                T
                    ϕ = (0.2754 0.2754 0.2754 0.2754 0) ,

                                                                T
                    ψ = (0 0.2754 0.2754 0.2754 0.2754) .

   Note that estimating α and θ with this optimization requires that the Jacobian
matrix of the top 1% and 10% wealth share must be invertible as a function of α and
θ. We numerically calculate the Jacobian matrix in our optimal point in Appendix
D and find that it is invertible.

4.4 Model Fit

The estimated model with 5 types predicts the top 1% and top 10% wealth shares
with only a few percentage points difference in the year 2000, as can be observed in
table 2. The observed level of the top 10% wealth share is slightly too high and the
top 1% wealth share is slightly too low for our model to adjust to. However, these
measurements of Swedish wealth inequality are not exact, so the errors might well
be within the error margins of the observed values.

                                    17
                     Table 2: Data and Model Estimation

                           Top 10% Top 5% Top 1%
                      Data 57.81 44.36 20.48
                      Model 55.29 44.08 25.02

Table 2 reports the wealth shares, expressed in percentages of total wealth, of the top 10%, 5%,
and 1% wealthiest, given by the data and our model. The data on wealth shares are taken from
Piketty (2014) for the top 1% and 10% wealth share and Roine and Waldenstr¨om (2009) for the
top 5% wealth share. The ”Model” row shows the results of our estimated model.

Figure 6: Top 1% and 10% predicted wealth inequality, given by our model, versus the observed
wealth inequality from Piketty (2014). The axes for predicted versus observed wealth are separated
to further illustrate the time series trend.

   The estimated model also captures a few untargeted moments very well. As can
be observed in table 2, the model very precisely captures wealth inequality for the
top 5% wealth share, taken from Roine and Waldenstr¨om (2009), despite this being
an untargeted moment.
   Furthermore, though the model is only estimated to match wealth inequality
in the year 2000, the model captures the time series trend of wealth inequality in
Sweden. To illustrate this untargeted moment of trend movement of decreasing and
increasing inequality being captured, figure 6 is included. The axes for predicted
versus observed wealth are separated to further illustrate the time series trend.

                                    18
5 Results

In this section, we present a number of counterfactual scenarios in which we use our
model to explore the effect of different scenarios on wealth inequality in the year
2000. One suggestion to explain the increased wealth inequality is return hetero-
geneity, caused by both differing market exposure and idiosyncratic risk. Evidence
of this theory can be found in Xavier (2021). In table 3 we have set up a series of
counterfactual scenarios to study this assertion by adjusting the type-dependent βj
and σj for the population in our model.
   The first counterfactual scenario is when we set a homogeneous β for all types,
but we let the idiosyncratic risk σj for each type remain the same as in the estimated
                                                       C
model. Here, β is set as the mean of all interpolated points for βp for 0 ≤ p ≤ 100.
This counterfactual scenario explores a case where all households carry the same
market risk while maintaining heterogeneity in idiosyncratic risks. Intuitively, this
should create less spread in the returns on wealth in the population compared to
the baseline model. As can be seen in table 3, having a homogeneous β reduces the
wealth concentration of the top 10%, 5%, and 1%, effectively lessening the wealth
concentrated in the top percentiles and reducing the overall inequality. Since we are
reducing the heterogeneity of the returns and observing a reduced wealth inequality,
the results are consistent with the findings of Xavier (2021), that return heterogeneity
is a driving factor of wealth inequality.
    Next, we investigate the effect of the idiosyncratic risk σj . We start by letting the
βj of each type remain the same as in the estimated model, but setting a homogeneous
                                                                      C
σ for all types. The homogeneous σ is calculated as the mean of all interpolated σp
for 0 ≤ p ≤ 100. Note that this scenario has no change on households’ market
investment, but sets the same idiosyncratic risk for all households. From table 3 we
see that this has a large effect on the top shares of wealth. Both the top 10% and
5% share of total wealth decreases and the top 1% wealthiest share is reduced to
19.94%, which illustrates how idiosyncratic risk drives wealth inequality.
   We then combine the two previous scenarios and let the βj and σj be homogeneous
across all types. Essentially, this population only consists of one type and every

                                    19
          Table 3: Data, Estimated Model, and Counterfactual Scenarios

                                      Top 10% Top 5% Top 1%
           Data 57.81 44.36 20.48
           Baseline Model 55.29 44.08 25.02
          Counterfactuals (%)
          - Homogeneous β 49.96 38.85 21.01
          - Homogeneous σ 50.38 38.51 19.94
          - Homogeneous β and σ 47.07 35.45 17.83
                         2
          - Halving σ                   46.13 34.92 17.56
           - Increased β4 and β5 to β3 57.07 46.14 26.89
           - Shift to market type 4 and 5 55.59 44.66 25.66
Table 3 compiles the results of our counterfactual scenarios with each number representing the share
of wealth expressed in percentages. The data on wealth shares in the year 2000 are taken from
Piketty (2014) and Roine and Waldenstr¨om (2009). The ”Baseline Model” row shows the results of
our estimated model. The first four counterfactuals illustrate the role of return heterogeneity and
the last two results capture the effect of increased market participation of low types.

household has the average market and idiosyncratic variance found in Sweden. As
can be seen in table 3, the effects seem to be additive as the wealth shares of the top
10%, 5%, and 1% are reduced even further than in previous scenarios. We observe
that the wealth share of the top 1% and 5% richest are reduced the most. The top
1% wealthiest share is reduced to only 17.83% of the total wealth of the population.
   In the next scenario, we let the βj of each type remain the same as in the es-
timated model, but reduce the idiosyncratic risk σj of each type by halving the
                             2
idiosyncratic variance σj . Once again, this scenario has no change in households’
market investment. Similar to previous scenarios, this should reduce the spread in
returns and as can be seen in table 3, the total wealth shares of the top 10%, 5%,
and 1% are reduced, consistent with the theory that return heterogeneity in the
population exacerbates wealth inequality.
   These counterfactual scenarios illustrate how return heterogeneity is a driving
factor of wealth inequality. What we can also observe from table 3 is that adjusting
the idiosyncratic risk has a very impactful effect. This is interesting considering that

                                    20
an entrepreneurial venture involves much idiosyncratic risk as there is a lot of capital
invested in a single business. The results could therefore be a sign that successful
entrepreneurs, who have founded successful companies and amassed great wealth in
the process, could be a large contributing factor to wealth inequality. This is similar
to the theories of ”superstars” such as in Gabaix and Landier (2008) and Rosen
(1981).
   One possibility to reduce wealth inequality is to increase the stock market par-
ticipation and financial sophistication of the households in the lower percentiles of
the wealth distribution. We therefore consider whether changes in the investment
behavior of the lower types in our model can impact wealth inequality. The results
for these two counterfactual scenarios can be seen in the bottom two rows of table 3.
In the first scenario, we increase the βj of types 4 and 5, the types with the lowest
βj , to the level of the third type. By increasing their βj we are simulating a sce-
nario where the stock market participation increases among these households, which
could be a key way for lower-wealth households to amass more wealth and effectively
decrease wealth inequality. The observed effect on wealth inequality is very slight,
and the reported wealth shares actually grow slightly. This may stem out of the
transitioning between types, and that a few initially low-type households build up a
larger investment base that can be leveraged when they transition to higher types.
Either way, we find the increased market participation for the low types to have a
very slight impact.
    For our next scenario, we consider the possibility of reducing wealth inequality by
increasing the financial sophistication of the households in the lower percentiles of the
wealth distribution. With our model, we simulate the effect of the lowest percentile
types using more optimal investment strategies. This is achieved by shifting some
of the idiosyncratic variance to market exposure while maintaining the same level
of total variance. The exact calculation and method can be found in Appendix E.
This shift would be analogous to a diversification of their asset portfolios. As we
keep their total variance constant, this counterfactual scenario requires no change in
risk preferences. Once again, we find little change in wealth inequality under this
counterfactual scenario. It rather has the opposite effect as it marginally raises the

                                    21
                               Table 4: Tax Effect

             Tax level Top 10% Top 1%
            Both tax components (%)
              - 20% 70.36 35.83
             - 30% 55.29 25.02
              - 40% 40.73 13.68
             Market return tax component (%)
              - 20% 70.44 34.46
             - 30% 55.29 25.02
              - 40% 49.67 20.63
Table 4 shows the resulting wealth shares, expressed in percentages, when changing the tax rate
of our model. The first part of the table shows the effect of changing the tax component for
both market and idiosyncratic returns while the second part of the table shows the results of only
changing the tax component for market returns. The standard tax rate in the model is 30% and
these results are shown in bold font.

top 10%, 5%, and 1% share of total wealth. The results from this and the previous
scenario with increased β4 and β5 hint that raising the financial sophistication and
increasing stock market participation may not be the most efficient tool to combat
wealth inequality, at least in a relative sense. It is important to note that these
measures may well increase wealth in an absolute sense for these types.
    Next, we investigate the policy implication of the capital gains tax rate parameter
τ . In table 4 we observe that there is a clear effect of higher taxes leading to lower
inequality and lower taxes leading to higher inequality. These findings are consistent
with the results in Nirei and Aoki (2016), which investigated inequality and income
tax. Nirei and Aoki (2016) find that when the top marginal tax rate is reduced,
wealth inequality increases. There are two main effects behind these observations.
The first is that a lower tax rate increases the after-tax volatility of returns on wealth.
From table 3 we know that this increases wealth inequality. A lower tax rate also
reduces the inflow for the households at the bottom of the wealth distribution. These
findings seem to apply also to our case of capital gains tax and wealth inequality.
   A further important consideration is that our model taxes market return and

                                    22
idiosyncratic return with the same base tax of 30%. In this, we are assuming that
all components of the household portfolio are taxable with the 30% capital income
tax. A consideration against this setup would be that a large part of the household’s
average portfolio, and therefore a large part of the volatility, comes from real estate.
Real estate, dependent upon where it is located, carries much idiosyncratic risk for
households. To mirror the effect of lower or higher taxes on market investments,
while maintaining taxation on other assets such as real estate, we in the second half
of table 4 show the effect of only changing the tax component in the market returns
while keeping the tax component in the idiosyncratic variance term constant. We
see that a lowering of the tax rate generally causes an increase in wealth inequality
and higher taxes lead to a decrease in wealth inequality, but not as much as when
also changing the tax component in the idiosyncratic risk term seen in the first part
of table 4.
   As for the results of any model which simplifies very complex phenomena in
the real-world economy, these results can be questioned. Most importantly, results
that may stem from simplifying primitives must be discussed. In the model, we are
assuming both equal income and consumption-to-wealth ratios across all individuals
in the population. This is of course unrealistic and a simplification. We also make
a series of simplifications regarding the tax part of our model. We are using a 30%
capital gains tax and do not implement a wealth tax. We also make simplifications in
our reasoning surrounding the taxation of entrepreneurs since there are quite complex
rules concerning what should be taxed as salary versus capital income.
   Some of these concerns may be mitigated by the estimation of two key parameters
in α and θ. For example, a wealth tax would have a very similar effect as θ in our
model. Though some shortcomings remain, we believe that our wealth model, al-
though making important simplifications, highlights significant effects in the Swedish
economy as it relates to wealth inequality. We find the importance of the high id-
iosyncratic risk, tax policies, and the limited effect on wealth inequality of higher
financial sophistication for low-wealth types.

                                    23
6 Robustness

We now wish to consider the robustness of the key results found in the previous
section. Importantly, we consider vulnerability towards the number of types, the
length of the data period used, and the calculation of the type-dependent parameters.
To capture the effect on our three key takeaways, we consider the counterfactual
scenarios when idiosyncratic risk is lowered, when low types shift idiosyncratic risk
to market risk, and when the capital gains tax is increased to 40% in both tax
components.
   To investigate the results for a different number of types, we consider J = 2, 5, 10
types, where of course 5 types are used in the baseline model. Given the number of
types chosen, the type-dependent parameters are set according to the same method-
ology with interpolated data from Calvet et al. (2007) and equations (16) and (17).
   Next, we consider the length of the data period. As motivated in Appendix A,
we use 55 years of history of data to have 80% explanatory power of the wealth
inequality. However, we now investigate the results if a shorter history of data in
45 or 35 years was used instead. The data not only impacts the development of the
wealth distribution from (1), but also the initial distribution. Recall that the initial
distribution is found by (13), analogous to solving for the steady-state distribution
of (1), with the otherwise time-dependent parameters set as the average of the entire
data period.
   Lastly, we consider if the type-dependent parameters set by (16) and (17), where
the mean value between percentiles is used, were instead set by the median value. The
interpolation of Calvet et al. (2007) remains the same, but now the type-dependent
                                                         C      C
parameters βj and σj between p1 and p2 would instead by set as βp′ and σp′ where
  ′
p = (p2 − p1)/2.
                                                                                  ∗       ∗
   In all these cases, we estimate the changed model for new values of α and θ . In
table 5, we for each model find the predicted 1% wealth share as ˜w1 and the predicted
10% wealth share as ˜w10. For each of our three key counterfactual scenarios, we then
                                                                                                              ′                ′                                            ′
consider the new predicted 1% and 10% wealth, ˜w1 and ˜w10, to find ∆ ˜w1 = ( ˜w1 − w˜1)
                                  ′
and ∆ ˜w10 = ( ˜w10 − w˜10). We then in the table report relative ∆ ˜w1 and ∆ ˜w10, where

                                    24
                              Table 5: Robustness

                                             2
                           Halved σ       Shift in low types Tax increase
                           ∆ ˜w10 ∆ ˜w1 ∆ ˜w10 ∆ ˜w1 ∆ ˜w10 ∆ ˜w1
  Number of types (%)
  - 2 Types -17.55 -31.30 7.00 13.67 -31.76 -56.18
  - 5 Types -16.56 -29.82 0.55 2.56 -26.33 -45.31
  - 10 types -11.65 -22.21 -4.29 -4.87 -20.81 -34.89
  Years of data (%)
  - 55 years -16.56 -29.82 0.55 2.56 -26.33 -45.31
  - 45 years -14.78 -28.33 -1.87 -1.83 -24.57 -42.30
  - 35 years -19.19 -35.51 1.08 2.40 -27.97 -48.72
  Parameter calculation (%)
  - Mean -16.56 -29.82 0.55 2.56 -26.33 -45.31
  - Median -18.82 -34.24 1.78 4.90 -28.06 -49.31
Table 5 shows robustness for the key counterfactual scenarios. Relative ∆ ˜w1 and ∆ ˜w10 are displayed
in the table, capturing how much the counterfactual scenario relatively affects the given model. For
two types, only the lowest type shifts its risk towards the market. With 10 types, the bottom four
types are affected, as this remains consistent with 40% of types being impacted as the baseline
model shifts 2 out of 5 types.

they are divided by w˜1 and w˜10 respectively. This captures the impact of each
counterfactual scenario on the model in question. Reporting the relative difference
facilitates comparisons to the effects of the counterfactual scenarios on the changed
models versus the baseline model.
   Overall, we find that the effects of the counterfactual scenarios are robust for
                                                          2
both the top 10% and 1% wealth share. Halving σ  consistently decreases the top
10% wealth share by around 14% to 19% and the top 1% wealth share by 22% to
32%. Furthermore, we find that a shift from idiosyncratic to market risk for low
types has little to no impact on wealth inequality. There is a greater effect when 2
types are used, but in this case, half of the population is impacted by the shift as the
parameters for type 2 are changed. For 5 and 10 types, only 40% of the population is
impacted. Lastly, we find that an increase in capital gains tax has a strong negative

                                    25
effect on both the top 1% and 10% share of total wealth in all cases.

7 Conclusion

To investigate the impact of idiosyncratic risk, financial sophistication, and capital
gains tax on wealth inequality in Sweden, we extended a wealth inequality model
from Gabaix et al. (2016) to a type-dependent wealth model. We constructed this
model to utilize statistics from Calvet et al. (2007) using a unique data set. The
model could then be used to investigate various counterfactual and policy scenarios.
    Our main contribution is reasserting and finding driving factors of wealth inequal-
ity with our model specialized for Swedish data. We find that idiosyncratic risk in
returns is a strong driver of wealth inequality in Sweden. These results are consis-
tent with those found in Xavier (2021). Additionally, we find that increased financial
sophistication for less wealthy percentiles in the population has a limited impact in
reducing the relative shares of wealth inequality. Lastly, we find that capital gains
tax and other taxation policies can have a strong impact on wealth inequality in
Sweden.
   As for the results of any model which simplifies very complex phenomena in the
real-world economy, these results can be questioned. Most importantly, results that
may stem from simplifying primitives must be discussed. The model estimation
of two key parameters may somewhat mitigate these shortcomings, though others
remain. All in all, we believe that our wealth model, although making important
simplifications, highlights significant effects in the Swedish economy as it relates to
wealth inequality. Importantly, we find that these results are robust for various set-
ups of our model. We consistently find the importance of the return heterogeneity,
tax policies, and the limited effect on wealth inequality of higher financial sophisti-
cation for low-wealth types in different set-ups of the model.
   In future work, the model could be further developed to better capture policy
effects and changes. With such tweaks, the model could be tuned to fit data over a
time series trend to study wealth inequality over periods of time. Furthermore, the

                                    26
model could be developed further to allow for decomposition and micro-foundations
of wealth return volatility. With this, drivers of inequality could be more precisely
identified.

                                    27
Published Papers

Calvet, Laurent E, John Y Campbell, and Paolo Sodini (2007). “Down or out: Assess-
   ing the welfare costs of household investment mistakes”. In: Journal of Political
   Economy 115.5, pp. 707–747.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F Katz (2016). “The effects of ex-
   posure to better neighborhoods on children: New evidence from the moving to
   opportunity experiment”. In: American Economic Review 106.4, pp. 855–902.
Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier (2008). “Why has CEO pay increased so
   much?” In: The quarterly journal of economics 123.1, pp. 49–100.
Gabaix, Xavier, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll (2016).
   “The dynamics of inequality”. In: Econometrica 84.6, pp. 2071–2111.
Nirei, Makoto and Shuhei Aoki (2016). “Pareto distribution of income in neoclassical
   growth models”. In: Review of Economic Dynamics 20, pp. 25–42.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (1994). “ls lnequality Harmful for Growth”.
   In: American Economic Review 84.3, pp. 600–621.
Piketty, Thomas (2014). “Capital in the 21st Century”. In: Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press.
Roine, Jesper and Daniel Waldenstr¨om (2009). “Wealth concentration over the path
   of development: Sweden, 1873–2006”. In: Scandinavian Journal of Economics
   111.1, pp. 151–187.
Rosen, Sherwin (1981). “The economics of superstars”. In: The American economic
   review 71.5, pp. 845–858.
Sharpe, William F (1964). “Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium
   under conditions of risk”. In: The journal of finance 19.3, pp. 425–442.

Unpublished Papers

Xavier, Inˆes (2021). “Wealth inequality in the US: the role of heterogeneous returns”.
    In: Available at SSRN 3915439.

                                    28
Books

Chancel, Lucas, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman (2022).
   World inequality report 2022. Harvard University Press.
Sch¨on, Lennart, Olle Krantz, et al. (2016). New Swedish historical national accounts
   since the 16th century in constant and current prices. Department of Economic
   History, Lund University.

Documents

Aff¨arsv¨arlden (n.d.). Aff¨arsv¨arldens generalindex. Accessed: 2023-03-12. url: Affarsvarlden.
    se.
Riksbanken (n.d.). Volume II: House Prices, Stock Returns, National Accounts, and
    the Riksbank Balance Sheet, 1620–2012. Accessed: 2023-03-13. url: riksbank.se.
Skatteverket (n.d.). Skatter, Historik. Accessed: 2023-03-24. url: skatteverket.se.
Statistics Sweden (n.d.). Statistical database. Accessed: 2023-03-23. url: statistikdatabasen.
    scb.se/pxweb/en/ssd/.
Swedish House of Finance Research Data Center (n.d.). FinBas. Accessed: 2023-04-
    24. url: hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/.

                                    29
8 Appendices

Appendix A

To motivate the explanatory power our model gives, while only using data for a
limited number of years, we simulate a number of economies. We then regress the
end-year wealth inequality based on τ years of history of data on market return and
growth.
   To simulate several economies, we assume a multivariate normal distribution for
sampling excess market returns and growth, with a given correlation. Formally, we
                                                                                      T
have for excess market return re,t and growth gt for a given year t as Rt = (re,t, gt)
which is sampled from the distribution as
                                     !
                                                                   2
                                          T           σe ρ · σeσg
            Rt ∼ N (μ, Σ) , μ = (μe, μg)  , Σ =           2    . (21)
                                                    ρ · σeσg σg

                                                                                                    2
   Here, μe is the mean of excess market return, μg is the mean of growth, and σe
       2
and σg are their respective variances. Furthermore, we have ρ as their correlation.
This sampling allows us to simulate different outcomes of an economy, and study
how the excess market data and growth inputs dictate the results.
   The initial distribution of wealth is set as the steady-state solution for R0 = μ.
Then, the finite difference method from (1) is used with sampling according to (21).
The actualized excess market return minus growth, re,t − gt, is recorded for each
year. As is ˜w10, the top 10% wealth share in the final state. With this data, we run
a multi-linear regression as

            X
                         w˜10 = α +      βt(re,t − gt). (22)
                                        τ ≤t≤200
   The regression is meant to predict the end-state wealth inequality with τ years
of history of data on actualized excess market return minus growth. Naturally, for
higher τ and more data availability, the regression will have higher predictive power.
   This is done for our estimated wealth model with 5 types. We run 1000 sim-

                                    30
                     2
Figure 7: Adjusted R of a multi-linear regression of market and growth performance to predictP
the modeled wealth inequality. The regression is given as ˜w10 = α +   τ ≤t≤200 βt(re,t − gt). The
regression is allowed tau years of data, and more years of data availability leads to a higher ex-
planatory power of wealth inequality.

ulations of this economy with a simulation period of 200 years. We set ρ = 0.7,
μe = 6%, μg = 2.5%, rf = 1%, σe = 14.78% (from Calvet et al. (2007) table), and
σg = 1%. We run regressions with 0 < τ < 200. From each of these regressions,
                                   2
Figure 7 shows the Adjusted R  of the regressions for a given τ , which captures the
explanatory power of viewing τ years back.
   We found that 55 years of data yields over 80% explanatory power for economies
simulated for 200 years. The plateau after 100 years suggests that there is no more
information to be gained about wealth inequality levels by using actualized returns
minus growth past about 100 years back. This high predictive power for 55 years
of data underlies our decision to use market, growth, and interest rate data dating
back to 1945 in our actual Swedish data.

Appendix B

In this model, the labor share of income is calculated as the average income divided
by the average wealth of an individual in the country. We use data from Statistics
Sweden to calculate this parameter for Sweden. Because of the wealth tax, there are
extensive records of household wealth in Sweden and we use this data to calculate

                                    31
an average over the years 2004-2007. (Statistics Sweden)
   Over the period we find an average monthly salary of 24 675 SEK and an average
wealth of 506 250 SEK which gives us a labor share of income of 4.87% which is
similar to the measure in Gabaix et al. (2016).

Appendix C

In table 6, we see the calibration results of using different numbers of types. We
observe that the 10-type set-up does not perform as well as the 2- and 5-type set-
ups, undershooting the 10% wealth share and overshooting the 1% wealth share
relative to the other set-ups. The 2- and 5-type calibrations are roughly equal in
performance but we elect to use the 5-type calibration to better model the Swedish
economy and have more accurate results.

                          Table 6: Number of Types

                                  ∗  ∗
                        α      θ      Top 10% Top 1%
                  Data 57.81 20.48
                  2 types 0.1780 5.26% 54.79 24.16
                  5 types 0.2754 5.61% 55.29 25.02
                  10 types 0.2377 5.95% 53.64 25.95

                                                                              ∗      ∗
Table 6 shows the calibration results of using different amounts of types. The α  and θ  columns
show the optimal value for the parameter for that number of types. The ”Top 10%” and ”Top 1%”
columns show the resulting wealth shares, expressed in percentages, the model generates with those
input parameters. The first row shows the targeted wealth shares from Piketty (2014).

Appendix D

To ensure that the optimization for estimating the model can be done with both
parameters α and θ, we must ensure that the targeted variables ˜w1 and ˜w10, which
correspond to the predicted 1% and 10% wealth share, are impacted with distinctive
effects in regards to α and θ. This corresponds to linear independence between ∇ w˜1

                                    32
and ∇w ˜10 as functions of α and θ, and the following Jacobian matrix being invertible
for the optimum variables.
                          !
                                           ∂ w˜1   ∂ w˜10
                                       ∂α    ∂α
                               J =   ∂ w˜   ∂ w˜    .
                                                          1       10
                                              ∂θ     ∂θ
                                   ∗                  ∗
   For the optimum variables α  = 0.2754 and θ  = 5.51%, we numerically compute
the Jacobian in this point with a central difference quotient. We then have
                             !
                              −8.89 −4.50
                        J ≈                   .
                             −965.02 −1025.57

   Clearly, we see linear independence in the columns of J. We thus have that the
matrix is invertible, which can be calculated as
                             !
                           −1     −0.2144 0.00094
                       J   ≈                  .
                                  0.2018 −0.0019

   We see that there is linear independence in the columns of J and that the Jaco-
bian, therefore, is invertible. This supports using both α and θ for estimating the
model.

Appendix E

                                                                         2
For a given type j, we aim to keep the level of variance, σj,tot, constant but shift
                                    2                                          2
the idiosyncratic variance, σj,idio, to higher market variance σj,m. As these two
components make up the total variance, we have

                                        2        2         2
                             σj,tot = σj,idio + σj,m. (23)

    The table from Calvet et al. (2007) includes a systematic risk measure as |βj |σB ,
          2
where σB is market variance for β = 1. As we also can observe βj , we find that
Calvet et al. (2007) assumes market risk σB = 14.78%, which we use as well. We
             2                 2
thus have σj,m = (0.1478βj )  which simplifies (23) as

                                    33
                                    2        2                    2
                            σj,tot = σj,idio + (0.1478βj ) . (24)

   In our counterfactual scenario, we reduce idiosyncratic variance by half and aim
                                                                                             ∗
to maintain the same total variance. We aim to find updated σidio∗ and β . The
                                                                                             j
halving of idiosyncratic variance yields

                                           2
                            ∗    2    σj,idio         ∗       σj,idio
                  (σj,idio) =      =⇒ σj,idio =  √                 (25)
                                   2                 2

                                        ∗                                                  2
   As the updated σj,idio∗ and β  must still give the same total variance σ    from
                                        j                                                   j,tot
(24), we can use this relationship to find βj .

                                                                     2         ∗     2
             2        ∗    2            ∗ 2         ∗ 2    σj,tot − (σj,idio)
           σj,tot = (σj,idio) + (0.1478βj )  =⇒ (βj ) =           2 ,
                                                              0.1478
               q
                                                2         ∗     2
                                    σj,tot − (σj,idio)
                                      ∗
                          βj =                                       (26)
                                          0.1478
                                             ∗           ∗
   For type j, we can set the new σidio and βj for the counterfactual scenario ac-
cording to (25) and (26).

                                    34