CHANGING PATTERNS OVER THE FOMC CYCLE

EDVIN HOLST

THEODOR VON DER ESCH

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
                          Stockholm School of Economics

Changing Patterns over the FOMC Cycle
Abstract:

   We document that in the period 2017 to 2022, the US stock market did not feature
   the same pattern of higher excess stock returns in even weeks following Federal
   Open Market Committee (FOMC) announcements as in the period 1994 to 2016.
   We show that timing of Board of Governors meetings and direction of Fed funds
   target rate movements affect US market returns in both periods, and connect
   changes in these factors to the distortion of the even-week return pattern. The
   behavior of uncertainty over the FOMC cycle, both for the 1994-2016 and the 2017-
   2022 period, shows that drops in uncertainty neither are unique to the time of FOMC
   announcements nor persist in the post-sample period. Followingly, we argue that the
   resolution of a FOMC uncertainty risk premium is not what drives return- patterns
  around FOMC announcements.

Keywords:

   FOMC, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Pre-FOMC announcement drift,
   VIX, uncertainty, macro-announcements

Authors:
   Edvin Holst (25207)
   Theodor von der Esch (25120)
Tutor:

   Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:

   We wish to express our sincerest gratitude to Mehran Ebrahimian for engagement
   and useful guidance throughout the research process.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Edvin Holst and Theodor von der Esch, 2023

                                  1
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                                I. Introduction

What drives patterns of excess stock returns around macroeconomic announcements? In
the recent decade, researchers have demonstrated a soaring interest in the relationship
between the behavior of the stock market and pre-scheduled macroeconomic
announcements, with a particular focus on monetary policy announcements by the
Federal Reserve (the Fed). Early papers within this strand of literature have documented
that policy announcements do have a direct impact on the stock market. Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005) show that a hypothetical 25 basis point surprise decrease in the Federal
funds rate leads to approximately 1% increase in broad stock indices. Savor and Wilson
(2013) take a closer look at announcement days and find that US stocks systematically
generate significantly positive excess returns on pre- scheduled announcement days of
information with macroeconomic implications, explained by an equity premium for
holding the risk embedded in these announcements. While these findings can be explained
with traditional asset-pricing models, novel results presented by Lucca and Moench (2015)
have been more difficult to derive to a risk-based explanation. They find that over the
period 1994 to 2011, the entire risk premium connected to Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) announcements is earned in the 24 hours leading up to the
announcements, while the post-announcement returns are not significantly different from
zero. The authors show that the result holds regardless of the direction of the coming news
announcement and are not accompanied with increased variance in stock returns,
suggesting that a traditional risk-based model is incapable of explaining the pre-FOMC
announcement drift.
       Amidst these findings, several studies have been conducted with the aim of
bringing clarity into the peculiar pattern of a pre-FOMC announcement drift. Cieslak,
Morse and Vissing‐Jorgensen (2019) expand the scope of investigation by studying not
only the behavior of the US stock market in the hours around the FOMC announcements,
but the entire period between two FOMC meetings, referred to as a “FOMC cycle”. They
find that, over the period 1994 to 2016, US stocks followed a pattern of biweekly excess
returns. In even weeks, 0, 2, 4 and 6, of the FOMC cycle, US excess stock returns were
significantly higher than odd weeks. The authors tie this pattern to biweekly decision-
making at the Fed, through Federal Reserve Board of Governors meetings. They also
argue that the systematically accommodating monetary policy during the period
contributed to the observed pattern. Most importantly, the channel of informal
communication is, Cieslak et al. (2019) argue, what led the market to react to the monetary
policy between official FOMC announcements. With supporting evidence from a close
examination of the timing of Board of Governors meetings, Fed Funds futures, stock
market return patterns, together with narrative evidence of informal information flows,
Cieslak et al. (2019) argue that the pre-announcement drift and the pattern of stock returns
over the FOMC cycle is driven by Fed leaks.
       To better understand the underlying drivers of the stock return pattern over the
FOMC cycle, this study expands on the literature by prolonging the sample to years after
the original period 1994 to 2016. This post-sample period features characteristics which
makes it an interesting subject for examination. Firstly, it is overall a period characterized
by proportionally more Fed funds rate increases than the original sample period. Cieslak
et al. (2019) argue that the biweekly pattern of excess returns is a consequence of
accommodating policy in response to poor market performance, that systematically has

                                  2
                          Stockholm School of Economics

been underestimated by investors, and as a result, driven down the equity premium once
knowledge about the accommodating policy reached the market. As opposed to the 1994-
2016 period which on average featured accommodating monetary policy, the post-sample
period is characterized by relatively restrictive monetary policy. Except for the two
precipitous Fed funds rate drops in March 2020 as a response to the Covid-19 pandemic,
the period exhibited only 3 occasions of interest rate decreases, but 14 occasions of
interest rate increases, resulting in a total 425 basis point increase in Fed funds rate over
the period. Although a “promise to act”, by lowering rates in case of poor market returns,
might still be present under such conditions, transcripts from FOMC meetings indicate a
less accommodative stance from the beginning of our new sample period, with rapidly
rising equity valuations seen rather as a concern than something desirable (see extracts of
FOMC meeting transcripts in Appendix 1). Moreover, multiple Fed funds rate increases
in 2022 despite poor market performance also signifies less regard taken to poor stock
market performance in the post-sample period.
       Second, the schedule of Board of Governors meetings, which Cieslak et al. (2019)
argue is the source for the biweekly decision-making at the Fed, has changed in the post-
sample period. The explanation put forward by Cieslak et al. (2019) as to why even weeks
of the FOMC cycle feature higher excess returns is that the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors convenes in one of the two days prior to a FOMC meeting, and then typically
holds a meeting every other week throughout the cycle. Starting from the first FOMC
cycle in the post-sample period, the last Board of Governors meetings prior to the FOMC
meetings were continuously held on FOMC day -7 rather than in one of the two days
before. Moreover, the post-sample period also features Board of Governors meetings less
regularly throughout the FOMC cycle.
        Third, in the post-sample period the biweekly pattern of excess returns is known
to investors. Cieslak et al. (2019) argue that the impact of the accommodating policy
systematically has been unexpected by investors, leading to a decrease in risk premium
once the news has been unveiled. If the biweekly excess returns are driven by mis-
calibrated expectations, the acknowledgment of such error would lead informed investors
to adjust their expectations accordingly, which would eventually eliminate the pattern of
biweekly excess returns (McLean and Pontiff, 2016).
       In the light of this background, studying the pattern of returns over the FOMC
cycle in a post-sample period serves several purposes. Firstly, expanding the aggregate
sample period offers an opportunity to test whether the factors Cieslak et al. (2019) use
to connect the pattern to the Fed in fact are the true drivers of it. If the timing of Board of
Governors meetings as well as the nature of the policy decided at these have been the
drivers for the biweekly pattern, changes to these would consequently lead to a changed
pattern. Secondly, such investigation offers additional knowledge to the debate of whether
return patterns around the FOMC announcement and throughout the cycle are driven by
risk-based explanations or by informal news of systematically accommodating policy.
Based on this, we aim to answer the following question: Does the pattern of higher US
excess stock returns in even weeks of the FOMC cycle persist after 2016?
       To examine whether the biweekly pattern of excess returns over the FOMC cycle
has persisted in the post-sample period, we collect daily data of the excess returns of the
US stock market. We gather the dates of all pre-scheduled FOMC meetings to relate the
performance of the stock market to the FOMC cycles. Data of the timing of the discount
rate meetings held by the Federal Reserve we obtain to investigate the importance of the
timing of the decision-making by the Fed. In addition, we gather Fed funds target rates to

                                  3
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

evaluate if the direction in which the Fed makes monetary policy decisions influences the
impact of the Fed decision-making on the stock market. To guarantee comparability, as
well as legitimacy of our contribution, we follow as closely as possible the methodology
and data sources of Cieslak et al. (2019).
        Our results reveal that the pattern of significantly higher excess returns in even
weeks of the FOMC cycle is no longer present in the 2017 to 2022 period. In this post-
sample period, daily US stock returns are on average lower in even weeks than odd weeks
in the FOMC cycle. In week 0 of the cycle, excess returns were on average 17 basis points
lower than in odd weeks, significant on the 10% level, and excess returns in weeks 2, 4
and 6 were on average 5 basis points lower than days in odd weeks, while not significant
at the 10% level.
       Acknowledging that the overall policy conducted by the Fed is more restrictive in
the 2017 to 2022 period relative to the original sample period, and changes in timing of
Board of Governors meetings, we examine if the occurrence of a Board of Governors
meetings affects the US stock market. We do this by testing the performance of US stocks
in the week following Board of Governors meetings while also controlling for the yearly
change in Fed Funds target rate. Our results indicate that the effect of the two factors on
daily excess return is approximately the same over the two periods, suggesting that
changes in these factors led to the distortion of return pattern between FOMC
announcements.
        Lastly, bearing in mind that there exist other explanations beyond the leakage-
story suggested by Cieslak et al. (2019) to explain return patterns around FOMC
announcement, we follow up with a discussion on their different implications. Since many
recent papers have explained the pre-FOMC announcement drift through the resolution
of an uncertainty risk factor, we connect to these by investigating the behavior of
uncertainty, proxied by the VIX index, over the entire FOMC cycle. By regarding the
behavior of VIX over the FOMC cycle, in relation to the evolution of excess return, we
further add on the research by Cieslak et al. (2019) as they do not formally investigate
behavior of uncertainty between FOMC announcements. Our results show that for the
period 1994-2016, resolution of VIX accompanied by high excess returns does not only
occur just prior to FOMC announcements, but biweekly throughout the entire cycle,
suggesting that such pattern is not uniquely linked to the occurrence of an FOMC
announcement. Furthermore, results for the 2017-2022 period indicate that also the
behavior of VIX over the FOMC cycle has changes its pattern in the post-sample period.
In 2017 to 2022 VIX no longer drops in the days prior to FOMC announcements, further
suggesting that both resolution of uncertainty and patterns of excess returns around
FOMC announcements are not driven purely by a risk-premium inherently linked to the
announcement. Rather, we argue that the resolution in uncertainty likely is caused by new
information reaching the market through informal communication channels upon Board
of Governors meetings.

                                  4
                          Stockholm School of Economics

                           II. Theoretical Framework

This paper most closely relates to the strand of literature that investigates the relation
between the stock market and macroeconomic announcements, and more specifically the
behavior of the US stock market around monetary policy decisions by the Fed. Building
on earlier findings showing that announcement days are associated with significantly
higher excess returns unconditionally of the nature of the announcement (Savor and
Wilson, 2013), Lucca and Moench (2015) show that this unconditional return in fact
occurs prior to the announcements. This finding of the pre-FOMC announcement drift by
Lucca and Moench (2015) suggests that the excess returns are not explained by the risk
in holding stocks at the time of the announcement. Cieslak et al. (2019), show that over
the period 1994 to 2016, US stocks exhibit biweekly peaks in excess returns around
FOMC announcements. Based on their finding, Cieslak et al. (2019) argue that the pre-
FOMC announcement drift is part of a larger pattern driven by news about
accommodating policy from the Fed, slipping out from regularly scheduled Board of
Governors meetings. In line with Cieslak et al. (2019), our scope of investigation spans
to include all days of the FOMC cycle, not only the days around the announcement.
Different from Cieslak et al. (2019), our study focuses on a post-sample period including
the years 2017-2022. Moreover, motivated by the fact that Cieslak et al. (2019) tie the
pattern to accommodating policy and the biweekly occurrence of Board of Governors
meetings, we pay special attention to the behavior of the stock market following such
meetings while considering the nature of the current monetary policy conducted. By doing
so, we shift focus from timing of FOMC announcements to Board of Governors meetings
and differentiate years depending on direction of Fed funds rate changes.
       Sparked by Lucca and Moench’s (2015) finding, several theoretical models
incorporating different risk factors have been designed to explain the pre-FOMC
announcement drift. Many of these highlight documented drops in uncertainty prior to the
announcement, proxied by decreases in the VIX index. Hu, Xing, Pan, Wang, and Zhu
(2022) develop a model where the drop in uncertainty prior to FOMC announcements
represent the resolution of a risk factor connected to the market impact of the news, while
Ai, Bansal, and Han al (2021) explain it by increased information acquisition by
uninformed investors close to the announcement. To connect these models as plausible
explanations to the return pattern around announcements, we also investigate changes in
uncertainty between the FOMC announcement, both for the original sample period, as
well as our sample period. Our paper differs from these by studying patterns of
uncertainty over the entire FOMC cycle, specifically around Board of Governors
meetings. Thus, we expand on the research by Cieslak et al. (2019) in an additional
dimension by including change in uncertainty, through VIX, with background of the risk-
oriented literature.
       In summary, our contributions are threefold. Firstly, we use a later sample period
as a subject for investigation. By doing so we grasp not only a longer period, but
observations from a different economic climate compared to the original sample.
Secondly, we more concretely consider the timing of Board of Governors meetings as the
timeframe. This helps us to better identify the effect that such meetings pose on the stock
market, indifferent to their scheduling. Thirdly, we regard a risk-based explanation to the
pattern by comparing the movements of excess returns over the FOMC cycle with the
evolution of VIX in the same timeframe.

                                  5
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                 III. Data Description and Methodology

To assure maximum comparability with the original paper, we use as close as possible
the same data sources as Cieslak et al. (2019). Our main datasets consist of US stocks
excess returns, dates of Federal Market Open Committee (FOMC) meetings and Federal
Reserve Board of Governors meetings, daily VIX and the Fed funds target rate. All
datasets and estimations throughout exclude weekends. Below, we describe each dataset
in detail.

US Stock Market Data
To test the behavior of US stocks in relation to the FOMC cycle, we collect data of daily
US market returns and risk-free rates from Kenneth French’s website, for the period 1994-
2022. As gathered, the US market return is a value-weighted average of all CRSP firms
incorporated in the US and listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, or AMEX. The US 1-month
treasury bill rate is used as a proxy for the risk-free rate. To arrive at the daily risk-free
rate, the 1-month bill rate is divided by the number of days in that specific month. The
daily market excess return is calculated as the difference between the daily US market
return and the daily risk-free rate, according to the following equation:

                                  𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑡 = 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡

Where:

𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑡 = The %-log cum dividend daily excess return of the US stock market
𝑅𝑚,𝑡 = US stock market return at day t

𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = US risk free rate at day t

The US market excess return in our sample includes all days except weekends.
Dates when the US stock market was closed due to holidays are included, but we set, as
Cieslak et al. (2019), market returns and risk-free rates to zero on these days.

FOMC Meetings
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is the body of the Federal Reserve that
controls the Open Market Operations, which, together with the discount rate and reserve
requirements, is one of the three tools used by the Federal Reserve to control the US
monetary policy. Open Market Operations, defined by the Federal Reserve as “the
purchase and sale of securities in the open market by a central bank”, are used to increase
or decrease the Fed funds rate paid by US banks on the overnight borrowing of reserves
kept at the Fed (Federal Reserve, May 3, 2023). The Fed funds rate paid by banks impacts
the interest rate at which the banks can offer loans to corporations and individuals.
Therefore, the Fed funds rate is a key instrument in steering the national economic
environment toward the goals of high employment rates, stable prices, and moderate long-
term interest rates. The FOMC consists of 12 voting members that together decide on the
Fed funds rate. These members are the 7 members of the Fed Board of Governors, the
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as well as 4 rotating members from
                                   6
                          Stockholm School of Economics

the 11 remaining Federal Reserve Banks who serve on a 1-year basis. Normally, the
FOMC convenes on 8 pre-scheduled meetings per year, where they decide on the Fed
funds target rate. Each FOMC meeting is followed by an announcement the same day,
where the decision to change or to keep the current Fed funds rate is declared to the public.
Thus, FOMC meeting days and FOMC announcements days are synonymous in our
study.
       To map the timing of each FOMC cycle, we gather all the dates for the FOMC
meetings from December 21, 1993 (which marks the beginning of the first FOMC cycle
in 1994) to December 30, 2022. Data of FOMC meetings is collected from the Federal
Reserve Archival System for Economic Research (FRASER). For the period until 2016,
our dates are consistent with those used by Cieslak et al. (2019). In the new sample period
2017 to 2022, we exclude dates for notation votes and meetings that are unscheduled or
canceled, as done by Cieslak et al. (2019). These exclusions amount to 8 dates. In case of
meetings that last for two days we count, as Cieslak et al. (2019), the second meeting day
as FOMC day in our data. After these adjustments, we count 46 FOMC meetings in the
new sample period 2017 to 2022. All included FOMC meeting dates are listed in
Appendix 2. In Figure 1, we display the timing of each FOMC meeting in the year,
separated by the two sample periods, 1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022. In both samples,
FOMC meetings are conducted on 8 occasions and with similar intervals, i.e., scheduling
is consistent over the entire sample period.
       In the search for textual indications of if the monetary policy conducted by the
Federal Reserve has been characterized by increased tightening or accommodation, we
have also review transcripts from FOMC meetings held over the studied period. FOMC
meeting transcripts are made publicly available 5 years after the meeting has taken place,
meaning that the latest transcripts available at the time of writing this paper is from 2017.
Relevant extracts from transcripts are collected from the Federal Reserve’s official
website and are shown in Appendix 1 (Federal Reserve, Jan 13, 2023).

           Panel A: 1994 to 2016 Panel B: 2017 to 2022

Figure 1. Timing of FOMC meetings in the year 1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022. This
figure shows a histogram of days in the year when FOMC meetings occurred. Panel A shows
meetings in years 1994 to 2016 and Panel B shows meetings for years 2017 to 2022. In case of
two-day meetings, the second day is recorded.

                                  7
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

Fed Funds Target Rate
Data of the Fed funds target rate over the period 1994 to 2022, was collected from the
Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) website. The data is daily, excluding weekends,
and in case of interval the rate is counted as the average of the upper- and lower limit of
the Fed funds target rate range. In Figure 2 we show the yearly aggregate changes in Fed
funds rate over the years 1994 to 2022.

Figure 2. Yearly changes in the Fed funds target rate, years 1994 to 2022. This figure
displays the aggregate yearly changes in Fed funds target rate over years 1994 to 2022.

Board of Governors Meetings
The Federal Reserve Board of Governors is a group of seven individuals, nominated by
the US President, that guide the operations of the Federal Reserve System, and all of whom
are members of the FOMC. One of the Board’s most important responsibilities is the
supervision of the nation’s 12 regional Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks gather data
about the current economic situation from businesses in different industries in their
respective region, which is considered when the FOMC and the Board of Governors make
monetary policy decisions. The regional Reserve Banks also lend money to commercial
banks and depository institutions, and the interest rate at which this is done, typically
referred to as the “primary credit rate”. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913, section 14
stipulates that each regional Reserve Bank must set their primary credit rate at least every
14th day (Federal Reserve, March 13, 2017). Since the primary credit rate is common for
all 12 Reserve Banks and is subject to approval for the Board of Governors, each regional
Reserve Bank submits recommendations on the primary credit rate, which is then
discussed at Board of Governors discount rate meetings. As noted by Cieslak et al. (2019),
since the regional Reserve Banks all submit discount rate recommendations at different
times, but are obligated to submit recommendations biweekly, it takes two weeks for the
Fed to gather a full set of updated recommendations. For this reason, Cieslak et al. (2019)
argue that Board of Governors meetings, over the period 1994 to 2016, tend to occur
biweekly. Since the closest Board of Governors meeting prior to FOMC announcements
over the period 1994-2016 was held just before

                                  8
                          Stockholm School of Economics

the FOMC meeting, these meetings naturally occur around the start of each even week of
the cycle. In their paper, Cieslak et al. (2019) argue that the importance of the Board of
Governors meetings is connected to the update and discussion on the recent economic
state that takes place at these meetings, and that they are highly important for monetary
policy decision-making. As opposed to FOMC meetings, the scheduling of closed Board
of Governors meetings is not made public long in advance but is declared a few days
ahead on the Federal Reserve’s website. Moreover, transcripts from the meetings are not
published, only a short description of the matters considered as well as minutes made
public 1-2 months after the occurrence of a meeting.
       As access to the full record of Board of Governors meeting dates is restricted, we
use the data published by Cieslak et al. (2019) for the period 1994 to 2016. Over the new
sample period 2017 to 2022 we obtain data on the dates of Board of Governors meetings
from the Federal Reserve website. In accordance with Cieslak et al. (2019), we only
include the described discount rate meetings, which refer to meetings where the Board of
Governors convenes to discuss the biweekly recommendations of primary credit rates
submitted by the 12 regional Reserve Banks. In total, we count 72 such meetings over the
2017-2022 sample period. The timing of these meetings around FOMC announcements
for both the original sample period 1994 to 2016 and the new sample 2017 to 2022 are
depicted separately in Figure 3 which clearly shows the change in scheduling post 2016.

           Panel A: 1994 to 2016 Panel B: 2017 to 2022

Figure 3. Timing of Board of Governors meetings around FOMC announcements years
1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022. This figure shows histograms of timing of Board of Governors
meetings around FOMC announcements where day 0 is FOMC announcement day. For this
exercise, the FOMC cycle begins on day -8, while in the original definition, it starts on day -6.
Panel A shows meetings in years 1994 to 2016 and Panel B shows meetings in years 2017 to 2022.

VIX Data
To examine fluctuations and accumulations of uncertainty over the FOMC cycle, we use
the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) as a proxy for uncertainty. Daily VIX index data for years
1994 to 2022 is gathered from the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) website.
The VIX index, also referred to as the “market fear gauge”, measures the expected
volatility of the US stock market. Calculated by taking the weighted average prices of call
and put options on the S&P500 index with different maturities and strike prices, the VIX
index level indicates the expected percentage change for the S&P500 index over the
coming year, calculated at a 68% significance level.

                                  9
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                        IV. Analysis and Results

To investigate whether the pattern of biweekly excess returns in the FOMC cycle remains
in the 2017 to 2022 period, we begin by mapping the behavior of US stocks over the
FOMC cycle. Our results visualized in Figure 4 show that in the period 2017 to 2022, the
US stock market has not followed the same even-week pattern of excess returns over the
FOMC cycle as in the 1994 to 2016 period. We arrive at these results when replicating the
exercise by Cieslak et al. (2019) by plotting the average cumulative 5-day US excess
returns, counting t to t+4, over each day in the FOMC cycle for the two periods 1994 to
2016 and 2017 to 2022 respectively. Because of the smaller size of the later sample, we
limit the days of the FOMC cycle of the 2017 to 2022 period to 28 (instead of day 33 as
for the period 1994 to 2016) since the number of observations per cycle day drops sharply
after week 5. In line with the definition set by Cieslak et al. (2019), day -1 marks the first
day of week 0, and since the data excludes weekends, a new week commences every five
days. Over the 1994 to 2016 period, the average cumulative 5-day excess returns were
0.57%, 0.33%, 0.46% and 0.60% for week 0, 2, 4 and 6 respectively, with all of these
being at or in immediate proximity to the peaks in the pattern of cumulative excess returns
over the FOMC cycle. Over the 2017 to 2022 period, the average cumulative 5-day excess
returns for the even weeks were -0.47%, 0.42% and -0.02% for week 0, 2 and 4
respectively, with none of these constituting peaks in the pattern of excess returns over
the FOMC cycle.
        When comparing the time periods, we see a changed pattern in evolution of US
excess stock return over the FOMC cycle. While our results in Figure 4 reveal that the
pattern found by Cieslak et al. (2019) is drastically different from what we see in the
period 2017 to 2022, visual inspection indicates continued cyclicality in the behavior of
US stock returns around FOMC announcements. However, this cyclicality differs from
the original sample period both with regards to the timing and frequency in peaks of 5-
day excess returns. The original sample 1994 to 2016 showed peaks in 5-day cumulative
excess return approximately every 10 days in the cycle, lining up at (or at immediate
proximity to) the start of even weeks in the cycle, occurring at days -1, 11, 20 and 29.
However, the sample 2017 to 2022 showed peaks on days -5, 5, 12 and 21. Seemingly,
there has been a distortion of the pattern of higher excess returns on the US market in
even weeks of the FOMC cycle first documented by Cieslak et al. (2019), and the pattern
has not persisted in the later period 2017 to 2022.

                                   10
                          Stockholm School of Economics

Figure 4. Stock returns over the FOMC cycle in years 1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022.
This figure shows the plot of average 5-day cumulative excess returns, counting t to t+4, in days
of the FOMC cycle. Day 0 is FOMC announcement day. Point labels indicate the day of the
FOMC cycle on the x-axis. Weeks of the FOMC cycle are defined as; Week -1, day -6 to -2; Week
0, day -1 to 3; Week 1; day 4 to 8; Week 2, day 9 to 13; Week 3, day 14 to 18, Week 4, day
19 to 23; Week 5, day 24 to 28; Week 6, day 29 to 33.

For statistical confirmation that the pattern of biweekly peaks in excess returns has not
remained the same in the post-sample period, we proceed to test the statistical significance
of the daily excess returns in even weeks of the FOMC cycle during 2017- 2022. For
comparison, we also replicate the results by Cieslak et al. (2019) for the original sample
period. The results, which are presented in Table I further highlights that a change in the
pattern of excess returns over the FOMC cycle has taken place in the post-sample period.
In 2017 to 2022, the average excess returns in week 0 of the cycle was 17 basis points
lower than odd-week days, significant at the 10% level, and average excess returns on days
in weeks 2, 4 and 6 were 5 basis points lower than odd-week days, while insignificant on
the 10% level. In the original sample period, average excess returns were 14 basis point
higher in week 0 compared to odd-week days, and 11 basis point higher in week 2, 4 and
6 compared to odd-week days, both significant at the 1% level. Thus, these results further
underscores that the previously documented pattern of significantly higher excess returns
in even weeks of the FOMC cycle does not hold over the period 2017 to 2022.

                                   11
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                                      Table I
   Regression of Daily US Excess Stock Returns over FOMC Cycle Even Week
                    Dummies, 1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022
This table represents regressions of daily US excess stock returns over dummies for even weeks
in the FOMC cycle. Even weeks in the FOMC cycle are defined as; Week 0: days -1 to 3, Week
2: days 9 to 13, Week 4: days 19 to 23, Week 6: days 29 to 33. Column 1 shows the regression
for the original sample period 1994 to 2016 and column 2 shows the same regression for the new
sample 2017 to 2022. Results are in percent, robust to heteroskedasticity. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

The apparent shift in pattern of excess returns over the FOMC cycle between the two
sample periods naturally leads to the question of what has caused this change.
        As a starting point we return to the factors that Cieslak et al. (2019) underline as
drivers of the biweekly pattern of excess stock returns over the 1994 to 2016 period.
These highlighted drivers are biweekly decision-making at Board of Governors meetings,
unexpectedly accommodative policy, and leaks about such. Followingly, we analyze if
these drivers have changed between the earlier and later sample period. Logically, if these
factors were essential for the biweekly pattern to occur over the original sample period,
changes to any one of these would consequently cause a change to the pattern of returns
over the FOMC cycle. Since there are inherent difficulties in concluding whether informal
channels of communication have ceased, we focus our analysis by looking at the other
two factors, that is, the timing of Board of Governors meetings and whether policy
conducted by the Fed has been accommodative.
       A closer examination of Board of Governors meetings scheduling and Fed funds
rate movements in the post-sample period reveals that both have changed since the
original sample period, suggesting that both may explain the changed pattern of excess
returns over the FOMC cycle. Therefore, we proceed to regard both factors one by one,
starting with Board of Governors meetings.
        In their paper, Cieslak et al. (2019) show that the even-week effect of higher
excess returns is driven by even weeks following Board of Governors meetings. In the
sample 2017 to 2022 the timing of Board of Governors meetings is different to that of the
earlier sample in two aspects. Firstly, the frequency of meetings has decreased
substantially. From an average of 29 meetings yearly (659 in total), from 1994 to 2016,
the frequency decreased to 12 meetings yearly (72 in total) from 2017 to 2022 (yearly
frequency of Board of Governors meetings shown in Appendix 3). Secondly, the timing

                                   12
                          Stockholm School of Economics

of Board of Governors meetings is not consistent over the two periods. As shown in
Figure 3, the 1994-2016 period shows a more distinct pattern of weekly Board of
Governors meetings and highest concentration on days -2 and -1, days preceding FOMC
announcements. Over the years 2017 and 2022, the Board of Governors meetings were
conducted with clear overweight on day -7 of the cycle, more than one week before
FOMC announcements, and no meetings on days -2 and -1 of the cycle.
      Moreover, the post-sample period is characterized by generally more restrictive
monetary policy than the original sample period. Cieslak et al. (2019) argue that informal
news from the Board of Governors meetings positively affected the stock market in 1994
to 2016 because decision-making was systematically accommodating, and that the Fed
responded to poor market performance by ensuring decreases in Fed funds rates if needed.
We find several clear indicators that the policy enacted has been less characterized by
accommodation in the post-sample period, both in general and regarding the performance
of equity markets. First, the cumulative change in Fed funds target rates over the period
2017-2022 equals a 425 basis point increase, with fourteen target rate hikes and only five
target rate decreases. Second, published transcripts from FOMC meetings indicate the
abandonment of accommodative monetary policy, starting in 2017. For instance, the
following quote was expressed by FOMC member Robert S. Kaplan on the first FOMC
meeting of 2017:

   I believe we’re making good progress on reaching our dual-mandate objectives. I
   believe, though, that the risk of overshooting our full employment objective is real,
   and I do believe we’ll continue to make gradual progress on reaching our 2 percent
   inflation objective in the medium term. In light of this, I believe we should be taking
   steps to remove accommodation in the months ahead. And while I believe it’s
   appropriate to stand pat for today, I also believe that if the economy progresses as I
   expect, it will be appropriate to remove some amount of accommodation at our
   March meeting.

In addition to general tightening, quotes from FOMC members indicate that high equity
valuations in the beginning of the post-sample period are seen as a warning sign rather
than something desirable. The following quote was expressed by Chair Yellen on the
FOMC meeting held on December 12-13, 2017:

   My September SEP submission had already factored in (…) But I hadn’t factored
   in the almost 7 percent rise in stock prices that’s occurred since September. This
   latest increase, if it were to persist, would modestly boost consumer spending
   growth over the next few years, as households tend to adjust their spending
   gradually in response to an increase in net worth. (…) In light of the additional
   stimulus arising from the proposed changes to fiscal policy and the recent increase
   in equity prices, I now anticipate that a modestly faster pace of policy tightening
   will be appropriate over the next several years in order to prevent the economy from
   overheating.

This kind of reasoning stands in stark contrast to how Cieslak et al. (2019) argued that the
Fed had used the stock market to inform about suitable monetary policy in the original
sample period, and thus further indicates less policy accommodation in the post- sample
period. Lastly, multiple interest rate hikes in 2022 despite poor stock market

                                   13
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

performance further suggest that the Fed has not enacted accommodating policy in
response to poor stock market performance in the post-sample period.
       Hence, two fundamental drivers of the pattern of biweekly returns as originally
discovered by Cieslak et al. (2019) seems to have changed; Scheduling of Board of
Governors meetings and the policy conducted by the Federal Reserve. To bring clarity to
what has altered the pattern of excess returns from biweekly to what we see for the new
period 2017-2022, we begin to examine the change in Board of Governors meetings. If
the changed schedule of Board of Governors meetings is the true cause for the changed
pattern of stock returns over the FOMC cycle, we would expect to see the average similar
effect in the days following Board of Governors meetings in both periods, regardless of
their timing. To see if this is the case, we run a regression of daily excess stock return in
t over dummy for occurrence of a Board of Governors meeting in the proceeding 5 days
t-5 to t-1. On average, the effect is absent in the new period 2017 to 2022, while significant
and positive at the 1% level in 1994 to 2016 (see column 1 and 3 of Table II), indicating
that a change of timing of the Board of Governors meetings alone has not caused a
changed pattern of the stock returns in the cycle.
       We proceed to run the same regression for each year over the entire period 1994
to 2022 individually to see if there is a breaking point in time where excess returns in the
days following the Board of Governors have stopped being significantly different from
zero. Connecting to our indication that generally more restrictive monetary policy has
characterized the post-sample period, we also acknowledge that the stock market reaction
to news leaking from Board of Governors meetings likely depends on if these indicate
interest rate increases or decreases. Reasonably, if leaks about Board of Governors
meetings still have occurred, but the news indicate monetary policy tightening, we would
expect this to have another effect than news about accommodating policy. To account for
monetary policy, we separate years depending on the direction of Fed funds rate change
by highlighting years of increase in blue and years of decrease in orange. In figure 5, we
see that in years of Fed funds rate decrease (orange dots), the average effect of Board of
Governors meetings occurring in the preceding week on daily excess returns in day t tends
to be positive and higher than in years of Fed funds rate increases (blue dots). This holds
consistently with one obvious exception of 2007 in the original sample (left of the dashed
line), and consistently in the post 2016 sample.

                                   14
                          Stockholm School of Economics

Figure 5. Effect of Board of Governors meetings on daily US excess stock return,
year by year, 1994 to 2022. This figure shows a margin plot of the average effect of occurrence
of Board of Governors (BoG) meetings in the five preceding days, t-5 to t-1(excluding weekends)
on daily excess return on day t. Margins indicate the 90% confidence interval. Years highlighted
in blue are characterized by Fed funds rate increase and years highlighted with orange are
characterized by Fed funds rate decreases. The dashed vertical line marks the separation of the
two sample periods, 1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022.

As the conducted policy seemingly impacts how Board of Governors meetings affect
excess stock returns, we run regressions where we include both these factors. Table II
shows that when accounting for timing of Board of Governors meetings and direction of
Fed funds rate changes in the year, the effect on stock returns is the same in both sample
periods. In column 2 and 4 of Table II, we run regressions of daily excess return in t over
three variables: 1) occurrence of Board of Governors meeting in days t-5 to t-1, 2) a
dummy variable for yearly increase in Fed funds rate and 3) the first two variables in
interaction. The results show us the significant average negative effect of the interaction
term on daily excess returns in both periods, of the same direction and comparable
magnitude. We also see a similar positive effect of the Board of Governors meeting
dummy on excess returns in both periods. This supports the thesis that the change in
scheduling of Board of Governors meetings and policy conducted through Fed funds rate
changes together has contributed to the distortion of the biweekly pattern of US excess
stock returns that Cieslak et al. (2019) documented in years 1994 to 2016. However, the
key underlying drivers, Board of Governors meetings and Fed funds rate changes, are
present in both periods, yet in different composition.

                                   15
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                                     Table II
 Regressions of Daily US Excess Stock Returns over Board of Governors Meetings
                Dummies and Fed Funds Target Rate Changes
This table presents daily US excess stock returns over a dummy variable for Board of Governors
(BoG) meetings occurring on days t-5 to t-1, yearly increases in Fed funds target rate and these
two variables in interaction. In column 1 and 3, we present regressions of Daily US excess stock
returns in t over the dummy for the occurrence of a Board of Governors meeting on day t-5 to t-
1. We present in column 2 and 4, regressions of Daily US excess stock returns in day t over three
independent variables: 1) occurrence of Board of Governors meetings in day t-5 to t-1 in a year,
2) a dummy variable for yearly aggregate Fed funds rate increase, 3) the first two in interaction.
Results are in percent, robust to heteroskedasticity. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

In summary, our results display multiple findings. Firstly, the pattern of higher excess
returns on the US stock in even weeks following FOMC announcements is not present in
the same way during the period 2017 to 2022 as in 1994 to 2016. During the post-sample
period 2017-2022, average 5-day excess returns over the FOMC cycle show a cyclical
pattern, however with different timing and intervals of peaks compared to the 1994 to
2016 sample. Secondly, when controlling for timing of Board of Governors meetings and
yearly Fed Funds target rate changes, we see consistent effects of these variables on daily
excess returns over both periods. Occurrence of Board of Governors meetings has a
marginal positive effect on daily excess returns in the following week. However, this
positive average effect on daily excess return is dampened in the case of a year
characterized by Fed funds rate increase. These findings suggest that the change in
scheduling of Board of Governors meetings and the difference in Fed funds rate
movements between the two samples contributed to the inconsistency in return pattern.
However, the key underlying drivers are present in both periods and with consistent
effect, which in turn indicate that the informal communication may still explain the
movements in excess return over the FOMC cycle.

                                   16
                          Stockholm School of Economics

                             V. Discussion

Despite evidence by Cieslak et al. (2019) indicating that biweekly decision-making,
systematically accommodating policy following weak stock market performance and leaks
about such policy has driven the biweekly pattern of returns, there is expression of doubt
in related literature whether leakage is the true explanation to return patterns around
FOMC announcements. Focusing specifically on the pre-announcement drift, several
researchers have attempted to derive risk-based explanations to the phenomenon in recent
years. While these papers propose different explanations to why the market has
systematically generated positive returns prior to FOMC announcements, a common
denominator is that market uncertainty plays a vital role in explaining the occurrence and
magnitude of the drift. Hu et al. (2022) show that over the period 1994-2018, uncertainty
tended to accumulate over a 6-day period before FOMC announcements to later resolve
just prior to the announcement, and that both the magnitude of the accumulation and its
following resolution predicts the occurrence and size of the pre-FOMC announcement
drift. The authors argue that in addition to the risk carried in the news announcement
itself, which is demonstrated by the risk-return ratio, the VIX index represents an
additional risk factor concerning the market impact of the news risk, which as opposed to
the news risk is resolved before the announcement and consequently brings positive pre-
announcement excess returns. While the resolution of market impact uncertainty is
claimed to be the reason for a drop in VIX index in this model, Hu et al. (2022) remain
silent on the reasons why this would occur prior to the actual announcement. Along the
same lines, Ai, Bansal, and Han (2021) document that a drop in uncertainty prior to the
FOMC announcement helps to explain the drift. However, they propose that the drop is a
consequence of uninformed investors acquiring information that already exists in the
market, close to the FOMC announcement, which reduces overall uncertainty and brings
positive excess returns. Also, Laarits (2022) shares the view that the pre-FOMC
announcement drift can be explained by the resolution of an uncertainty risk premium.
However, rather than the resolution of market impact uncertainty or information
acquisition by uninformed investors, Laarits (2022) argues that the reduced uncertainty
comes from the resolution of announcement interpretations, where investors’
understanding of FOMC announcements depends on whether recent news has been good
or bad.
       While these recent papers suggest conflicting explanations to why uncertainty
historically has dropped prior to FOMC announcements, they express a consensus that
the resolution of an uncertainty risk premium can explain the occurrence of the pre-
FOMC announcement drift. As Hu et al. (2022) present, the empirics for their 1994-2018
sample period also shows that uncertainty in fact has accumulated to then drop prior to
FOMC announcements, and that the drop in uncertainty predicts the pre-FOMC
announcement drift. However, although these proposed models theoretically could
explain stock behavior around FOMC announcements, they do not offer any explanation
as to why stocks have experienced a pattern of biweekly excess returns throughout the
FOMC cycle, as shown by Cieslak et al. (2019). Although not expressed explicitly, none
of the models by Hu et al. (2022), Ai, Bansal, and Han (2021) or Laarits (2022) suggest
any systematic sudden drops in uncertainty over the FOMC cycle (for instance following
Board of Governors meetings), as they argue that the drops in uncertainty are uniquely
linked to the FOMC announcements. To assess whether drops in uncertainty are unique

                                   17
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

to the days before the announcement, we investigate the behavior of uncertainty, proxied
by the VIX index, over the entire FOMC cycle for the 1994-2016 period. Moreover, since
the aforementioned authors, Hu et al. (2022), Ai, Bansal and Han (2021) and Laarits,
2022), argue that FOMC announcements inherently are associated with resolution of an
uncertainty risk premium, their models suggest that FOMC announcement should bring
positive pre-announcement returns regardless if monetary policy enters a eriod
characterized by more tightening, or if there has been a change of timing of the Board of
Governors meetings before the FOMC meeting and throughout the FOMC cycle. To
check whether that reasoning holds, we also map the behavior of VIX over the 2017-2022
period, which as earlier concluded is a period characterized by more restrictive monetary
policy and changed scheduling of Board of Governors meetings. We do this by plotting
excess return and change in VIX, both as 5-day aggregation counting day t to t+4 and
separating the two periods 1994 to 2016 and 2017 to 2022.

                               Panel A: 1994 to 2016

      Avg. 5-day stock excess return, t to t+4 (pct) Avg. 5-day change in VIX, t to t+4 (absolute)
                              Panel B: 2017 to 2022

      Avg. 5-day stock excess return, t to t+4 (pct) Avg. 5-day change in VIX, t to t+4 (absolute)
Figure 6. Excess returns and VIX changes over the FOMC cycle, 1994 to 2016 and
2017 to 2022. This figure shows the forward 5-day US stock excess return and forward 5-day
VIX changes over the FOMC cycle. Both metrics are aggregates of days t to t+4. VIX change is
counted in absolute terms and calculated as the difference in VIX between day t-1 and t. Panel B,
2017 to 2022, is delimited to days in the FOMC cycle up to and including day 28 because of
smaller sample size with few observations after day 28. Point labels indicate the day of the FOMC
cycle on the x-axis.

                                   18
                          Stockholm School of Economics

Our results pictured in Figure 6 indicate two things; evolution of VIX change (in absolute
terms) also follows a cyclical pattern over the entire FOMC cycle and likewise stock
returns, the VIX pattern shifted between the two sample periods. As we see in Panel A,
during the period 1994 to 2016, 5-day change in VIX was on average 0.38%-units in week
-1, 0.51%-units in week 1, 0.66%-units in week 3 and 0.23%-units in week 5. In even
weeks of the cycle, the uncertainty tended to resolve, with a 5-day change in VIX of -
0.65%-units in week 0, -0.23%-units in week 2, -0.11%-units in week 4 and -0.45%- units
in week 6. The figure indicates a clear negative relationship between the uncertainty index
and the excess returns over the cycle, emphasized by the fact that all the local peaks in 5-
day excess returns over the cycle (day -1, 9, 20 and 29) also occur at or close to the lowest
local points of the VIX accumulations, indicating that drops in uncertainty have been
accompanied by high excess returns. While the negative relationship between change in
uncertainty and excess returns have been previously documented (Dennis, Mayhew and
Stivers, 2006), these results show that VIX systematically has accumulated in odd weeks
of the FOMC cycle and resolved in even weeks of the cycle over the 1994- 2016 period.
In Panel B, we repeat the same task for the 2017 to 2022 period. Our results show that the
negative relationship between market uncertainty proxied by the VIX index, and the stock
returns persists in the post-sample period despite the shift in the pattern of excess returns
over the FOMC cycle. Like the 1994-2016 period, peaks in average 5-day cumulative
excess returns in the 2017 to 2022 period are accompanied by resolutions in uncertainty,
following days of VIX accumulation. As a part of this shift, we also note that the pattern
of high VIX accumulation in the period prior to FOMC announcements does not seem to
have persisted in the 2017-2022 period.
       After learning that VIX moves countercyclical to excess return over both sample
periods despite the change in behavior of excess return, we relate these insights to existing
theory. Firstly, Panel A is in line with the VIX-returns relationship around FOMC
announcement first shown by Hu et al. (2022), namely that VIX over the period 1994 to
2016 features high average accumulation in the period before the announcements, to then
drop just prior to the announcement, accompanied by increases in excess returns.
However, the results also show that uncertainty accumulation followed by a subsequent
drop, accompanied by high excess returns is not unique to the days around the
announcement. Rather, for the 1994-2016 period, such a pattern repeats itself biweekly
over the FOMC cycle. Moreover, the fact that the pattern of drops in VIX following
periods of accumulation over the entire cycle indicates that the VIX-return behavior is
not uniquely linked to the timing of FOMC announcements. Another finding is that the
VIX does not seem to show an accumulating pattern followed by a drop prior to the
FOMC announcement in the post-sample period. In the case that the VIX-return pattern
shown in the period 1994 to 2016 period was caused by the resolution of a risk premium
that emerged because of the occurrence of an FOMC announcement, as suggested by Hu
et al. (2022), asset-pricing theory suggests that we would observe the same pattern in the
post-sample period. Arguably, if FOMC announcements inherently cause the resolution
of an uncertainty risk premium, we would expect that pattern to persist in the 2017-2022
period.
       Instead of resolution of a risk premium connected to the FOMC announcement
explains announcement’s preceding VIX drop, it is likely that the reduced uncertainty has
been caused by information about accommodating decision-making from Board of
Governors meetings reaching the market. The period 1994 to 2016 systematically features
Board of Governors meetings in the days prior just to FOMC meetings. In a case where

                                   19
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

the general market sentiment is characterized by high uncertainty, and information about
accommodating policy reaches the market, we would expect to see the market uncertainty
decline in the following days. Moreover, if such an event would occur throughout the
FOMC cycle, and not only before the announcement, we would expect a similar effect.
The pattern shown in Figure 6 Panel A is thus alignable with the explanation by Cieslak
et al. (2019) that information from decision-making at Board of Governors meetings drive
both the pre-FOMC announcement drift, as well as the pattern of biweekly excess returns
for the 1994 to 2016 period through reduced uncertainty. Additionally, the explanation
that information about accommodating policy from Board of Governors meetings has
driven both return patterns and uncertainty drops around FOMC meetings and throughout
the cycle is further supported by the fact that the pattern is changed in the post-sample
period, which both featured changes in the timing of Board of Governors meetings and
more restrictive policy than the original sample. While the risk-based explanations
assume that the VIX-return behavior is independent of both the content of the
announcements as well as the timing of the preceding Board of Governors meeting, the
leakage-explanation implies that the pattern were to change in the case that these factors
changed and is thus consistent with the results we show in Figure 6.
        As a concluding remark, while our results support that information from even-
week Board of Governors meetings drives the pattern of excess returns through the
FOMC cycle over the 1994-2016 period we are yet unable to confidently determine
whether the pattern is a pure anomaly driven by investor’s mis-calibrated expectations, or
if the pattern contains a risk parameter. For instance, it remains unclear why uncertainty
accumulates systematically in odd weeks of the cycle over the 1994-2016 period. Since
the occurrence of Board of Governors meetings usually is declared a few days in advance,
it is theoretically possible that a risk-premium connected to informally communicated
information from these meetings exists if such information is anticipated. Since we
neither can confirm nor deny that this is the case based on our results, we see risk-based
models focusing on the occurrence of Board of Governors meetings as interesting avenues
for future research.
       In summary, we investigate the behavior of the VIX index over the FOMC cycle,
both for the 1994 to 2016 period as well as for our post-sample period. We find that
patterns of resolution of uncertainty have occurred biweekly throughout the cycle,
indicating that such pattern is not unique to timing of FOMC announcements and
therefore not likely purely driven by a risk-premium connected to the announcement.
Moreover, we find that the behavior of uncertainty, just like with that of excess returns,
changes in the post-sample period that is characterized by different scheduling of Board
of Governors meetings and less accommodating policy. As part of this change, resolution
of uncertainty prior to FOMC announcements are not observable in the 2017 to 2022
period. This further underscores that both inter-announcement uncertainty and excess
return patterns more likely are explained by informal communication from the Federal
Reserve between announcements than by a pure FOMC announcement risk premium.
Although it is possible that uncertainty level plays a role in explaining the magnitude of
both the pre-announcement drift, as shown by Hu et al. (2022), and returns over the entire
cycle, our above results indicate that the uncertainty drop is not uniquely driven by the
FOMC announcement. Consequently, we argue that models aiming at explaining the
movements in stock returns between FOMC announcements should pay closer attention
to the events of Board of Governors meetings.

                                   20
                          Stockholm School of Economics

                            VI. Conclusion

This paper investigates the behavior of US stocks in relation to announcements about
monetary policy made by the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee (FOMC). We
show that the previously documented pattern of US stocks generating significantly higher
excess returns in even weeks of the FOMC cycle does not persist in the post- sample
period 2017 to 2022. We find that there has been a distortion of the biweekly return
pattern, both in timing of high peaks of 5-day excess return and length of intervals between
peaks. We document that the two factors - timing of Board of Governors meetings and
proportion of Fed funds rate increases versus decreases - have changed in the post-sample
period. When controlling for both Board of Governors meeting scheduling and yearly
aggregate changes in Fed funds rate, we find that the effect on daily excess return is
consistent over both sample periods. We conclude that for both sample periods, both
Board of Governors meetings occurring in the preceding week and direction of Fed funds
rate changes in the year affects daily excess returns, and differences in these factors likely
caused the change in return pattern.
       We also connect to recent models suggesting that excess returns prior to the
FOMC announcement have been driven by the resolution of an uncertainty risk premium
which inherently occurs close to the announcement. We do this by investigating the
behavior of uncertainty, proxied by VIX, over the entire FOMC cycle. Our results show
that for the 1994 to 2016 period, VIX has decreased systematically in even weeks of the
cycle and not only around the FOMC announcement, indicating that drops in uncertainty
do not seem to be uniquely linked to the occurrence of an FOMC meeting. Moreover, we
find evidence that the pattern of VIX accumulation as excess return patterns has changed
in the post-sample period. This finding further suggests that both drops in uncertainty and
patterns of biweekly excess returns have been driven by news about accommodating
policy for the 1994 to 2016 period around Board of Governors meeting dates, rather than
by the resolution of an uncertainty risk premium connected to FOMC announcements.
       Our research contributes to understanding of the mechanisms behind systematic
movements on the US stock market between monetary policy announcements by the
FOMC. We highlight the importance of explanations connected to both risk and informal
communication when trying to deduce what is the cause for observed patterns of stock
returns over the FOMC cycle. Yet, the puzzle of stock movements around FOMC
announcements is not fully resolved and reason for further investigation remains. There
is need for continued research of the risk-side of explanations to the Board of Governors
meetings impact on the stock market and qualitative study of informal communication
from the Fed.

                                   21
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                            References

Ai, Hengjie and Bansal, Ravi and Han, Leyla Jianyu, Information Acquisition and the
       Pre- Announcement Drift (November 13, 2021). Available at SSRN:
       https://ssrn.com/abstract=3964349 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3964349

Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner. “What Explains the Stock Market’s
       Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?” The Journal of Finance 60, no. 3 (May 3,
      2005): 1221–1257.

Cieslak, Anna, Adair Morse, and Annette Vissing‐Jorgensen. “Stock Returns over the
       FOMC Cycle.” The Journal of Finance 74, no. 5 (June 20, 2019): 2201–2248.

Dennis, P., Mayhew, S., & Stivers, C. (2006). Stock Returns, Implied Volatility
       Innovations, and the Asymmetric Volatility Phenomenon. Journal of Financial
       and Quantitative Analysis, 41(2), 381-406. doi:10.1017/S0022109000002118

Federal Reserve, “Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.” Federal Reserve
       Board - Board Meetings, 2023
         https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/boardmeetings/meetingdates.htm,
      Accessed 23 March 2023

Federal Reserve, “Federal Open Market Committee", Jan 13, 2023,
         https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical_year.htm,
       Accessed May 1, 2023

Federal Reserve, “Federal Reserve Act”, March 13, 2017,
       https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section14.htm, Accessed May 5,
      2023

Federal Reserve, “Policy Tools”, May 3, 2023,
       https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/openmarket.htm, Accessed May
       11, 2023

FRASER. “Federal Open Market Committee Meeting Minutes, Transcripts, and
       Other Documents.” FRASER, https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/federal-
       open-market- committee-meeting-minutes-transcripts-documents-
       677?browse=1960s. Accessed March 23, 2023

FRED. “Federal Reserve Economic Data: Fred: St. Louis Fed.” FRED, Federal Reserve
       Bank of St. Louis, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/. Accessed March 28, 2023

French, Kenneth R. Kenneth R. French - Data Library,
         https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html,
       Accessed March 23, 2023

Hu, Grace Xing, Jun Pan, Jiang Wang, and Haoxiang Zhu. “Premium for Heightened
       Uncertainty: Explaining Pre-Announcement Market Returns.” Journal of
      financial economics 145.3 (2022): 909–936. Web.
                                   22
                          Stockholm School of Economics

Laarits, Toomas, Pre-Announcement Risk (October 4, 2022). NYU Stern School of
       Business, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3443886 or
       http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3443886

Lucca, David O., and Emanuel Moench. “The Pre-Fomc Announcement Drift.” The
       Journal of Finance 70, no. 1 (January 19, 2015): 329–371.

Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson. “How Much Do Investors Care About Macroeconomic
Risk?
Evidence from Scheduled Economic Announcements.” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 48, no. 2 (April 2013): 343–375.

WRDS, Wharton Research Data. “Wharton Research Data Services.” WRDS, https://wrds-
        www.wharton.upenn.edu/, Accessed April 19, 2023

                                   23
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

                       Appendices

             Appendix 1. Extracts from FOMC Meeting Transcripts

January 31-February 1, 2017
MS MESTER:
   ...So it’s important that we remain vigilant against falling “behind the curve.” Like
   the siren song, waiting for uncertainty to resolve before acting is always seductive.
   But we have continued to make progress on our goals. There’s a growing list of
   policy rules that suggests the current stance of policy is too accommodative and
   increasingly so. The Board staff’s assessment of asset valuation pressures has risen
   from moderate to notable, and leverage is very high for speculative-grade corporate
   borrowers. In this environment, if we accumulate enough delays, we could easily
   find ourselves “behind the curve.” I hope we avoid that shipwreck. And if between
   now and March the data come in consistent with the forecast, I hope we will be
   open to moving the funds rate up

March 14-15, 2017
MS BRAINARD:
   ...Third, I favor a gradual and predictable phaseout of reinvestments, at least over
   the first two years when principal repayments are elevated. While the background
   memo suggests there would be little difference in the economic effects of gradually
   phasing out versus immediately ceasing reinvestment, we cannot rule out that there
   may be material differences in how markets will react. A phaseout should reduce
   the risk of an adverse market reaction because it would only gradually increase the
   amount of securities the market will be required to absorb. It also aligns with the
   Committee’s desire to remove accommodation gradually and seems to risk a lower
   likelihood of misinterpretation by markets as a signal of impatience

July Meeting 2017:
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY:
   Since the previous FOMC meeting, we’re seeing the same trends: Stocks are higher,
   and the dollar is weaker. These movements have been large compared with the
   modest rise we see in short- and long-term interest rates. As I’ve noted many times,
   monetary policy does work through financial conditions. So if financial conditions
   do not tighten as we desire, then we are likely to have to do more.

                                   24
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                           Appendix 2
                       Included FOMC meetings
1993 Dec-21

1994 Feb-04 Mar-22 May-17 Jul-06 Aug-16 Sep-27 Nov-15 Dec-20

1995 Feb-01 Mar-28 May-23 Jul-06 Aug-22 Sep-26 Nov-15 Dec-19

1996 Jan-31 Mar-26 May-21 Jul-03 Aug-20 Sep-24 Nov-13 Dec-17

1997 Feb-05 Mar-25 May-20 Jul-02 Aug-19 Sep-30 Nov-12 Dec-16

1998 Feb-04 Mar-31 May-19 Jul-01 Aug-18 Sep-29 Nov-17 Dec-22

1999 Feb-03 Mar-30 May-18 Jun-30 Aug-24 Oct-05 Nov-16 Dec-21

2000 Feb-02 Mar-21 May-16 Jun-28 Aug-22 Oct-03 Nov-15 Dec-19

2001 Jan-31 Mar-20 May-15 Jun-27 Aug-21 Oct-02 Nov-06 Dec-11

2002 Jan-30 Mar-19 May-07 Jun-26 Aug-13 Sep-24 Nov-06 Dec-10

2003 Jan-29 Mar-18 May-06 Jun-25 Aug-12 Sep-16 Oct-28 Dec-09

2004 Jan-28 Mar-16 May-04 Jun-30 Aug-10 Sep-21 Nov-10 Dec-14

2005 Feb-02 Mar-22 May-03 Jun-30 Aug-09 Sep-20 Nov-01 Dec-13

2006 Jan-31 Mar-28 May-10 Jun-29 Aug-08 Sep-20 Oct-25 Dec-12

2007 Jan-31 Mar-21 May-09 Jun-28 Aug-07 Sep-18 Oct-31 Dec-11

2008 Jan-30 Mar-18 Apr-30 Jun-25 Aug-05 Sep-16 Oct-29 Dec-16

2009 Jan-28 Mar-18 Apr-29 Jun-24 Aug-12 Sep-23 Nov-04 Dec-16

2010 Jan-27 Mar-16 Apr-28 Jun-23 Aug-10 Sep-21 Nov-03 Dec-14

2011 Jan-26 Mar-15 Apr-27 Jun-22 Aug-09 Sep-21 Nov-02 Dec-13

2012 Jan-25 Mar-13 Apr-25 Jun-20 Aug-01 Sep-13 Oct-24 Dec-12

2013 Jan-30 Mar-20 May-01 Jun-19 Jul-31 Sep-18 Oct-30 Dec-18

2014 Jan-29 Mar-19 Apr-30 Jun-18 Jul-30 Sep-17 Oct-29 Dec-17

2015 Jan-28 Mar-18 Apr-29 Jun-17 Jul-29 Sep-17 Oct-28 Dec-16

2016 Jan-27 Mar-16 Apr-27 Jun-15 Jul-27 Sep-21 Nov-02 Dec-14

2017 Feb-01 Mar-15 May-03 Jun-14 Jul-26 Sep-20 Dec-13

2018 Jan-31 Mar-21 May-02 Jun-13 Aug-01 Sep-26 Nov-08 Dec-19

2019 Jan-30 Mar-20 May-01 Jun-19 Jul-31 Sep-18 Oct-30 Dec-11

2020 Jan-29 Apr-29 Jun-10 Jul-29 Sep-16 Nov-05 Dec-16

2021 Jan-27 Mar-17 Apr-28 Jun-16 Jul-28 Sep-22 Nov-03 Dec-15

2022 Jan-26 Mar-16 May-04 Jun-15 Jul-27 Sep-21 Nov-02 Dec-14

                                  25
                      Edvin Holst & Theodor von der Esch

Appendix 3. Frequency of Board of Governors meetings over years 1994 to 2022.
This figure presents a histogram of the frequency of conducted Board of Governors meetings,
year by year, over the period 1994 to 2022. Only interest meetings among scheduled Board of
Governors meetings are counted.

                                   26
                          Stockholm School of Economics

                                Appendix 4
 Regressions of Daily US Excess Stock Returns over Board of Governors Meetings
                Dummies and Fed Funds Target Rate Changes
This table presents daily US excess stock returns over a dummy variable for Board of
Governors (BoG) meetings occurring on days t-5 to t-1, continuous yearly change in Fed
funds target rate and these two variables in interaction. In column 1 and 3, we present
regressions of Daily US excess stock returns in t over the dummy for the occurrence of a
Board of Governors meeting on day t-5 to t-1. We present in column 2 and 4, regressions
of Daily US excess stock returns in day t over three independent variables: 1) occurrence
of Board of Governors meetings on day t-5 to t-1 in a year, 2) continuous yearly aggregate
Fed funds rate increase, 3) the first two in interaction. Results are in percent, robust to
heteroskedasticity. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                   27