       Best buys and own brands: investment platforms’ recommendations
                                              of mutual funds



               Gordon Cookson, Tim Jenkinson, Howard Jones, and Jose Vicente Martinez*




                                                  ABSTRACT
             Individuals increasingly buy mutual funds via on-line platforms, whose ‘best buy’
             recommendations heavily influence flows. As intermediaries of mutual funds,
             platforms provide none of the unobservable interaction or intangible benefits of
             brokers, and so allow clean tests of the determinants, influence, and value, of their
             fund recommendations. Using unique U.K. data, we find that platforms favor
             ‘own brand’ funds and those paying them a higher commission share. Investors
             discount own-brand recommendations, but not those paying high commission
             shares (which were not observable in the UK). A regulatory ban on commission-
             sharing lowered costs and improved the informativeness of platform
             recommendations.


                                                 December 2019


            Key words: Mutual funds, recommendations, investment platforms, retail investors
                                       JEL classification: G23, G24, G30




* Gordon Cookson (gordon.cookson@kpmg.co.uk) is with KPMG, and was formerly with the UK Financial Conduct
Authority; Tim Jenkinson (tim.jenkinson@sbs.ox.ac.uk) and Howard Jones (howard.jones@sbs.ox.ac.uk) are with the
Saïd Business School, University of Oxford; Jose Vicente Martinez (jose.v.martinez@uconn.edu) is with the
University of Connecticut, School of Business. We thank Anish Thakrar for his assistance over the course of the
research project, and we thank Neely Bailey, Kate Blatchford, Egemen Genc (discussant), Diane del Guercio, Abigail
Hornstein, Bige Kahraman, Peter Lukacs, Veronika Pool (discussant), Jonathan Reuter, Lingling Wang, Becky Young,
seminar participants at the University of Cambridge Judge Business School, NHH Bergen, Nova University in Lisbon,
the University of Connecticut, the University of Konstanz, and participants at the 9th Professional Asset Management
Conference (Rotterdam), the World Banking and Finance conference (Bangkok), and the Western Finance Association
(Coronado) conference for helpful comments and discussions.




                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                                                 1.       Introduction

Investment platforms, or ‘fund supermarkets’, are important intermediaries in mutual fund investment. These

on-line services allow retail investors to research, buy and sell, manage, and monitor their mutual fund holdings.

In the U.K., for instance, around 50% of retail mutual fund flows are now channeled through investment

platforms, which offer investors a wide array of funds to choose from.1 Since many investors would find sifting

through thousands of mutual fund products complex and bewildering, some of the leading platforms publish

recommendations of selected funds.2 The considerable influence of these ‘best buy’ lists, which we document

in the present paper, was recently brought to public attention in the U.K. by the high-profile collapse of

Woodford Investment Management, after around 300,000 of the clients of Hargreaves Lansdown, the largest

investment platform in the U.K., had followed their recommendation and committed $2 billion to Woodford’s

flagship fund. We use a unique, regulator-sourced data set covering the U.K. mutual fund industry to analyze

the factors that determine whether a mutual fund appears on these best buy lists, and whether investors should

be influenced by them.

           In many markets, notably the U.S., the boundaries between brokers and platforms are blurred: many

brokers also operate platforms, and do not make data available to distinguish the different channels through

which they intermediate mutual fund flows. Prior research, working within this limitation, has found that

broker-mediated mutual funds have higher fees and worse performance (Bergstresser, Chalmers, and Tufano

(2009), Chalmers and Reuter (2012), and Del Guercio and Reuter (2014)), but investors may be willing to bear

these costs in return for the intangible benefits brokers provide to investors by offering a personal service. In

contrast, the platforms we study do not offer a personal service, and their advice is limited to the funds on their

best-buy lists. Furthermore, unlike traditional brokers, the fund recommendations can be observed. This allows

us to link recommendations with incentives, flows, and performance in a way which has not been possible in

previous studies of mutual fund intermediation.


1
    With some GBP1.2 trillion of assets under management the U.K. mutual fund industry is one of the largest outside the
U.S. (Investment Company Institute (2017)).
2
    See Financial Times October 19, 2019.
                                                                                                                      1


                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
        The recommendations we study are prepared by teams of researchers employed by the platform and

are expressly intended to help investors choose funds expected to outperform. As one leading platform explains

“Our experienced research team analyses all the major markets and sectors to identify the best long-term

prospects. We spend thousands of hours each year scrutinizing investment strategies, performance analysis,

and fund managers”. In making these recommendations, investment platforms face two potential conflicts.

First, when platforms both run a fund supermarket and manage funds offered through it, they have an incentive

to recommend these ‘own brand’ funds. Second, when funds share commission revenue with the platform,

platforms have an incentive to recommend such funds. Of course, giving in to such incentives would undermine

the integrity of the process that produced the best buy list in the first place. We investigate whether the

platforms are susceptible to such conflicts of interest when drawing up their lists of recommendations, and

whether these recommendations add value for investors. We also test whether investors discount platform

recommendations when they can identify a potential conflict. After all, it is normally obvious that a platform

is recommending one of its own funds. On the other hand, commission sharing arrangements in the U.K. are

not made publicly available.

        In order to address these questions, we require information not only on the platform recommendations

but also on the commission-sharing arrangements between funds and platforms. We have access, through the

U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), to detailed, non-public data for three leading direct-to-consumer

platforms over the period 2006–2015 including access to platforms’ recommendations of mutual funds. Each

of these platforms offers on average 45% by number, and 75% by value, of all mutual funds available to retail

investors in the U.K. Together these three platforms have a share of over 50% of assets under administration

of all direct-to-consumer platforms. As well as platforms’ recommendations across a wide range of asset

classes and investment regions, our data set includes precise details of the fees charged by asset managers, the

fraction of these fees shared with platforms and, for two of the platforms, the investor flows into mutual funds

which were channeled through the platforms. We also take advantage of a regulatory change that occurred in

2014, the Retail Distribution Review (RDR) which banned commission-sharing with platforms. We analyze




                                                                                                              2


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
the impact of this change, which removed one of the potential conflicts of interest, on best buy lists, the funds

offered by platforms, and the overall cost to investors.

           Our main results are as follows. Considering first the drivers of recommendations, we find that

affiliated own brand funds are more likely to be recommended by platforms. Controlling for past performance,

costs, and other variables, affiliated funds are significantly more likely to be added to the recommendation list

than non-affiliated funds. Average model-implied addition probabilities for affiliated funds are three times as

large as for otherwise identical non-affiliated funds. At the same time, other things equal, affiliated funds are

less likely to be deleted from recommendation lists than non-affiliated funds. We estimate that these differences

in addition and deletion probabilities imply, in our sample, a long-term equilibrium percentage of affiliated

funds in recommendation lists equal to 14.6%, compared to 3.9% for otherwise identical non-affiliated funds.

This tendency of platforms to recommend affiliated funds (over non-affiliated funds) increased following RDR,

which banned revenue sharing arrangements between platforms and funds.

           We further find that, for the period when commission-sharing was permitted, funds were more likely

to appear on recommended lists if they shared a higher proportion of their revenues with the platforms. Our

estimates indicate that, all else equal, an increase of 42bps in the fraction of assets funds pay to platforms

would result in an increase in the long-term probability of appearing on recommendations lists from 4.2%

(current or baseline levels) to 6.4%.3

           We contrast these findings with a parallel analysis based on Morningstar recommendations.

Morningstar analysts, like platforms, make forward-looking recommendations, but they do not face the same

potential conflicts of interest. In their case, recommendations are not tilted towards funds affiliated with

platforms or those sharing high levels of revenues with platforms. This suggests that the tendency of platforms

to recommend such funds is the result of favoritism, rather than some potentially unobservable qualities of the

funds in question. The fact that, after revenue sharing agreements were banned, platforms tended to replace in



3
    42bps is the difference between the median revenue (as a percentage of assets) platforms obtain from funds in the top
2% of this variable and those in the bottom 98%. The 2% : 98% split mimics the split between affiliated and non-affiliated
funds.
                                                                                                                        3


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
their recommendation lists funds that had shared a higher proportion of their revenues with funds that had

shared less, points in the same direction.

        Regarding the impact of platform recommendations on flows, our analysis shows that it is substantial.

Every month following the addition of a fund to a platform’s recommendation list or while still recommended,

that fund experiences an average inflow of 0.16% (1.92% annualized) of the total assets under management of

the fund (and not just those invested through the platform). When we interact recommendations with the first

of our two possible conflict measures – affiliation – we find that flows are less responsive to the

recommendation of a fund affiliated with a platform. On the other hand, the response of flows to

recommendations does not vary significantly with revenue-sharing, suggesting that investors do not offset

platforms’ biases along this dimension. The different responses of flows to affiliated and high revenue-sharing

funds likely reflect the fact that fund affiliation is evident to investors whereas, in the U.K., revenue-sharing

agreements are not disclosed. Interestingly, our analysis suggests that payments by funds to platforms also

have a noticeable impact on flows independently of their impact via recommendations.

        As to whether recommendations help investors, over our 10-year sample period, a portfolio comprising

all funds recommended by platforms delivered average net returns, in excess of Morningstar category

benchmarks, of 0.08% per year. In contrast, non-recommended funds available on the same platform under-

performed these benchmarks by 0.86% per year. When we compare the returns of recommended funds to the

returns of non-recommended funds classified in the same Morningstar investment category, which is a closer

comparison, the results are similar: recommended funds outperform non-recommended funds by a statistically

significant 0.60% per year, or 0.80% per year if we base the comparison on category-matched fund alphas.

        Platform recommendations are, however, highly correlated with Morningstar analyst ratings: 60.3%

of platform recommendations are for funds classified as gold, silver, or bronze by Morningstar. When

platforms recommend funds not endorsed by Morningstar, which happens disproportionally with affiliated

funds and those that share a higher proportion of commission revenue, those funds do not outperform. This

suggests that while recommended funds do better than funds chosen at random, their value on top of

Morningstar recommendations is limited. It also suggests that conflicts of interest affect platform


                                                                                                               4


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
recommendations and their value for customers: affiliation and revenue share deals seem to be behind the

deviations of platform recommendations from Morningstar ratings. Only after RDR, which banned

commission sharing arrangements between asset managers and platforms, did the platform recommendations

become incrementally informative.

           Consistent with the predictions of Stoughton, Wu, and Zechner (2011), RDR also resulted in a

reduction in the costs faced by retail investors who use platforms. We estimate that the cost to such investors

fell by 26 basis points, on average, for those funds which were available both before and after the change.

When considering all funds, i.e. including those dropped by platforms at the time of the regulatory change and

those taken up by platforms at that time, the drop in fees and charges was 33 basis points. This overall fee

reduction came about partly through platforms replacing more expensive funds (typically paying larger

percentages of assets under management to platforms) with less expensive ones. Therefore, RDR impacted not

only which funds are recommended but also which funds are offered by platforms.

           To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to analyze the mutual fund recommendations of

investment platforms, a large and fast growing category of intermediary for retail investment, and relate them

to the conflicts they face. In this sense, it is related to previous research which has studied the recommendations

of mutual funds, notably Reuter and Zitzewitz (2006), by the financial media, and Armstrong, Genc, and

Verbeek (2017), by Morningstar analysts.4 It is also closely related to the work of Christoffersen, Evans, and

Musto (2013), who find that the incentives of brokers intermediating mutual funds, notably revenue sharing,

drive flows into those funds. With direct access to recommendations, and no unobserved actions or benefits

associated with interaction with brokers, we can separate the actions of the intermediary from those of the

customer to provide direct evidence of the role of platforms and their recommendations in directing flows. The

focus on favoritism toward affiliated funds is something our paper shares with Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu

(2016) who find that mutual fund families acting as trustees of 401(k) plans display a bias towards affiliated

funds which is not undone by customers. We find, by contrast, that retail investors do discount platforms’



4
    Jenkinson, Jones, and Martinez (2016) and Cookson, Jenkinson, Jones, and Martinez (2019) also study recommendations
of mutual funds and managed products but targeted to institutional (rather than retail) clients.
                                                                                                                     5


                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
recommendations of affiliated funds, a contrast which perhaps reflects the difference between the narrowness

of choice in 401(K) plans and the breadth of choice on platforms.5


                                          2.        Institutional setting and data


A.          Investment platforms and the regulatory framework

           Investment platforms are web-based services which allow retail investors to research, buy and sell,

manage, and monitor their holdings in mutual funds.6 They are an important and growing distribution channel

in many countries. In the U.K., assets under administration held in platforms rose from around GBP100 billion

at the end of 2008 to almost GBP600 billion at the end of 2016 (Platforum (2017)). Platforms accounted for

52% of gross sales of funds to retail investors in 2015, representing GBP83 billion (Investment Association

(2016)); a third of these platform sales were direct-to-consumer, and two-thirds intermediated by an advisor

(FCA (2016)). In this paper, where we analyze the determinants and impact of platform recommendations, we

focus on the direct-to-consumer channel. Sales not involving platforms may be made directly with an asset

manager or through an advisor. The leading direct-to-consumer platform in the U.K. is Hargreaves Lansdown,

which has a 36% share of assets under administration. The next three largest – Barclays Stockbrokers, TD

Direct Investing, and Fidelity Personal Investing – have around 10% each. The rest of the market is shared

among a large number of small players. Of the ten largest U.K. direct-to-consumer platforms by market share,

seven are vertically integrated, meaning that they have affiliated mutual funds which they offer via their

platform (FCA (2016)).




5
    More widely, the paper can be seen in the context of studies that explore the distortive incentives faced by agents, brokers,
financial advisors, and other intermediaries (see, e.g., Mullainathan, Noeth, and Schoar (2012); Anagol, Cole, and Sarkar
(2017), Egan (2018), and the theoretical work of Stoughton, Wu, and Zechner (2011) and Inderst and Ottaviani (2012a,
2012b, and 2012c)).
6
    We use ‘investment platform’ synonymously with ‘fund supermarket’. The term ‘investment platform’ is sometimes
used in the U.K. to include so-called ‘wrap’ platforms, in which assets other than fund shares (e.g. directly owned equities)
may be held, but we do not include these in our study.
                                                                                                                              6


                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
          Investment platforms offer a wide range of funds, which can be analyzed by the user according to asset

class, investment style, charges, and, sometimes, third-party rankings, and other criteria. Within its universe

of funds, a platform may also provide a list of recommended funds, the focus of the present paper, which is

updated from time to time.

          The way in which platforms are remunerated for their services in the U.K. must be seen in the context

of a regulatory change which occurred towards the end of our sample period. From 2006, when our sample

starts, to 2012, investors paid a single all-in annual fee (and in some cases an initial charge) to the asset manager,

who could share this fee with platforms in return for channeling funds to them. The details of such revenue-

sharing arrangements were not disclosed and even their existence was unknown to many investors. There were

no separate payments to platforms. The value of revenues paid to platforms by mutual funds as part of the

revenue-sharing arrangements were typically between 0.5% and 0.75% of the amount invested.

          Between 2013 and 2016, the U.K. asset management industry implemented the RDR which ended

revenue-sharing with platforms and required investors to pay the platform and the asset manager separately for

their services.7 For platforms, RDR rules came into force for new business on 6 April 2014 and applied to all

business (i.e. not just new business) through a ‘sunset clause’, which required these distributors to have

completed the transition before 6 April 2016. In order to keep their business under the old and new regimes

separate, mutual funds maintained ‘bundled’ share classes, on which revenues could be shared with platforms,

and launched ‘clean’ share classes, which could not take part in revenue sharing. Each of the platforms we

study switched to clean asset classes for new investments during the period February 2014 to April 2014.

Existing investments were gradually converted into clean share classes by April 2016. Therefore, from April

2016 all their clients were being charged a separate distribution (platform) fee.




7
    Similar bans on commission sharing have also been implemented in other countries (e.g. in the Netherlands and
Australia) or are in the process of being implemented (e.g. in Switzerland, Sweden, South Africa, and Canada). In January
2018 the European Union banned independent advisors, including platforms that make recommendations, from receiving
commission from asset managers under the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID 2).
                                                                                                                       7


                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
        Following the implementation of RDR, the situation in the U.K. is simple for platforms: investors pay

one fee to the platform (the platform charge) and a separate fee to the fund manager (the asset manager fee),

and there is no sharing of either annual or initial charges.


B.      Mutual fund recommendations

        Some investment platforms produce (and regularly review) best buy lists of mutual funds, which

appear prominently on their websites. Selection criteria include past performance, perceived risk, charges,

process, as well as tenure of the fund manager. These recommendations are presented to investors as reflecting

the outcome of in-depth research and are designed to guide investors – who are otherwise faced with a few

thousand funds to choose from – towards a short-list of funds to consider. For instance, one of the leading

platforms explains, “There are over 2,500 funds available to private investors. While many will conduct their

own research, others might need some extra help, so our research team have scoured the market to unearth

what we believe are the best funds for new investment across the major sectors.” They go on to claim that the

funds on their best buy list “ … offer the ultimate combination of first-class long-term performance potential

and low management charges.” Another platform explains their process and philosophy as follows: “We are a

team of 11 research analysts who spend our days sourcing, researching, recommending and monitoring fund

managers for our clients to invest in. We believe in manager skill, and we believe that having a well-resourced

team that can conduct in-depth analysis we can identify manager skill.”

        In contrast to conventional supermarkets, which promote products in return for direct payments by

suppliers, platforms present their best buys to investors by identifying funds that have better future prospects.

As one platform puts it, the funds are their “highest conviction picks”. Whilst platforms give some indication

about how they go about conducting their fund due diligence, there is clearly a large element of judgment

involved. Platforms may also face a short-term financial incentive to recommend their own brand funds and

(prior to RDR) those funds that share the most commission.




                                                                                                               8


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
C.         The dataset

           We use data obtained by the FCA from the four largest investment platforms. One of these platforms

was excluded from the analysis, as critical data required for our analysis (such as revenue share data and

investment flow data) were not available. The data was made available on condition that the identity of the

platforms remained anonymous and that no per-platform results were presented in our analysis. The three

platforms that form the basis of our study have a combined share in excess of 50% of the U.K. market for

direct-to-consumer assets under administration. None of the smaller platforms, from which data was not

obtained, has a market share in excess of 5%. Furthermore, most of them do not produce their own

recommendations. Data was provided on a monthly basis by each platform for the period 2006-2015, or the

period during which a recommendation list was available to clients.

           Each of the platforms in our study makes available to their clients at least one internally produced

recommendation list. 8 When a platform has more than one internally prepared recommendation list we

aggregate them into a single list per platform. This data allows us to identify, for each platform, when a mutual

fund appeared in a recommendation list, the period during which it remained on the list, and (if applicable) the

date when the mutual fund was removed from the list. This information is typically not publicly available, as

platforms are not required to disclose their historical fund recommendations.

           The data requested by the FCA also provided us with information for the same three platforms on their

annual core platform charges over time, expressed as a proportion of assets under administration. For each

mutual fund share class available on the platforms in our sample we also have historical information on the

revenue shared by the fund with platforms in the form of commission, as well as the revenue passed on to a

platform’s clients in the form of a rebate. The revenue passed on by the fund to the platform and any rebate to

platform clients are expressed as a proportion of assets under management. We also have information at a share

class level on fund initial charges, expressed as a proportion of initial investment.




8
    Some platforms also make available to their clients recommendation lists produced by third parties not connected to the
platform (these external recommendation lists may also be available elsewhere, such as on third party websites).
                                                                                                                         9


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
           Before RDR, the principal source of revenue for investment platforms was a share of annual fees

passed onto them by fund managers. This share of fees paid by funds to platforms used to vary by mutual fund

and share class. Following RDR, the main source of revenue for platforms is a separate platform charge levied

directly from investors. Platform charges are the same for all mutual funds offered on a platform, but vary from

platform to platform. Platform charges in some cases vary according to an investor’s portfolio size, with larger

portfolios being rewarded with lower platform charges.

           We carry out our analysis at the fund-platform level. This is because all fund research and

recommendations relate to funds rather than individual share classes. Because of RDR, funds tend to have

clean and bundled retail share classes (at least during part of our sample period). If a fund has multiple retail

share classes within each of these two categories, we group them into a single clean or bundled group (or ‘fund’

as we call it) by averaging performance, fees, and other charges.9 We analyze only the bundled group during

the period when platforms offered bundled share classes for new investments and the clean group during the

period when platforms offered clean share classes for new investments.10 We label the first of these periods

the ‘pre-RDR period’ and the second the ‘post-RDR period’. The pre- and post-RDR periods are platform-

specific and depend on when the platform implemented RDR for new investments.

           These variables are combined with publicly available monthly data for 2006-2015 on returns, assets

under management, and other variables of interest from Morningstar Direct, a third-party source for fund and

share class information. Charges data is also sourced from Morningstar Direct, and is available only annually.

The charges data is augmented with charges data obtained by the FCA from a sub-sample of asset managers.

           Our sample comprises equity, fixed income, asset allocation, and alternative investment open-ended

retail mutual funds available for sale in the U.K., with GBP-denominated share classes. We exclude mutual



9
    We use share class information to construct aggregate, fund-level, observations. For each platform we use only the share
classes distributed through that platform rather than all available fund share classes. This means that a mutual fund may
have a different cost, revenue share agreement, and performance when acquired through different platforms.
10
     An exception to this rule is some mutual funds that were only available in clean share format before RDR. Those mutual
funds are included in the pre-RDR analysis. Note that, during part of the ‘post-RDR’ period, platforms continued using
bundled share classes and receiving a share of the funds’ annual fees, but only for pre-existing investments.
                                                                                                                        10


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
funds in the following Morningstar asset classes: commodities, property, money market, convertible and

miscellaneous, because none (or almost none) of the funds in these asset classes ever appeared in the platform

recommendation lists in our sample. The excluded asset classes only represent a small percentage of the funds

offered by these platforms. Our dataset contains both currently operating and closed/merged funds.

        For our analysis it is important to determine which funds are offered on each platform, as these funds

form the pool from which a platform’s recommendation lists are drawn. We use two criteria to infer availability

in a platform: the existence of revenue share agreements (we only have this information on an end-of-year

basis); and within-platform fund flows (this information was obtained by the FCA for two platforms and is

available on a monthly basis but only when funds experience flows). We designate a fund as being available

on a platform in any given month if there is a revenue share agreement in place and/or if, within three months

of the month in question, there are flows within the platform. Both indicators coincide in almost all cases.

        Of the funds listed on the platforms in our sample, some are affiliated to the platform and others are

not affiliated. We use two different Morningstar Direct data fields (‘branding name’ and ‘advisor’) to track

affiliation. Branding name reflects the fund distributor, and advisor is the fund management company. A fund

is considered affiliated to a platform if it shares branding name or advisor with the platform.

        Platforms typically carry a large number of mutual funds. As Table 1 shows, on average each platform

in our sample includes 1,595 different mutual funds. This represents 45.2% of the funds available in the U.K.

each year during our sample period (in the four large asset classes we study). The assets under management of

these funds are 74.9% of all assets under management by U.K. mutual funds, suggesting that most of the larger

funds are available via the platforms. During our sample period, on average, 7.2% of the funds available in the

platforms appeared on recommendation lists, a percentage that has shown a tendency to decrease over time.

As shown in Table 2, funds offered on the platforms tend to be larger, older, and exhibit better past performance

(percentage of Morningstar 5 Star rated funds) than those not available on the platforms. They are also

marginally more expensive.

        Table 3 contains further information about the sample of mutual funds offered and recommended by

each platform. It shows that equity funds are the largest category both in terms of funds offered (an average of


                                                                                                               11


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
1,015 funds per year, or 64% of the available funds) and in terms of recommendations (an average of 82 fund

recommended per platform per year, or 74% of the recommendations made), followed by fixed income and

asset allocation. Alternative investment mutual funds represent only a small fraction of their offering sample.


                          3.       Platform incentives, recommendations, and fund flows


A.         What determines recommendations?

           In this section, we explore what determines platform recommendations. Table 4 describes the

characteristics of mutual funds which are recommended and those which are not. Our sample contains 330,175

platform-fund-month observations, of which 231,524 are observations from before the implementation of RDR

for new investments and 98,651 are from after RDR implementation. In the full sample, 20,461 platform-fund-

month observations correspond to recommended funds and 309,714 to non-recommended funds.

           Overall, recommended funds exhibit significantly better past performance. We compute fund

performance percentile rankings using past one- and three-year platform-specific returns in excess of

Morningstar chosen benchmarks, and we also calculate the percentage of 5-starred Morningstar funds in each

group.11 On the former measure, the average one-year (three-year) past performance percentile ranking of

recommended funds is 55.8 (63.4), whereas the non-recommended funds average 49.0 (48.5).

           The percentage of funds rated as gold, silver, or bronze by Morningstar analysts, a forward-looking

measure of quality, is also significantly larger among recommended funds.12 18.0% of recommended funds




11
     Returns used in the computation of performance ranks are adjusted to reflect all relevant charges and rebates levied by
each platform in which the fund is offered. These charges and rebates are computed assuming a total combined investment
in mutual funds of GBP 50,000 through the platform. When there are initial charges we take their impact on costs and
returns into account by assuming a five-year holding period.
12
     The Morningstar Analyst rating is a qualitative, forward-looking measure of performance that reflects Morningstar
analysts’ expectation of a fund’s future performance relative to its peers over a business cycle (see Armstrong, Genc, and
Verbeek (2017)). The current Morningstar Analyst rating scale was introduced in November 2011 and consists of gold,
silver, bronze, neutral and negative ratings. Before this, two different systems were used: elite, superior, standard, inferior,




                                                                                                                            12


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
have the gold rating, compared with only 1.4% of non-recommended funds. Indeed, over 60% (14%) of

recommended (non-recommended) funds are rated as gold, silver or bronze, which suggests that platforms are

either heavily influenced by Morningstar Analyst ratings when constructing their best-buy lists, or at least that

they use similar information and criteria. Recommended funds also tend to be less costly to investors, they are

significantly larger in terms of assets under management, possibly in part because of the recommendations,

and exhibit higher standard deviations of monthly returns.

         Table 4 also shows that a significantly higher percentage of affiliated than non-affiliated funds is

recommended in these internal lists. Recommended funds also tend to contribute significantly higher revenues

to the platforms listing them, per each pound individuals invest in through the platforms.

         These characteristics of recommended and non-recommended funds, being univariate and observation

weighted, do not necessarily imply any bias in favor of affiliated funds or funds that make larger contributions

to platforms. Affiliated funds and funds that make larger revenue contributions to platforms may be better

funds. After all, recommended funds in general exhibit better past performance, are more highly rated by

Morningstar analysis (in principle an unbiased source), and are on average cheaper than non-recommended

funds, and the same may be true of the subgroup of affiliated and high-contributing funds that are

recommended. Even if that were not true, funds in these two categories might also exhibit other characteristics

that the analysts preparing recommendations list also favor, like significant size or a long track-record.

         To test whether mutual funds affiliated with the platforms and those which share more revenues with

the platform are treated preferentially relative to non-affiliated funds or funds which share less of their revenues




impaired, and an AAA, AA, A system inherited from the acquired business Old Broad Street Research. These were
mapped together as follows: elite and AAA historical ratings mapped directly to the gold ratings cohort, and we labeled
them together as “gold”. We also create a broader category capturing any level of positive recommendation, which we
refer to as “gold, silver or bronze” (and so, in addition to our “gold” category, this includes funds rated as superior, AA,
A, silver or bronze).
                                                                                                                        13


                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
with the platform, we study alterations which platforms make to their recommendation lists.13 Platforms adjust

their recommendation lists from time to time by deleting some mutual funds and adding others. Similar to

Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2016), we use the following logit models separately to model fund addition and

deletion probabilities:
                                  234      234     234      234    234
           !(#$%&,(,) = 1) = -.#//&,(,)01 5266 + 89&,(,)01 5:;  + <&,(,)01 =>234 ?,                           (1)

where the function -(A) is defined as -(A) = exp(A) /(1 + exp(A)), ACTp,f,t = ADDp,f,t (Addition) or DELp,f,t

(Deletion) is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if mutual fund f is added to, or deleted from,

(depending on the specification) the recommendation list in platform p during month t and 0 otherwise,
   234                                                                                                     234
#//&,(,)01 is an indicator for whether the fund f is affiliated with platform p at the end of month t−1, 89&,(,)01

is the revenue obtained by the platform p from each pound individuals invest in fund f through the platform at
               234
time t−1, and <&,(,)01 is a vector of lagged control variables including the pro-rated total cost of the fund

assuming a five-year investment or holding period (fund’s total expense ratio, plus one fifth of the initial fund

charge, plus associated platform charges minus any fund rebates), performance percentiles computed using

platform-specific fund returns in excess of Morningstar category benchmarks over the previous one and three

years (platform-specific returns take into account charges and rebates applied by platforms assuming a five-

year investment or holding period), the turnover of the fund, the natural logarithm of the fund’s size (in millions

of GB pounds), fund age, the standard deviation of the fund’s return, an indicator variable for whether

Morningstar has assigned a five-star rating to the fund, indicator variables for whether Morningstar analysts

have assigned a gold, or gold, silver, or bronze rating to the fund, and a full set of fund style (e.g., equity, fixed

income, asset allocation, and alternative investments) by year indicator variables.

           We estimate different logit regressions for additions to the recommendation lists and deletions from

these lists. We also estimate different logit regressions for the full sample (of additions or deletions) as well as



13
     At any point in time, list membership depends on these decisions, as well as the initial listing decisions made when a
recommendation list is first launched. In our analysis we exclude initial listing decisions since we do not always observe
them in our sample (some of them were made before the start of our sample period). Including initial listing as additions,
for the platforms we have that information, does not significantly alter the results reported below.
                                                                                                                       14


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
for subsamples covering the periods before and after the implementation of RDR by each platform. In the post-
                             234
RDR regressions we exclude 89&,(,)01 from the set of explanatory variables, as the platform service charge

fee (the revenue obtained by each platform from each pound individuals invest in funds) is the same across

funds. In all cases we report coefficient estimates and z-scores based on standard errors clustered at the mutual

fund level.

        If there were favoritism toward affiliated funds then, all else equal, the percentage of affiliated funds

recommended would be larger than the percentage of non-affiliated funds recommended. In the long run

(steady state equilibrium) these percentages depend exclusively on the conditional probabilities of adding an
                                             2FF                                                 FGH ),
affiliated fund to the recommendation list .!266 ?, removing an affiliated fund from that list (!266    adding a

                                                 2FF
non-affiliated fund to the recommendation list .!I266 ?, and removing a non-affiliated fund from that list

  FGH ).
(!I266                                                                              2FF    2FF    FGH
         As shown in the Appendix, favoritism toward affiliated funds implies that !266 J.!266 + !266 ?>

 2FF     2FF     FGH
!I266 J.!I266 + !I266 ?. A sufficient (although not necessary) condition for this inequality to be satisfied is

      2FF    2FF       FGH    FGH
that !266 ≥ !I266 and !266 ≤ !I266 , with at least one of these two inequalities satisfied in a strict sense.

That is, all else equal, affiliated funds have to be more, or at least as, likely to be added to recommendations
        2FF                                                                                    FGH
lists (5266 ≥ 0, using Equation (1) notation) and less, or at most as, likely to be delisted (5266 ≤ 0), with at

least one of these two inequalities satisfied in a strict sense. Similarly, a sufficient condition for favoritism

towards funds paying higher revenues to the platform is that, all else equal, funds contributing higher revenues
                                                                       2FF
be more, or at least as, likely to be added to recommendations lists (5:;  ≥ 0), and less, or at most as, likely

                 2FF
to be delisted (5:;  ≤ 0), with at least one of these two conditions satisfied in strict sense.

        Table 5 reports logit coefficient estimates for the various specifications. We find that addition

probabilities differ significantly between affiliated and non-affiliated funds. For the full sample, the coefficient

estimates on our Affiliated dummy in the additions model is significantly positive at the 1% level. This indicates

that, at identical levels of past performance, external assessments of future performance, costs and other

controlled for variables, affiliated funds are significantly more likely to be added to the recommendation list

than non-affiliated funds. The sub-period analysis indicates that this effect is stronger in the post-RDR period.

Before RDR there was a modest, but statistically insignificant, preference for own-brand funds. Since RDR,
                                                                                                                 15


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
the probability of being recommended is significantly higher for funds that are affiliated with the platform.

These results are mirrored in the deletion models, where the coefficient estimates on our Affiliated dummy

variable becomes negative and significant at the 1% level in the post-RDR period.14 As shown in the Internet

Appendix, similar results obtain if we replace all explanatory variables with within-investment style percentile

rank versions of those variables.

           To interpret the coefficient estimates we compute average marginal effects. The second part of Table

5 displays model-implied average marginal effects for the two main variables of interest: Affiliation and

Platform Revenue from the Fund. Using data for the entire sample period, the results show that, all else equal,

the predicted probability of being added to a recommendation list in any given month is 0.0020 greater for

affiliated funds than for non-affiliated funds. As a result, average model-implied monthly addition probabilities
                       2FF
for affiliated funds (!266 = 0.0031) are three times as large as for otherwise identical non-affiliated funds
  2FF
(!I266 = 0.0011).15 At the same time, deletion probabilities are smaller for affiliated funds than for non-

affiliated funds, with differences in deletion probabilities equal to -0.0088 per month for the full sample and a

statistically significant -0.0290 per month for the post-RDR sample. To understand the impact of these

differences in addition and deletion probabilities it is useful to think on their implications for the long-term

percentage of affiliated and non-affiliated funds being recommended. Using average model-implied estimates

of addition and deletion probabilities for all funds available in platform menus and clones of those funds that

only differ in their affiliation status yields a long term, equilibrium, percentage of non-affiliated funds in
                                2FF     2FF     FGH
recommendation lists of 3.90% (!I266 J.!I266 + !I266 ? = 0.0011 / (0.0011 + 0.0270)), compared to 14.56%




14
     A possible explanation for the increased favoritism towards affiliated funds in the post-RDR period is that
recommending non-affiliated funds became a less attractive proposition once revenue sharing agreements were banned.
This is consistent with the observed decline in the fraction of non-affiliated funds receiving a recommendation in this
period (in contrast, the percentage of affiliated funds receiving recommendations stayed relatively constant).
                                                                         2FF
15
     Average model implied addition probabilities for affiliated funds, !266 , are computed as the average across our sample
      2FF     2FF      2FF    2FF
of -.5266 + 89&,(,)01 5:;  + <&,(,)01 =>2FF ?, whereas average model implied addition probabilities for non-affiliated
        2FF                                                         2FF      2FF    2FF
funds, !I266 , are computed as the average across our sample of -.89&,(,)01 5:;  + <&,(,)01 =>2FF ?. We follow a similar
procedure for the computation of affiliated and non-affiliated fund deletion probabilities.
                                                                                                                        16


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
  2FF    2FF    FGH
(!266 J.!266 + !266 ? = 0.0031 / (0.0031 + 0.0181)) for otherwise identical affiliated funds. That is, these

addition and deletion probabilities imply a long run percentage of affiliated funds being recommended that is

3.7 times larger, other things equal, than the percentage of non-affiliated funds receiving a recommendation.

For comparison, the actual percentages of non-affiliated and affiliated funds being recommended during the

full period were 6.09% and 11.09%, respectively. They are different from our conditional estimates, but not

by a large margin, suggesting that much of the difference in recommendation propensities for these two groups

of funds likely relates to their affiliation status and not to particular characteristics of the funds.16

           Addition probabilities are also significantly larger for mutual funds paying a larger share of the assets

they obtain through the platform back to the platforms. Our calculations indicate that, all else equal, an increase

of 100 bps in Platform Revenue from the Fund increases the probability of the fund being added to the

recommendation list by 0.0019 in any given month, with no discernible effect on deletion probabilities. As an

illustration, this implies that an increase in Platform Revenue from the Fund equal to 42bps (the difference

between the median revenue obtained from funds in the top 2% of this variable and those in the bottom 98%)

will result in average addition probabilities that are 70% larger than the average model-implied addition

probabilities for the observations in our sample. In turn this leads to an increase in the long term percentage of

funds in recommendation lists from 4.16%, for funds with actual revenue share agreements
  2FF    2FF    FGH
(!2P  J.!2P  + !2P  ? = 0.0011 / (0.0011 + 0.0265)), to 6.37% for otherwise identical funds with 42bps

                                  2FF        2FF        FGH
higher revenue share agreements (!2PQR.ST J.!2PQR.ST + !2PQR.ST ? = 0.0019 / (0.0019 + 0.0287)).17 That is,



16
     If we use data from the post-RDR period only, the implied long term equilibrium percentages of non-affiliated and
affiliated funds in recommendation lists stand at 0.39% and 12.40%, respectively. For comparison, the actual percentages
of non-affiliated and affiliated funds being recommended during this period were 3.62% and 11.87%. The lower implied
percentage for non-affiliated funds (compared to the full sample estimates) mirrors the decline in the numbers of these
funds in recommendation lists in the post-RDR period but may include a transitory component as well (temporarily higher
deletion probabilities, and lower addition probabilities, during a period of adjustment to a new regime).
                                                                                    2FF
17
     Average model implied addition probabilities at current revenue share levels, !2P  , are computed as the average across
                   2FF      2FF     2FF      2FF    2FF
our sample of -.#//&,(,)01 5266 + 89&,(,)01 5:;  + <&,(,)01 =>2FF ? , whereas average model implied addition




                                                                                                                        17


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
these addition and deletion probabilities imply a long run percentage of recommended funds that is 53% larger

than the percentage implied by actual revenue share agreements other things equal. The effect is larger, 97%,

if we focus on estimates obtained for the pre-RDR period only. The effect is weaker, but still present, if instead

of using revenue share as a regressor we use a percentile rank version of this (and all other) variables.

           The additional control variables indicate that funds that are costlier to investors (higher Total Fees and

Charges Ratio) are, other things equal, less likely to be added to recommendation lists, and as likely to be

deleted once there. Thus, while platforms issuing these recommendations may favor funds that make higher

payments to platforms, they do not certainly favor funds that are more expensive to their customers. 18

Additionally, funds with better prior performance (Morningstar 5 Star, Prior 1-Yr. Perf., and/or Prior 3-Yr.

Perf.) or expected future performance (Morningstar Gold or Morningstar G., S., and B.) are marginally more

likely to be added to the recommendation list and/or less likely to be deleted from these lists. Morningstar five-

star funds are more likely to be added to recommendation lists and are equally likely to be deleted from them

once there (when simultaneously controlling for the funds past one and three year return in excess of

Morningstar chosen benchmarks), whereas funds with recent one and three year good past performance are

less likely to be deleted from these lists. At the same time, funds rated gold, silver, or bronze by Morningstar

analysts, a measure of expected future performance and independent analysts’ sentiment for the fund, are

marginally more likely to be added to and less likely to be deleted from these lists.

           Morningstar analyst ratings are produced by a team of analysts following processes that are similar to

those used by the analysts that prepare platforms’ internal lists (see Armstrong, Genc, and Verbeek, 2017).

Morningstar analysts are likely drawn to some of the same features of mutual funds which, while unobservable

to the econometrician, also attract platform analysts. However, they have no reason to be influenced by the



                                                          2FF
probabilities at 42bpts higher revenue share agreements, !2PQST , are computed as the average across our sample of
     2FF      2FF      234            234    234
-.#//&,(,)01 5266 + (89&,(,)01 +0.42)5:;  + <&,(,)01 =>234 ? . Average model implied deletion probabilities are
computed in a similar way.
18
     This is less trivial than it seems, given the evidence that investors have trouble minimizing fees when left to their own
devices (see, for instance, Barber, Odean and Zheng (2005), Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2010), Anagol and Kim (2012),
or Grinblatt, Ikäheimo, Keloharju, and Knüpfer (2015)).
                                                                                                                          18


                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
affiliation or revenue share incentives that potentially distort platforms’ internal recommendation lists. In the

Internet Appendix (Table IA.4) we show that neither an affiliation between fund and the platform where it is

offered, nor a revenue rebate has any significant impact on Morningstar analysts’ addition and deletion

decisions to gold, silver, or bronze lists, during the full sample or during any of the sample periods we study.

These results suggest that Morningstar analysts do not see anything special in these funds, and reinforce the

idea that platform recommendations exhibit favoritism towards such funds. Further tests included in the

Internet Appendix, showing that funds added to the recommendation list after RDR (and available in platforms

before RDR) on average paid significantly lower kickbacks to platforms in the pre-RDR period than those that

were removed from the recommendation lists in the same period, point in the same direction.

        Overall, our results for both addition and deletion decisions provide evidence that affiliated funds are

treated differently than non-affiliated funds. Affiliated funds are more likely to be added to and, after RDR,

are less likely to be deleted from, recommendation lists. We find similar results for funds that share more of

the commission revenues with platforms before RDR. Together with the results that suggest that Morningstar

analysts are not swayed by these funds, they provide evidence that platform recommendation lists favor

affiliated mutual funds and funds with high revenue share to an extent that is difficult to justify by the qualities

of those funds. These results are broadly consistent with, yet distinct from, the more indirect evidence provided

by Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2013) for fund flows, and with the results reported by Reuter and

Zitzewitz (2006) for the recommendations in personal finance publications. They also accord with the

favoritism towards affiliated funds documented by Pool, Sialm and Stefanescu (2016) in the context of 401(k)

menu formation.


B.      What effect do recommendations have on flows?

        To explore how asset flows respond to recommendations we expand a typical flow-performance

regression (see, for instance, Ippolito (1992) and Sirri and Tufano (1998)) to include lagged recommendations

as a regressor. We consider two flow measures: first, the platform-specific GBP flow into and out of a mutual

fund, a variable obtained from the platforms themselves; and, second, the percentage flow computed as the


                                                                                                                 19


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
ratio of platform-specific GBP flows to the total net assets invested in the mutual fund (whether through the

platform or not) as of the end of the previous year.19

           We are interested in measuring how flows respond to recommendations, controlling for publicly

available measures of past performance, as well as for other product attributes known to affect flows which

could also affect recommendations. We therefore estimate the response of platform-specific flows to

recommendation changes using the following regression on monthly data:

                    /WXY&,(,) = 8Z$&,(,)01 5:G3 + 89&,(,)01 5:; + <&,(,)01 => + [&,(,) ,              (2)

where Flowp,f,t is either the platform-specific GBP flow or the percentage flow, 8Z$&,(,)01 is an indicator

variable that captures whether fund f appears in the recommendation list of platform p at time t-1, 89&,(,)01 is

the revenue obtained by platform p from each pound individuals invest in fund f through the platform at time

t−1, and <&,(,)01 is the same vector of lagged control variables that we used in the previous section, except

that we also include a full set of fund-platform indicator variables, and in the GBP flows regressions we use,

as regressors, the total net assets of product i on date t-1 (fund size), rather than the log assets (see Del Guercio

and Tkac (2002)).20 To reduce the effect of outliers on the percentage flow regressions, we remove all funds

with total net assets at time t-1 below GBP 10 million from the sample (see, e.g., Chevalier and Ellison (1997)).

           Columns (1) and (3) of Table 6 report the results of estimating this regression in the full sample using

pooled time-series cross-sectional data with GBP flows and percentage flows as the dependent variables. The

coefficients on the variable capturing the effect of lagged recommendation levels on flows are positive and

statistically significant (in all cases t-statistics are based on standard errors clustered at the fund level). This

suggests that individual investors respond to funds appearing in the recommendation list of a given platform

by increasing their investment in the recommended fund through that platform. The estimate in column (1)

indicates that recommended funds experience, on average, an increase in net flows of GBP 0.86 million per




19
     An alternative normalization could be based on the total net assets invested in the mutual fund through each platform,
but we do not have that information available.
20
     Notice that including a full set of fund-platform indicator variables renders the inclusion of the affiliated indicator
variable unnecessary, since affiliation is a time invariant characteristic in our sample.
                                                                                                                        20


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
month (GBP 10.32 million once annualized) in every month following their appearance in the list. Qualitatively

similar results obtain if we use percentage flows as the dependent variable.21 The estimates in column (4)

suggest that a mutual fund appearing in the recommendation list in the previous month receives, on average,

extra net inflows equal to 0.16% (1.92% once annualized) of the overall assets managed by that mutual fund

(and not just those invested through the platform), owing to that recommendation.22

            The impact of recommendations on fund flows is further illustrated in Figure 1.A. This figure shows

that additions to and deletions from recommendation lists have an immediate effect on flows. Recommended

funds experience an increase in net flows in the month they are recommended and net flows stay high during

the recommendation period. Net flows then experience a significant drop, even compared to pre-

recommendation levels, when the fund is removed from the recommendation list. This may reflect investors

attracted by those recommendations moving their money elsewhere once the fund is no longer recommended.

            Our regressions also indicate that past (one and three year) performance and Morningstar five star

ratings have a significant direct impact on asset flows, in addition to their indirect impact via recommendations.

This is in line with the previous literature on the topic (see, for instance, Ippolito (1992), Chevalier and Ellison

(1997), and Sirri and Tufano (1998) for the impact of past performance, and Bergstresser and Poterba (2002),

Del Guercio and Tkac (2008), and Ivković and Weisbenner (2009) for the influence of Morningstar star ratings).

However, appearing on a platform recommendation list has a significantly larger direct effect on net flows

through the platform than receiving a five-star rating by Morningstar, or being included in Morningstar analysts’




21
     Results are also similar if we use within-style fractional rank variables as regressors, or if we use fund-time fixed effects,
instead of platform-fund fixed effects, as reported in Internet Appendix Tables IA.6 and IA.7.
22
     Because we divide flows through a single platform by total assets under management all coefficients in the percentage
flows column look relatively small. To put the 0.16% figure in perspective, consider that the average platform in our
sample has a 15%-20% market share (of the direct to consumer platform market), which means that if all the platforms
were to recommend a mutual fund that would result in a 9.6% to 13.8% asset flow once annualized.
                                                                                                                               21


                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
gold, silver, or bronze categories rating. The better-known Morningstar recommendations may influence

platform recommendations but their direct effect on platform flows is insignificant.23

           The sub-period analysis reveals that the impact of platform recommendations is present in the pre- and

post-RDR periods, although it is stronger and more significant in the former. It also reveals that the payments

funds made to platforms before RDR had a noticeable impact on flows, independently of their impact on

recommendations. This could be the result of platforms separately promoting, advertising, or simply offering

a better positioning to, funds that shared more of their commission revenue with them, and is another channel

through which revenue share may impact overall fund flows. A further channel concerns whether a fund

appears on the platform at all, something we turn our attention to in Section 5.

           In Table 6 we also report the results of estimating a modified version of equation (2) that includes

interaction variables for Recommendation List and Affiliated and for Recommendation List and Platform

Revenue from Fund. These interactions should help us investigate whether investors offset the favoritism which

platforms show towards affiliated funds and towards funds with high revenue share agreements in the

recommendation lists.

           The coefficients on the interaction effect between Recommendation List and Affiliated are negative

and significant in the GBP and percentage flow regressions (specifications (2) and (4)), suggesting that

investors are skeptical about recommendations of affiliated funds. In fact, the coefficients on the interaction

are approximately equal in absolute value to the value of the coefficients on Recommendation List (plus the

contribution of the Recommendation List and Platform Revenue from Fund interaction), indicating that

affiliated recommendations have no noticeable net impact on flows. The coefficients on the interaction effect

between Recommendation List and Platform Revenue from Fund, on the other hand, are not statistically

different from zero in either the GBP or percentage flow regressions. This is the case in the full sample




23
     Unlike platform recommendation lists, Morningstar star and analyst ratings can potentially reach investors in multiple
platforms as well as investors who access mutual funds through other means. See the cited papers by Bergstresser and
Poterba (2002), Del Guercio and Tkac (2008), and Ivković and Weisbenner (2009) and the paper by Armstrong, Genc,
and Verbeek (2017) for an analysis of Morningstar star and analyst ratings impact on aggregate flows respectively.
                                                                                                                        22


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
(specifications (2) and (4), in which Platform Revenue from Fund is invariant across funds after RDR) and the

pre-RDR sample (specifications (6) and (8)). To compare the magnitudes of the recommendation-affiliation

and recommendation-revenue interactions, we split the funds in our sample 2% : 98% based on their sharing

of commission revenue with platforms (to match the split between affiliated and non-affiliated funds). In the

pre-RDR period, the bottom 98% of funds in terms of Platform Revenue from Fund reported platforms

revenues of 60bps per pound invested (median), while the 2% most profitable funds reported them revenues

of 102bps per pound invested (median). Using the estimates in the pre-RDR period specification (6) we see

that an increase in Platform Revenue from Fund of 42bps, from 60bps to 102bps, results in only a small

reduction in net flows following a recommendation: GBP 0.21 million per month (from GBP 0.83 million per

month to GBP 0.62 million per month – for non-affiliated funds), which is not statistically significant.24 If we

look at percentage flows (specification (8)), there is not even an insignificant reduction. This suggests that

investors, who are not privy to revenue share agreements, do not in general offset the favoritism towards these

funds in recommendations lists.

           These results allow us to expand on the findings of Christoffersen, Evans, and Musto (2013). They

suggest that, in the context of investment platforms, some, but not all, of the effect of revenue share agreements

on funds flows happens through the effect of the former on recommendations/advice. Our results also shed

light on the ability of investors to undo the biases of financial intermediaries. In our study, investors heavily

discount affiliated mutual fund recommendations, to the point where it almost makes no difference for flows,

but they do not adjust for favoritism towards funds with high revenue share agreements with the platforms that

recommend them. Previous research on 401(k) plans by Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2016) finds no evidence

that plan participants are able to undo the affiliation bias exhibited by fund families involved in plan design.

However, while 401(k) plans usually offer very restrictive menus (on average, 12.6 mutual funds, of which 4.8



24
     For reference, if we take the same group of funds and pre-RDR specification as a starting point, we see that moving
from a situation where the recommendation is regarded as coming from a non-affiliated platform to one in which the
platform is affiliated with the fund, results in a highly significant reduction in net flows of GBP 0.65 million per month
(from GBP 0.83 million per month to only 0.18 million per month). And the effect is even stronger in the full sample,
which seems more appropriate to gauge the effect of affiliation on recommendation flows.
                                                                                                                      23


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
are affiliated – see cited study), platforms offer a much richer choice set (on average, 1,595 funds of which

only 28 are affiliated). As a result, it is much easier for investors to find non-affiliated alternatives to affiliated

funds in investment platforms than it is on 401(k) plans. Thus the transparency or opacity of the conflict of

interest seems to have a substantial effect on the way investors respond to recommendations, but also how

much room for maneuver there is available.


                           4.       The performance of best buy recommendations

We measure the value to investors of platforms’ best buy recommendations by comparing the performance of

recommended funds with the performance of other funds which are also available via the platforms but not

recommended.

        We carry out this comparison in three different ways. First, we compute the average returns in excess

of Morningstar category benchmark returns of all recommended and, separately, all non-recommended funds

available in each month. We do this platform by platform, and then average the results across platforms, with

each platform receiving the same weight. Funds which are not available via any of the platforms do not enter

into our calculations. This is because we evaluate recommendation lists, and lists can only recommend funds

that are part of the platforms on which they appear.

        Second, we match each recommended fund to all non-recommended funds which are classified in the

same (level 2) Morningstar investment category (e.g., UK large-cap growth equity) and also available in the

platform. For each recommended fund we compute the equal-weighted average return of all non-recommended

funds in both the same category (our sample covers 160 such categories) and platform. We then create equal-

weighted portfolio returns of the recommended funds and of the portfolios of non-recommended funds

classified in the same Morningstar category, in excess of category benchmarks.

        Third, to allow for possible differences in risk exposure within a given Morningstar category, we

compute alphas for recommended and non-recommended funds classified in the same Morningstar category.

These alphas are from single-factor models that use the 160 Morningstar category benchmarks as factors. We

regress monthly fund returns in excess of the monthly short-term Treasury bill rate in the UK on the excess

return of each benchmark. Following Gerakos, Linnainmaa, and Morse (2016), we first estimate these
                                                                                                                    24


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
regressions fund-by-fund and collect \]) = ^_] + `̂]) . We then create equal-weighted portfolios of these

residuals for the recommended funds and for the portfolios of non-recommended funds classified in the same

Morningstar category.

           In our calculations we alternatively assume that funds are held only for the period during which they

are listed in the recommendations lists or, to allow for the possibility that investors may be inattentive or

disinclined to rebalance their portfolios with the frequency that such a strategy assumes, for five years starting

each listing month (or until the end of our sample period).25 In all cases we use platform-specific net returns,

which take into account charges and rebates applied by platforms assuming a notional investment of GBP

50,000 per account. Fund initial charges (front end loads), if any, are prorated assuming a five-year holding

period.

           The results in Panel A of Table 7 indicate that, over our 10-year sample period, the portfolio of all

funds on the platforms’ best buy lists delivered average net returns in excess of Morningstar benchmarks of

0.08% per year. These returns are, on average, a statistically significant 0.94% per year higher than the excess

returns obtained by other funds available to investors in these platforms but not listed in recommendation lists.

Similar results obtain if we compare the returns of recommended funds to the returns of non-recommended

funds classified in the same Morningstar category (a closer comparison) or if we compare one-factor alphas of

recommended and (Morningstar category-matched) non-recommended funds, thus controlling for different

risk exposures, or leverage, within a given category. On this last basis, recommended funds outperform non-

recommended funds by between 0.63% and 0.80% per year, depending on the holding period assumption. That

outperformance extends to both the pre- and post-RDR periods.26

           Platform recommendations, however, are highly correlated with Morningstar recommendations:

60.3% of platform recommendations are for funds classified as gold, silver, or bronze by Morningstar. Previous



25
     Estimates of average holding periods for mutual fund retail investors in the U.K. vary between 4 and 6 years for the
period under study. See Investment Association (2016).
26
     When using this last metric, the performance of recommended and non-recommended funds is typically higher than
when just comparing to benchmarks. This is because the average fund in our sample has a beta with respect to its
Morningstar category benchmark of 0.89 (significantly smaller than 1).
                                                                                                                      25


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
research by Armstrong, Genc, and Verbeek (2017), and our own analysis in the Internet Appendix, shows that

Morningstar recommends funds that perform well on average. To gain insight into the incremental value of

platform recommendations we next explore the performance of: (1) mutual funds that are recommended both

by platforms and Morningstar, (2) funds recommended by platforms but not by Morningstar, and (3) funds

recommended by Morningstar but not by platforms. Panel B of Table 7 shows that, during our ten-year sample

period, funds recommended by both platforms and Morningstar outperform non-recommended funds by a

statistically significant 1.06% to 1.62% per year, depending on the holding period assumption and on whether

we look at gold, or gold, silver, and bronze recommendations. The table also shows that when platforms deviate

in their recommendations from Morningstar that is no longer the case: funds recommended by platforms but

not by Morningstar perform at the same level as non-recommended funds (their impact in Panel A masked by

the large proportion of their recommendations that match Morningstar’s). On the other hand, funds

recommended by Morningstar but not by platforms outperform non-recommended funds by a statistically

significant 0.70% to 1.44% per year.27 This is true for the pre-RDR sample and, by extension, for the full

sample (most of which belongs in the pre-RDR period), but not for the post-RDR sample. Post-RDR funds

recommended by platforms but not by Morningstar significantly outperform non-recommended funds.

          As shown in Panel C of Table 7, when platforms deviate from Morningstar they do so disproportionally

to recommend funds that are own brands or, during the pre-RDR period, have high revenue share agreements

with them. Morningstar also tends to recommend funds that generate more revenue for the platforms than those

it does not recommended, by 3 basis points, but for platforms this number is three times as high. And

Morningstar does not exhibit any inclination to recommend platform-affiliated funds. The percentage of

Morningstar recommended affiliated and non-affiliated funds is indistinguishable from each other, while

platforms recommend a significantly larger share of affiliated than non-affiliated funds.




27
     Funds recommended by both platforms and Morningstar are benchmarked against funds in the same Morningstar
category recommended by neither of the two. Funds recommended by either platforms or Morningstar but not the other
are benchmarked against funds not recommended by platforms (in the first case) or Morningstar (in the second).
                                                                                                                 26


                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
        Overall, our results provide strong evidence that, on average, platform recommended funds perform

better than funds chosen at random. However, during most of our sample period, when platforms deviate from

Morningstar to recommend funds not endorsed by this rating service, which happens disproportionally in the

case of funds that are affiliated and those that share a higher proportion of commission revenue, that

outperformance disappears. Funds recommended by platforms but not by Morningstar perform at the same

level as non-recommended funds. On the other hand, funds recommended by Morningstar but not by platforms

outperform non-recommended funds significantly. Only in the post-RDR period, when some (revenue share),

but not all (affiliation), of the conflicts affecting platform recommendations were tempered, do platform

recommendations seem to provide value on top (or independently) of Morningstar recommendations.


 5.      Regulatory changes limiting revenue sharing and their impact on platform menus and funds

Our analysis covers the ten-year period from 2006 to 2015. As described in Section 2, towards the end of this

period the Retail Distribution Review, introduced with the aim of improving clarity for investors and reducing

conflicts of interest in the remuneration of financial advisers, effectively ended commission sharing between

asset managers and platforms. Results presented in Table 4 indicate that RDR not only impacted platform

recommendations but may also have affected the costs for retail investors of accessing mutual funds (total

charges and fees faced by retail investors went down following RDR) and even the mutual funds made

available by platforms.

        In Table 8 and Figure 2 we offer a more detailed analysis of the impact of RDR on fees, platform

revenues, and, by extension, platform menus. Table 8 shows the average change in the cost of mutual funds to

platform investors (Fees and Charges) and revenues obtained by platforms from new investments (Platform

Revenue from Funds) following the implementation of RDR for new investments. The results in this table were

obtained by comparing funds before and after the implementation of RDR over our entire sample period, but

similar results obtain if we look only at the two years before and after RDR implementation.

        As shown in the first row of the table, taking into account all platform specific charges and rebates, as

well as direct payments to platforms post-RDR, the average cost of investing in mutual funds for new investors

went down by 33bps following RDR. If we look at all funds, not just those offered through platforms, the
                                                                                                              27


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
difference (using average platform charges ignoring rebates and loads), at 17bps, is lower but still highly

significant – the funds not offered through platforms, originally cheaper on average than those offered through

platforms, experienced a smaller reduction in price. These results are broadly in line with the predictions of

Stoughton, Wu, and Zechner (2011), according to which revenue share agreements (or ‘kickbacks’) are always

associated with higher portfolio management fees and costs to investors. Results in Table 8 also suggest that

part of the reduction in costs for new investments (15bps) was absorbed by asset managers and part (18bps)

by platforms. In general, these patterns do not seem to be the result of a long term trend in funds costs (see

Figure 2) or a shift towards cheaper asset classes (see within effects), but are likely related to RDR.28

           The second and third rows in Table 8 decompose the cost and platform revenue differences before and

after RDR between the part attributed to changes in costs and platform revenue for existing funds (second row)

and the part attributed to new funds that replace old ones following RDR (third row). The second row shows

the pre- vs post-RDR difference computed using only mutual funds available both before and after the

implementation of RDR (i.e., a direct comparison of fees before and after RDR for the same funds). The drop

in fees observed for what is essentially a comparison of bundled share class fees minus rebates (pre-RDR) with

clean share class fees plus platform fees (post-RDR) for the same funds is smaller, at 26bps, than the drop in

fees and charges from comparing funds that were only made available after RDR and funds that were only

available before RDR, at 55bps. The drop in platform revenue obtained from funds mirrors this pattern: 16bps

when looking at the same funds pre- and post-RDR versus 23bps when comparing funds offered only before

RDR with those offered only after RDR.

           As explained in section 2.A, post-RDR platform revenues from new investments are the same across

funds. And, as we have just seen, the drop in revenues for funds retained in platforms following RDR is smaller

than the drop in revenues between funds offered only before RDR and funds offered only after RDR. This




28
     It is important to note that the cost and revenue changes reflected in Table 8 and Figure 2 are for new investments only.
At least during part of our post-RDR period, costs and revenue share agreements stayed at their pre-RDR levels for
existing investments. This means that average fees and revenues obtained by asset managers and platforms (an average
of those for old and new investments) did not go down as markedly, at least initially.
                                                                                                                          28


                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
means that retained funds had lower pre-RDR revenue share agreements in place, by 7bps, than those removed.

Their overall cost to investors was also lower, by 29bps. In other words, in the months following the

implementation of RDR for new investments, platforms were more likely to replace more expensive funds

(typically paying larger percentages of assets under management to platforms) with less expensive ones once

these agreements were no longer in place. This suggests that revenue share agreements (or the inclination or

willingness to share revenues) affect what is offered via platforms, in addition to what is recommended.


                                              6.      Conclusions

Investment platforms are important intermediaries between mutual funds and their investors. We study

investment platforms in the U.K., which has one of the largest mutual fund industries in the world and where

platforms intermediate around half of mutual fund flows. Among the wide range of funds that platforms make

available, they select some to recommend to investors, and these recommendations have a considerable impact

on fund flows. In making these recommendations, platforms are subject to two potential conflicts of interest.

First, platforms are affiliated with some of the funds they offer to investors, and second, platforms in the U.K.

have been allowed, until recently, to receive from mutual funds a share of the asset management fees which

the funds obtain from investors. Using a unique data set sourced through the U.K. financial regulator, which

includes precise details of investment platforms’ recommendations, fund flows through individual platforms,

and the affiliation or revenue-sharing relationship that the platforms have with mutual funds, we examine the

drivers, impact, and performance of investment platforms’ recommendations of mutual funds. We also take

advantage of an important regulatory change during our sample period which banned revenue-sharing, and so

removed one of the potential conflicts of interest facing platforms.

        We find that, on average, platforms recommend funds that have better historical performance and have

lower fees. Recommended funds are also significantly more likely to be rated gold, silver, or bronze by

Morningstar analysts. Importantly, our results also show that a significantly higher percentage of affiliated than

non-affiliated funds is recommended, and that, per GBP invested, recommended funds share more of their

revenues with the platforms than non-recommended funds.


                                                                                                               29


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
        Our results confirm that platform recommendations have a substantial impact on flows. However,

when we confine ourselves to recommended funds which are affiliated with the platform, flows are less

responsive, suggesting that investors discount such own brand recommendations. We also find that, although

platforms often recommend funds that are also highly rated by Morningstar, it is the platform recommendations

that drive flows. On the other hand, flows to recommended funds do not seem to depend on the revenue shared

by these funds with the platforms, suggesting that investors (who in the U.K. do not see the revenue-sharing

arrangements) do not offset platforms’ favoritism towards such funds.

        On average, funds recommended by platforms perform better (after the recommendation) than other

funds. However, conflicts of interest seem to affect the quality of these recommendations, for when platform

recommendations deviate from those of Morningstar, which happens disproportionally in favor of affiliated

and high revenue share funds, those funds do not outperform. Only after a regulatory change in the U.K., which

replaced revenue share arrangements from asset managers to platforms with separate platform charges, did

these deviating recommendations start adding value. After that regulatory change, platforms tended to replace

funds that had previously paid high kickbacks with funds that had (prior to the change) paid lower kickbacks

in their recommendation lists. The change also resulted in a reduction in the costs faced by retail investors who

use their services. The evidence is that this drop came about largely because platforms replaced more expensive

with less expensive funds. The latter finding suggests that revenue share arrangements have an effect, not only

on the funds recommended by platforms, but also on the funds which are offered by platforms.




                                                                                                              30


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                                                  Appendix

We define favoritism towards affiliated funds as a situation where, all else equal, the percentage of affiliated

funds recommended, 8266 ⁄b266 , is larger than the percentage of non-affiliated funds recommended,

8I266 ⁄bI266 .

        Proposition 1. In the long run (steady state equilibrium) the percentage of affiliated funds

recommended and the percentage of non-affiliated funds recommended depend exclusively on the conditional
                                                                        2FF
probabilities of adding an affiliated fund to the recommendation list .!266 ?, removing an affiliated fund from

            FGH ),                                                           2FF
that list (!266    adding a non-affiliated fund to the recommendation list .!I266 ?, and removing a non-

                                 FGH )
affiliated fund from that list (!I266  . Moreover, favoritism toward affiliated funds implies that

 2FF    2FF    FGH      2FF     2FF     FGH
!266 J.!266 + !266 ? > !I266 J.!I266 + !I266 ?.

        Proof. With a constant number of affiliated funds (b266 ) available each period the expected number

of affiliated funds recommended in period t+1 .8266,)Q1 ? is:

                                                   2FF           FGH
        Z) .8266,)Q1 ? = 8266,) + .b266 − 8266,) ?!266 − 8266,) !266 ,                               (A.1)

        or, rearranging terms,
                                       2FF    FGH           2FF
        Z) .8266,)Q 1 ? = 8266,) e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266 .                                    (A.2)

Similarly, the expected number of affiliated funds recommended in periods t+2, t+3, …, t+n is:

                                      2FF    FGH    T      2FF       2FF    FGH           2FF
        Z) .8266,)QT ? = 8266,) e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266 e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266

                                                                                                     (A.3)

                                      2FF    FGH    g      2FF       2FF    FGH        T
        Z) .8266,)Qg ? = 8266,) e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266 e1 − !266 − !266 f +

                       2FF       2FF    FGH           2FF
                 b266 !266 e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266                                            (A.4)

        …

                                       2FF    FGH   h       2FF       2FF    FGH        h01
        Z) .8266,)Q h ? = 8266,) e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266 e1 − !266 − !266 f            + ⋯+

                              2FF       2FF    FGH           2FF
                        b266 !266 e1 − !266 − !266 f + b266 !266 .                                   (A.5)

Dividing (A.5) by b266 , the expected percentage of affiliated funds recommended in period t+n is:


                                                                                                             31


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                                             2FF    FGH     h      2FF       2FF
        Z) .8266,)Q h ⁄b266 ? = 8266,) e1 − !266 − !266 f Jb266 + !266 e1 − !266 −

                                 FGH  h01          2FF       2FF    FGH      2FF
                                !266 f      + ⋯ + !266 e1 − !266 − !266 f + !266 .                  (A.6)

And in the long run, as n→∞:

                                                      2FF    FGH       h    2FF ∑h01
         lim Z) .8266,)Qh ⁄b266 ? = lim 8266,)R e1 − !266 − !266 f Jb266 + !266  ]pR e1 −
        h→n                          h→n

                                     2FF    FGH     ]
                                    !266 − !266 f.                                                  (A.7)

                                                        2FF    FGH
With non-zero addition and deletion probabilities e1 − !266 − !266 f < 1 and as a result:

                                      2FF    2FF    FGH
         lim Z) .8266,)Q h ⁄b266 ? = !266 J.!266 + !266 ?.                                          (A.8)
        h→n

A similar result obtains for the expected percentage of non-affiliated funds recommended. As a result,

favoritism toward affiliated funds requires that:
          2FF    2FF    FGH      2FF     2FF     FGH
         !266 J.!266 + !266 ? > !I266 J.!I266 + !I266 ?. □                                          (A.9)

                                                                                              2FF    2FF
        Proposition 2. A sufficient condition for relationship (A.9) to be satisfied is that !266 ≥ !I266 and

 FGH    FGH
!266 ≤ !I266 , with at least one of these two inequalities satisfied in a strict sense.
                       2FF    2FF           FGH        FGH     2FF    2FF       FGH    FGH
        Proof. Define !266 = !I266 + ^ and !266 + r = !I266 . !266 ≥ !I266 and !266 ≤ !I266 imply

that ^ ≥ 0 and r ≥ 0. Replacing these two expressions in (A.9):

           2FF         2FF         FGH      2FF     2FF     FGH
         .!I266 + ^?J.!I266 + ^ + !266 ? > !I266 J.!I266 + !266 + r?.                               (A.10)

With non-negative ^ and r (and non-zero probabilities) this is the same as:

          2FF        2FF     FGH         2FF    2FF         FGH
        .!I266 + ^?.!I266 + !266 + r? > !I266 .!I266 + ^ + !266 ?.                                  (A.11)

After simplifying terms (A.11) becomes:
          FGH     2FF
        ^!266 + r!I266 + ^r ≥ 0,                                                                    (A.12)

which is always satisfied when ^ ≥ 0 and r ≥ 0 with at least one of these inequalities satisfied in strict

sense. □




                                                                                                             32


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                                                References


Anagol, Santosh, Shawn Cole, and Shayak Sarkar, 2017, Understanding the advice of commissions-motivated

        agents: Evidence from the Indian life insurance market. Review of Economics and Statistics 99, 1–15.

Anagol, Santosh, and Hugh Hoikwang Kim, 2012, The impact of shrouded fees: Evidence from a natural

        experiment in the Indian mutual funds market. American Economic Review 102, 576–593.

Armstrong, Will J., Egemen Genc, and Marno Verbeek, 2017, Going for Gold: An Analysis of Morningstar

        Analyst Ratings. Management Science, forthcoming.

Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, and Lu Zheng, 2005, Out of sight, out of mind: The effects of expenses on

        mutual fund flows. Journal of Business 78, 2095–2120.

Bergstresser, Daniel, John M R Chalmers, and Peter Tufano, 2009, Assessing the costs and benefits of brokers

        in the mutual fund industry. Review of Financial Studies 22, 4129–4156.

Bergstresser, Daniel, and James Poterba, 2002, Do after-tax returns affect mutual fund inflows? Journal of

        Financial Economics 63, 381–414.

Chalmers, John, and Jonathan Reuter, 2012, Is Conflicted Investment Advice Better than No Advice? No.

        w18158. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives. Journal

        of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Briggite C. Madrian, 2010, Why does the law of one price fail? An

        experiment on index mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies 23, 1405–1432.

Christoffersen, Susan E.K., Richard Evans, and David K. Musto, 2013, What do consumers’ fund flows

        maximize? Evidence from their brokers’ incentives. Journal of Finance 68, 201–235.

Cookson, Gordon, Tim Jenkinson, Howard Jones, and Jose Vicente Martinez, 2019, Virtual Reality?

        Investment Consultants’ Claims About Their Own Performance. University of Connecticut and

        University of Oxford Working paper.

Del Guercio, Diane, and Jonathan Reuter, 2014, Mutual fund performance and the incentive to generate alpha.

        Journal of Finance 69, 1673–1704.

                                                                                                         33


                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula Tkac, 2002, The determinants of the flow of funds of managed portfolios:

       Mutual funds versus pension funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37, 523–557.

Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2008, Star power: The effect of Morningstar ratings on mutual fund

       flow. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 907–936.

Egan, Mark, 2018, Brokers vs. Retail investors: Conflicting interests and dominated products. Journal of

       Finance, Forthcoming.

FCA,      2016,      Asset     Management           Market     Study         Interim     Report,      November,

       https://www.fca.org.U.K./publication/market-studies/ms15-2-2-interim-report.pdf .

Gerakos, Joseph, Juhani T. Linnainmaa, and Adair Morse, 2016, Asset Managers: Institutional Performance

       and Smart Betas. Working paper 22982. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grinblatt, Mark, Seppo Ikäheimo, Matti Keloharju, and Samuli Knüpfer, 2015, IQ and mutual fund choice.

       Management Science 62, 924–944.

ICI (Investment Company Institute), 2016, Characteristics of Mutual Fund Investors, Research Perspective

       Vol 22 (7), October. https://www.ici.org/pdf/per22-07.pdf .

ICI    (Investment      Company       Institute),      2017,    Investment           Company       Fact   Book.

       https://www.ici.org/pdf/2017_factbook.pdf .

Inderst, Roman, and Marco Ottaviani, 2012a, Competition through commissions and kickbacks. American

       Economic Review 102. 780–809.

Inderst, Roman, and Marco Ottaviani, 2012b, Financial advice. Journal of Economic Literature 50, 494 –512.

Inderst, Roman, and Marco Ottaviani, 2012c, How (not) to pay for advice: A framework for consumer financial

       protection. Journal of Financial Economics 105, 393–411.

Investment    Association,   2016,   Asset     Management       in     the    U.K.     2015–2016,     September.

       https://www.theinvestmentassociation.org/assets/files/research/2016/20160929-amsfullreport.pdf .

Ippolito, R., 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality. Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45–70.

Ivkovic, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2009, Individual investor mutual fund flows. Journal of Financial

       Economics 92, 223–237.


                                                                                                             34


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
Jenkinson, Tim, Howard Jones and Jose Vicente Martinez, 2016, Picking winners? Investment consultants’

        recommendations of fund managers. Journal of Finance 71, 2333–2370.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Markus Noeth, and Antoinette Schoar, 2012, The market for financial advice: An audit

        study. Working paper 17929. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and

        autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55, 703–708.

Platforum, 2017, U.K. Adviser Platform Guide, March. http://www.platforum.co.uk

Pool, Veronika K., Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu, 2016, It pays to set the menu: mutual fund investment

        options in 401 (K) plans. Journal of Finance 71, 1779–1812.

Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2006. Do ads influence editors? Advertising and bias in the financial

        media. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 197–227.

Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows. Journal of Finance 53, 1589–1622.

Stoughton, Neal M., Youchang Wu, and Josef Zechner, 2011, Intermediated investment management. Journal

        of Finance 66, 947–980.




                                                                                                          35


                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
             Table 1: Platforms, Funds, and Recommendations - Descriptive Statistics by Year
This table presents descriptive statistics on the sample of mutual funds and recommendation lists produced by and
available through the platforms used in our study. It shows the number of GBP denominated equity, fixed income, asset
allocation, and alternative investments retail mutual funds available in the UK, the average number and the percentage of
available funds offered per platform, the assets under management of funds offered in the platforms as a percentage of
the total assets under management of the funds available in the UK, and the average number and percentage of funds
recommended in any of the recommendation lists which platforms make available to their clients. These statistics are
presented for the full sample period as well as for each year during that period.

                Number of                                                       Average
               Equity, Fixed                             Average             Percentage of
                                                                                                Average Number      Percentage of
              Income, Asset       Average Number       Percentage of        Available Funds
                                                                                                    of Funds            Funds
              Allocation, and      of Funds per       Available Funds       Offered in each
                                                                                                 Recommended        Recommended
             Alternative GBP         Platform         Offered in each         Platform by
                                                                                                  per Platform       per Platform
               Denominated                               Platform            Assets under
              Mutual Funds                                                   Management
   2006           2,620                  1,167                44.6                 78.3              134                11.5
   2007           2,899                  1,361                46.9                 77.3              149                11.0
   2008           3,129                  1,545                49.4                 74.7              150                9.7
   2009           3,298                  1,705                51.7                 76.4              132                7.7
   2010           3,460                  1,547                44.7                 73.8              103                6.7
   2011           3,711                  1,655                44.6                 75.2              102                6.1
   2012           3,848                  1,679                43.6                 74.5               96                5.7
   2013           3,989                  1,743                43.7                 74.9              103                5.9
   2014           4,191                  1,830                43.7                 72.7               82                4.5
   2015           4,438                  1,717                38.7                 71.0               61                3.5
  Mean            3,558                  1,595                45.2                 74.9              111                 7.2




       Table 2: Characteristics of Mutual Funds Offered and Not Offered through the Platforms
This table presents descriptive statistics for funds offered, and not offered, through the platforms of our sample. The
variables include: fund age, fund size (in billions of GBP) as measured by total assets under management, the volatility
of monthly fund returns, turnover, the total fees and hypothetical distribution charges for the fund (computed using
average platform charges for clean share classes post-RDR and excluding rebates and loads), and the percentage of five
star rated funds by Morningstar. The figures reported are simple averages using all monthly observations for each fund.
Each fund may enter into the sample up to three times (one per platform) in a single time period. It may enter as an in-
platform fund for one of the platforms and not in platform for the other two. p-values for the differences are reported in
square brackets and are based on standard errors clustered at the fund level. Significance levels for tests of the difference
in means are denoted by *, **, and ***, which correspond to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                     Return Std.                        Fees and       Morningstar 5
                                Fund Age         Fund Size                                Turnover
                                                                        Dev.                          Charges (Av.)        Star
                             (in Years)           (in ₤B)              (in %)              (in %)          (in %)          (in %)
Funds in Platform                12.63              0.25                3.46               112.94          1.58            12.77
Funds not in Platform             6.10              0.08                3.01               220.10          1.52             4.42
Difference                     6.53                 0.17                0.45              -107.16         0.06              8.35
                            [<0.01]***           [<0.01]***          [<0.01]***           [0.09]*      [<0.01]***        [<0.01]***



                                                                                                                                    36


                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                   Table 3: Mutual Funds Offered and Recommended by Asset Category
This table presents descriptive statistics on the sample of mutual funds available through the platforms used in our study.
It shows the average number of funds per platform, average number of Morningstar categories represented by those funds,
the average number of funds recommended per platform, average assets under management per fund (in millions of GBP),
and the average net fees and platform charges to investors (in % per year). Descriptive statistics are reported for the full
sample of mutual funds and separately for each of the asset classes included in our study: equity, fixed income, asset
allocation, and alternative investments. The numbers reported are averages per year.
                                                                            Average Assets
                                            Average Number Average Number                            Average Net Fees
                           Average Number                                       under
                                             of Morninstar     of Funds                                and Platform
                            of Funds per                                   Management per
                                               Categories  Recommended per                          Charges to Investors
                              Platform                                      Fund (millions
                                              Represented      Platform                                (% per year)
                                                                                 GBP)
All funds                      1,595              103                111                238                 1.56
Equity                         1,015               69                 82                242                 1.59
Fixed income                    215                25                 15                327                 1.17
Asset Allocation                310                 8                 11                187                 1.74
Alternative Investments          55                 1                  3                 99                 1.73




                                                                                                                           37


                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
            Table 4: Characteristics of Recommended and Non-Recommended Mutual Funds
This table presents descriptive statistics for funds recommended and not recommended in the recommendation lists
produced by and available through the platforms of our sample. Affiliated is the percentage of funds affiliated with the
platform in each category. Platform Revenue from the fund is the revenue obtained by the platform from each pound
individuals invest in the fund through the platform (in %). The remaining variables are mutual fund-level variables: fund
age, fund size (in billions of GBP) as measured by total assets under management, the volatility of monthly fund returns,
turnover, the total net fees and platform charges for the fund, the percentage of five star rated funds by Morningstar, the
percentage of gold-rated and gold, silver, or bronze-rated funds by Morningstar and mean performance percentiles.
Performance percentiles are calculated using funds returns in excess of Morningstar chosen benchmarks over the previous
one and three years. The averages are reported for the full sample as well as for the period before and after the
implementation of RDR for new investments by each platform. P-values for the differences are reported in square brackets
and are based on standard errors clustered at the fund level. Significance levels for tests of the difference in means are
denoted by *, **, and ***, which correspond to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                          All                         Pre-RDR                       Post-RDR
                               Rec.     Not Rec.   Diff.     Rec.     Not Rec.   Diff.      Rec.    Not Rec.     Diff.
Affiliated                      3.79      1.98     1.81       2.56      1.65      0.91      9.16      2.73        6.43
  (in %)                                         [0.03]**                        [0.20]                        [<0.01]***
Platform Revenue                0.59     0.54      0.05       0.64     0.60       0.04      0.40      0.40          -
  from Fund (in %)                              [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Fund Age                       13.33     12.58     0.75      12.84     12.29      0.55      15.47     13.23    2.24
  (in Years)                                      [0.26]                         [0.45]                     [<0.01]***
Fund Size                       1.09     0.21      0.88       1.05     0.19       0.86      1.21      0.24     0.97
  (in ₤B)                                       [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Return Std. Dev.                3.81     3.44      0.37       4.05     3.83       0.22      2.78      2.55     0.23
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                      [0.06]*                       [0.09]*
Turnover                       99.92    113.88    -13.96     103.01   117.01    -14.00      85.02    105.88   -20.86
  (in %)                                         [0.04]**                       [0.05]*                      [0.01]**
Total Fees and Charges Ratio    1.46     1.56      -0.10      1.52     1.64      -0.12      1.15      1.36     -0.21
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Morningstar 5 Star             30.94     11.56     19.38     30.83     10.18     20.65      31.39     14.71    16.68
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Morningstar Gold               18.04     1.41      16.63     18.84     1.43      17.41      14.53     1.35     13.18
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Morningstar G., S., and B.     60.31     14.00     46.31     61.62     13.01     48.61      54.56     16.24    38.32
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Prior 1-Yr. Perf.              55.76     49.06     6.70      55.61     49.00      6.61      56.29     49.19    7.10
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Prior 3-Yr. Perf.              63.44     48.52     14.92     64.97     48.24     16.73      59.22     49.01    10.21
  (in %)                                        [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***                    [<0.01]***
Observations                   20,461   309,714              16,642   214,882               3,819    94,832




                                                                                                                            38


                        Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                       Table 5: Logit Model of Mutual Fund Additions to and Deletions
                                        from Recommendation Lists
The first part of this table reports coefficient estimates for the logit model Prob(ACTp,f,t = 1) = (AFFp,f,t−1βAFF + RSp,f,t−1βRS
+ Zp,f,t−1βZ), where ACTp,f,t is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if mutual fund f is added to or deleted from
(depending on the specification) the recommendation list in platform p during month t and 0 otherwise, AFFp,f,t−1 is an
indicator for whether the fund f is affiliated with platform p at the end of month t−1, and RSp,f,t−1 is the revenue obtained
by the platform p from each pound individuals invest in fund f through the platform at time t−1. The other lagged control
variables in vector Z include the fund age, the natural logarithm of the fund’s size, the volatility of monthly fund returns,
fund turnover, the total net fees and platform charges ratio for the fund, indicator variables for Morningstar five star-rated
funds, Morningstar Analysts’ gold-rated funds, and Morningstar Analysts’ gold-, silver-, or bronze-rated funds,
performance percentiles and a full set of investment style by year indicator variables (not reported). Performance
percentiles are calculated using funds returns in excess of Morningstar chosen benchmarks over the previous one and
three years. Different regressions are estimated for Additions and Deletions and for the full sample as well as for the
period before and after the implementation of RDR for new investments by each platform. z-scores based on standard
errors clustered at the mutual fund level are included in parenthesis. The second part of the table displays model-implied
average marginal effects for the two variables of interest: Affiliation and Platform Revenue from the Fund. Significance
levels are denoted by *, **, and ***, which correspond to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                       Additions                                    Deletions
                                             All        Pre-RDR      Post-RDR             All        Pre-RDR      Post-RDR
Affiliated                                  1.15           0.75         2.95            -0.57          0.19         -2.47
                                         (2.87)***        (1.40)     (3.96)***         (-1.17)        (0.37)      (-2.14)**
Platform Revenue from Fund                  1.92           2.32                          0.27          -0.41
                                         (4.68)***     (5.79)***                       (0.43)         (-0.55)
Fund Age                                   -0.01           -0.01         -0.08          -0.00          0.00          -0.02
                                          (-1.05)        (-0.63)      (-2.29)**        (-0.22)        (0.05)        (-1.11)
Log (Fund Size)                             0.29           0.27          0.36            0.10          0.24          -0.23
                                         (4.32)***     (3.83)***       (1.81)*         (0.98)         (1.63)        (-1.36)
Return Std. Dev.                           16.33          18.37         -40.02           3.45          2.49          -8.72
                                          (1.83)*       (2.02)**       (-0.88)         (0.61)         (0.33)        (-0.69)
Turnover                                   -0.14           -0.22         0.27            0.07          0.23          -0.45
                                          (-1.64)       (-2.00)**      (1.65)*         (0.68)        (2.07)**      (-1.67)*
Total Fees and Charges Ratio               -0.99           -1.37         0.25           -0.08          0.11           0.10
                                         (-2.47)**     (-3.11)***       (0.18)         (-0.20)        (0.19)         (0.20)
Morningstar 5 Star                          1.27           1.30          1.06           -0.13          0.08          -0.37
                                         (5.05)***     (4.91)***        (1.40)         (-0.60)        (0.30)        (-0.87)
Morningstar Gold                           -0.15           -0.25         0.67           -0.33          -0.19         -0.59
                                          (-0.35)        (-0.53)        (0.58)         (-0.96)        (-0.50)       (-0.85)
Morningstar G., S., and B.                  0.43           0.46          0.93           -0.52          -0.76         -0.11
                                          (1.90)*       (1.96)**        (1.01)       (-2.27)**      (-2.58)***      (-0.25)
Prior 1-Yr. Perf.                          -0.54           -0.37         -2.48          -0.62          -0.37         -1.98
                                          (-1.32)        (-0.83)      (-2.57)**      (-2.07)**        (-1.06)     (-3.09)***
Prior 3-Yr. Perf.                           0.31           0.19          1.03           -0.93          -1.69          0.98
                                           (0.63)         (0.36)        (0.79)      (-2.67)***      (-3.82)***       (1.41)
                                                                      Average Marginal Effects
Affiliated                                0.0020         0.0015        0.0032         -0.0088        0.0035        -0.0290
Platform Revenue from Fund                0.0019         0.0031            -           0.0052        -0.0068           -
Pseudo-R²                                  0.14           0.14           0.17            0.07          0.07          0.13
Investment Style by Year Indicators         Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                              100,474        66,090        34,017           8,308         5,895         2,354




                                                                                                                               39


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                                     Table 6: Regressions of Asset Flows on Past Mutual Fund Recommendations
This table reports the results of panel regressions of monthly platform specific GBP and percentage asset flows on past fund recommendations and interactions of
this variable with other variables of interest. GBP flows are expressed in millions of GB pounds. Percentage flows are computed as the ratio of platform specific
pound flows to total assets under management at the end of the previous year. Each column represents a separate regression. All regressions include a set of lagged
control variables: the fund age, the fund size (the natural logarithm of the fund’s size in the relative flow regressions), the volatility of monthly fund returns, fund
turnover, the total expense ratio for the fund, indicator variables for Morningstar five star-rated funds, Morningstar Analysts’ gold-rated funds (previously elite), and
Morningstar Analysts’ gold-, silver-, or bronze-rated funds (previously elite or superior), performance percentiles and indicator variables for calendar years (not
reported) and platforms-individual fund absorbing fixed effects. Performance percentiles are calculated over the previous one and three years based on funds in the
same Morningstar category.Results are presented for the full sample period as well as for the period before and after the implementation of RDR for new investments
by each platform. t-statistics based on standard errors clustered at the mutual fund level are included in parentheses. Significance levels are denoted by *, **, and
***, which correspond to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                     40


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
            Table 7: Performance of Recommended and Non-Recommended Mutual Funds
Panel A of this table shows the performance of mutual funds that are listed as recommended by the platforms in our
study. It also shows the performance of mutual funds not recommended in these lists, and the difference in performance
between recommended and non-recommended mutual funds (for the full as well as the Pre- and Post- RDR samples).
Performance is measured using returns in excess of benchmarks selected by Morningstar as well as alphas from a model
that uses Morningstar category benchmarks as factors and expressed in % per year. Within category comparisons are
made by pairing recommended funds with non-recommended mutual funds classified in the same (level 2) Morningstar
category. Results are separately shown assuming mutual funds are held only for the period they are recommended as
well as for five years starting each listing month (or until the end of our sample period). Panel B separately shows the
performance (one factor alphas within category comparison) of mutual funds that are listed as recommended by
platforms and Morningstar, by platforms but not by Morningstar, and by Morningstar but not by platforms. Panel C
shows, for each of the three categories of funds mentioned above, the percentage of funds affiliated with the platform
and the pre-RDR average revenue obtained by the platforms from each pound individuals invest in these funds. These
statistics are compared to the same statistics for funds in the same Morningstar category but not recommended. The t-
statistics in the Panels A and B, where we use portfolio methodologies, are based on standard errors, robust to
conditional heteroscedasticity and serial correlation of up to two lags as in Newey and West (1987), and are reported in
parentheses. The t-statistics in Panel C, where we use panel methods, are based on standard errors clustered at the fund
level. ***, **, * denote statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                               A) Platform Recommendations
                                  Holding Period for as long as Listed                     Five-year Holding Period
                                           Avg. Excess Ret. One Factor                    Avg. Excess Ret. One Factor
                          Avg. Excess Ret. over Benchmark -  Alphas -    Avg. Excess Ret. over Benchmark -  Alphas -
                          over Benchmark Within Category Within Category over Benchmark Within Category Within Category
                                             Comparison     Comparison                      Comparison     Comparison

Recommended Mutual            0.08%             0.06%              0.58%        -0.01%             -0.03%              0.45%
Funds                         (0.11)            (0.08)             (0.61)       (-0.02)            (-0.03)             (0.50)
Non-Recommended Mutual        -0.86%            -0.54%            -0.22%        -0.84%             -0.51%              -0.18%
Funds                         (-1.35)           (-0.81)           (-0.28)       (-1.32)            (-0.76)             (-0.22)
Recommended minus Non-         0.94%             0.60%             0.80%         0.83%              0.48%               0.63%
Recommended (All)            (3.75)***         (2.88)***         (3.49)***     (4.32)***          (3.21)***           (3.56)***
 Recommended minus Non-        0.88%            0.61%              0.85%         0.76%              0.45%               0.59%
 Recommended (Pre-RDR)       (3.13)***         (2.44)**          (3.06)***     (4.08)***          (2.95)***           (3.33)***
 Recommended minus Non-        1.29%             0.63%             0.72%         1.11%              0.60%               0.66%
 Recommended (Post-RDR)       (2.39)**         (3.05)***         (3.11)***      (2.22)**          (3.40)***           (3.22)***




                                                                                                                                  41


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                                                        B) Platform vs. Morningstar Recommendations: Performance
                                                                                 Platform
                                                                              Recommended
                                              Platform and Morningstar                         Morningstar Recommended but not
                                                                                  but not
                                                    Recommended                                       Platform Recommended
                                                                                Morningstar
                                                                              Recommended
                                        Morningstar Gold,                                     Morningstar Gold,
                                                           Mornigstar Gold                                        Mornigstar Gold
                                        Silver or Bronze                                       Silver or Bronze
                                              1.07%             1.79%             -0.03%             0.34%            0.92%
          Recommended Mutual Funds
                                              (1.26)           (2.14)**           (-0.03)            (0.45)           (1.08)
One Factor Non-Recommended Mutual            -0.23%             0.02%             -0.37%            -0.35%           -0.44%
 Alphas: Funds                               (-0.29)            (0.02)            (-0.46)           (-0.45)          (-0.49)
 Holding Recommended minus Non-               1.29%             1.77%              0.34%             0.70%            1.36%
Period for Recommended (All)                (5.80)***         (4.30)***            (0.71)          (3.25)***        (2.78)***
as long as    Recommended minus Non-         1.43%             1.55%              0.25%              0.75%            1.51%
  Listed      Recommended (Pre-RDR)        (5.56)***         (3.54)***            (0.43)           (2.97)***         (2.59)**
             Recommended minus Non-          0.74%            2.77%               0.81%               0.46%           0.72%
             Recommended (Post-RDR)         (2.16)**         (2.64)**            (2.17)**            (1.79)*          (1.32)
                                             1.04%             1.47%             -0.46%              0.33%             1.15%
          Recommended Mutual Funds
                                             (1.30)           (1.85)*            (-0.43)             (0.44)            (1.38)
           Non-Recommended Mutual           -0.17%             0.26%             -0.30%             -0.51%            -0.37%
One Factor Funds                            (-0.21)            (0.30)            (-0.38)            (-0.67)           (-0.46)
  Alphas:
           Recommended minus Non-            1.21%             1.21%             -0.16%              0.84%             1.52%
 Five-year Recommended Mutual Funds        (5.70)***         (3.49)***           (-0.43)           (4.47)***         (3.71)***
  Holding
              Recommended minus Non-         1.37%             1.20%             -0.29%              0.93%             1.64%
  Period      Recommended (Pre-RDR)        (5.62)***         (2.94)***           (-0.63)           (4.24)***         (3.36)***
             Recommended minus Non-          0.66%            2.67%               0.87%               0.45%           0.57%
             Recommended (Post-RDR)         (2.09)**         (2.63)**           (3.08)***            (1.72)*          (0.97)
                                       C) Platform vs. Morningstar Recommendations: Revenue from Funds and Affiliation Status
                                                                            Platform
                                                                          Recommended
                                            Platform and Morningstar                         Morningstar Recommended but not
                                                                             but not
                                                  Recommended                                      Platform Recommended
                                                                           Morningstar
                                                                          Recommended
                                       Morningstar Gold,                                    Morningstar Gold,
                                                         Mornigstar Gold                                       Mornigstar Gold
                                       Silver or Bronze                                      Silver or Bronze
                  Recommended Mutual          0.64            0.63                 0.64                0.68            0.68
                        Funds             (66.88)***       (33.98)***          (58.39)***          (76.61)***       (21.70)***
    Platform
                   Non-Recommended            0.60            0.61                 0.56                0.64            0.64
 Revenue from
                      Mutual Funds        (65.86)***       (46.45)***          (54.34)***         (116.46)***       (44.02)***
  Fund (in %)
                  Recommended minus           0.04            0.02                 0.09                0.03            0.03
                   Non-Recommended         (3.97)***         (1.22)             (8.41)***           (4.40)***         (1.23)
                  Recommended Mutual         2.30              0.44               5.44                 2.27             1.94
                        Funds              (2.53)**           (1.01)           (3.90)***            (4.84)***          (1.34)
                   Non-Recommended           1.09              1.14               1.66                 2.35             2.05
Affiliated (in %)
                      Mutual Funds        (7.29)***         (5.16)***          (5.38)***           (11.64)***        (4.00)***
                  Recommended minus          1.21              -0.70              3.78                -0.08            -0.11
                   Non-Recommended          (1.39)           (-1.36)           (2.89)***             (-0.17)          (-0.07)




                                                                                                                               42


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
             Table 8: Changes in Fund Fees and Charges and Platform Revenue from Funds
                                           following RDR
This table shows the average change in the cost of mutual funds to platform investors (Fees and Charges) and revenues
obtained by platforms from investments (Platform Revenue from Funds) following the implementation of RDR. Fees
and Charges are computed using information on platform specific charges and rebates (Platform Specific) and include
direct payments to platforms after RDR. The first row in the table shows this difference computed using all funds offered
in the platforms. The second row shows the difference computed using only mutual funds offered in platforms both
before and after the implementation of RDR (i.e., a direct comparison of fees before and after RDR for the same funds).
The third row shows the difference in Fees and Charges between funds that were only offered in platforms after RDR
and funds that were only offered in platforms before RDR. The differences in the first and third rows, where funds
before and after RDR may differ in terms of asset class and Morningstar category, are also reported using fixed effects
for each of these classifications. For reference, the last column of the Table shows the differences in Fees and Charges
(Average) for all mutual funds in the sample (whether they are offered in the platforms or not). For this last calculation,
Fees and Charges are computed excluding rebates and loads and adding an average platform charge to clean shares after
RDR. p-values for the differences are reported in square brackets and are based on standard errors clustered at the fund
level. Significance levels for tests of the difference in means are denoted by *, **, and ***, which correspond to the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                Funds in Platform                               All Funds
                                             Fees and Charges Platform Revenue                               Fees and Charges
                                            (Platform Specific)   from Fund          Difference (i) - (ii)      (Average)
                                                    (i)               (ii)                                          (iii)

A) All funds vs. all funds                        -0.33               -0.18                 -0.15                 -0.17
                                               [<0.00]***          [<0.00]***            [<0.00]***            [<0.00]***
    Within asset class                             -0.33              -0.18
                                                [<0.00]***         [<0.00]***
    Within Morningstar Category                    -0.33              -0.18
                                                [<0.00]***         [<0.00]***
B) Same funds after RDR vs. before RDR            -0.26               -0.16                 -0.10                 -0.11
                                               [<0.00]***          [<0.00]***            [<0.00]***            [<0.00]***
C) Funds only available after RDR vs.             -0.55               -0.23                 -0.32                 -0.37
funds only available before RDR                [<0.00]***          [<0.00]***            [<0.00]***            [<0.00]***
    Within asset class                             -0.56              -0.22
                                                [<0.00]***         [<0.00]***
    Within Morningstar Category                    -0.63              -0.23
                                                [<0.00]***         [<0.00]***
                                                   0.29               0.07
Difference: (B) - (C)
                                               [<0.00]***          [<0.00]***




                                                                                                                          43


                         Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
                     Figure 1: Fund Flows in Response to Platform Recommendations
This figure plots the marginal effect of receiving a platform recommendation on fund flows. Marginal effects are
computed using a regression specification similar to that of equation (2) for percentage flows but including, in addition
to all the variables included in that equation, a set of leads and lags for the start and end of the recommendation as well
as interactions of these leads and lags with fund affiliation and platform revenue obtained from the fund (for Figures B
and C). The marginal effects of receiving a platform recommendation, for the first three months of the recommendation,
R(F) to R(F+2), the last three months R(L-2) to R(L), and the rest of the recommendation period, RR, as well as the
effect of being about to receive a recommendation, R-4 to R-1, and being dropped from the recommendation list, R+1
to R+4, are computed: A) at the means of all explanatory variables; B) at the mean of all explanatory variables except
affiliation which is evaluated at 0 (Non-Affiliated) and 1(Affiliated); and C) at the mean of all explanatory variables
except Platform revenue from funds which is evaluated at 1.025 (High revenue) and 0.6 (Low revenue). The figure
shows point estimates of these marginal effects as well as 95% confidence bands.
                                          A: Flows to Recommended Funds - All
                            0.5
                            0.4
                            0.3
                            0.2
                            0.1
                              0
                            -0.1
                            -0.2
                            -0.3
                            -0.4
                            -0.5
                                                              All Recs.



                                    B: Flow to Recommended Funds - Aff. and Non-Aff.
                              1
                            0.8
                            0.6
                            0.4
                            0.2
                              0
                            -0.2
                            -0.4
                            -0.6
                            -0.8
                             -1
                                                     Non-Affiliated       Affiliated



                                   C: Flows to Recommended Funds - High and Low Rev.
                              1
                            0.8
                            0.6
                            0.4
                            0.2
                              0
                            -0.2
                            -0.4
                            -0.6
                            -0.8
                             -1
                                                    High Revenue      Low Revenue




                                                                                                                       44


                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
            Figure 2: Fund Fees and Charges and Platform Revenue from Funds over Time
Figure A shows the evolution over time of Fees and Charges alternatively computed using information on platform
specific charges and rebates (Platform Specific) or average platform charges excluding rebates and loads (Average). It
also shows the evolution over time of the yearly revenue (as a ratio) obtained by platforms from mutual fund held
through the platform. Figure B shows the evolution over time of fund Fees and Charges (Funds in Platform, All Funds)
computed using average platform charges excluding rebates and loads. In all cases Fees and Charges and Platform
Revenue ratios are year-end numbers. The pre-RDR period is 2006-2013 whereas the post-RDR period (for new
investments) is 2014-2015.




                                                                                                                   45


                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3024128
