                           BE451 - Degree Project in Finance

                                            Fall 2026

                         Course director: Riccardo Sabbatucci

                      Course administrator: Anneli Sandbladh


   1. Introduction

The B.Sc. thesis serves as the “capstone” of the specialization in Finance. It is open to students
enrolled in the Finance specialization.

The B.Sc. thesis is an independent written work of a scientiﬁc character worth 15 ECTS credits. In
this work, students demonstrate that they can identify and analyze a problem, and that
they can present and defend the results. The thesis should pose a theoretical, methodological
and/or empirical challenge, illustrating the ability to think systematically and critically, as well
as showing an ability to interpret and discuss data and literature.

The goals (“learning outcomes”) of the course are as follows: Ability to analyze research questions
in ﬁnance, to summarize and to place the work vis-a-vis the existing literature, to
use econometric tools in the process, and to present the results of the analysis in writing.

The course structure is as follows: (i) introductory overview of applied research issues in
ﬁnance, (ii) econometrics and methodology lectures and seminars, (iii) individual (i.e., per
student team) and (iv) joint (i.e., all student teams assigned to a tutor) meetings with a tutor,
(v) presentation of the thesis at the end of the term.

Grading is mainly based on the quality of the submitted thesis; the presentation of the thesis
and the discussion of the thesis written by another group also factor into the grade. Professor
Riccardo Sabbatucci is the examiner of this course.

   2. Prerequisites

The Degree Project is usually done during the autumn or spring semester in the third year of
study. To qualify for the course, students must, no later than at the beginning of that autumn
or spring semester, have passed at least one of the two courses within the specialization in
which the project is to be written. They must also have fulﬁlled all course obligations (for
example, assignments and project work) except for the ﬁnal written exam in the second course
within that specialization.

   3. Format and process

Students work in pairs. Based on the thesis proposal (synopsis, see more information below),
the B.Sc. thesis course director, Riccardo Sabbatucci, will allocate a supervisor (“tutor”) for each
thesis. The students should then promptly connect with the supervisor to schedule a meeting.
The supervisor provides tutoring, support with methods, etc., but the ground rule is that students
work independently (independence will be part of the assessment). Further feedback will be
provided in the midterm group seminar, where the thesis drafts will be discussed by the
supervisor and fellow students. The completed thesis will be presented at the end of the semester.
Each student, paired with another student, will act as a discussant for one thesis.

General rules are as follows:

   -   Language: English
   -   Maximum length: 40 pages, plus appendix if necessary
   -   Should meet formal requirements in academic writing (see below)
   -   Students work in pairs
   -   Cross-department theses are not supported. That means that if you would like to have the
       grade for a thesis in Finance on your transcript, you must write a thesis in Finance
       (supervised by a tutor appointed by the Department of Finance) and team up with a
       student in Finance.

   4. Timeline and important dates

September 2, 13:15 – 15.00: An introductory lecture will provide an overview of how to write
a thesis in ﬁnance; this is also a great opportunity for you to ask any organizational questions
about the course. It is mandatory to attend the lecture.

September 7, 13.15 – 15.00 (Torsten): Main Library workshop. Attending this workshop is
voluntary but highly recommended. Students will be introduced to various databases and
literature search strategies.

September 8, 11, and 15, 12.15pm – 13.00 (Zoom – link will be posted on Canvas): Database
workshops. Attending the workshops is voluntary but highly recommended. Students will be
introduced to various databases.

Database workshops:
- September 8, 12.15-13.00 (online): S&P Capital IQ
- September 11, 12.15-13.00 (online): Holdings - Shareholder Data Platform
- September 15, 12.15-13.00 (online): LSEG Workspace
- ShoF databases: Youtube video



September 3, 8, 15, 22: Students attend tutorials in which they will be introduced to
the most common econometric methods in ﬁnance (cross-sectional regressions, panel data,
time series regressions, and asset pricing techniques). These tutorials will be led by Morteza
Aghajanzadeh, an experienced PhD student who is the teaching assistant on the course.
Morteza will also provide oﬃce hours for technical issues (coding and data collection)
throughout the semester. While attending these lectures is strongly recommended, it is not
mandatory.

September 9, 1:00pm: deadline for the submission of a “synopsis.” Students should
formulate two research questions and write a two-page synopsis on their preferred thesis
topics. Synopsis should be submitted on Canvas under “Assignment” “Synopsis submission”.
Consider the document titled “Synopsis” (on Canvas) when writing this document. Based on
students’ suggestions, given various constraints, the course director will allocate a tutor to each
group.


Mid-term group meeting with tutor: There will be a group seminar with the tutor to assess
each group's progress and discuss what remains to be done. The speciﬁc date will be decided
by the tutor.
Students will discuss their thesis progress in individual meetings with the tutor (throughout
the term). Based on feedback from these meetings, students are expected to work independently
on their theses. Students have to attend the individual meetings and the midterm group meeting
with their tutors. Applying the methods and tools discussed in the lectures and seminars to the
problem analyzed in the thesis is a key criterion for the grading of the thesis.

December 7, 10.00am: The deadline to submit the ﬁnal thesis online on the course website (via
Canvas) as well as replication ﬁles to Anneli Sandbladh (anneli.sandbladh@hhs.se).
Final versions are presented in seminars before December 12. Each group must present their
own thesis and discuss another group’s thesis. These presentations are in person, and the dates
are set by the thesis tutors.
The grade is based on the quality of the version of the thesis submitted on December 7. After the
seminar presentation, students have approximately one week to make ﬁnal corrections before a
deﬁnite version of the thesis is published on the course web by Friday, December 18 at 18.00. If
the examiner ﬁnds that the seminar version of the thesis cannot be given a passing grade,
changes may be required. In such case, a speciﬁc deadline for changes will be speciﬁed.

   5. Choosing the Subject and Getting Inspiration from Prior Work

Students writing their thesis either come up with their own ideas for the thesis or start from a
topic suggested by one of the tutors. This process usually requires a lot of reading of existing
papers, published and not-yet-published work (i.e., working papers). Students may ﬁnd it
helpful to consult for inspiration the following sources:
   - Look through recent issues of the most prominent journals in economics and ﬁnance. 1
       Usually, you will be able to download full-text versions of the papers as .pdf documents
       if you are using an IP address from SSE (i.e., if you are searching the internet from
       within the SSE network).
   - Search for papers on http://scholar.google.com. There you usually ﬁnd published as
       well as unpublished papers.
   - Also look through research topics and papers available on the Department of Finance
       faculty web pages. This might not just provide you with ideas for the thesis, and you
       may contact the faculty member for some advice even if s/he is not your tutor.

In general, it is advisable to pick topics for which you ﬁnd a reasonable number of academic
papers, as these papers will provide some guidance on the related literature, on useful sources
for data, and on appropriate techniques for the empirical analysis.

An excellent starting point of a thesis is to (partially) replicate an interesting paper and attempt
to make a meaningful extension.

Important note on sources and references: In the past, there have been cases where students
have gotten “inspiration” for topics, hypothesis development, formatting, coding, regression
design, writing etc. from other theses, without citing them. This may constitute plagiarism
that is detected by our software. This is very unpleasant for all parties involved and must be
avoided at all costs.
To be clear: cite ALL sources and do not copy without clear attribution. Even if you do not directly build
on another thesis (you are, in fact, advised not to do so but to build on research papers), this means that
you also need to cite related theses (from SSE and elsewhere). Plagiarism (such as copying from another
thesis without attribution) will result in serious consequences, including but not limited to the receipt of a
“Fail” grade for the course.

    6. Collecting Data

When writing the BSc thesis, students will likely work with data on ﬁrm ﬁnancials. Many
interesting datasets (such as Compustat and CRSP) are available via WRDS. Instructions and




1
 The Journal of Finance, Journal of Financial Economics, The Review of Financial Studies, The Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, The Review of Finance, The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
American Economic Review, Journal of Economic Literature, Journal of Political Economy, Econometrica,
Review of Economic Studies, Journal of Monetary Economics, Journal of Economic Theory, Journal of
Econometrics, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Journal of Monetary Economics.
the required class code for setting up a WRDS account are available on Canvas. Additionally,
students can use many of the databases from the Research Data Center of the Swedish House of
Finance: https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoﬃnance/data-center/
There will be demo sessions for databases provided by the library team. Participation is
highly recommended. See Section 4 above and Canvas for times and dates.

   7. Writing the Thesis

When writing your thesis, it is mandatory to use the front-page template available in the word
document on Canvas under “Resources”. Otherwise, the format should be as close as possible
as the format of published papers in the Journal of Finance (that includes, for example, the
absence of a table of contents).
The thesis should be maximum 40 pages single-spaced 12pt, not including the appendix.
One good reference for writing academic papers is John Cochrane’s “Writing Tips for PhD
Students” which is available here:
https://www.johnhcochrane.com/s/phd_paper_writing.pdf .

Finally, pay attention to writing styles and paper structures when reading research papers
published in top Finance and Economics journals; one can learn a lot from following their
example. For example, pay attention to how published papers refer to the related literature
on which they build and to which they contribute. It is not a full review of the literature! It is
a careful comparison of the contributions of the closest papers relevant to the topic.

Whenever you ask yourself how to write, structure your ideas, comment on tables, etc., look
at recent papers published in the Journal of Finance.

   8. Content and Structure

The emphasis in the thesis should be on the analysis of a well-defined topic or question in
economics or financial economics. The economic issues at the center of the thesis should be
outlined and motivated in the introduction, followed by a section with a focused presentation of
the relevant literature and (if applicable) a brief account of the stylized facts. In case your thesis
includes empirical analysis (which almost always is the case), you should provide a description
of the data and a critical discussion of your data sources. The core part of the thesis usually
presents your empirical analysis with a critical evaluation of your results and resulting economic
insights. Compare your results with the existing literature and outline their wider implications.
The conclusion should contain a short, non-repetitive summary that refers to the initial questions.

Length

The main text of the thesis should be around 25-40 pages in length, from introduction to
conclusion, including a selection of the most relevant figures, graphs, and tables. Additional and
supplementary visuals should be placed in appendices after the reference list. Longer does not
mean better; often the contrary is the case. The more efficient the exposition, the easier it is to read
and comprehend the thesis; this is an important quality criterion for the final evaluation of the
thesis.

Writing

Your thesis must be the result of independent work. Use your own language and do not simply
copy from other texts. All sources and quotations used must be referenced (detailed guidelines
follow below). Define key concepts the first time you use them. Before writing a paragraph or
section, think carefully what you would like to say and then check if what you have written is
what you intended to say. When writing, use short and direct sentences to present the text as
transparently and logically as possible. Simple and transparent writing most often reflects that
the authors have understood and mastered the problems, while complexity is too often the result
of confusion.

By writing and re-writing, your thoughts are sorted out. Therefore, allow for enough time to re-
write the text multiple times. A common mistake that students make in the thesis writing process
is to start too late with the actual writing of the thesis. The final product is graded by the examiner
and if the thesis is not well written the examiner has no chance of appropriately assessing all the
qualities of the thesis. Readability of the thesis is an important quality criterion on its own as well.

Formatting

All visuals, tables and figures, must be numbered, have a title, and must have a self-contained
caption.

The reader must be able to understand the visual (a figure or table) by reading the caption, not
the preceding text; variables used should be defined in the caption as well as the type of test
statistics depicted. Place important visuals in the main text and supplementary ones in
appendices at the very end of the thesis (after the reference list).

All but very short mathematical expressions should be displayed on a separate line and be
centered. Numbering important equations facilitates referring to them in the text. Only number
equations that are referred to later in the text. Technical and extended formal mathematical
derivations of models or presentations of quantitative methods, if they are not the key
contribution of the thesis, are best pooled in self-contained appendices.

Citing Sources in Text

We suggest you use the author/date system for in-text references as follows: “Smith and Easton
(2005) show that...” or “(Larson and Hatchett, 2004).” The page numbers for all sources are not
included in-text (unless there is a direct quote from the article), they follow the appropriate
reference in the list of references as explained above. When there are many authors (three plus),
you may use the following simplification: La Porta et al. (1997). This format is standard in the
finance literature. However, always cite all authors the first time you refer to a paper (use “et al.”
only after the first citation). Most if not all the references that you read for your thesis will use
this format as well; just follow their example. Note that it is of utmost importance for the integrity
of any academic work, including a thesis, that you correctly and comprehensively cite all the
sources that influence your work.

Bibliography

The list of references at the end of the thesis must start on a new page, with the title, “References”.
All references mentioned in the text must be included in the list of references and vice versa.
References are listed in alphabetical order and follow the same format: author, date of
publication, title of chapter/article, title of book/publication, publication information, and pages
used. If you take information directly from webpages or other electronic sources also include the
appropriate URL in the list of references. If the author is not specified, e.g., if you are using
information from a corporate author or a governmental institution, this authority should be listed
as author. Below are some explicit examples:

       -   Papers published in periodicals:

Scholes, Myron, 1991, Stock and compensation, Journal of Finance 46, 803–823.
Wright, Brian D., and Jefrey C. Williams, 1989, A theory of negative prices for storage, Journal of
Futures Markets 9, 1–13.
Schwert, G. William, 1993, The Journal of Financial Economics: A retrospective evaluation (1974–
91), Journal of Financial Economics 33, 369–424.


       -   Unpublished Working Papers:
Buchinsky, Moshe, and Oved Yosha, 1995, Evaluating the probability of failure of a banking firm,
Cowles Foundation Discussion paper no. 1108, Yale University.
Ongena, Steven, and David C. Smith, 1998, What determines the number of bank relationships?
Cross-country evidence, working paper, Norwegian School of Management.
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 1998, Regime switches in interest rates, NBER Working paper
6508.


       -   Monographs (Books) as sources:
Fama, Eugene F., and Merton H. Miller, 1972, The Theory of Finance (The Dryden Press, Hinsdale,
IL).
Keynes, John Maynard, 1930, A Treatise on Money, Vol. II (Macmillan, London).
       -   Papers that represent contributions to collective work:
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1982, Corporate financial structure and managerial
incentives, in John J. McCall, ed.: The Economics of Information and Uncertainty (University of
Chicago Press).
   -   Government documents:
Securities and Exchange Commission Release No. 24-2446, 1940.
National Association of Securities Dealers, 1998, Notice to Members 98-88.
Kennickell, Arthur, 1992, Imputation of the 1989 survey of consumer finances: Multiple
imputation and stochastic relaxation, manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.


   -   Articles in the popular press (weekly Magazines and daily Newspapers):
The Economist, 1998, Overcharging underwriters, June 27.
Morgenson, Gretchen, 1998, Stock options are not a free lunch, Forbes, May 18.
Lowenstein, Roger, 1997, Street’s incredible unshrinking spread, Wall Street Journal, April 10, C1.


   9. Submitting the Thesis

The submission of the final thesis is done in two steps (consider the deadline specified above in
the timeline):

1. Upload your final thesis though “Assignments” on Canvas. In addition to the thesis
submission, each group is required to submit a zip file (i.e., ONE file) containing date / code
replication files to the thesis to the course administrator, Anneli Sandbladh
(anneli.sandbladh@hhs.se). Non-compliance is liable to grade retention and in extreme cases
not passing the course. Read below the instructions for the replication files.

2. After your defense, upload your thesis on the Publish Thesis application through the following
link: https://cwpt2019.hhs.se/studentinfo.aspx. For that submission you can correct some typos
or small mistakes that are mentioned during the opposition, but nothing substantial. Follow
instructions from this page: https://portal.hhs.se/studentsupport/usefulinfo/pages/uploading-
thesis.aspx .

The structure of the zip file with replication files should be as follows:

   -   One or more data files;
   -   One or more code files (e.g.: do-files if you use Stata, py-files if you use Python, R-files if
       you use R);
   -   One README file.

While variable names can be in either Swedish or English, the do and README files should be in
English.
The data should be as close as possible to the original (raw or primary) data. Example: If the thesis
uses real prices, the data file should contain both nominal prices and the price deflator required
to construct real prices.

There is no restriction on the programming software and format of the files.

Files should have generous comments (in English). It is useful to organize the file(s) in sections
such as data construction, descriptive statistics, econometric results etc. Each output in the thesis
(tables, figures etc.) should be clearly displayed in the programme file.

The files should contain the thesis title, the authors, and their contact details; Each variable of the
data file should be included and described. Example: RPRICE is defined as real prices deflated
by the consumer price index and is expressed in thousand SEK.

The data sources should be clearly defined to ensure replicability. Example: PRICE is obtained
from Statistics Sweden at www.scb.se, accessed on August 2, 2026.

Refer to the following Wikipedia article for a complete description of what a README file is:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/README. In short, the README file needs to describe how to run
your files and in which order to get each table, figure, etc., of your thesis. For example, the
README would describe lines of code that need to be changed such that the code can run on any
computer. The README should specify the lines of the programme file where each table, figure,
etc., can be found. If there are several programme files, the README should clearly specify the
order in which they have to be run to replicate the thesis.

Finally, the use of confidential data does not exempt one from submitting the above. If this is your
case, (1) rest assured that the data will be securely stored and held offline, with a note clearly
stating the confidentiality of the data; and (2) please provide a copy of the NDA together with
your files. If you have doubts about the process please contact the course director.



   10. Code of Conduct

Individual work should be done independently. Group work should have only contributions
from group members. Work with traces of other persons' (group's) work will be deemed as
equally unacceptable and discarded. Rectitude and professional behaviour during the attendance
of the lectures, meetings with the tutors, and group seminars is an integral part of the final grade.
   11. Writing with Artificial Intelligence

You can make use of AI but you must submit an AI-appendix/AI-disclosure detailing what AI
tools you have used and how (it can be very short). You can use AI to improve the quality of your
writing (think of an advanced grammar checker) but do not use AI to directly write part of your
thesis, which would be against fair usage of these instruments. Also note that AI has a very
distinctive and often very convoluted writing style. You should be very careful when using these
tools that it does not decrease the quality of your essay, which is often the case.



                                                                    This version: August 14, 2026
