Stockholm School of Economics
Department of Finance
Bachelor’s Thesis in Finance
Spring 2010
 Abnormal returns prior to tender offers in the
           Swedish Stock Market

Erica Sandelin* Viktor Thell**

Abstract

For this paper 236 tender offers on Swedish listed companies have been studied. The purpose was
primarily to investigate abnormal return for the target companies between 1997 and 2009. We
believe that that there are three main factors affecting the abnormal return: leakage of information
that reach some institutions or individuals but not the whole market, pure market speculation and
rumors that are available to the whole market. An analysis was made on variables that could explain
leakage before a public announcement of a merger or an acquisition. With the results conclusions
were made that significant abnormal returns can be observed for pre bid run-ups in the Swedish
Stock Market. Since evidence could not been found for illegal insider trading and media speculation
could not explain the abnormal returns, the conclusions of this study is that the abnormal returns
are due to a combination of leakage affected by insider information and pure market speculations.

Key Words: Insider trading, Abnormal return, Pre bid run-up

*21247@student.hhs.se
**21250@student.hhs.se

Tutor: Per Strömberg
Discussants: Rehan Chaudhry (21230) & Caroline Duveblad (21184)

Acknowledgements: Firstly we would like to thank our tutor Per Strömberg for sharing his
vast experience and offering constructive support along our writing path. Secondly, we would
like to thank OMX, Zephyr and Bloomberg for providing us with essential data for this thesis.
   1. Introduction

  “Change-of-control transactions provide an opportunity for corporate insiders with knowledge of
an impending takeover to earn abnormal returns by buying stock in the target firm ahead of the first
                public announcement and selling after the bid has been announced”
                                                                (King & Padalko 2005)
Insider trading investigations and prosecutions have been most common in corporate mergers and
acquisitions (Meulbroek 1992). Still, only a few cases of pre bid run-ups that are investigated by the
Ekobrottsmyndigheten (EKB) in Sweden are taken to court. It is difficult to prove that a pre bid
run up is due to insider leakage or market speculation. The most well-known insider trading scandals
in Sweden are the Pinkerton insider affaire in 1999 and the Cevian-, Nordea- and the Morgan
Stanley- insider scandals in 2007 (For further readings see Affärsvärlden (2002) and Affärsvärlden
(2009)).

The purpose of this paper was to analyze abnormal returns prior to announcements of a merger or
an acquisition for Swedish listed companies on OMX, Nordic Growth Market (henceforth
abbreviated NGM) and Aktietorget. Apart from a general observation of pre bid run-ups on
Swedish listed companies, an analysis has been made on the underlying factors that could explain the
abnormal return before a tender offer. To obtain an up to date analysis on pre bid run-ups on the
Swedish market, the chosen time period was from 1997 to 2009. Many previous studies have been
made on insider trading, mostly on other markets than on the Swedish market. This study attempts
to bring a deeper knowledge in this field, with an analysis of explanatory variables that to our
knowledge has not previously been studied.

                                                                             2
2. Background

Discussions are held worldwide on whether regulations on insider trading are effective and whether
insider trading is improving or reducing efficiency, either at firm level or for the stock market as a
whole (Beny 2005).

   “At firm level, the debate concerns the agency implications of insider trading; that is, the effect of
insider trading on agency costs within the firm. At the market level, the debate concerns the effect of
    insider trading on characteristics of the stock market, such as stock market liquidity and volatility
                               and stock price efficiency or accuracy” (Beny 2005)

There are several arguments whether insider trading should be publicly regulated or left as a matter
for private contracting. We have summoned the main arguments necessary for the subject of this
paper. Arguments in favor of regulations are e.g. that regulations on insider trading are necessary
from a fair perspective (Eklund 2003). All existing or potential shareholders in the market should
have access to the same information (Eklund 2003). Bainbridge (2000) explains three efficiency-
based arguments for regulating insider trading.

    (1) Insider trading harms investors and thus undermines investor confidence in the securities
       markets.
    (2) Insider trading harms the issuer of the affected securities
    (3) Insider trading amounts to theft of property belonging to the corporation and therefore
        should be prohibited even in the absence of harm to investors or the firm.
                                                                       (Bainbridge 2000)
According to King & Padalko (2005), insider activity could undermine investor confidence, reduce
liquidity in secondary markets, increase the rate of return demanded by less-informed investors or
raise the cost of capital for firms, thereby reducing public welfare. Opponents of insider trading
laws, e.g. Manne (1966), believe that insider trading is efficient and therefore is a mandatory
prohibition inefficient. Others, e.g. Epstein (2004) believe that insider trading may be efficient or
inefficient depending on the firm and, in either event, Epstein would prefer private contracting over
regulation because he believe that private parties are more capable than the government of assessing
the effect of insider trading on the corporation (Beny 2005).

                                                                             3
2.1 The Swedish legal System

2.1.1 Definition of an Insider and Insider information

For this paper we have defined an insider according to the definition from the Swedish law: Lag
(2000:1087) om anmälningsskyldighet för vissa innehav av finansiella instrument. The following persons are
considered to have a position of possessing inside information in a public company:
 A member or alternate member of the company or its parent company’s board
 Executive Director or Deputy Executive Director of the Company or its parent
 Auditor or deputy auditor of the company or its parent
 Member of general partnership, which is the parent company, excluded limited partners
 A person that is of senior management or has other qualified assignment and has access to
    unpublished information, which could affect the share price of the company
 Officers and agents that according to point 1-3 above or other leading positions of a subsidiary
    could obtain access to unpublished information that may affect the share price
 Large shareholders of the company, which means owning at least 10 percent of the capital or of
     the voting rights or owning shares together with an other individual or legal entity.
 A person that has a close relation to large shareholders of the company, at least 10 percent of
    the capital or of the voting rights

The definition of insider information is according to Lag (2005:377) om straff för marknadsmissbruk vid
handel med finansiella instrument, information about non-public circumstances, which will significantly
affect the price on the financial instrument. According to that same law, it is illegal for a person who
has access to insider information to buy or sell the financial instrument.

2.1.2 Law and Regulations

Even though insider trading has existed in both the Swedish and in the international markets for the

                                                           th
last century, it was not until the middle of the 20  century that law and regulations were effectively
adapted to this phenomenon. In the US, regulations on insider trading began to develop in the
1930s. However, it was not until the 1960s that insider trading was forbidden (Eklund 2003). In
Sweden, it was not until in 1985 that insider trading was criminalized (Eklund 2003). The legislation
on insider trading was developed in 2000 where ”Insiderstrafflagen” (2000:1086) and ”Lagen om
anmälningsskyldighet för vissa innehav av finansiella instrument om anmälningsskyldighet” (2000:1087) became

                                                                             4
legal documents. In 2005 ”Lagen om straff för marknadsmissbruk vid handel med finansiella instrument
“(2005:377) also called Marknadsmissbrukarlagen (henceforth abbreviated MmL) was implemented.
MmL then replaced Insiderstrafflagen (2000:1086).

The purpose of the regulation on the insider trading is to protect the market’s and the public’s
confidence (Ds 2000:4). The legal development shows a clear trend towards an ever more restrictive
view of insider trading (Eklund 2003). In spite of this, experience from countries that have
prohibited insider trading shows that the law has had little preventive effect and the suspected
insider trading has proved to be very difficult to prosecute (Eklund 2003).

Apart from the above mentioned laws, three players have a responsibility towards prohibiting and
investigating insider trading. Firstly, financial institutions and firms such as exchanges and banks
have the responsibility to report any suspicion of insider trading or other illegal activity that would
affect the stock market. The report is made to Finansinspektionen (henceforth abbreviated FI), a
Swedish equivalent to the S.E.C.. FI who is responsible for that MmL is followed correctly, is also in
charge of the Insynsregistret, the Swedish equivalent to the Official Summary of Securities Transactions and
Holdings, a directory where trades from the insiders of a firm are registered. According to FI (2010), a
person with insider’s status must report to (FI) within five banking days after a transaction.
Ekobrottsmyndigheten (henceforth abbreviated EBM) is the third instance related to insider trading
regulations. Since 2004 EBM is solely responsible for insider investigations.

However, it is also noteworthy that pre bid run ups do not have to be a result of only insider trading.
It can also be sophisticated trading or rumor that causes abnormal returns. Kyle (1985) differentiates
three types of traders: a single risk neutral insider, random noise traders and competitive risk neutral
market makers. By using non-public information, the insider makes positive profits, while the
uninformed noise trader trades randomly (Kyle 1985). The third type of trader sets prices (in the
semi-strong sense) conditional on the information they have on the quantities traded by others (Kyle
1985). This would indicate that the third group, even though they are outsiders, would be able to
predict pending takeovers with only public information. An alignment thereby exists with the semi-
strong form of the Efficient Market Hypothesis, which will be further discussed in the next section
of this paper.

                                                                             5
3. Theoretical framework

3.1 Previous research

In a study of the American equity market, Keown & Pinkerton (1981) found abnormal returns for
announced and completed mergers during 1975-1978. The daily average abnormal return was
significant from twelve trading days prior to the announcement of a tender offer (Keown &
Pinkerton 1981). They concluded that mergers are rarely held in secret and trading on the nonpublic
information exists (Keown & Pinkerton 1981). Jarrell & Poulsen (1989) found similar results and
that there were no differences in abnormal return between hostile and friendly take-overs. King &
Padalko (1981) studied pre bid run ups of Canadian takeovers between 1985 and 2002. A recently
published thesis by Kleman & Whetje (2009) studied pre bid run-ups in the Swedish market during
1999-2008. Their results also supported the finding that significant abnormal returns exists (Kleman
& Whetje 2009).

3.2 The Efficient Market Hypothesis
As mentioned previously, discussions on insider trading have focused on whether insider trading
affects the market efficiency. The theoretical background regarding market efficiency was initiated
by Eugene Fama in 1970 with the Efficient Market Hypothesis (henceforth abbreviated EMH).
According to Fama (1970), in an efficient market any information that could be used to predict a
stock performance should already be reflected in the price. Therefore, if there are any profit-
opportunities, investors will immediately take advantage of this until there are no profit-
opportunities left and the price reaches equilibrium. Underlying assumptions to this theory are that
all information is available to everyone and therefore there are no transaction costs (Fama 1970). No
buyer or seller can affect prices alone and actors want to maximize their profits (Fama 1970).
However, in reality different markets are more and less analyzed, which has an impact on the
effectiveness of the market. Less analyzed markets tend to be less efficient (Bodie, Kan & Marcus
2008), whereby smaller firms tend to be less analyzed than bigger ones (Bodie, Kan & Marcus 2008).

Fama (1970) distinguishes the EMH between three forms.

     The weak-form hypothesis – Stock prices reflect on all information that can be derived by

                                                                             6
         examine trading data e.g. past prices.
     The semi strong-form hypothesis – Stock prices reflect on all publicly available information of a
        firm. E.g. past prices, firm’s product line, quality of management, patents, forecasted
         earnings but not the information that is only available for insiders in the company.
     The strong-form hypothesis- Stock prices already reflect on all information relevant to the firm,
        even including the insider information of the company.

The strong form hypothesis would indicate that active portfolio management would be useless and
not result in higher returns than passive portfolio management. If the strong form would explain the
market most correctly, insider trading prior an announcement would not exist. In fact, there would
not be a major shift in the stock price by the time of a tender offer announcement since the market
would have adjusted for this new information along the time as the insiders decided on the deal. On
the contrary, if there is an indication of pre bid run-ups that is followed by high abnormal returns on
the announcement day, the strong form of the EMH would not hold and the semi-strong would be
more adaptable.

3.3 M&A Premium

In the next part of this paper, underlying reasons for trading on inside information are discussed. A
clarification will be made on why stock prices fluctuate during the time of a tender offer and why
companies pay a premium to the target’s shareholders. According to Andrade, Mitchell & Stafford
(2002), between 1973 and 1998 the yearly average of the median premiums on M&A:s in the U.S.
was at 39.33 percent. But why would a company be willing to pay almost a 40 percent premium? A
premium does not have to indicate that the market does not understand the real value of the target
company, which would contradict the EMH. To understand the premium that is offered, one needs
to understand the different purposes for the underlying acquisitions. There are several underlying
factors and explanations for an acquisition, and only a few will be mentioned and discussed in this
paper. The Efficiency theory states that in general three different synergies exist: financial synergies,
operational synergies and managerial synergies (Trautwein 1990). To be assured, as an acquirer, that
you will be able to implement potential synergies plans, it is of importance to acquire the majority of
the equity in order to gain control of the target. Another theory is the Monopoly Efficiency, where the
acquisition results in a greater market share (Trautwein 1990). The third theory is the Valuation theory,

                                                                             7
which argues that an M&A is planned and executed by managers who have better information on
the target’s value than the stock market (Trautwein 1990). Given that the current stock price is the
discounted value of all future cash flows to shareholders, the positive effects of an M&A would
create higher future cash flows to the acquirers and therefore explain a higher price than the current
market price.

A challenge for the acquirer to overcome is the free-riding problem of stockholders (Grossman &
Hart 1980). If the target’s bid price is below a fictional share price, which incorporates the post
acquisition gains for the company, every shareholder has the opportunity not to tender the offer and
free-ride on the gains of the acquisition. Depending on enough of the other shareholders choose to
tender. If the Valuation theory does not hold, the bidder has to offer a price at least equal to the
market’s expected future value of the company in order to overcome the free-riding problem.
Therefore the offer price should theoretically reflect all the synergy gains to be accepted by the
shareholders.

A recent and well debated example from the M&A industry is the Kraft and Cadbury-deal where
Kraft’s final offer was 13 times Cadbury’s past EBITDA and roughly 49 percent more than the
average stock price during the month prior to the offer. According to The Financial Times (2010),
this premium was not high comparing to prior transactions in the food industry, which is on average
12 times the EBITDA. Some of the reasons that were previously explained would motivate the
acquirer to pay such a high price for the target. Kraft’s CEO, Irene Rosenfeld, stated that a $675
million of annual cost synergies could be achieved by the end of the third year, at the same time as
Kraft could take advantages of the geographical and product markets where Cadbury is present
(Financial Times 2010).

3.4 Factors contribution to increased leakage and abnormal return

The existence of pre bid run-ups does not necessarily have to indicate illegal activity. King &
Padalko (2005) explains that studies of corporate takeovers have not been able to discern whether
pre-bid run-ups reflect illegal insider trading (including leakage), the market’s anticipation of an
impending bid in response to legitimate sources such as media speculation, pure speculation (i.e. an
“acquisition premium” is incorporated in the share price if the market thinks the company is a good
target for an acquisition) or some combination of all three.

                                                                             8
It is hard to obtain an exact understanding of the fraction of the pre bid run-ups that is anticipated
by insider trading or by the market. For this paper different potential factors were studied that could
affect the leakage and therefore the abnormal return for a firm’s stock price before the
announcement of a tender offer. In the following section factors believed that could affect the
leakage the most will be discussed. These variables will also be explained more technically in the
Methodology section.

3.4.1 Swedish or Foreign Acquirer

The domicile of the acquirer can have different effects on the abnormal return. One could argue that
the leakage of non-public information and therefore abnormal return should be greater if the bidder
is in the same market as the target. This would result in less leakage if the acquirer was foreign.

3.4.2 Financial Advisors

Kale, Kini & Ryan (2003) discussed in their paper the advisors role in corporate takeovers. They
concluded that the better reputation the analysts have, the higher the value for the takeover will be
and the higher the probability is that the takeover becomes completed. Bodnaruk, Massa and
Simonov (2007) showed in their study that insider trading is present between the different divisions
in global investment banks. This implied that the same bank that was advisory for an M&A deal also
took a position in the target before the announcement (Bodnaruk, Massa & Simonov (2007). The
acquired stakes by the banks were shown as being positively related to the probability of observing
the bid and to the target premium (Bodnaruk, Massa & Simonov (2007). An aspect that has not been
studied is the potential relationship between the leakage and the advisory firm. Therefore this was
analyzed as well as the number of advisory firms that have been involved in each deal.

3.4.3 Deal Value

Hackbarth & Morellec (2008) found that abnormal returns are lower for larger deals than for
smaller. Finnerty (1976) found that insiders purchase shares in smaller sized companies with higher
profitability and greater dividend and that insider sells shares of the companies with the opposite
characteristics. Therefore it was of interest to observe if the deal values for the sample had a
correlation with the pre bid run-ups.

                                                                             9
3.5 Factors contribution to overall higher bid-premium

A number of factors in a take-over lead to higher offered bid-premium. Therefore a number of
control variables are needed to normalize the above stated factors. If these control variables are not
included, the correlation between factors impacting abnormal returns and factors impacting the bid-
premium could result in false interpretations about the cumulative abnormal return.

3.5.1 Cash or Stock

As many previous papers Faccio & Masulis (2005) concluded that the deal structure can be a
depending factor on corporate governance, corporate control and other financial risks. Masulis,
Wang & Xie (2007) found that the deal structure has an effect on the bidder’s return, where cash has
a positive impact and stock had a negative one on the return. This should intuitively also have an
effect on the pre bid run-up.

In a stock-swap offer, the value of the deal during the accept period is not known at the time of the
announcement since there is uncertainty about the acquiring firms’ future stock price. Hence, deals
offered with cash should intuitively converge to the offered cash price more quickly than with stock-
swap and hybrid forms.

3.5.2 Rumor and Media Speculation

Pre bid run up do not always have to be a result of insider trading. Sometimes the media speculates
of a potential takeover before the actual announcement date, which can lead to abnormal trade on
the speculated firm’s stock. However, insiders might be using the media as an alibi for their insider
trading, making it look like the pre bid run up is due to public information. The prosecutor accused
the Cevian-insider of acting in this way (Affärsvärlden 2010). The tender offers that the prosecutor
is referring to are Biacore, Gambro and Skandia Försäkring AB. Due to these accusations an
individual evaluation has been made on the abnormal returns for these stocks, shown in the
Empirical Results.

                                                                            10
3.5.3 Volume

A common attribute for the insider trader is that they prefer to trade when the stock is liquid
(Admati & Pfleiderer 1988). The reason for this is to minimize their impact on the trading volume.
The liquidity of a stock can have numerous other effects on the pre bid run-ups. E.g. financial
institutions tends to follow stocks that are liquid and don’t put as much emphasis on stocks of
smaller firms with illiquid stocks. This would have an impact on the speculation of a potential M&A
before the public announcement.

4. Data

The data sample contained potential acquisitions, tender offers, where the target was a publicly
traded company listed on any of the Sweden’s three stock exchanges: Nasdaq OMX, NGM or
Aktietorget. The time frame was between 1997 and 2009. The initially data sample was on 448
tender offers. An exclusion was made on divestments and minority stake offers since those deals do
not usually yield the same magnitude of shift in stock price as bids for control do. More precisely,
the data sample only included tender offers on acquisitions, IBOs, mergers where the offer resulted
in a percentage of the shares that would guarantee the bidder control of the target (over 50 percent)
and the percentage of shares for the deal equaled at least 15 percent. However, offers from acquires
that all ready had a majority stake in the target and want to increase their ownership, e.g. from 60
percent to 90 percent was excluded. Finally, the offers that were a follow-up bid or a counter-bid
were excluded if the new bid was made less than a year from the original offer. This was due to the
fact that the target already was heavy scrutinized by the market. This resulted in 256 tender offers. A
continued elimination of the tender offers was made by also excluding offers where the target had
done an IPO fewer than 100 trading days prior the offer due to estimation problems and very high
attention from the market. Also where the acquirer has bought some part of the target’s equity bit by
bit, so called a toehold. Lastly, the data sample did not contain bids where previous bids had been
offered by the same acquirer within a year. The total data sample resulted in 236 deals.

The data was collected from different databases, depending on the required data. The tender offers
were collected from two different databases; OMX for all deals where the company was listed on
OMX and Bloomberg for all deals where the company was listed on NGM or Aktietorget. From

                                                                            11
these databases the deal value and the payment structure was obtained as well as the information on
whether or not it was successful. The stock prices, the trade volume and the market value of the
bidder were obtained through Datastream. The information regarding the deal, such as the financial
advisor, the rumor date and percentage sought, was collected through the database Zephyr.

Trading day zero was defined as the first trading day where the market can react on the
announcement of a deal. This means that in those cases where an announcement reaches the market
post market close or when the stock exchange was closed, the trading day after as the day zero was
used.

4.1 An overview of the data

In the Appendix (D1), the reader finds an overview of all the 236 tender offers, where the target, the
bidder, the announcement date and the CAR (-10;-1) CAR (-5;-1) are presented.

In D2 descriptive statistics is presented as well as data for most of the studied explanatory variables
on leakage and the control variables. This table will hopefully give a clearer overview of the data
sample. In the results section (A5) the reader firstly obtains an overview over the bidder’s financial
advisors. The firms that have been involved in most deals are Enskilda (15 percent), Handelsbanken
(11 percent), Carnegie (6 percent), Nordea (5 percent) and ABN Amro (4 percent). The rest of the
advisors were individually involved in a too small number of deals and were therefore categorized
into groups. The average number of financial advisor per deal was 0.85. Even though several of the
deals were advised by numerous advisors, 31 percent of the deals did not report a use of financial
advisory services. This could be due to the fact that they only had juridical or accounting advisories,
that they did not to report this information correctly or that they just did not use any advisories for
the deal.

Among the 236 deals, 67.2 percent of the deals were paid with cash, the rest with stock or a hybrid
form of payment. 82.4 percent of the bids were successful and 28.2 percent of the average trading
value per day during the estimation window had a value of less than 10 million SEK.

                                                                            12
5. Methodology

In order to examine if insider trading has occurred for listed Swedish companies that has been
exposed by a tender offer, an event study was performed in accordance to Keown & Pinkerton
(1983), King & Padalko (1981), Meulbroek (1981) and other prior research in this field. An event
study is a statistical method to assess the impact of an event on the value of a firm. The statistical
software package STATA was used for all the analysis

The method included two steps. The first step, the event study, was to measure the amount of
abnormal return prior to the announcement day which could indicate leakage. This was followed by
a more profound Ordinary Least Squared (OLS) analysis of the cumulative abnormal return for
every firm, which included a search for specific parameters that could explain the abnormal return.

5.1 First-step

The event study was divided into two time periods, the estimation window and the event window.
One could also add a post-event window as shown in the figure below, however this data was not
seen as needed for the regression and analysis for this paper. The estimation window was tested for
the stock returns ranging from 120 to 31 trading days prior to the announcement (-120, -31). The
intention with this time span was to obtain a good estimate of the normal return of the target’s
stock. As well as limiting the amount of noise in the estimate due to leakage. For the event window,
stock returns ranging from -30 trading days prior the announcement up until one day before the
event (-30,-1) were included.

Even though the noise might have been limited by not taking (-30,-1) trading days into account
when estimating the normal return, some noise would be included since the returns for a specific
firm are related to news like dividends announcement, financial reports, capital structure changes
that could have occurred during the estimation periods. The main goal was however to acquire a
normal return which would reflect on the current state of the firm.

                                                                            13
  Estimation Window Event Window Post-event window
      Τє(T0,T1] Τє(T1,T2] Τє(T2,T3]

T0 T1 0 T2 T3

                                    τ

When the abnormal return was estimated, returns ranging from -120 trading days prior the
announcement up until 10 trading days after the announcement, [-120;10], were used.

The regression techniques that have been used for previous event studies were used to calculate the
different returns for this study. The following function was used to calculate the return for firm i at
date t as well as for a market proxy using adjusted prices:

                                                                          𝑃𝑖𝑡
                               𝑅𝑖𝑡 = ln              1
                                                     𝑃𝑖𝑡 −1
When estimating the normal return the predicted return from the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(henceforth abbreviated CAPM) was used. CAPM was independently introduced by Jack Treynor
(1961), William Sharpe (1964), John Lintner (1965) and Jan Mossin (1966).

                             𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝑡 ∗ 𝑅𝑀𝑘𝑡 𝑖𝑡 (2)

The chosen proxy for the market portfolio was the OMX-Stockholm Benchmark index (see graph
C1). This index is a value-weighted index containing the 80-100 largest, by market value, firms listed
on the OMX. The index performance is specifically created to serve as a good benchmark for
investors (OMX Group 2007). As pointed out by Richard Roll and Stephen Ross (1980), CAPM
regressions are condemned to get some bias in their estimates partly since one cannot find the entire
market portfolio and therefore a proxy for the market portfolio is used in practice. This will of
course also affect the regressions in this study where CAPM was used since the real Swedish Market
portfolio cannot be found.

                                                                            14
After calculating the returns, the abnormal return was defined as the difference between the
estimated normal return and the realized return. Since the excess returns were not used in (2), the
alpha from the regression was also used when estimating the abnormal return:

                        𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖𝑡 – 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑀𝑘𝑡 𝑖𝑡 3

To make sure that the abnormal returns were robust and to take the critique of CAPM into
consideration, AR was also defined as the difference between the real return and the return of the
market:

                            𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖𝑡 – 𝑅𝑀𝑘𝑡 𝑖𝑡 (4)

With the abnormal return estimates, a new variable was defined to determine if abnormal price
movements in the stock price existed before the date of announcement. Given the definition above,
we believe that abnormal return has three (aside from measurements errors) main explanations:
leakage of information that reach some institutions or individuals but not the whole market, pure
market speculation and rumors that is available to the whole market. Since it’s hard to separate the
two first mentioned main explanations these have been treated as one compounded explanation.
Abnormal return due to rumors can however more easily be taken out of the sample, as previously
explained.

The next step was to calculate a variable measuring the average abnormal return for the sample
during each specific trading day. In the appendix the measure is presented in three definitions: The
standard one derived from (3), without the CAPM-estimates (4) and a variation of (3) where
observations were excluded if they neither had a price jump at the announcement or positive
cumulative abnormal return from trading day -10 until 0. The last AAR can be said to have been the
one of greatest value for us. If the share price already is at a level near the offer, leakage would not
appear as abnormal return. The latter AAR would therefore give a more accurate view of the
existence of leakage and insider trading.

                                             𝑛=236
                                                        𝑖=1     𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡
                         𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡 =               (5)
                                                 𝑛

                                                                            15
Subsequently, the student t-test was used to determine if the AAR for the given trading day, in
relation to the announcement, was statistically larger than zero. When testing this, significance levels
for a one-sided alternative was used.

                                                               𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡
                        𝑇𝑡 =                     (6)
                                       𝑆𝑡𝑑𝑒𝑣(𝐴𝐴𝑅)𝑡
                                                                 𝑛

After t-testing all of the AAR:s, the aim was to also test if the cumulative effect was significant.
Cumulative abnormal return and cumulative average abnormal return were calculated by the
following formulas:

                                      𝑡=−1
                                      𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖= 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡  (7)
                                      𝐼=−10

                                                 𝑛=236
                                                           𝐼=1     𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡
                          𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡 =            (8)
                                                    𝑛
5.2 Second step

For the next regression, analyzes were made on certain deal characteristics and their impacts on the
cumulative abnormal return. CAR during the last 10 days was used as the base variable for the
dependent variables. The large number of different forms of CAR led to noisy dependent variables.
The time-period was chosen given the point in time that the t-tests suggested that the cumulative
abnormal return became statistically significant and should therefore be least noisy. To robust test
the definition, a longer and a shorter time window was also used.

Intuitively, the abnormal return should be positive correlated to the bid premium. Therefore, to
shield against this matter, the following equation was used with and without the minimum and
maximum constraint:

                                  𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖 𝑡 − 10; −1
                  max ( 0 ; min                     ; 1 ) (9)
                                           𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖 𝑡 − 10; 0

                                                                            16
Given earlier work in both fields of pre bid run-ups before tender offer announcements and in the
more general field of M&A, the following set of independent variables were used to establish if there
are certain variables that impact abnormal return. Some of these variables were described more
profound earlier in this paper. In this section a more technical explanation will be given to each
variable.

5.2.1 Leakage proxy

The intention of this variable was to measure the amount of abnormal trading during the last week.
This was defined as the average trading volume during the last two trading weeks (-10;-1) (because
the CAAR starts to be significant 10 days before the announcement day) divided by the average
trading volume from the start of the sample (-120) until the trading day (-11):

                                 𝑡=−1
                                    𝑖=−10 𝑉
                                                          𝑛
                               𝑡=−11         (10)
                                   𝑖=−120 𝑉
                                                           𝑛

If the coefficient for this variable in the OLS regressions is positive then it implies that on average,
the higher the trading volume is during the last two weeks, the higher is the CAR. This relationship
could suggest that the leakage is of a high enough magnitude to drive up the trading volume and
therefore it is analyzed as a proxy for leakage.

A version of this variable was also tested when one was subtracted from the formula. This was due
to worries that the variable would take up parts of the intercept since its average was close to one.
The different definition did not impact the results.

5.2.2 Published rumor dummy

To divest any bias due to media speculation and other rumors of acquisitions, Zephyr’s database was
used to observe the difference between the rumor and the announcement date for the tender offers.
Two dummy variables were created; the first one took a value of one if the rumor occurred during
the last two weeks prior to the offer and zero for all other rumor periods, including no difference
between the rumor date and the announcement date. The second dummy took a value of one if
there was a difference between the rumor date and the announcement and zero if there had not

                                                                            17
existed a rumor period and if the first dummy had a value of one. The first should control for false
CAR due to public information during the event window, the second should measure the effect of a
firm being on some kind of “watch list” for investors.

5.2.3 Financial advisors

As explained earlier in this paper, financial advisors to each tender offer have been observed, since
we wanted to measure the effect of certain institutions on abnormal return. The intention was to
take financial advisories, lawyers and accountants in consideration. However, the information on
which lawyers or accountants that was behind each deal was scarce and these advisory services were
in most cases made by many different smaller firms and therefore this information became
insignificant.

After have gathered data on financial advisors a set of dummy variables were created for each
financial advisor for the bidder. The exclusion of the target’s advisory was due to the fact it had
fewer observations and that in some cases the target and its advisory are not aware of the proposed
acquisition before the public announcement. A bank or an M&A boutique that had been advisories
to more than 10 deals obtained their own dummy variables. The rest were categorized into three
groups; other Scandinavian M&A advisories, smaller M&A advisories and other international banks.
A group was also created for those who had not reported usage of financial advisory services. The
type of deals that did not report a financial advisor was of different characteristics and therefore
should not create any bias in the regressions.

5.2.4 Number of Advisors

The intuition was that the number of persons involved in a deal should have a positive correlation
with the probability of leakage. Therefore the effect of number of financial advisors working on the
buy side of the deal on the abnormal return was measured.

5.2.5 Deal Value

To measure the effect of the deal size on the abnormal returns, each value of the potential
acquisition was studied by taking the share price offer times the number of shares that the buyer
wanted to acquire. The logarithm of Deal Value was used in the regression since we believe that the

                                                                            18
effect should be non-linear. E.g. an increase in Deal Value from 15 million SEK to 20 million SEK
probably does not have the same effect as an increase from 2000 million SEK to 2005 million SEK.

5.2.6 International or domestic deal

Since all the targets in the data sample were Swedish public firms, the intention was to observe if the
nationality of the acquirer would influence the abnormal return. It can be argued that the
Scandinavian market is relatively closely integrated with most of the financial firms having their main
operations in these countries. Therefore “international” was defined as outside Scandinavia. A
dummy variable was created where the variable took the value of one if the acquirer was a firm
outside of Scandinavia and zero otherwise.

5.1.7 Payment type

To control for the fact that cash offers have greater post announcement return than stock swaps and
hybrids, a dummy variable was created. This dummy took a value of one if the payment type of the
tender offer was cash and zero if the deal structure was in another form; stocks, swaps or hybrids.

5.1.8 Volume

When observing all targets, it was noticed that some firms’ stocks were very illiquid and not trading
as often as others were. Therefore another dummy was created, which controlled for the illiquidity
of the targets’ stocks. The dummy took the value of one if the average trading value per day during
the estimation window had a value of less than 10 millions. The level was selected after observing
very small price movements for stocks that had a value of trading volume lower than 10 millions.

Another variable for volume was also used to control for differences in liquidity for stocks above the
dummy level. The logarithm of the trading volume was used since it can be argued that the
relationship between trading value and CAR most likely is non-linear. I.e. an increase from 4 million
SEK to 12 million SEK does not have the same impact as a trading volume increase from 1000
million SEK to 1008 million SEK. This variable could also work as a proxy for less analyzed stocks
since financial institutions tends to follow stocks that are liquid and don’t put as much emphasis on
stocks of smaller firms with less liquid stocks.

                                                                            19
5.1.9 Time-periods

Abnormal returns can be believed to be different during certain time periods. We believed that the
trends of M&A:s is most likely due to factors that would have an effect on the industry over more
than a year and therefore wanted to control for this. Since the intention with this paper was not to
look at a yearly effect on insider trading such as an implementation of a new law, time periods was
believed as a better control variable for abnormal returns. The time periods were 1997-2000, 2001-
2004 & 2005-2009.

5.2 Second Regression

With the above defined regressors a number of regressions were performed. Several different
versions of the CAR as the regressands were used. The main independent variable was CAR (-10,-1).
A CAR with the same time-period was used excluding the observations without high AR on the
announcement day and with a negative CAR (-10, 0). However, in general it is hard to choose a
correct CAR-variable since the form of the cumulative abnormal return greatly differs amongst the
different observations.

Thereafter, the CAR with a range of different regressors was tested. First with each variable group
by themselves, e.g. all the advisors dummies as regressors or the Leak variable as the lone regressor.
After this, more variables were added in different steps to determine the true effect they had on the
regressand. With this methodology a better understanding hoped to be obtained for which of the
variables that was correlated with each other. The Leak variable was dropped in some of the
regressions since this variable had a strong effect.

6. Empirical Results

In our first part regression significant abnormal returns were found for all three definitions of AAR.
In graphs C2 & C3 in the results section, one can observe the CAAR both including and excluding
the observations without a high abnormal return at the announcement day or when they had a
negative CAR (-10,0). In both cases the CAAR starts to become positive from trading day -25 and
the CAAR at trading day -1 is equal to 6.3 percent and 6.9 percent respectively. Graphs in C4 & C5
shows normalized versions of C2 & C3 where the CAAR at the event day is set to one and the rest
of the CAAR’s at the different days are relative to that day. There it can be observed that

                                                                            20
approximately 27 percent and 28.6 percent respectively of the total CAAR was reached one day
proceeding to the event.

During the last week of trading before the event, four out of five trading days experienced
significant AAR (B2). The results are also robust to the definition of AR since the same four trading
days were significant (although not at the same level) in the model without beta estimation (B2).

In the model where observations with negative run-up were excluded the same results as above were
found but more statistically significant. The AAR during the last trading week ranges from 0.45
percent up to 1.20 percent in the three definitions. These returns are large enough to also be
financially significant.

The CAAR displayed in the graphs starts to be significant at the 5 percent level 10 trading days
before the event (B3) where the last three days are significant at the 0.1 percentage level. The CAAR
without the negative observations is significant at the 5 percent level 13 trading days prior to the
event and the full last trading week the significance levels are below 0.1 percent (B3). The CAAR are
well above 2 percent at the start of the next to last trading week and hence the results are also
financially significant.

B4 displays the impact of our explanatory variables on CAR (-10,-1) (except the Advisor dummies).
The fact that the Leakage variable was significant means that the CAR was on average higher the
more the average trading volume exceeded the standard trading volume. This variable was also
significant when controlling for the more illiquid companies (Volume < 10 million), which more
easily could obtain high values of the Leakage Variable. The variable was significant in all regressions
whichever variables that were used simultaneously. No other variable other than the Leakage
Variable and the intercept were significant at the one percent level. Overall the regressions had a low

  2
R , this could be due to the fact that the factors that explain the CAR are hard to quantify or because
of the earlier mentioned different forms of CAR for each observation. The fact that the leakage
variable was the only significant variable could be explained by that this variable does not depend as
much on the different forms of CAR since it is defined with the same time window as the
dependent variable.

In B4 one can see that the other variables display less consistency in their coefficients. The time-
periods were the only other set of variables that were significant when working as the only

                                                                            21
regressors. The sub-period 1997-2000 had a high negative value with 2005-2009 as the time base.
Likewise when 1997-2000 worked as the base, 2005-2009 had a high positive value, although not
significant. The sign of the 2001-2004 time period dummy depended on which of the other two
time-periods that was used as the base period. The size of the coefficients and whether they were
positive or negative were robust to adding other explanatory variables, controlling for certain types
of deals being more common during different years. This suggests that the trend is going towards a
market with more abnormal returns and reactions prior to announcements.

Our other explanatory variables were insignificant at acceptable levels although they had the
anticipated signs. The signs suggested that the CAR decreases with large deals and with international
acquirers. On the other hand the CAR increased with the number of firms working as financial
advisors on the deal and with the average volume of the target. The latter variable could, as
explained earlier, also be viewed as a proxy for number of analysts covering the company.

None of the control variables Cash and Success, which were used to try to control for a high bid
premiums were significant. Cash had the expected sign but success did not. Success was used as a
proxy for the investors’ estimation of a successful bid when they obtained information about the
deal. The fact that this had the wrong sign could be due to the variable working bad as proxy,
market did not successfully incorporate the probability of success in their valuations or because of
the low variance of the variable.

In the regressions when advisors were included, the results did not differ vastly (B5). In one of the
regressions the dummy for smaller “unknown” financial advisors were negative and significant. This
was without controlling for the value of the deal. When controlling for the Deal Value the “Other
Advisors” was still negative but it was insignificant. The signs of the other advisor dummies were
also hard to interpret since they differed depending on which other characteristics that was included.

When using CAR (-10,-1) excluding the observations without a negative run-up as the dependent
variable (see B6 & B7) the results were mainly equal to our main CAR. The same can be said for B8
where the percentage of the total CAR (-10, 0) was used. The only striking difference was that in
these last regressions, the dummy for rumor during the event period was positive instead of
negative. However they were more insignificant than in the other regressions.

                                                                            22
A couple of other regressions with different dependent variables can be viewed in the appendix
(under other regression results).

King and Padalko (2005) investigated pre bid run-ups on the Canadian market with a data sample of
420 offers. This was a notably bigger data sample than ours and they used a different event window
and a slightly different methodology. Results from the Canadian study showed: The CAAR (-20,-1)
were 7.0 percent and the total CAAR including the announcement was 18.9 percent. Ascioglu,
McInish & Wood (2002) studied the U.S market but observing tender offers in 1995. Their CAAR
(-20,-1) was 6.4 percent and the CAAR including the announcement day was 12.7 percent. The pre
event CAAR was similar to our findings but they had a lower total CAAR (see B1 & B3).

Our data sample included the targets that have been discussed regarding the Cevian-insider scandal;
Gambro, Biacore & Skandia Försäkring AB. However, the Pinkerton scandal where Securitas was
the bidder was on a U.S. target firm and was therefore excluded from our sample. The CAR (-10,-1)
for Gambro, Biacore and Skandia Försäkring AB was 9.7 percent, 6.4 percent and -1.5 percent
respectively. That can be compared with our average CAR (-10,-1) for the whole sample, 4.5
percent. Looking at the trading volume during the time before the public announcement for these
firms we could observe a higher volatility than usual. The graphs C5, C6 & C7 shows the price
development for these firms. They also underline the problem with different forms of AR since the
price movements occur during different time-periods in the estimation- and/or event window.

7. Conclusions

Our results clearly show that there is abnormal return before the tender offers become public. Due
to a lot of different forms of CAR and the relative small number of observations it is hard to draw
any conclusions on which variables that truly effect the abnormal return before an announcement of
a tender offer, except our Leakage Variable. The positive CAR coincides with a lot of trading on the
stocks in question, which could be explained by leakage.

Since our empirical results showed that the rumor impact is not a significant explanatory variable on
abnormal returns, the pre bid run-ups should be affected by non-public information. Therefore, one
could conclude that our results are in line with the semi-strong form of the Efficient Market
Hypothesis. However, it is harder to conclude in which way our results would support this

                                                                            23
conclusion. Is the pre bid run ups due to information that only the insiders possess and take
advantage of? Or are market speculators as outsiders able to predict pending takeovers with only
public information? These two types of trading have been impossible for us to separate. And we
therefore have to conclude that abnormal returns are due to a combination of illegal insider trading
and pure market speculations.

However it is important to point out that leakage does not always have to show up as abnormal
return. There could be cases in our sample when there has been a leak and some trade on the non-
public information. This only creates abnormal return if it impacts the price setting mechanisms
enough. Likewise there could have been cases in our study where abnormal return exists due to the
random walk properties of stock returns.

8. Future research

Analyzing pre bid run-ups of only Swedish takeovers results in a small sample size especially when
the data sample is refined by different criterion. Therefore it might be of interest to broaden the
sample by observing tender offers on the whole Scandinavian market. Making the time period larger
or having a less narrow selection criterion could also be done, but that approach creates other
problems such as including irrelevant tender offers. Even though these markets intuitively have
small cultural and juridical difference, comparisons on the leakage and its explanatory variables could
be made. One could also study the change in the juridical system in regards to insider trading and
look at the effect on pre bid run-ups. Our finding of a significant relationship between abnormal
return and abnormal trading volume could also be compared and analyzed with the framework of
Behavioral Finance and particularly the buy signs of technical analysis.

                                                                            24
References

Admati, A. R., & Pfleiderer P. (1988). “A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and Price
Variability”, The Review of Financial Studies Vol. 1, pp. 3-40

Affärsvärlden (2010). ”Insiderrättegången - direkt från rättsalen”. Available
[online]: http://www.affarsvarlden.se/affarsjuridik/article719011.ece
[2010-02-03]

Affärsvärlden (2002). ”Pinkerton tillbaka i rätten idag”. Available
[online]: http://www.affarsvarlden.se/hem/nyheter/article256080.ece
[2002-05-16]

Andrade, G., Mitchell, M. & Stafford, E. (2002). “New Evidence and Perspectives on Mergers”. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 2 (Spring, 2001), pp. 103-120

Ascioglu, N.A., McInish T., & Wood R. (2002). “Merger Announcements and Trading”. Journal
of Financial Research 25(2): 263–78.

Bainbridge, S. M. (2000). “Insider Trading: an overview”. The Encyclopedia of Law & Economics, Vol. 3,
pp. 772-812,.

Baker, M., Pan, X. & Wurgler, J. (2009). “A Reference Point Theory of Mergers and Acquisitions”.
Working Paper, Harvard Business School and New York University.

Beny, L. N. (2005). “Do Investors Value Insider Trading Laws? International Evidence”. American
Law and Economics Review, vol. 7, issue 1, pages 144-183

Bodie Z., Kan A., Marcus A. (2008). "Investments". McGraw-Hill, 7:th Ed. pp. 649

Bodnaruk, A., Massa M. & Simonov A. (2007). “Investment banks as insiders & market for
corporate controls”. Review of Financial Studies, 2009, vol. 22, issue 12, pages 4989-5026

Eklund, J. (2003). “Varför förbjuda insiderhandel?”. Ekonomisk Debatt, vol 31, issue 5, pp. 18-28

Epstein R. (2004). “In Defence of the Corporation”. New Zealand Law Review 2004, pp. 707-721.

Faccio, M. & Masulis, R. W. (2005). “The choice of Payment Method in European Mergers and
Acquisitions”. The Journal of Finance,Vol. 60, No. 3, pp. 1345‐1388

Fama, E. F. (1970). “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work”. Journal of
Finance, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 383-417

Financial Times (2010). “Bigger Kraft faces tough task ahead”. Avaliable
[online]: http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b63cd0b4-3cec-11df-bbcf-00144feabdc0.html
[2010-05-20]

                                                                            25
Finansdepartementet (2000). ”Ny insiderlagstiftning, m.m.”. Departementsserien (Ds 2000:4). Available
[online]: http://www.regeringen.se/sb/d/108/a/2115
[2010-05-20]

Finansinspectionen (2007). “Marknadsmissbruk och Anmälningsskylldighet”. Finansdepartementet.
Available [online]: http://www.fi.se/Templates/SearchPage____1686.aspx?pattern=
Marknadsmissbruk+och+Anmälningsskylldighet
2010-05-20

Finansinspektionen (2009). “Detta ska anmälas” Available
[online]: http://www.fi.se/Templates/Page____10974.aspx
2010-05-20

Finnerty, J.E (1976). “Insiders Activity and Insider Information – a Multivariate Analysis”. Journal of
Financial Analysis and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 11, pp. 205-216

Grossman, S. J. & Hart, O. D. (1980). “Takeover Bids, The Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of
the Corporation”. The Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 42-64

Grossman, S. J. & Stiglitz, J. E. (1980). ”On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets”.
American Economic Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, pp. 393-408 70

Hackbarth, D. & Morellec, E. (2008). “Stock Returns in Mergers and Acquisitions”. The Journal of
Finance, Vol. 63, No. 3, pp. 1213-1252

“Insiderstrafflag” (2000:1086), Available
[online]: http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/20001086.htm
[2010-05-11]

Kale, K. & Ryan Jr. (2003). “Financial Advisors and Shareholder Wealth Gains in Corporate
Takeovers”. Journal of Finance and Quantitative Analysis¸ Vol. 38, No. 3 (Sep., 2003), pp. 475-501

Keown, A. J., and Pinkerton, J. M. (1981). “Merger Announcement and Insider Trading Activity: An
Emperical Investigation”. The Journal of Finance, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 855‐869

Kleman, W. & Whetje, A. (2009). “Pre‐Bid Run‐Ups and Insider Trading ‐ Evidence from the
Swedish stock market”. Stockholm School of Economics Master Thesis in Finance

King, M. R. & Padalko M. (2005). “Pre‐Bid Run‐Ups Ahead of Canadian Takeovers:
How Big Is the Problem?”. Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 20053

”Lag (2000:1087), Om anmälningsskyldighet för vissa innehav av finansiella instrument”, Available
[online]: http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/20001087.htm
[2010-05-11]

                                                                            26
”Lag (2005:377), Om straff för marknadsmissbruk vid handel med finansiella instrument”, Available
[online]: http://www.notisum.se/rnp/sls/lag/20050377.htm
[2010-05-11]

Litner, J. (1965). “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection on Risky Investments in Stock
Portfolios and Capital Budgets” Review of Economics and Statistics. Vol 47, pp.13-37

Manne, H. G., (1966) “In Defense of Insider Trading,” 44 Harvard Business Review, Nov./Dec.,
pp. 113-122.

Masulis, R.W., Wang C. & Xie F. (2007). “Corporate Governance and Acquirer Returns”. The Journal
of Finance, Vol. 62, No. 4, pp. 1851-1889

Meulbroek, L. K. (1992). “An Empirical Analysis of Illegal Insider Trading”. The Journal of Finance,
Vol. 47, No. 5, pp. 1661‐1699

OMX (2007). “OMX Stockholm Benchmark (OMXSB)”, Nasdaq OMX. Avaliable
[Online]: www.omxgroup.com/digitalAssets/.../8489_OMXSBenchmark_swe
[2010-03-15]

Roll, R. & Ross, S. A. (1980). “An Empirical Investigation of the Arbitrage Pricing Theory”. Journal
of Finance, Vol. 35, No. 5, pp. 1073-1103

Sharpe, W.F (1964). “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of
Risk”. Journal of Finance, Vol 19, pp. 4325-442

Treynor, J. L. (1961). "Market Value, Time, and Risk". Unpublished manuscript dated 8/8/61, No.
95-209.

Trautwein, F. (1990). “Merger Motives and Merger Prescriptions”. Strategic Management Journal, Vol.
11, No. 4 , pp. 283-295

Databases:

Datastream (Database accessed during spring 2010)

Zephyr (Database acceded during spring 2010)

OMX, www.nasdaqomxnordic.com, (Database accessed during spring 2010) Available:
[online]: http://nordic.nasdaqomxtrader.com/newsstatistics/corporateactions/Stockholm/
Tender_Offers/

                                                                            27
Results

A – Descriptive statistics

A1 – Year Distribution

 Year
 1997 4.6%
 1998 5.9%
 1999 11.8%
 2000 13.4%
 2001 9.7%
 2002 4.6%
 2003 8.8%
 2004 5.5%
 2005 6.3%
 2006 9.7%
 2007 8.4%
 2008 8.8%
 2009 2.5%
 All 100%

A2 - Time Period distribution

 Time period

 1997-2000 35.7%
 2001-2004 28.6%
 2005-2009 35.7%

A3 – Tables over Control variables

 Control variable Average
 Cash offer 67.2%
 Bid Successfull 82.4%
 Volume < 10 mil. 28.2%

                                                                            28
A4 – Explanatory variables

 Variable Average Stddev. Min Max
 Leak Variable 1.46 1.39 0.00 12.38
 Deal value 5401.12 19855.19 6.79 244891.00
 Rumor during event window 1.7%
 Rumor any time else 8.4%
 Number of financial advisors 0.85 0.75 0.00 4.00
 Volume 203.3248 797.8335 0.539091 10949.64
 Buyer outside of Scandinavia 27%

A5 - An overview of the allocation of the financial advisories for the acquiring
companies

 Advisor Percentage
 Other smaller advisors 10%
 Foreign Investment Banks 18%
 Other Scandinavian Advisors 14%
 Handelsbanken 11%
 Nordea 5%
 Carnegie 6%
 Enskilda 15%
 ABN Amro 4%
 No advisor reported 17%
 All 100%

                                                                            29
B Results from First Part Regression

B1- An overview of our results of the Cumulative Abnormal Return, CAR.

 Variable N Average Stdev Min Max
 Car -10:-1 236 4.56% 0.14 -0.60 0.85
 Car-5:-1 236 3.60% 0.11 -0.56 0.55
 Car %-normalized 236 35.89% 0.37 0.00 1.00
 Car % 236 135% 10.02 -16.83 121.75
 Car-1:1 236 18.04% 0.18 -0.18 1.18
 Car -10:-1 without negative 236 3.55% 0.12 -0.56 0.49
 Car -15:-1 236 5.25% 0.18 -0.62 1.33

                                                                            30
B2 - Table over the average abnormal return the last 30 trading days.
This table shows results with three different definitions of AR. The first one is with AR= Realized Return –
CAPM predicted return. The second one is with AR= Realized Return – Market Return. The third one is a
version of the first one where all observations that did not experience a price shift at the event day (or had
not a positive CAR (-10, 0)) are excluded. The third column in each table indicates how many of the
observations that had positive AR that specific trading day.

 T AAR t-stat Positive AAR t-stat Positive AAR t-stat Positive
 -30 0.01% 0.05 45.80% 0.05% 0.20 42.86% 0.02% 0.09 41.60%
 -29 0.48%** 1.74 51.68% 0.31% 1.08 46.64% 0.52%** 1.79 47.90%
 -28 -0.51% -2.06 44.96% -0.66% -2.53 39.08% -0.53% -1.99 41.18%
 -27 0.25% 1.06 50.84% 0.06% 0.25 44.12% 0.33%* 1.31 47.90%
 -26 0.02% 0.08 50.00% -0.19% -0.77 45.80% 0.02% 0.07 46.22%
 -25 -0.24% -0.72 52.52% -0.40% -1.18 47.90% -0.25% -0.71 50.00%
 -24 0.00% 0.01 48.32% -0.14% -0.35 47.06% -0.07% -0.14 43.70%
 -23 0.42%** 1.93 57.56% 0.35%* 1.60 54.62% 0.36%* 1.53 52.10%
 -22 0.11% 0.42 49.58% 0.16% 0.57 47.06% 0.15% 0.53 46.64%
 -21 0.21% 1.00 55.88% 0.23% 1.07 50.84% 0.23% 1.05 52.10%
 -20 -0.02% -0.07 48.32% -0.12% -0.47 43.28% 0.07% 0.27 45.80%
 -19 0.13% 0.49 52.94% 0.15% 0.54 51.26% 0.15% 0.52 48.74%
 -18 -0.07% -0.29 50.84% -0.13% -0.53 43.70% 0.00% 0.02 47.06%
 -17 0.11% 0.54 47.90% 0.00% 0.00 42.02% 0.11% 0.51 43.28%
 -16 0.19% 0.78 55.04% 0.21% 0.84 51.68% 0.24% 0.91 51.26%
 -15 -0.20% -0.67 47.48% -0.20% -0.66 47.48% -0.02% -0.10 42.44%
 -14 0.17% 0.91 50.00% 0.25% 1.27 47.90% 0.09% 0.47 45.80%
 -13 0.22% 0.81 46.64% 0.18% 0.67 43.70% 0.31% 1.10 44.12%
 -12 0.37% 1.23 51.26% 0.15% 0.49 43.70% 0.44% 1.34 47.90%
 -11 0.13% 0.39 49.58% 0.14% 0.44 46.22% -0.04% -0.16 46.22%
 -10 0.56%** 1.78 54.20% 0.33% 1.07 48.74% 0.62%** 1.84 50.84%
 -9 -0.14% -0.42 50.84% -0.24% -0.68 45.38% 0.00% -0.01 47.48%
 -8 0.18% 0.67 50.00% 0.08% 0.29 50.42% 0.13% 0.51 47.90%
 -7 0.09% 0.36 48.32% 0.03% 0.12 47.48% 0.08% 0.34 45.38%
 -6 0.29% 1.07 47.90% 0.23% 0.81 49.16% 0.33% 1.19 44.12%
 -5 0.98%*** 2.79 51.26% 0.86%*** 2.45 48.74% 1.18%**** 3.20 47.48%
 -4 0.46%** 1.80 55.88% 0.38%* 1.44 50.42% 0.63%** 2.32 53.36%
 -3 0.79%** 1.99 58.40% 0.63%** 1.66 52.52% 0.84%** 1.95 54.62%
 -2 0.45% 1.26 57.56% 0.44% 1.19 52.52% 0.48% 1.24 52.94%
 -1 0.91%**** 3.02 59.66% 0.82%*** 2.67 52.94% 1.08%**** 3.36 55.88%
 0 17.15%**** 14.51 89.50% 17.09%**** 14.49 89.08% 18.67%**** 15.20 84.87%
 Level of significance: *= 10% ; **= 5% ; ***=1%; ****=0.1%

                                                                            31
B3 - Table over the cumulative average abnormal return the 30 last trading days

This table displays results from two different definitions of AR. The first one is with AR= Realized Return –
CAPM predicted return. The second one (CAAR v. 2) is a version of the first one where all observations that
did not experience a price shift at the event day (or had not a positive CAR (-10, 0)) are excluded.

            T CAAR t-stat CAAR v. 2 t-stat
             -30 0.00% -0.15 0.00% 0.29
             -29 0.48%** 1.74 0.48% 1.79
             -28 -0.03% -0.08 0.00% -0.01
             -27 0.22% 0.50 0.30% 0.70
             -26 0.24% 0.55 0.31% 0.75
             -25 0.00% -0.01 0.08% 0.16
             -24 0.00% 0.00 0.02% 0.04
             -23 0.42% 0.60 0.35% 0.51
             -22 0.53% 0.71 0.49% 0.67
             -21 0.74% 0.94 0.71% 0.91
             -20 0.72% 0.93 0.77% 1.02
             -19 0.86% 1.15 0.91%* 1.27
             -18 0.79% 1.02 0.91% 1.23
             -17 0.89% 1.09 1.01%* 1.29
             -16 1.09% 1.23 1.24%* 1.47
             -15 0.89% 0.93 1.22%* 1.38
             -14 1.06% 1.07 1.30%* 1.41
             -13 1.28%* 1.28 1.59%** 1.71
             -12 1.65%* 1.53 1.99%** 1.97
             -11 1.78%* 1.62 1.95%** 1.87
             -10 2.33%** 1.99 2.52%** 2.25
             -9 2.19%** 1.79 2.52%** 2.17
             -8 2.37%** 1.94 2.64%** 2.25
             -7 2.46%** 1.96 2.72%** 2.27
             -6 2.74%*** 2.14 3.03%*** 2.45
             -5 3.73%*** 2.88 4.11%**** 3.28
             -4 4.19%*** 3.16 4.69%**** 3.69
             -3 4.98%**** 3.29 5.45%**** 3.73
             -2 5.43%**** 3.48 5.90%**** 3.90
             -1 6.34%**** 3.95 6.89%**** 4.45
             0 23.50%**** 11.41 24.07%**** 12.03
             Level of significance: *= 10% ; **= 5% ; ***=1%; ****=0.1%

                                                                            32
     B4 – Regressions with CAR(-10,-1) as the regressand

                        The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

R-sqP -valueNo. Of Obs.Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%Volume < 10 m.2005-20092001-20041997-2000Ln (Volume)Success Cash   Number of AdvisorsBuyer outside ScandinaviaLn (Deal Value)Rumor earlier than -10Rumor last 10 trading daysLeak VariableConstantCar -10:-1










0.0860.0064236                                                                                        (0.011)0.0299***(0.015)0.00251




0.01920.2116236                                                                              (0.048)0.0620(0.054)-0.0623    (0.009)0.0415****2




0.11120.0101236                                                                               (0.044)0.0612(0.087)-0.1055(0.010)0.0312***(0.015)-0.00273




0.0860.0243236    (0.018)-0.0013                                                                              (0.011)0.0299***(0.015)0.00304





0.11550.026226                                                                        (0.004)-0.0018(0.044)0.0626(0.089)-0.1016(0.010)0.0309***(0.033)0.00875





0.11570.0495226                                                                 (0.016)-0.0047(0.004)-0.0016(0.044)0.0627(0.089)-0.1019(0.010)0.0308***(0.033)0.00886




0.11940.0451226                                                         (0.012)0.0122     (0.005)-0.0030(0.044)0.0626(0.089)-0.1112(0.010)0.0313***(0.033)0.00607




0.11980.0744226                                                         (0.012)0.0124(0.017)-0.0058(0.005)-0.0028(0.044)0.0626(0.090)-0.1118(0.010)0.0313***(0.033)0.00618




0.00020.8312226                                                                      (0.004)-0.0010                   (0.035)0.05179



0.00150.492236                                                                (0.017)-0.0120                          (0.011)0.0489****10





0.00030.7901236                                                        (0.012)0.0031                                   (0.014)0.0430***11




0.00180.5408236                                                 (0.020)0.0124                                         (0.017)0.0373***12




0.00540.2895236                                         (0.025)-0.0266                                                 (0.023)0.0676***13




0.00050.6954236                                  (0.005)0.0018                                                        (0.018)0.0393**14




0.01230.1406236            x   x   (0.027)-0.0242(0.018)-0.0358**                                                             (0.015)0.0653****15
                                                                  33
              B5 – Regressions with CAR (-10,-1) as the regressand

                                         The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

CAR -10:-1 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Constant 0.0170 0.0112 0.0496**** 0.0076 0.0286 0.0194 0.0242
                              (0.039) (0.037) (0.014) (0.020) (0.056) (0.053) (0.019)
Leak Variable 0.0298*** 0.0300*** 0.0285*** 0.0305*** 0.0307*** 0.0304***
                              (0.010) (0.010) (0.011) (0.010) (0.010) (0.011)
Rumor last 10 trading days -0.0929 -0.0947 -0.0838 -0.0858
                              (0.103) (0.105) (0.109) (0.111)
Rumor earlier than -10 0.0619 0.0567 0.0659 0.0610
                              (0.043) (0.045) (0.042) (0.044)
Ln (Deal Value) -0.0030 -0.0029 -0.0039 -0.0036
                              (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)
Buyer Outside Scandinavia -0.0140 -0.0149 -0.0112 -0.0122
                              (0.019) (0.019) (0.019) (0.019)
ABN Amro 0.0004 0.0029 -0.0043 -0.0125 0.0048 0.0061
                              (0.025) (0.027) (0.031) (0.028) (0.027) (0.029)
Carnegie -0.0353 -0.0358 -0.0391 -0.0436 -0.0380 -0.0379
                              (0.035) (0.035) (0.031) (0.030) (0.035) (0.036)
Enskilda 0.0099 0.0087 -0.0055 0.0051 0.0140 0.0128
                              (0.027) (0.027) (0.029) (0.028) (0.028) (0.028)
Handelsbanken 0.0091 0.0100 -0.0170 -0.0058 0.0106 0.0106
                              (0.021) (0.022) (0.020) (0.020) (0.021) (0.021)
Nordea 0.0299 0.0259 0.0207 0.0128 0.0270 0.0232
                              (0.044) (0.046) (0.042) (0.050) (0.044) (0.046)
Foreign Investment Bank 0.0284 0.0280 0.0356 0.0240 0.0273 0.0270
                              (0.029) (0.030) (0.031) (0.028) (0.029) (0.030)
Other Scandinavian Advisors 0.0053 0.0034 -0.0148 -0.0031 0.0041 0.0023
                              (0.022) (0.023) (0.021) (0.020) (0.022) (0.022)
Other Advisors -0.0239 -0.0238 -0.0412 -0.0372* -0.0196 -0.0194
                              (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.022) (0.022)
1997-2000 x x -0.0391**
                                      x x (0.018)
2001-2004 -0.0006 0.0024 -0.0290
                                        (0.022) (0.021) (0.025)
2005-2009 0.0171 0.0159 x
                                       (0.020) (0.019) x
Volume < 10 -0.0032 -0.0057 -0.0052 -0.0005
                                                               (0.019) (0.023) (0.023) (0.018)
Cash 0.0243 0.0242
                                                                           (0.021) (0.022)
Success -0.0288 -0.0267
                                                                           (0.025) (0.024)
Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
No. Of Obs. 226 226 236 236 226 226 236
P -value 0.2188 0.2569 0.3948 0.2153 0.2154 0.3113 0.0386
R-sq 0.1354 0.1389 0.0322 0.1056 0.1466 0.1491 0.1011
                                                                           34
B6 – Regressions with CAR (-10,-1) as the regressand (excluding negative CAR (-10, 0)

                                     The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.
                    R-sqP -valueNo. Of Obs.Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%Volume < 10 m.2005-20092001-20041997-2000Ln (Volume)SuccessCash  Number of AdvisorsBuyer outside ScandinaviaLn (Deal Value)Rumor earlier than -10Rumor last 10 trading daysLeak VariableConstantCar -10:-1 w/o negative










                    0.08760.0081217                                                                           (0.011)0.0299***(0.015)0.01011



                     0.02530.0995217                                                                  (0.052)0.0678(0.061)-0.1022*  (0.009)0.0495****2





                     0.12140.0096217                                                                  (0.047)0.0647(0.107)-0.1582(0.010)0.0317***(0.015)0.00443




                     0.08760.0302217   (0.018)-0.0016                                                                 (0.011)0.0298***(0.016)0.01074




                     0.12690.0213210                                                            (0.005)-0.0017(0.048)0.0678(0.108)-0.1536(0.010)0.0314***(0.035)0.01385




                     0.12720.0414210                                                      (0.017)-0.0055(0.005)-0.0015(0.048)0.0680(0.108)-0.1533(0.010)0.0313***(0.035)0.01406




                     0.13060.0369210                                                (0.013)0.0118   (0.005)-0.0030(0.047)0.0673(0.106)-0.1666(0.010)0.0319***(0.035)0.01137




                     0.1310.0647210                                                (0.013)0.0120(0.018)-0.0063(0.005)-0.0027(0.047)0.0676(0.107)-0.1664(0.010)0.0318***(0.035)0.01158





                     0.00010.9037210                                                           (0.005)-0.0006               (0.038)0.05579



                     0.00270.3754217                                                     (0.018)-0.0164                     (0.012)0.0582****10




                     0  0.9747217                                               (0.012)0.0004                            (0.014)0.0533****11




                     0.00030.8148217                                         (0.023)-0.0053                                  (0.020)0.0574***12




                     0.00960.1645217                                   (0.026)-0.0365                                        (0.024)0.0838****13




                     0.00150.5421217                            (0.005)0.0031                                               (0.018)0.043**14



                    0.00920.2397217         (0.028)0.0189x  x  (0.026)-0.0129                                                 (0.024)0.0513**15     35
  B7 – Regressions with CAR (-10,-1) as the regressand (excluding negative CAR (-10, 0)

                                         The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

Car -10:-1 w/o negative 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Constant 0.0197 0.0150 0.0597**** 0.0169 0.0518 0.0472 0.0041
                             (0.041) (0.048) (0.014) (0.021) (0.061) (0.065) (0.025)
Leak Variable 0.0312*** 0.0314*** 0.0288*** 0.0321*** 0.0322*** 0.0302***
                             (0.010) (0.010) (0.011) (0.010) (0.010) (0.011)
Rumor last 10 trading days -0.1635 -0.1673 -0.1598 -0.1632
                             (0.121) (0.123) (0.124) (0.125)
Rumor earlier than -10 0.0685 0.0639 0.0712 0.0673
                             (0.046) (0.048) (0.046) (0.048)
Ln (Deal Value) -0.0028 -0.0029 -0.0044 -0.0043
                             (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.006)
Buyer Outside Scandinavia -0.0145 -0.0150 -0.0113 -0.0118
                             (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.021)
ABN Amro -0.0065 -0.0041 -0.0130 -0.0207 0.0017 0.0029
                             (0.025) (0.027) (0.032) (0.028) (0.026) (0.028)
Carnegie -0.0581 -0.0581 -0.0489 -0.0584* -0.0618* -0.0615*
                             (0.036) (0.036) (0.037) (0.035) (0.034) (0.035)
Enskilda 0.0069 0.0059 -0.0120 -0.0014 0.0115 0.0106
                             (0.028) (0.028) (0.030) (0.029) (0.029) (0.029)
Handelsbanken 0.0160 0.0169 -0.0182 -0.0034 0.0194 0.0196
                             (0.024) (0.024) (0.023) (0.022) (0.024) (0.024)
Nordea 0.0293 0.0262 0.0113 0.0037 0.0280 0.0253
                             (0.042) (0.044) (0.043) (0.050) (0.042) (0.044)
Foreign Investment Bank 0.0264 0.0263 0.0345 0.0224 0.0253 0.0252
                             (0.030) (0.030) (0.032) (0.029) (0.030) (0.030)
Other Scandinavian Advisors 0.0089 0.0073 -0.0181 -0.0062 0.0086 0.0073
                             (0.023) (0.024) (0.021) (0.020) (0.024) (0.024)
Other Advisors -0.0155 -0.0143 -0.0370 -0.0339* -0.0127 -0.0117
                             (0.022) (0.021) (0.020) (0.020) (0.024) (0.023)
1997-2000 0.0000 -0.0021 -0.0088465
                                        (0.023) (0.023) (0.024)
2001-2004 x x x
                                    x x x
2005-2009 0.0151 0.0104 0.0248
                                        (0.027) (0.026) (0.027)
Volume < 10 -0.0035 -0.0066 -0.0065 -0.0011
                                                              (0.019) (0.024) (0.023) (0.018)
Cash 0.0119 0.0119
                                                                            (0.024) (0.024)
Success -0.0384 -0.0367
                                                                            (0.027) (0.026)
Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
No. Of Obs. 210 210 217 217 210 210 217
P -value 0.2177 0.2434 0.5231 0.312 0.1854 0.2641 0.0702
R-sq 0.1495 0.152 0.0306 0.1074 0.1606 0.1621 0.0985

                                                                            36
B8- Regression with percentage of CAR (-10,0) as the regressand. Standardized so
that CAR only takes on values between 0 and 1

                                          The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

 Car % of total event return 1 2 3 4 5
 Constant 0.3020**** 0.3534**** 0.2999**** 0.1967** 0.0146
                                   (0.036) (0.025) (0.036) (0.092) (0.113)
 Leak Variable 0.0396** 0.0379** 0.0351** 0.0361*
                                   (0.018) (0.018) (0.018) (0.019)
 Rumor last 10 trading days 0.1891 0.1368 0.0985 0.0896
                                               (0.234) (0.222) (0.212) (0.195)
 Rumor longer than 10 t. days prior 0.0277 0.0267 0.0206 -0.0070
                                               (0.088) (0.085) (0.087) (0.092)
 Buyer outside Scandinavia -0.0530 -0.0624
                                                                       (0.052) (0.053)
 Ln (Deal Value) 0.0050 0.0142
                                                                       (0.017) (0.017)
 Number of Advisors 0.0207 0.0130
                                                                       (0.032) (0.032)
 Ln (Volume) 0.0163 0.0254
                                                                       (0.018) (0.023)
 1997-2000 x
                                                                      x
 2001-2004 0.1465**
                                                                                     (0.062)
 2005-2009 0.0899
                                                                                     (0.059)
 Volume < 10 m. 0.0809
                                                                                     (0.077)
 Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
 No. Of Obs. 236 236 236 226 226
 P -value 0.0302 0.6915 0.1321 0.1791 0.0517
 R-sq 0.0211 0.0046 0.0236 0.041 0.0721

                                                                            37
C- Graphs

C 1- Graph over OMXSB used as Market Proxy in the Beta Estimation

              OMXSB

    450
    400
    350
    300
    250
    200
    150
    100
     50
      0

C 2 - Graph over CAAR (-60,10)

               CAAR

  25%

  20%

  15%

  10%                                                     CAAR

   5%

   0%
        -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10
   -5%

                                                                            38
C 3 - Graph over CAAR (-60,10) (without observations without a price jump or
negative CAAR (-10,0))

               CAAR

  30%

  25%

  20%

  15%
                                                           CAAR
  10%

   5%

   0%
        -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10
   -5%

C 4 - Graph over Normalized CAAR (-60,10)

             Normalized CAAR

      120%

      100%

       80%

       60%

       40%

       20%

    Percentage of Total Price Jump0%
              -60 -55 -50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10
        -20%

                                                                            39
C 5 - Graph over Normalized CAAR (-60,10) (without observations without a price
jump or negative CAAR (-10,0))

              Normalized CAAR
      120%

      100%

       80%

       60%

       40%

       20%

    Percentage of Total Price Jump0%
              -60 -56 -52 -48 -44 -40 -36 -32 -28 -24 -20 -16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8
        -20%

C6 - Graph over stock prices for Gambro

             Gambro vs. OMXSB

                                                                          6-  1-  4  9
                     96-  91-  86-  81-  76-  71-  66-  61-  56-  51-  46-  41-  36-  31-  26-  21-  16-  11-
     121-  116-  111-  106-  101-

                           Gambro OMXSB

                                                                            40
 C7 - Graph over stock prices for Biacore

            Biacore vs. OMXSB

                                                                     6-  1-  4  9
                96-  91-  86-  81-  76-  71-  66-  61-  56-  51-  46-  41-  36-  31-  26-  21-  16-  11-
121-  116-  111-  106-  101-

                         Biacore OMXSB

 C8 - Graph over stock prices for Skandia

             Skandia vs. OMXSB

                                                                        6-  1-  4  9
                   96-  91-  86-  81-  76-  71-  66-  61-  56-  51-  46-  41-  36-  31-  26-  21-  16-  11-
   121-  116-  111-  106-  101-

                           Skandia OMXSB

                                                                             41
Appendix

D1 - Complete Data Sample (236 tender offers)

The following table shows the data sample that our event study is based on. The list consists of 236
tender offers on Swedish listed firms from 1997- 2009. The tender offers included are those where
the result of the merger or acquisition results in more than 50 % of the targets equity. The data
shown below is sorted in alphabetical order.

 Target Bidder Announcement CAR -10:-1 CAR -5:-1
                                                     Day
 ABB ABB 29/03/1999 0.143 0.160
 Academedia Newell Communications 22/10/2007 0.079 0.123
 Acando Frontec AB 14/05/2003 0.193 0.116
 Accelerator Nordic AB Optovent Enterprises Inc 15/07/2003 -0.280 -0.021
 AGA Linde AG 16/08/1999 0.126 0.000
 Ainax Scania AB 19/11/2004 -0.006 -0.004
 All Cards Service Center XPonCard Group AB 24/09/2007 0.188 0.158
 Allgon LGP Allgon Holding AB 22/08/2000 0.086 0.092
 Allgon LGP Allgon Holding AB 21/01/2003 0.025 -0.007
 Althin Baxter Sweden 22/12/1999 -0.009 0.179
 Annehem Fastigheter AB Peab AB 17/04/2009 0.050 0.027
 Arena Personal AB NorgesInvestor 4 AS 30/09/2008 -0.139 -0.007
 Arete TurnIT 13/09/2000 0.271 0.124
 Ark Travel Goldcup D 3319 AB 22/10/2007 0.218 0.220
 Artema Medical Cardias Science Inc. 10/01/2001 0.166 0.196
 ASG Danzas AG 26/04/1999 0.083 0.067
 Aspiro Schibsted ASA 17/02/2005 0.049 -0.010
 AssiDomän Sveaskog 11/10/2001 0.017 0.013
 Asticius IVG Holding 17/03/1999 0.058 0.053
 Astra Zeneca 9/12/1998 0.104 0.047
 ATLE AB Ratos AB and 3i Group Plc 19/02/2001 0.031 0.021
 AU-System Teleca AB 10/12/2001 0.052 -0.010
 Autodiagnos AB Genrad Inc 22/02/2000 -0.074 -0.009
 Avanza Bank Holding AB Nordnet AB 21/05/2002 -0.076 -0.010
 Avesta Sheffield AB Outokumpu OYJ 28/09/2000 0.075 0.081
 Balder Drott AB 9/02/2000 -0.027 -0.022
 Ballingslöv Stena Adactum AB 16/05/2008 -0.031 -0.058
 Benima Sigma AB 1/09/1998 -0.041 -0.082
 Biacore International GE Healthcare 20/06/2006 0.064 0.001
 Binar AB Pomona-gruppen AB 19/09/2003 0.150 0.002
 Biolin Scientific AB Meda AB 28/12/2001 -0.126 -0.072
 Biora Straumann Holding AB 6/04/2003 0.059 0.026
 Boss Media GEmed AB 1/02/2008 0.000 0.072
 BPA Procuritas Capital Partners 18/05/1999 0.027 0.051
 Broström A.P. Moeller Maersk A/S 27/08/2008 0.041 0.004
 BT Industries Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, Ltd 4/04/2000 0.009 0.030
 Bulten Finnveden AB 21/09/2000 0.009 -0.037
 Capio AB Opica AB/ Nordic Capital 01/09/2006 0.059 0.023
 Caran WM-data AB 14/12/1998 -0.004 -0.058
 Carl Lamm Carl Lamm Holding AB 6/05/2008 -0.014 0.016
 Carl Lamm Holding Ricoh European Holdings PLC 17/04/2009 -0.048 -0.036

                                                                            42
Target Bidder Announcement CAR -10:-1 CAR -5:-1
                                                    Day
Cash Guard AB PSI Group ASA 15/04/2008 -0.010 -0.021
Cell Network Mandator AB 7/02/2000 -0.179 -0.017
Celsius SAAB AB 16/11/1999 0.035 0.066
Celtica Ljungberg Gruppen AB 13/06/2003 0.014 -0.005
Cision Triton Fund II 30/04/2008 -0.050 -0.037
Cloetta Fazer Oy Karl Fazer AB 16/06/2008 -0.029 -0.024
Cloetta Fazer Oy Karl Fazer AB 17/02/2005 0.007 -0.006
Connecta Information Highway AB 25/02/2000 0.088 0.112
Consafe Offshore AB ProSafe ASA 3/05/2006 0.028 -0.002
Custos Custos AB/Orebro 8/11/2006 -0.007 -0.018
Dahl International AB Dahl Intressenter AB 11/02/1999 0.111 0.134
Diffchamb Raisio Group 13/02/2003 -0.002 0.038
Digital Illusions CE AB Electronic Arts Inc 15/11/2004 -0.045 -0.015
Digital Illusions CE AB Electronic Arts Inc 17/03/2006 0.015 -0.021
Diligentia Balder AB 20/03/2000 0.034 0.052
Dimension ProAct IT Group AB 15/09/2003 -0.598 -0.565
Din Bostad AB Fastighets Balder AB 26/06/2009 0.373 0.229
Diös AP Fastigheter AB 27/09/2000 0.004 0.020
El & Industrimontage Svenska AB E&I Intressenter AB 14/06/2007 0.023 -0.021
Eldon EQT Scandinavia BV 10/08/1999 -0.056 -0.008
Elverket Vallentuna AB E.ON AG 25/09/2007 0.026 0.026
Emil Lundgrens Gtie S.A 17/12/1999 0.036 0.007
Enator Tieto Corp. Oyj 3/03/1999 -0.105 -0.038
Eniro SEAT Pagine Giallo S.p.a 7/05/2001 0.077 0.059
Entra Tieto Enator AB 21/12/1999 0.125 0.039
Epsilon Danir 9/01/2003 0.056 0.022
Esselte JWCA 24/05/2002 0.037 0.077
Evidentia Claesson & Anderzen Invest 17/02/2000 -0.008 -0.064
Fabege Näckebro AB 4/06/1997 0.016 0.013
Fabege Wihlborgs Fastigheter AB 19/07/2004 0.059 0.015
Fastighets AB Tornet Fabege AB 3/02/2006 0.075 0.077
FB Industri Holding AB B&B Tools AB 6/10/2000 0.002 -0.028
Finnveden Cidron Invest 15/11/2004 0.004 0.015
Focal Point AB Telelogic AB 13/04/2005 0.013 0.026
Folkebolagen Lindab AB 8/05/2000 0.002 -0.028
Forcenergy Forcenergy Inc. 17/03/1998 -0.083 -0.032
Frango Cognos Inc. 24/08/2004 -0.014 0.010
Friluftsbolaget Fjällräven AB 31/05/2001 0.018 -0.001
Gambro Indap AB 3/04/2006 0.097 0.046
Gamers Paradise Holding AB CISL Gruppen AB 17/10/2005 0.537 0.207
GANT Procastor S.A. 11/12/2007 -0.015 0.001

                                                                           43
Target Bidder Announcement CAR -10:-1 CAR -5:-1
                                                    Day
Gexco AB Nordic Mining ASA 12/05/2006 0.455 0.305
Gibeck Louis AB Teleflex Medical Inc 12/05/1999 0.018 -0.005
Global Gaming Factory AB Global Factory Sweden AB 28/07/2006 0.307 0.374
Glocalnet Telenor ASA 7/02/2006 -0.151 -0.107
Gorthon Lines AB Rederi AB Transatlantic 7/10/2004 -0.048 0.026
Gorthon Lines AB Rederi AB Transatlantic 7/10/2004 0.073 0.026
Gotic Vasakronan 30/08/1997 -0.016 -0.020
Graninge Sydkraft 04/11/2003 0.039 0.054
Graphium Argynnis Industrier 30/04/1997 0.004 0.086
Guide Framtidsfabriken 3/12/1997 0.239 0.210
Gunnebo Industrier Segulah Stelleta Holding AB 22/07/2008 0.171 0.057
Gylling Optima Johnson Controls Inc. 29/08/2000 0.035 0.186
Gymgrossisten Nordic AB Modern Times Group AB 14/12/2007 0.082 0.009
Hoist International Hoist Intressenter 19/12/2003 0.066 0.049
Home Properties AB Home Invest ASA 24/06/2005 0.074 0.031
HQ Fonder AB HQ AB 20/06/2005 0.080 0.058
Human Care GGC Health Care LLC 14/01/2008 0.149 0.262
Humlegården Länsförsäkringar 1/11/1999 0.035 0.100
IBC Shipping ICB Shipping Ltd 20/08/1997 0.082 0.060
IBS Deccan Value Advisors Fund L.P. 30/06/2008 0.024 0.014
IM Innovationsmaklarna AB Affarsstrategerna AB 11/07/2001 -0.140 -0.168
IMS Data Martinsson Gruppen 18/02/2002 -0.224 -0.127
Industriforvaltnings AB Kinnevik Kinnevik Investment AB 16/02/2004 -0.105 -0.032
Intentia International Lawson Software Inc. 2/06/2005 0.083 0.102
Intra International AB IntraUSA Group Inc/The 2/12/2000 -0.227 -0.156
inWarehouse AB Komplett ASA 27/03/2007 0.043 -0.061
Invik & Co Milestone eHF 26/04/2007 -0.001 0.019
IRO Van de Wiele 16/08/2000 0.247 0.230
Jacobson & Widmark AB WSP Group PLC 11/05/2001 0.039 0.017
JC RNB Retail & Brands 9/05/2006 -0.082 0.007
Jobline TMT One AB 18/01/2002 0.291 0.234
JP Nordiska Kaupthing Bank hf 29/08/2002 0.038 0.006
JPBank Matteus AB 19/01/1999 -0.046 -0.024
Kalmar Industries AB Partek AB 15/05/2000 0.025 -0.022
Karlshamn BNS Industrier AB 11/07/2005 0.040 0.017
Karolin Machine Tool AB Nordstjernan AB 18/12/2003 0.042 0.029
Karolin Machine Tool AB Nordstjernan AB 29/10/2007 -0.213 -0.146
Kipling Dimension AB 17/12/2001 0.033 -0.016
Kjessler & Mannerstrale AB Traction Holding AB 14/02/2000 -0.032 -0.056
Klippan Weland AB 23/01/2006 -0.199 0.013
Klövern Wihlborgs Fastigheter AB 11/09/1997 0.024 0.037

                                                                           44
Target Bidder Announcement CAR -10:-1 CAR -5:-1
                                                    Day
Kontakt East Holding AB Multiple acquirers 26/05/2008 0.097 -0.009
Lawson International AB Lawson Software Inc 2/06/2005 0.083 0.102
LB Icon AB LBI International AB 21/03/2006 -0.013 -0.026
Ledstiernan Thuban AB 30/11/2009 -0.093 0.028
LGP Allgon Holding Powerwave Technologies Inc 1/12/2003 0.067 0.001
Lifco Carl Bennet 15/06/2000 0.005 -0.020
Liljeholmens Duni 2/12/1998 -0.052 0.002
Lindab Lindab Intressenter 15/05/2001 0.033 0.038
Lindex KappAhl Holding AB 13/08/2007 0.056 0.002
LPI Precision Ab Finnveden AB 11/11/1998 -0.118 0.000
Lundin Oil Talisman Energy Inc. 21/06/2001 0.145 0.100
Mandamus Fastigheter LRF Fastigheter 20/03/2003 0.044 0.034
Mandator Fujitsu Services 8/10/2007 0.008 -0.012
Mandator/ Cell Networks Pixelpark AG 20/03/2000 -0.077 -0.127
Mariebergs Tidning Bonnierföretagen 31/03/1998 0.017 0.038
Martinsson Gruppen AB Atle AB 16/09/1999 0.228 0.161
Matteus NH Nordiska Holding 10/04/2001 0.005 -0.074
Mogul Adera AB 26/11/2003 0.135 0.322
Monark Grimaldi Industri - koncernen 20/11/1999 0.211 0.066
Munksjö AB Smurfit Holdings 29/01/2002 -0.001 0.005
Måldata Sigma AB 17/12/1999 0.235 0.290
N&T Simbel 15/11/1999 0.025 0.041
Narkes Elektriska AB Segulah Alfa AB 11/09/2006 -0.006 0.002
Naturkompaniet Friluftsbolaget Ekelund & Sagner AB 20/03/2000 0.214 0.137
Nefab NPNC Intressenter AB 27/08/2007 0.120 0.149
Netwise Trio AB 25/10/2001 0.033 0.044
Netwise AB Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson 5/06/2006 0.096 0.012
NK City Fastigheter Hufvudstaden AB 30/03/1998 -0.069 -0.037
Nordbanken Nordbanken Holding AB 13/10/1999 0.088 0.050
Nordström & Thylin Argonaut AB 24/11/1997 -0.091 -0.035
Norrporten NS Holding AB 21/08/2000 0.086 0.069
North Atlantic Natural Resources Lundin Mining Corp 21/01/2005 0.015 -0.011
Näckebro Drott AB 8/9/1999 -0.033 0.013
OMX AB Nasdaq Stockmarket Inc. 25/05/2007 0.185 0.187
One Media Holding AB International Marketing & Sales Group Ltd17/01/2008 0.064 0.091
Optimail PostenNorge AS 22/11/2005 -0.005 -0.026
Optimum Optik AB Synoptik Holding AS 13/04/2004 0.478 0.485
PanAlarm AB Panaxia Security AB 21/10/2008 0.010 -0.098
Pandox APES Holding 21/11/2003 0.016 0.017
Peab Industri AB Peab AB 10/11/2008 0.010 0.012
Peak Carli Gry International A/S 16/03/1998 -0.050 -0.074

                                                                           45
Target Bidder Announcement CAR -10:-1 CAR -5:-1
                                                    Day
Perbio Science Fisher Scientific International Inc. 26/06/2003 0.014 -0.003
Pergo Pfleiderer Sweden AB 15/01/2007 0.069 0.077
Persea AB Investor Group 21/07/2003 0.007 -0.001
Perstorp Perstorp Intressenter 10/04/2000 0.014 0.045
Piren Rodamco N.V. 24/01/2000 -0.033 0.007
Platzer Fastigheter AB Fastighets AB Tornet 06/04/2001 -0.041 -0.114
PLM Rexam Ltd 30/11/1998 0.042 0.027
PriFast Balder AB 3/01/1999 -0.062 -0.017
Pronyx Teleca AB 5/07/2002 -0.073 0.034
Protect Data Check Point Software Technologies Ltd. 20/11/2006 0.013 -0.002
Provobis Scandic Hotels AB 12/04/2000 0.095 0.042
Q-Med Ivytan AB 3/11/2008 0.185 0.094
Realia Columna Fastigheter AB 23/04/2002 0.035 0.027
Resco AcandoFrontec AB 9/01/2006 0.438 0.191
Resco Fi System SA 11/09/2000 0.053 0.008
Riddarhyttan Agnico-Eagle Mines limited 12/05/2005 -0.009 -0.008
RKS AB Sigma AB 6/05/2004 -0.122 -0.069
Rörvik Timber Ittur Industrier AB 2/06/2005 0.080 0.012
SalusAnsvar DnB NOR BANK ASA 20/08/2007 0.421 0.416
Sandblom Sandblom & Stohne Intressenter 10/11/1997 0.049 0.083
Sardus Atria Koncern AB 16/02/2007 0.115 0.111
Scancem Heidelberger Zement AG 27/07/1999 0.002 -0.006
ScandiaConsult Ramboll 28/10/2002 0.073 0.087
Scandic Hotels AB Ladbrokes PLC 23/04/2001 0.062 0.004
Scandinavian Online Eniro AB 18/12/2001 0.848 0.545
Scandinavian PC Systems PC-Systemer ASA 23/03/1999 -0.094 -0.031
Scania Volvo AB 30/04/1999 0.032 -0.003
Scania MAN AG 18/09/2006 0.165 0.141
SecuritasDirect ESML Intressenter AB 13/11/2007 0.113 0.166
Segerströmn & Svensson Sanmina-SCI Corp 25/01/2001 -0.149 -0.108
Semcon JCE Group AB 6/03/2009 0.069 0.074
Sendit AB Microsoft Corp 12/05/1999 0.280 0.009
Senea Kamstrup A/S 24/07/2006 0.132 0.100
Shelton Petroleum AB Boerse Stuttgart 17/11/2008 0.262 -0.303
Sifab Fastighets AB Tornet 30/11/1998 0.042 -0.055
Sigma Askerö Utveckling AB 27/03/2008 0.083 0.034
Skandia Försäkring Old Mutual Plc 2/09/2005 -0.015 -0.018
Skanditek Industriforvaltning AB Bure Equity AB 14/10/2009 -0.026 0.023
Skoogs Trelleborg AB 25/08/1997 0.085 0.023
Song Networks Tele 2 Sverige 22/09/2004 0.506 0.031
Spectra Thermo Instrument Inc. 7/01/1999 -0.027 -0.033

                                                                           46
Target Bidder Announcement CAR -10:-1 CAR -5:-1
                                                    Day
Spendrups Bryggeri Spendrups Invest AB 1/05/2001 0.046 0.050
Stena-Line Stena Line AB 31/10/2000 0.005 0.024
Stora ENSO Oyj 26/06/1998 -0.087 -0.011
Storheden Wihlborgs Fastigheter AB 15/04/1998 0.031 0.020
Strålfors Posten AB 14/03/2006 0.003 0.001
Svedala Metso Oyj 21/06/2000 0.056 0.075
Swedbank (föreningssparbanken) SEB 22/02/2001 -0.042 0.005
Svenska Brand Lansforsakringar Wasa FörsakringsAB 26/02/2001 0.072 -0.008
Svenska Orienten SOL Intressenter 25/03/2003 0.058 0.108
Sydkraft E.ON Energie AG 21/01/2001 0.006 0.005
Telelogic IBM Corporation 04/06/2007 0.274 0.196
Tornet, Fastighets LRT Acquisition AB 20/10/2003 -0.009 -0.013
Tradedoubler AOLS Holding AB 15/01/2007 -0.072 -0.040
Trio AB Netwise AB 20/04/2005 -0.102 -0.078
Trio AB Teligent AB 8/02/2006 -0.056 -0.024
TryggHansa S-E-Banken AB 1/12/1997 0.036 0.024
TurnIT Nocom AB 22/12/2004 -0.054 -0.029
Utfors AB Telenor ASA 18/11/2002 0.324 0.187
Wayfinder Systems AB Vodafone Group PLC 9/12/2008 -0.050 -0.017
Verimation NetSys Technology Group 11/09/1998 0.029 0.329
Vision Park Entertainment KF Media 3/09/2001 0.401 0.376
VLT AB Investor Group 31/08/2004 0.003 0.005
WM-Data LogicaCMG plc 21/08/2006 -0.024 0.004
Vostok Energo Investments Ltd Vostok Gas Ltd 9/04/2003 -0.044 -0.054
XPonCard Oberthur Technologies S.A. 19/02/2008 0.089 0.035
XPonCard Group AB Argynnis Industrier 30/04/1999 0.004 0.086
Y.C.O. Businnespartners AB Varmlands Finans Sverige AB 31/05/2006 0.293 0.284
Zeteco Partek Oyj Abp 09/03/2000 -0.006 0.007
Zeunerts AB Kopparbergs Bryggeri AB 14/09/2000 0.029 0.002
Zodiak De Agostini Communications S.p.a 26/05/2008 0.017 0.002
Östgöta Danske Bank 17/03/1997 -0.017 -0.004

                                                                           47
D2 – A table over descriptive Statistics
This table is provided to give the reader an overview over our explanatory variables for leakages. Presented in the
following table are most of our variables. The two columns next to the target, dummy variables for the rumor period are
presented. The first rumor column represents rumors where the differences between the announcement date and the
rumor date has been longer than two weeks. The second Rumor column represents rumor with no regard to time. With
Deal Structure we explain how the offer is supposed to be paid (with cash, stock or hybrid). When looking at the
domicile the acquirer, we have studied if the bidder comes from outside Scandinavia or not. For the “Number of
advisor” column we have added up the financial advisor for the acquirer side. The final column represents the total value
of the tender offer.

 Target 0<Rumor Rumor>0 Deal Structure Outside Number of Final Deal
                                < 2 weeks Cash=1 Other=0 Scandinacvia Advisories value
 ABB 0 0 0 1 0 94336.53
 Academedia 0 0 1 1 0 7.99
 Acando 0 0 1 0 0 146.5
 Accelerator Nordic AB 0 0 1 1 1 36.22
 AGA 0 0 1 1 3 30 900
 Ainax 0 0 0 0 1 7036.59
 All Cards Service Center 0 0 0 0 1 197.34
 Allgon 0 0 0 0 2 3905.41
 Allgon 0 0 0 0 1 881.94
 Althin 0 0 1 0 1 515.55
 Annehem Fastigheter AB 0 0 1 0 1 471.91
 Arena Personal AB 0 0 1 0 1 131.39
 Arete 0 0 0 0 1 374.42
 Ark Travel 0 0 1 0 1 290.09
 Artema Medical 0 0 0 1 1 213.16
 ASG 0 0 1 1 1 3027.36
 Aspiro 0 1 1 0 1 256.19
 AssiDomän 1 0 1 0 4 28982.96
 Asticius 0 0 1 0 1 3668.53
 Astra 0 0 0 1 3 244891
 ATLE AB 0 0 1 0 0 10423.15
 AU-System 0 0 0 0 1 1229.21
 Autodiagnos AB 0 1 1 1 1 231.44
 Avanza Bank Holding AB 0 0 0 0 1 N/A
 Avesta Sheffield AB 1 0 0 0 1 13621.67
 Balder 0 0 1 0 2 3335.49
 Ballingslöv 0 0 1 0 1 2047.99
 Benima 0 0 1 0 1 196.62
 Biacore International 0 0 1 1 1 2807.92
 Binar AB 0 0 1 0 0 6.79
 Biolin Scientific AB 0 0 0 0 0 53.25
 Biora 0 0 1 0 1 352.34
 Boss Media 0 1 1 0 1 949.93
 BPA 0 1 1 0 0 1934.5
 Broström 0 0 1 0 2 7556.54
 BT Industries 0 0 1 1 1 7700
 Bulten 0 0 1 0 1 1099.52
 Capio AB 0 0 1 0 0 22888.95
 Caran 0 0 1 0 1 323.12
 Carl Lamm 0 1 0 0 0 622.61
 Carl Lamm Holding 0 1 1 1 1 577.45

                                                                            48
Target 0<Rumor Rumor>0 Deal Structure Outside Number of Final Deal
                               < 2 weeks Cash=1 Other=0 Scandinacvia Advisories value
Cash Guard AB 0 0 0 0 1 436.12
Cell Network 0 0 0 0 1 8031.99
Celsius 0 0 1 0 2 4486.81
Celtica 0 0 1 0 1 725.64
Cision 0 0 1 0 0 890.88
Cloetta Fazer 0 0 1 0 1 1608.49
Cloetta Fazer 0 0 0 0 0 306.79
Connecta 0 0 0 0 1 8166.27
Consafe Offshore AB 0 0 0 0 0 2133.62
Custos 0 0 1 0 1 1153.8
Dahl International AB 0 0 1 0 0 2704
Diffchamb 0 0 1 0 1 130.12
Digital Illusions CE AB 0 0 1 1 1 77.89
Digital Illusions CE AB 0 0 1 1 1 143.89
Diligentia 0 0 0 0 0 5138.76
Dimension 0 0 0 0 0 195.42
Din Bostad AB 0 0 0 0 0 510.34
Diös 0 0 1 0 1 1835.11
El & Industrimontage Svenska AB 0 0 1 0 0 483.37
Eldon 0 0 1 0 2 1631.16
Elverket Vallentuna AB 0 0 1 1 1 89.92
Emil Lundgrens 0 0 1 1 0 265
Enator 0 0 0 0 1 7622.58
Eniro 0 0 0 1 1 22503
Entra 0 0 0 0 1 2082.04
Epsilon 0 0 1 0 1 195.72
Esselte 0 0 1 1 1 5561.57
Evidentia 0 0 1 0 1 573.08
Fabege 0 0 1 0 0 2 200
Fabege 0 0 1 0 2 16513.56
Fastighets AB Tornet 0 0 1 0 1 1608.49
FB Industri Holding AB 0 0 1 0 1 138.96
Finnveden 0 0 1 0 0 3095.82
Focal Point AB 0 0 0 0 1 89.13
Folkebolagen 0 0 1 0 0 134.93
Forcenergy 0 0 0 1 0 N/A
Frango 0 0 1 1 1 383.28
Friluftsbolaget 0 0 1 0 0 107.64
Gambro 0 0 1 0 4 32514.08
Gamers Paradise Holding AB 0 0 0 0 0 306.38
GANT N/A N/A 1 1 1 1628.47

                                                                           49
Target 0<Rumor Rumor>0 Deal Structure Outside Number of Final Deal
                               < 2 weeks Cash=1 Other=0 Scandinacvia Advisories value
Gexco AB 0 0 0 0 0 N/A
Gibeck Louis AB 0 0 1 1 0 N/A
Global Gaming Factory AB 0 0 1 0 0 70.33
Glocalnet 0 0 1 0 1 544.76
Gorthon Lines AB 0 0 0 0 1 N/A
Gorthon Lines AB 0 0 0 0 1 156.91
Gotic 0 0 1 0 0 773
Graninge 0 0 1 0 1 5300
Graphium 0 0 1 0 0 270
Guide 0 0 0 0 1 1291.56
Gunnebo Industrier 0 0 1 0 0 2355.08
Gylling Optima 0 0 1 1 0 548.31
Gymgrossisten Nordic AB 0 0 1 0 1 198.62
Hoist International 0 0 1 0 0 278.78
Home Properties AB 0 0 1 0 0 3228.47
HQ Fonder AB N /A N/A 0 0 1 474.34
Human Care 0 0 1 0 1 110.56
Humlegården 0 0 1 0 0 604
IBC Shipping 0 0 1 1 0 472.89
IBS 1 0 0 1 1 853.01
IM Innovationsmaklarna AB 0 0 0 1 1 29.34
IMS Data 0 0 1 0 1 121.98
Industriforvaltnings AB Kinnevik 0 0 0 0 1 20815.27
Intentia International 0 1 0 1 1 3756.48
Intra International AB 0 0 1 1 0 23.53
inWarehouse AB 0 1 1 0 2 173.2
Invik & Co 0 0 1 1 2 5361.44
IRO 0 0 1 1 1 1531.25
Jacobson & Widmark AB 0 0 1 0 2 930
JC 0 0 0 1 2 1984.42
Jobline 0 1 1 0 0 1107.41
JP Nordiska 0 0 0 1 1 509.04
JPBank 0 0 0 1 0 109.02
Kalmar Industries AB 0 0 1 0 1 657.54
Karlshamn 0 0 1 0 2 2054.74
Karolin Machine Tool AB 0 1 1 0 0 234.4
Karolin Machine Tool AB 0 0 1 0 1 1082.59
Kipling 0 0 0 0 1 8.18
Kjessler & Mannerstrale AB 0 0 1 0 0 171.05
Klippan 1 0 1 0 1 482.14
Klövern 0 0 0 1 0 60

                                                                           50
Target 0<Rumor Rumor>0 Deal Structure Outside Number of Final Deal
                               < 2 weeks Cash=1 Other=0 Scandinacvia Advisories value
Kontakt East Holding AB 0 0 1 0 1 173.13
Lawson International AB 0 0 0 1 1 3113.42
LB Icon AB 0 1 0 0 2 1669.57
Ledstiernan 0 0 1 0 0 32564.05
LGP Allgon Holding 0 0 1 1 1 2939.16
Lifco 0 0 1 0 2 305.23
Liljeholmens 0 0 1 0 0 370.44
Lindab 0 0 1 1 1 4658.2
Lindex 0 0 1 0 1 7752
LPI Precision Ab 0 0 1 0 1 148
Lundin Oil 0 0 1 1 0 3 730
Mandamus Fastigheter 0 0 1 0 0 1363.16
Mandator 0 0 1 1 1 463.52
Mandator/ Cell Networks 0 0 0 0 1 9914.49
Mariebergs Tidning 0 0 1 0 0 5 400
Martinsson Gruppen AB 0 0 1 0 0 148.94
Matteus 0 0 0 0 1 462.28
Mogul 0 0 0 0 0 14.89
Monark 0 0 1 0 1 1 247
Munksjö AB 0 0 1 0 2 4120.98
Måldata 0 0 0 0 2 270.97
N&T 0 0 1 0 1 1447.68
Narkes Elektriska AB 0 0 1 0 0 1278.85
Naturkompaniet 0 0 1 0 0 66.77
Nefab 0 0 1 0 1 1184.59
Netwise 0 0 0 0 1 17.64
Netwise AB 0 0 1 0 1 251.9
NK City Fastigheter 0 0 0 0 0 1455.15
Nordbanken 0 0 0 0 0 N/A
Nordström & Thylin 0 1 0 0 0 3913.17
Norrporten 0 0 1 0 1 905
North Atlantic Natural Resources 0 0 0 1 0 88.96
Näckebro 0 0 1 0 2 11804.55
OMX AB 0 1 0 1 1 24787.1
One Media Holding AB 0 0 0 1 1 109.16
Optimail 0 0 1 0 2 125.65
Optimum Optik AB 0 0 1 0 1 103.57
PanAlarm AB 0 0 1 0 1 57.37
Pandox 0 1 1 0 1 4568.78
Peab Industri AB 0 1 0 0 2 5757.02
Peak 0 0 1 0 0 N/A

                                                                           51
Target 0<Rumor Rumor>0 Deal Structure Outside Number of Final Deal
                               < 2 weeks Cash=1 Other=0 Scandinacvia Advisories value
Perbio Science 0 0 1 1 1 6115.76
Pergo 0 0 1 0 2 3007.05
Persea AB 0 1 1 0 1 57.2
Perstorp 0 0 1 0 2 9265.44
Piren 0 0 1 1 1 2867.98
Platzer Fastigheter AB 0 0 0 0 1 641.1
PLM 0 0 1 1 1 5958.81
PriFast 0 0 1 0 2 1503
Pronyx 0 0 1 1 1 48.98
Protect Data 0 0 1 1 0 4207.58
Provobis 0 0 1 0 1 611.82
Q-Med 0 0 1 0 1 3722.9
Realia 0 0 0 0 1 4773.46
Resco 0 0 0 0 1 1454.42
Resco 0 0 1 1 0 179.26
Riddarhyttan 0 0 0 1 1 967.54
RKS AB 0 0 0 0 2 87.37
Rörvik Timber 0 0 1 0 0 75
SalusAnsvar 0 1 1 0 1 749.13
Sandblom 0 0 1 0 0 358
Sardus 0 0 1 0 1 886.74
Scancem 0 0 1 1 1 21705.89
ScandiaConsult 0 0 0 0 2 377.88
Scandic Hotels AB 0 0 0 1 1 9894.64
Scandinavian Online 0 1 1 0 2 127.15
Scandinavian PC Systems 0 0 1 0 1 N/A
Scania 0 0 1 0 1 5200
Scania 0 1 0 1 2 N/A
SecuritasDirect 0 0 1 0 1 8481.93
Segerströmn & Svensson 0 0 0 1 1 4215.82
Semcon 0 0 1 0 0 264.52
Sendit AB 0 0 1 1 1 1047.8
Senea 0 0 1 0 1 74.45
Shelton Petroleum AB 0 0 1 1 1 40
Sifab 0 0 0 0 0 14
Sigma 0 0 1 0 1 765.47
Skandia Försäkring 0 0 0 1 2 42720.7
Skanditek Industriforvaltning AB 0 1 0 0 1 1202.5
Skoogs 0 0 1 0 4 380
Song Networks 0 0 1 0 1 3506.79
Spectra 0 0 1 0 2 2819.04

                                                                           52
Target 0<Rumor Rumor>0 Deal Structure Outside Number of Final Deal
                               < 2 weeks Cash=1 Other=0 Scandinacvia Advisories value
Spendrups Bryggeri 0 0 1 0 0 681.99
Stena-Line 0 0 1 0 1 199.73
Stora 0 0 0 0 1 32564.05
Storheden 0 0 0 0 0 1978.43
Strålfors 0 0 1 0 1 2381.72
Svedala 0 0 1 0 1 13482.22
Swedbank (föreningssparbanken) 0 0 0 0 1 74533.2
Svenska Brand 0 0 1 0 1 148.88
Svenska Orienten 0 0 1 0 3 19
Sydkraft 0 0 1 1 1 23 400
Telelogic 0 0 1 1 0 5070.09
Tornet, Fastighets 0 0 1 0 0 18038.19
Tradedoubler 0 0 1 0 1 5997.42
Trio AB 0 0 0 0 1 189.36
Trio AB 0 1 0 0 1 278.19
TryggHansa 0 0 1 0 0 N/A
TurnIT 0 0 0 0 0 242.29
Utfors AB 0 0 1 0 1 264
Wayfinder Systems AB 0 0 1 0 1 219.55
Verimation 0 0 1 0 0 117
Vision Park Entertainment 0 0 1 0 1 113.47
VLT AB 0 0 1 0 1 782.38
WM-Data 0 1 0 1 2 12649.03
Vostok Energo Investments Ltd 0 0 0 1 0 583.05
XPonCard 0 0 1 1 1 846.44
XPonCard Group AB 0 0 1 0 0 278.88
Y.C.O. Businnespartners AB 0 0 0 1 0 N/A
Zeteco 0 0 1 0 1 306
Zeunerts AB 0 0 0 0 0 N/A
Zodiak 0 0 1 1 1 1459.43
Östgöta N/A N/A 1 0 0 2 845

                                                                           53
E - Other regression results

E1 - Regression with CAR (-5,-1) as the regressand

The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

 Car -5:-1 1 2 3 4 5
 Constant 0.0178* 0.0305**** 0.0126 0.0216 0.0312
                                     (0.011) (0.007) (0.011) (0.033) (0.056)
 Leak Variable 0.0125* 0.0127** 0.0136** 0.0141**
                                     (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.006)
 Rumor last 10 trading days -0.0001 -0.0177 -0.0099 -0.0038
                                                (0.017) (0.026) (0.029) (0.032)
 Rumor longer than 10 t. days prior 0.0644* 0.0640* 0.0715** 0.0740**
                                                (0.035) (0.033) (0.035) (0.036)
 Buyer outside Scandinavia -0.0024 -0.0007
                                                                       (0.015) (0.016)
 Ln (Deal Value) 0.0011 0.0005
                                                                       (0.005) (0.006)
 Number of Advisors 0.0007 0.0012
                                                                       (0.010) (0.010)
 Ln (Volume) -0.0055 -0.0055
                                                                       (0.005) (0.007)
 1997-2000 x
                                                                        x
 2001-2004 -0.0058
                                                                                        (0.018)
 2005-2009 -0.0013
                                                                                        (0.015)
 Cash 0.0168
                                                                                        (0.017)
 Success -0.0202
                                                                                        (0.021)
 Volume < 10 m. -0.0021
                                                                                        (0.027)
 Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
 No. Of Obs. 236 236 236 226 226
 P -value 0.0549 0.1762 0.0826 0.2312 0.4197
 R-sq 0.0236 0.026 0.05 0.0603 0.0697

                                                                            54
E2 - Regressions with CAR (-15,-1) as the regressand

The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

 Car -15:-1 1 2 3 4 5
 Constant -0.0002 0.0472**** -0.0075 -0.0156 0.0272
                                       (0.017) (0.011) (0.018) (0.043) (0.070)
 Leak Variable 0.0366*** 0.0387**** 0.0402**** 0.0408****
                                       (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.012)
 Rumor last 10 trading days -0.1183 -0.1717 -0.1758 -0.1570
                                                  (0.077) (0.117) (0.119) (0.126)
 Rumor longer than 10 t. days prior 0.0867 0.0857 0.0950 0.1036
                                                  (0.074) (0.068) (0.071) (0.073)
 Buyer outside Scandinavia 0.0083 0.0134
                                                                          (0.022) (0.022)
 Ln (Deal Value) 0.0010 0.0011
                                                                          (0.008) (0.009)
 Number of Advisors 0.0169 0.0167
                                                                          (0.019) (0.019)
 Ln (Volume) -0.0061 -0.0118
                                                                          (0.008) (0.011)
 1997-2000 x
                                                                          x
 2001-2004 0.0307
                                                                                          (0.027)
 2005-2009 0.0051
                                                                                          (0.025)
 Cash 0.0289
                                                                                          (0.027)
 Success -0.0594
                                                                                          (0.030)
 Volume < 10 m. -0.0275
                                                                                          (0.035)
 Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
 No. Of Obs. 236 236 236 226 226
 P -value 0.0058 0.1494 0.0044 0.0256 0.0249
 R-sq 0.0799 0.027 0.1149 0.1306 0.1553

                                                                            55
E3 - Regressions with CAR (-10,-1) without Alpha and Beta estimated normal
returns.

The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

 Car -10:-1 w/o beta estim. 1 2 3 4 5
 Constant -0.0013 0.0316**** -0.0050 -0.0387 -0.0662
                                     (0.013) (0.008) (0.013) (0.032) (0.048)
 Leak Variable 0.0256** 0.0259** 0.0258** 0.0264**
                                     (0.009) (0.009) (0.009) (0.009)
 Rumor last 10 trading days 0.0079 -0.0279 -0.0353 -0.0352
                                              (0.057) (0.086) (0.083) (0.090)
 Rumor longer than 10 t. days prior 0.0440 0.0434 0.0464 0.0403
                                              (0.034) (0.031) (0.033) (0.034)
 Buyer outside Scandinavia -0.0013 -0.0024
                                                                    (0.016) (0.017)
 Ln (Deal Value) 0.0056 0.0067
                                                                    (0.005) (0.005)
 Number of Advisors 0.0074 0.0059
                                                                    (0.010) (0.010)
 Ln (Volume) -0.0033 -0.0033
                                                                    (0.006) (0.008)
 1997-2000 x
                                                                    x
 2001-2004 0.0100
                                                                                   (0.019)
 2005-2009 0.0266
                                                                                   (0.018)
 Cash 0.0185
                                                                                   (0.019)
 Success -0.0055
                                                                                   (0.023)
 Volume < 10 m. 0.0021
                                                                                   (0.026)
 Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
 No. Of Obs. 236 236 236 226 226
 P -value 0.0049 0.4316 0.0123 0.0564 0.1212
 R-sq 0.0789 0.0098 0.0894 0.1022 0.1155

                                                                            56
E4 - Regression with percentage of Total CAR (-10,0)

The standard error is shown below the coefficients in parentheses.

 Car % of total event return 1 2 3 4 5
 Constant 1.3101 1.3982* 1.4142 2.5157 -0.0662
                                   (0.819) (0.721) (0.869) (3.427) (0.048)
 Leak Variable 0.0269 -0.0113 0.0448 0.0403
                                   (0.248) (0.205) (0.193) (0.226)
 Rumor last 10 trading days 3.0851 3.1008 4.2408 4.1741
                                             (3.458) (3.360) (3.354) (3.551)
 Rumor longer than 10 t. days prior -1.2044 -1.2041 -0.3821 -0.7521
                                             (0.740) (0.740) (0.544) (0.690)
 Buyer outside Scandinavia -1.2142 -1.4098
                                                                    (0.823) (0.943)
 Ln (Deal Value) 0.3244 0.5238
                                                                    (0.560) (0.610)
 Number of Advisors -0.3950 -0.5412
                                                                    (0.637) (0.695)
 Ln (Volume) -0.7746 -0.3814
                                                                    (0.654) (0.432)
 1997-2000 x
                                                                    x
 2001-2004 4.1107
                                                                                   (2.531)
 2005-2009 0.8647
                                                                                   (0.637)
 Volume < 10 m. 2.5856
                                                                                   (1.850)
 Level of significance: *=10%; **=5%; ***=1%; ****=0.1%
 No. Of Obs. 236 236 236 226 226
 P -value 0.9139 0.124 0.2453 0.7282 0.882
 R-sq 0 0.0028 0.0028 0.0203 0.0536

                                                                            57