STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

Bachelor Thesis in Finance
Academic year 2009/10

Sphere Performance and the Financial Crisis
               2008-2009
            – Evidence from the OMXS

        ELIN CARLSSON* DOUGLAS MARTINSSON**

                            ABSTRACT

Influential sphere ownership and its implications on company performance is an area of continuous research.
Previous literature focuses on agency costs and how these are affected by family ownership related to firm
performance, but also on banking-relationships and investment horizons. We study the performance of
Investor, Industrivärden and Kinnevik firms and non-sphere firms listed on the OMXS Large Cap and Mid
Cap from the first quarter 2006 to the third quarter 2009. Thus, we are able to study how the sample firms in
general and the sphere firms in particular were affected by the crisis starting in early 2008. We find evidence
that the Investor and the Industrivärden firms did not experience as heavy drops in excess stock returns as
the other firms during the crisis, confirming some branches of agency cost theory’s claim that they would be
more stable. These firms also report higher debt-to-capital ratios; Investor has a higher ratio for the entire
period and for Industrivärden we find an increase during the crisis period. For Kinnevik, we cannot find any
difference from the non-sphere firms, which argues for the effects of having a specific sphere bank. It seems
like sphere firms acted very conservatively regarding investments during the crisis, which gives no support to
arguments of extended investment horizons, but that is a matter of concern in the definition of efficient
investments during the crisis. What we have seen though is that the firms invest in general in accordance with
the industry they operate in.

                   Key Words: Sphere firms, family ownership, financial crisis

Tutor: Professor Per Strömberg
Date: May 28, 2010
Location: SIFR, Drottninggatan 89, Stockholm
Discussants: Erica Sandelin and Viktor Thell

              * 21263@student.hhs.se ** 21132@student.hhs.se
Introduction
Among scholars it is yet controversial whether sphere influence is a beneficial form of ownership and
particularly what the effects are during recessions. Previous research dating back to the late 1970s within
corporate finance and governance has provided findings of the importance and drawbacks of internal capital
markets, banking relationships and large shareholders’ effect on managerial efficiency.

One such area is that of large influential shareholder ownerships, including e.g. studies of family firms,
conglomerates and closed-end funds. Anderson and Reeb (2003) argue that family firms perform better than
nonfamily firms. Their results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that minority shareholders are adversely
affected by family ownership, suggesting that it is an effective organizational structure. Partly connected to
this branch of research are that of agency costs and the effect of managerial ownership. Jensen and Meckling
(1976) find a relationship between the separation of management and investors and the size of agency costs,
where agency costs are increasing in this separation. Many scholars have sought to empirically test this
hypothesis on mainly American firms and the general conclusion of the accumulated papers is that firms with
few, large and coordinated shareholders will be more efficient.

 Few studies have however been carried out on Swedish firms, which is surprising as Swedish enterprise is
characterized by several old spheres, possessing large shares of the market. Also, there is a lack of papers
investigating the effect of large shareholder owner structure during crises. Yet, it seems obvious that these
areas are of common interest. Business media in Sweden reports that some of the Swedish spheres managed

through the crisis without particularly heavy losses compared to other investors1. If this is the case, it implies

that ownership structure could better explain the ex post realized returns and performance during the crisis
period, rather than e.g. market beta, size and book-to-market that typically are used in estimating models of
ex ante returns and valuations. Another experience outside of media and theory; a person working within the
Swedish corporate finance industry posted us the question: “Say that Sandvik and Atlas Copco are equal in
every aspect except that one of them is trading at premium at the stock exchange. What could be the reason
for that?” The answer the person sought was based in ownership structure, namely that Atlas Copco is a part
of the Wallenberg consortium (Investor) and Sandvik is not. If this were true, there would also be differences
among the spheres.

There are more influential spheres in Sweden other than Wallenberg/Investor, for instance the
Stenbeck/Kinnevik sphere and Industrivärden/Handelsbanken. In addition to these, there are also some
spheres mainly investing and managing firms who are not traded on the stock exchange, such as Bonnier.
Investor, Kinnevik and Industrivärden would however be considered as the most important ones because of

1 Ollevik, Nils-Olof (2008).

                                                                                                   1
their size, age and investments. Investor and Industrivärden are in many aspects very similar; they are both
associated with a large bank, most of their possessions are large cap firms, they diversify their investments
over industries and they control their investments through a listed investment firm. One difference is that
Industrivärden is not associated with a particular family; however, Wallenberg’s investment group Investor is
no longer governed by family members only but rather by businessmen and – women with extensive
experience from management and board positions, as in the case with Industrivärden. Kinnevik is also an
influential sphere with investments in large companies, but with the difference that they are not related to a
specific bank and their portfolio of firms is less diversified.

It is useful to study all the three spheres, in order to obtain a wider perspective on the impact of strong
ownership on firm performance, or of sphere ownership more precisely. We analyze excess stock returns,
profitability, investment rates and debt-to-capital ratios for 127 firms listed on the OMXS Large Cap and Mid
Cap to explore the effects of such ownership. Our sample period stretches from the last quarter 2005 to the
third quarter of 2009; thus we will be able to study how the sample firms in general and the sphere firms in
particular were affected by the crisis starting in early 2008.

When running the tests, we control for industry-related effects (both fixed and indexed), size and book-to-
market effects and take heteroskedasticity, endogeneity, outliers and multicollinearity into consideration. We
also re-run some tests to gain more robustness to our findings.

We find that the Investor and Industrivärden spheres did not drop as much in excess stock returns as the
other firms during the crisis, supporting the idea that large shareholders bring stability to the market
performance. For Investor, we also find that the excess returns in the non-crisis period were somewhat lower
than for non-Investor firms. These two firms also report higher leverage ratios (debt-to-capital), in the case of
Investor it is higher for the entire period and for Industrivärden we find an increase for the crisis period. For
Kinnevik, we cannot conclude that they finance their capital differently from the non-sphere firms, suggesting
that the Investor and Industrivärden spheres take use of their bank influences.

Profitability of the samples firms, not surprisingly, went down during the crisis. We cannot state that sphere
control had any effects on firm profitability during the crisis, though we have seen that the Investor firms had
lower profitability over the full sample-period when taking industry-specific effects into account. But this
finding has to be taken more carefully since it could be explained by firm size.

In general the investment firms (i.e. Investor AB, Industrivärden AB and Investments AB Kinnevik)
decreased their investment rates in 2008 compared to 2007, which talks against theories of family firms
having extended horizons. Rather, it seems like the spheres acted very conservatively and did not take on
additional risk. Overall we observe that the sample firms’ investment rates are highly connected to the

                                                                                                   2
industries they belong to. However, it should be noted that the number of observations is low. We find that
Investor invested more when their portfolio firms invested less and vice versa, which could possibly be
explained by cross-subsidization. For Industrivärden, there are no particular patterns in investment rates and
for Kinnevik we observe that the investment rate for the portfolio firms constantly rose over the entire
sample period, but it does not reveal anything fruitful about the validity of the cross-subsidization hypothesis.

To summarize our conclusions and relating back to what we expect to observe with respect to theory, there
are two main findings. Our paper supports previous research arguing that banking-relationships are important
assets for access to capital. Our data, which however lacks detailed information on where the firms borrow
from and if they were in need of additional debt during the crisis, cannot state any evidence of lock-in effects.
Hence, bank presence in the portfolio seems to be beneficial for the sphere. The stock returns for the
Investor and the Industrivärden spheres did not drop as much as the other sample firms during the crisis; this
talks in favor of the previous research on agency costs that argue for minority shareholders being better off
with large shareholders in the firm ownership structure.

Section I presents theories and hypotheses from previous studies within this field. Section II clarifies the
paper’s research focus. Section III presents the choice of sample and study period, the definition of sphere
firms, the test variables and summary statistics for the entire sample and sub-groups. In Section IV, we report
the results and analyses from our empirical tests, and in section V we discuss the robustness and validity of
our results as well as potential problems of endogeneity. Section VI is the conclusion which summarizes the
main points of the paper and Section VII suggests some areas for future research. All tables and figures are
found in the Appendix.

    I. Sphere Performance and the Financial Crisis

In this section, we will present literature that relates to our study and the four areas we have for intention to
investigate.

In previous literature, there are a lot of studies on family firms with several investments. In this study, two of
the three chosen spheres are associated with families (Investor with Wallenberg and Kinnevik with Stenbeck)
whereas one is not (Industrivärden). Even if none of them is totally governed by the family, the families still
have large influence and most authors define family firms widely enough to make their findings applicable on
our study as well.

                                                                                                   3
    A. Equity Prices and Governance
Previous research on large shareholders’ effect on returns addresses the issues of agency costs. Several
scholars argue that this corporate governance form decreases myopic behavior whereas some point at the
risks associated with the separation of ownership and management.

According to theory of free-riding, in a company with a lot of small owners it may not be worth for any of
them to spend resources on monitoring the performance of the management. Shleifer and Vishny (1986)
discover a model in which the presence of large minority shareholders provides a partial solution to this free-
rider problem. They point to that large shareholders increase expected profits and the more so the larger their
ownership stake. This suggests that sphere firms which are characterized by having large and well known
shareholders would benefit from this which could result in higher and/or more stable stock prices compared
to other companies on the stock exchange.

Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) investigate variations in shareholder rights by using a “Governance
index”, including 1 500 large firms during the 1990s. They observe strong correlation between stock returns
and corporate governance. However, they experience problems in explaining causality, but state that if an
11.4 percentage point difference in firm value were even partially “caused” by each additional governance
provision, then the long-run benefits of eliminating multiple provisions would be enormous.

Stein (1989) makes an attempt to answer the question; does the desire to achieve a high stock price induce
corporate managers to behave myopically, inflating current earnings at the expense of longer term benefits?
His underlying reasoning is that higher earnings today will be correlated with higher earnings in the future.
The message of his paper is that managers' horizons can actually be very important. Shorter horizons lead to
increasingly myopic behavior, even when stock market participants are rational, i.e. this suggests that
managers who possess shares in the firm would have longer horizons which would also benefit external
shareholders. Then shareholders and especially minority ones would benefit from sphere ownerships where
horizons are extended and therefore earnings and stock prices would not be inflated.

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (1998) present a different picture of the ownership structure than
widely accepted in finance literature regarding that dispersed ownership would prevent minority shareholder
expropriation. They point out that this view has been questioned lately, since a lot of firms in the US have
large management ownership stakes. They suggest not only that, in many countries, large corporations have
large shareholders, but also that these are active in corporate governance activities. They conclude that
ownership concentration is a consequence of poor legal protection of minority shareholders which results in
benefits for both small and large shareholders.

                                                                                                   4
    B. Managerial Efficiency and Profitability
The ownership effects on profitability have been debated for several decades. Agency costs are also relevant
here as well as cross-subsidization and the effects when family CEOs and chairmen resign and are substituted
by externals.

Jensen and Meckling (1976) were two of the first authors to argue for these effects. Their principal argument
is that higher degree of separation between managers and the stockholders, the more agency costs there will
be based on the assumption that managers act to maximize their own utility. Their definition of utility is
including not only monetary but also social, physical and other benefits. They conclude that firms where the
managers own all the equity will be the most efficient and vice versa.

Ang, Cole and Wuh Lin (2000) further develop Jensen and Meckling’s findings by empirically testing their
suggestions on American small businesses. They present two main results with the first being a confirmation
that agency costs increase with outside managers. Moreover, they add an extra dimension by suggesting that
agency costs also increase with the number of shareholders with the motivation that few strong shareholders
easier can monitor managers than several individually weak ones.

In our study of three large Swedish spheres, these theories do not apply directly since the investment firms
not necessarily are represented in their portfolio firms’ management boards. However, as Hjelström (2007)
notes, the Swedish closed-end investment firms influence their partially controlled firms’ decisions and
strategies in order to increase firm value. Earlier studies of Swedish companies show that managers often

possess relatively high levels of shares themselves2. In that light, we should observe a majority of firms where

managers maximize their own utility both by acting for the firm’s best and by supporting own benefits.

Guedj and Papasaikoudi (2003) enlarge the principal-agency perspective. According to them, families with
several investments allocate resources unequally among the portfolio firms in order to promote certain firms
ahead of others. By doing so, the families can guarantee maintained superior performances in some firms and
use the results from this for all portfolio firms. Large diversified spheres should, as follows from their
reasoning, bear less risk and be more profitable regardless of the economic environment.

Several authors have studied the difference in value of family-founded and family-run businesses.
McConaughy et al (1998) find that founding-family controlled firms both are more efficient and more
valuable than other firms. In their comparison, they include several control variables e.g. size, industry and

2 See e.g. Cronqvist and Nilsson (2003). They particularly study how minority holders’ wealth is affected by agency costs
in different sets of ownership structures.

                                                                                                   5
managerial ownership. Some of their conclusions are that these firms have higher margins, present more
rapid growth in sales and invest more than non-family firms.

Villalonga and Amit (2004) develop and complicate this picture somewhat. They suggest that family
ownership creates abnormal value only when the founding family still serves as CEO or chairman of the
board. The effect disappears when descendants or external people are hired to these positions. Yet, when the
founding families are in charge, the firms enjoy superior performance within the same fields as McConaughy
et al suggest. There is an important flaw in Villalonga and Amit’s analysis, namely that the average age of the
family firms in their sample firm is lower than for the non-family firms, which might have an effect on the
measures they study.

Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988) investigate the relation between management ownership and market
valuation. They present a positive relation between management ownership and firm value in the 0% to 5%
range. Then in the 5% to 25% range the relation is negative, but above 25% the relation is positive again.
They suggest that the reason for the negative relation between 5% and 25% is due to entrenchment effects.
We have not taken different levels of ownership into account in our study, but it is worth to bear in mind that
the impact on management ownership in sphere performance could be non-monotonic.

    C. Leverage and Loan Implications
Overall, on leverage suggests that the supply of credits dropped during the financial crisis implying that firm
leverage should have decreased. However, the literature presents advantages of and drawbacks resulting from
banking-relationships: on the one hand, it should give easier access to capital; on the other hand it can
generate lock-in effects.

The financial crisis has had severe implications on extended loans and the level of debt-to-capital level of
companies, as documented by Ivashina and Scharfstein (2009). New loans to large borrowers in the US fell
heavily during the last quarter of 2008, relative to the prior quarter. They observed the bad performance of
large financial companies which caused short-term bank creditors to decrease their credit and made it hard
for banks to renew their short-term debt. This made interest rate spreads go up, which resulted in a greater
drop in lending than what is usually observed in economic downturns. This would suggest that firms
decreased or at least not increased their borrowing to levels above normal during the financial crisis. Another
conclusion Ivashina and Scharfstein draw is that if banks had liquidity issues during the crisis, they would be
reluctant to extend credit to firms with which they had no prior relationship. Then if bank-borrower
relationships matter for the lending process, borrowers of a liquidity-constrained bank could have problems

                                                                                                   6
to sign new credit contracts with another because of lock-in effects, which clearly is a drawback of banking-
relationships.

Cole (1998) also finds that a lender is more likely to extend credit to a firm with which it has a pre-existing
relationship, but that the length of this relationship is unimportant, hence he discusses the impact of
asymmetric information in lender-borrower relationships. Moreover, the results propose that the lender
engender the valuable information from these relationships fast. This implies that the take-overs made by e.g.
Investor, who acquired two firms during our sample period Husqvarna (2006) and Biovitrum (2009), can be
incorporated in the analysis of how the debt-to-capital ratios changed, assuming that Investor’s portfolio

firms preferably borrow from the sphere’s partially controlled bank SEB3. Cole states that the relationship is

independent of reputational effects of the firm as proxied by age and of firm riskiness as proxied by size,
leverage, return, and creditworthiness. That is why we in our study do not have to consider age and credit
worthiness in particular when analyzing the presence and effects of banking relationships, but to consider
size, leverage and return when analyzing debt-to-capital ratios.

Blackwell and Winters (1997) study the terms of credit and observe an inverse relation between the closeness
of banking relationships and interest rates. In a sample of bank loans to small firms they also find a positive
link between the bank’s monitoring effort and the loan’s interest rate. This would emerge from that banking-
relationships result in less need of monitoring and that these cost savings would therefore as suggested be
transmitted to the firms, in the form of lower interest rates. The authors study small private firms and
therefore assert that they can not extrapolate the results on large, publicly traded firms. The reason is that
there are no substantial cost savings from monitoring large firms since they are highly transparent, why only
small firms would benefit from staying in banking relationships longer. Though, if there are benefits from the
relationship other than decreased monitoring costs resulting in lower loan rates, those would apply to large
firms as well and thus the conclusions would be applicable to our study as well, even though we are not
investigating the terms of credit in this paper.

Greenbaum, Kanatas and Venezia (1988) have studied how a bank’s access of private information of
potential borrowers default risk affects the loan rate offered. They show that a bank’s newer borrowers are
treated more favorably in terms of loan rate than those of longer standing, given that the latter’s default risk is
known more precisely than that of the former. Consequently, they mean that the probability that the
borrower will get an offer with a lower loan rate from a competitor is increasing with the length of the
relationship. Though the credit worthiness of potential new borrowers were more uncertain during the
financial crisis than during normal states of the economy and might have favored longer standing borrowers

3 It is difficult to gather information on where the firms borrow from. We therefore assume that the Investor firms
preferably borrow from their house bank SEB and Industrivärden from Handelsbanken. Hjelström (2007) finds that the
investment firms aim at shaping strategic decisions in their portfolio firms, which would support our assumption.

                                                                                                   7
for just the reason stated by the authors, that the default risk is known more precisely than for newer
borrowers. Thus, even though the theory is contradictive to the others above concerning importance of
relationship, it should have been reversed and therefore affirmative during the financial crisis.

Rajan (1992) argues that the costs of bank financing are not as clear as the benefits. Informed banks make
flexible financial decisions which prevent a firm's projects from going away, the cost of this credit is that
banks have bargaining power over the firm's earnings, once projects have started. Therefore the main
conclusion of his paper is that there is a basic trade-off between bank debt and arm's-length debt.

   D. Investment Utilization and Allocation
Combining ownership and management are by prior literature suggested to result in lower firm value, because
of these managers inability to make efficient investment decisions, while managers in firms with specialized
ownership instead would be more successful in assessing efficient investments. However, spheres might
engage in cross-subsidization, i.e. an inefficient distribution of capital among the portfolio firms.

James (1999) examines the specialization of ownership and decision-making functions and state that these
could instead cause considerable agency costs, which he shows may not be present in family businesses. He
states that the extended horizon characteristics of family firms may provide the necessary incentives for
decision makers to invest in line with the market rule, while limiting agency costs that arise when ownership
and control are separated. This suggests that family-firms and spheres would combine the best of two worlds
and therefore make investments when it is optimal. The findings of James show that greater attention needs
to be placed on the family firm as a viable and effective form of economic organization.

There is a lot of literature on the conglomerate discount, i.e. that conglomerates are valued less than matched
portfolios of the individual firms. Recent studies find that this diversification discount results from
conglomerates’ inefficient allocation of capital expenditures across divisions. We are not investigating whether
this value discrepancy is at hand, but if there are signs of cross-subsidization in investment rates of the
sample. One feature of a model of Scharfstein and Stein (2000) is that it implies a kind of ”socialism” in
internal capital allocation, whereby weaker divisions get subsidized by stronger ones. This adds up to the
literature above about that there are some factors beside pure market driven ones about how sphere capital is
allocated.

Rajan (1992) argues that while banking-relationships offers flexibility, the control they receive by extending
credit could give rise to lock-in behavior. This confirms the theory discussed under debt-to-capital, that
relationship-banking can distort the firm's incentives.

                                                                                                   8
   II. Research Focus

From the presentation of previous literature of our four research variables, we will now form a set of
hypotheses that summarizes what we expect to observe in our data.

The large shareholders characterizing sphere firms would induce stability in stock prices, due to elimination of
free-riding. Our sample period stretches over the financial crisis, where we expect the sphere firms to over-
perform, i.e. not experience as heavy drops in returns as the non-sphere firms (Hypothesis I).

Previous research suggests that active large shareholders will aim at affecting the managerial decisions. This
would result in sphere firms being more profitable and possibly manage through the crisis more effectively
than non-sphere firms (Hypothesis II).

Banking relationships make the access to interest-bearing debt easier according to the literature. However,
there might follow lock-in effects, making firms related to specific banks unable to borrow from other banks.
We can therefore expect the Industrivärden and Investor spheres to have higher debt-to-capital ratios
compared to other firms, including the Kinnevik sphere (Hypothesis III).

Concerning investment rates, the horizons have been given a lot of attention in conjunction with family firm
ownership. From this we would expect the sphere firms’ investment rates to be unrelated to the financial
crisis (Hypothesis IV).

   III. Data and Methodology

In this section we present our sample data, the performance measures and control variables used to carry out
the empirical tests. Then we report summary statistics for the whole sample and comparative statistics
between the subgroups sphere firms versus non-sphere firms; and crisis versus non-crisis period respectively.

    A. Choice of Time Period and Sample
We are interested in studying the effects of sphere ownership on firm performance before and during the
financial crisis, hence we have chosen the time period from the first quarter 2006 (fourth quarter 2005 for

                                                                                                   9
investment rates) to the third quarter 2009 (fourth quarter 2008 for investment rates). There is no unified
opinion of when the crisis started, which led us to explore some of the major events in 2007 and 2008 and
evaluate the extent to which these gave evidence for when the crisis began. The Northern Rock bailout in

September 2007 was one of the earliest victims of the subprime lending effects4; they were later nationalized

by the United Kingdom government in February 2008. The Northern Rock is however only one out of
several cases, although one of the most important ones, of financial break-downs in the mortgage industry
during this period. Almeida, Campello, Laranjeira and Weisbenner (2009) investigate the effects of the credit
crisis of 2007 and define the three first quarters of 2007 as the pre-crisis period. Ivashina and Scharfstein
(2009) state that the peak of the crisis occurred in late 2008, hence when the market began to recover. With
respect to this and certain events on the market we therefore define the first quarter of 2008 as the beginning
of the crisis. For three of the tests, where we evaluate accounting measures, the crisis period will be until the
third quarter of 2009, thus the last period in our sample. However, the market recovered in terms of stock
returns already in the beginning of 2009, so the fourth quarter of 2008 will be the end period when analyzing
stock returns.

The paper focuses on Swedish firms listed on the OMXS Large Cap and OMXS Mid Cap with one exception
for Kinnevik-owned Metro International, which has an A and B share listed on the OMXS Small Cap. Some
firms have been excluded because of late introduction on the stock exchange causing problems in obtaining
sufficient accounting data. Totally 127 companies are included in the sample, however some of them have
been introduced during the period so the total number of firm-quarter observations is 1 931. Out of these
127 companies, we identify 26 firms partially owned by spheres of which one, L M Ericsson AB, is owned by

both Industrivärden and Investor5. The distribution of firms among spheres and the nine industry groups, as

defined by Dagens Industri, is summarized in Table 1. Clearly, firms in the Financials group are
overrepresented among the sphere firms (34.7%), which motivate us to take industry effects into account
when running the regressions. We will do this by forming an equivalent number of dummy variables which
will estimate these effects; for investment rate and stock returns we will also use industry indices to more
confidently control for differences among industries and periods.

The accounting data is mainly downloaded from COMPUSTAT Global - Quarterly and in case of flaws we
have complemented the data set with these missing values by manually going through quarterly reports for 75
firms. For banks and financial companies, we have used somewhat different measures for some of the
variables due to the unique nature of their businesses, which will be described in connection to the usage of
these measures. Since we use the same data for all firms within the industry and control for industry-specific

4 BBC News (2007).
5 In the empirical tests we will treat this as owned by both of them. When we use dummy variables for sphere
ownerships, both the Investor and the Industrivärden dummy will equal one for L M Ericsson.

                                                                                                  10
effects, most potential deviations will be cleansed out. In addition, we will test for robustness in the results by
re-running the tests but exclude all financial firms.

Market data, i.e. stock prices (adjusted and unadjusted) and number of shares outstanding, is downloaded
from Datastream Advance 4.0. We will use the unadjusted stock price multiplied by the number of shares
outstanding to obtain the market equity, and the adjusted stock prices when comparing the stock returns over
time since these correct for changes in the number of shares. For firms with more than one listed share, we
use value-weighted returns incorporating both share prices according to the formula:

            𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 1    𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 1              𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 1              𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 2    𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 2              𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 2
                 𝑃𝑖,𝑡         −𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1                         𝑁                                𝑃𝑖,𝑡         −𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1                         𝑁
𝑅𝑖,𝑡 =       𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 1 × 𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 1   𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 2 +       𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 2 × 𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 1   𝑠𝑕 𝑎𝑟𝑒 2 ,
                   𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1                  𝑁         +𝑁                       𝑃𝑖,𝑡−1                  𝑁         +𝑁

Where

Ri,t = quarterly returns for firm i in quarter t,
Pi,t= price of the stock for firm i in period t,
N = number of shares.

    B. Definition of Sphere Firms
The choice of spheres was carried out with respect to size, age and number of (partially) controlled firms on
the OMXS; we only considered the spheres’ core investments and operational investments, i.e. we did not
regard private equity investments, which however usually not are listed on the OMXS Large Cap and Mid
Cap. There was however some complementary concerns regarding the definition of which firms to define as
sphere firms. First, the sphere portfolios vary over time as they acquire and dispose shares continuously.
Second, their influence over the firms is dependent on the number of shares held and the number of board
members. We dealt with the first problem by defining dummy variables for the three spheres and letting it
equal 1 in each period for each firm when the relevant sphere owned shares in the observed firm. By this, we

could for instance take into account that Investor acquired Husqvarna in early 2006 and BioVitrum in 20096.

Further, we observed that the spheres via their respective investment companies owned sufficient shares to

obtain at least one board member. Hence, we solve the second issue by defining all sphere firms7 as those

firms where the investment firm owns shares and therefore do not consider how large their ownership is in

6 Investor AB (2010).
7 There are in total 26 sphere firms including the investment firms, of which nine in the Investor sphere (Investor, ABB,
AstraZeneca, Atlas Copco, Electrolux, Husqvarna, Saab, SEB, BioVitrum), ten in the Industrivärden sphere
(Industrivärden, Handelsbanken, Höganäs, Indutrade, Munters, Sandvik, SCA, Skanska, SSAB, Volvo), one in both the
Investor and the Industrivärden sphere (L M Ericsson) and six in the Kinnevik sphere (Kinnevik, Metro International,
Millicom, Modern Times Group, Tele2 and Transcom).

                                                                                                  11
relation to other shareholders. In addition to these measurable characteristics of influence, there might be
qualitative aspects, such as heritage and perceptions among investors that follow with sphere ownership
contributing to performance.

   C. Performance Measures
Firm performance could be measured in various ways. As this study aims at offering a broad view by
presenting multiple results following from sphere influence and control, we have chosen four dependent
variables to test.

Firm performance on the market will here be determined by the quarterly excess stock returns calculated
using adjusted prices. We use the observed stock prices on the last banking day of each quarter and withdraw
the risk-free rate, using the 3-month bond rate from Sweden’s Central Bank Riksbanken.

We estimate profitability using earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) divided by total assets. Profitability
could ideally be measured as EBIT over turnover (net sales), but due to financial companies’ deviating
accounting standards this would generate misleading values as they might present both negative turnover and
EBIT data.

Two of the spheres, Investor and Industrivärden, are connected to two of the largest Swedish banks: SEB
and Handelsbanken, respectively. It is therefore interesting to study what effect this has on firm leverage. We

                                                                  𝐷
measure this by the debt-to-capital ratio (    ) which is interest-bearing debt over the sum of interest-bearing
                                               𝐷+𝐸
debt and shareholder’s booked equity and by the ratio debt-to-assets where we divide the firms’ interest-
bearing debt by its total assets. The first measure is somewhat more precise in capturing the financing
structure since it drops working capital, i.e. short-term liabilities such as payables to suppliers. We use the
second measure to examine whether the inclusion of working capital results in different outcomes. For the
banks, we include all long-term interest-bearing debt reported in the financial statements. The rationale for
this is that long-term interest-bearing debt is not part of their operational business, which on the other hand
short-term interest-bearing debt could be.

Also, due to the spheres’ age and wide possessions, we investigate if sphere ownership has any effect on
investment rate, particularly during the crisis period. Our evaluation measure for this is the annual capital

                                                                                                  12
expenditures8 divided by total assets. For financial firms, whose main investments are securities and/or shares

in firms, we use the net cash flow from investment activities as an equivalent measure.

   D. Control Variables
In order to cleanse out size effects and effects from differences in booked equity compared to the market
value of equity, we form two control variables for this. Firm size is the natural logarithm of market equity
plus booked value of debt, and book-to-market value is the ratio booked equity divided by market value of
equity. Market equity is obtained by multiplying the number of shares outstanding with the unadjusted share
price; in cases of dual-class shares we sum this calculation for both shares and obtain value-weighted average
returns.

The sample firms’ sensibility to changes in the market index is controlled for with an excess market return

variable. We download data on Affärsvärldens Generalindex9 to use as market proxy and withdraw the risk-

free rate (3-month bond rate from Riksbanken). This will give us one average beta for all sample firms over
the full period; we do not download individual firm’s betas, but we control for cyclicality using industry
indices as explained further down.

We also form three sphere dummy variables for each sphere that equals one when the relevant sphere owns
shares in the observed firm and zero otherwise and nine industry dummies that equals one when the
observed firm belongs to the relevant industry and zero otherwise. When we test the investment rate and the
stock returns, we also use industry indices to investigate the sample firms’ sensitivity to industry-specific
variations. Dummy variables only control for fixed effects, i.e. the average effect during the sample period,
whereas indices take fluctuations into account. To study the effect of the crisis, we form a crisis dummy that
equals one for the defined crisis period and zero otherwise. Lastly, to check for difference-in-difference
effects for the sphere firm ownership during the crisis, we form three difference-in-difference dummy
variables. These will equal one if the observation belongs to one of the spheres and there was crisis, and zero
otherwise, i.e. it is the product of each sphere variable times the crisis variable.

    E. Summary Statistics
When collecting all variables of interest in Table 2 over the entire sample period, we observe in Panel A that
the min-max spread for market return and risk-free rate are relatively wide which reflects the turn from boom

8 We use annual data for this since a majority of the firms in our sample do not specify the investments in tangible assets
in their consolidated quarterly cash flow statements.
9 A wide index updated daily for the largest stocks on the OMXS. We download it from Datastream Advance 4.0.

                                                                                                  13
to recession over the period. The prices on the market have at average gone down over the research period,
as shown by the mean of the market return. Overall, the data set offers large spreads in all variables. Note
also that the minimum value for book-to-market is negative and the maximum value for debt-to-capital
exceeds 1.00, which is explained by Swedish Match reporting negative booked value of shareholders’ equity in
2008 quarter 1 and 2. In the next session we will test for robustness in our findings by excluding outliers and
see if these cause any effects on our conclusions.

Panel B reports the results from mean comparison tests on the independent and dependent variables. The
tests were conducted using sample means for each firm over the period and grouping the results in order to

enable comparisons10. The sphere firms are significantly larger than non-sphere firms in terms of the natural

logarithm of market equity plus interest-bearing debt, when regarding statistical and economical significance.
However, the results give some indications that sphere firms have had lower debt-to-assets ratio but higher
debt-to-capital ratio although the t-statistics for these differences are not significant on all commonly applied
levels. However, in the debt-to-assets measure, non-interest-bearing liabilities (e.g. working capital) are
included which explains the reverse outcomes.

The non-sphere firms seem to over-perform sphere firms when studying the means of stock returns and
return on assets. These values are however not significant; hence, these indications ought not to be perceived
as representative. In addition, the min-max spread of excess stock returns ranges from -70.41% to 209.25%,
so in that light the difference between the subgroups is not economically important. Moreover, we have in
this test not cleansed away effects from our control variables and as the two groups differ with respect to firm
size, book-to-market ratio and industry distribution (see Table 1); these will most likely be valuable to
incorporate in the analysis.

From the correlation matrix in Panel C, we find that sphere ownership is almost uncorrelated with all
independent variables apart from firm size. Also, the independent variables in the matrix do not show any
strong correlation between the explanatory variables which supports that the multivariate tests we will
perform further ahead are unbiased.

The central focus of the study is to investigate how the sample firms’ performance measures and
characteristics were affected during the financial crisis. Table 3 presents statistics on differences between the
two sub-periods, crisis and non-crisis.

Panel A reports the results from a mean comparison test between the crisis and non-crisis period. The
observed market performance in the crisis period is significantly lower, which consequently affects the book-

10 We ran the test in STATA 9.2 using the command ttest and categorized them using a dummy variable sphere firm that
equals one when the observed firm is owned by one of the spheres and zero otherwise.

                                                                                                  14
to-market value as the market capital becomes lower. The firm profitability is also lower in the crisis period;
the reported difference between the sub-periods is both statistically and economically significant. Also the
debt-to-assets and debt-to-capital ratios went up during the crisis, although the increases are conservative in
economic terms. Recall that we use another definition of the crisis period for the stock returns.

   IV. Results and Analysis

In this section we will further investigate the sample firm performance by studying four different variables.
First, we will analyze the quarterly stock returns over the period from the first quarter 2006 to the third
quarter 2009. Thereafter, we will look at profitability, debt-to-capital ratio and finally investment rate. For
investment rates we analyze annual data.

    A. Stock Returns
When studying the quarterly stock returns, the performance measure is calculated according to the formula:

(𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔 𝑕𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖,𝑡 −𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔 𝑕𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖,𝑡−1)
                                              , where weighted stock price is used since some firms in the
                  𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔 𝑕𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖,𝑡−1
sample have dual-class traded shares, i.e. A and B shares or equivalent.

When graphing the industry value-weighted stock returns over the sample period from the first quarter 200611

to the third quarter 2009 (see Figure 1) we observe that the market began to recover already in the beginning
of 2009. This goes in line with Ivashina’s and Scharfstein’s findings that the peak of the crisis occurred in late

200812. Therefore, it can be misleading to treat 2009 as part of the crisis period when studying the stock

returns as these compare the stock price in the current quarter with the previous one. Also, the results of
market reactions are observed prior to accounting data, especially when studying returns instead of nominal
prices. For instance, in our sample the prices in early 2009 were lower than in 2007 but the observed returns

are higher in 2009 and 2007 due to the heavy drop in prices in 200813. Due to this, we will in the analysis of

stock returns define the crisis period as the four quarters of 2008 and treat 2009 as the after period. For the
other three analyses 2009 will be included in the crisis period definition.

11 The fourth quarter of 2005 does not generate observations for stock returns, as we do not collect data for the third
quarter 2005. Hence, we have the number of shares outstanding and the stock prices for quarter 4 2005, which is used to
calculate the quarterly return in the first quarter 2006.
12 Ivashina, V. and Scharfstein, D. (2009).
13 A numerical example: If the price fell from 100 SEK to 50 SEK in one period, the return is -50% and then recovered
to 75 SEK in the next period, that return would be +50% although the price is lower than in the first period.

                                                                                                  15
The industry indices are formed as the observed stock returns for each firm multiplied by its market equity
divided by the total market equity within the industry, thus value-weighted indices. The energy index, which is
more volatile during 2008-2009, consists of only three firms which make it more sensitive to firm-specific
events.

When graphing the trends over the period, we used actual stock returns. However, when analyzing the market
performance using multiple explanatory variables, we will use excess stock returns as performance measure.
The main equation we estimate in this section is:

𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × ln (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ) + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t−1 + 𝛽3 × Rm,t − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 + δ4i × Crisis + δ5i ×
Investor + δ6i × Industrivärden + δ7i × Kinnevik + δ8i × Energy + δ9i × Utilities + δ10i × Manufacturing +
δ11i × Durables + δ12i × Nondurables + δ13i × Health + δ14i × Financial + δ15i × IT + δ16i × Telecom + δ17i ×
Investor × Crisis + δ18i × Industrivärden × Crisis + δ19i × Kinnevik × Crisis + εi,t

Where

Ri,t = quarterly returns for firm i in quarter t,
Rf,t= the risk-free rate, the 3-months bonds issued by Riksbanken,
Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt,
Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share

price; in this analysis we use the BtM observed in the beginning of the period14,

Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to quarter 4 and zero
otherwise.
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially
owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Energy, Utilities, Manufacturing, Durables, Nondurables, Health, Financial, IT, Telecom = dummy variables for the
nine industries that equal one if the firm belongs to the industry and zero otherwise.
Investor x Crisis, Industrivärden x Crisis, Kinnevik x Crisis = difference-in-difference dummy variables for each
sphere during the crisis; they equal one when both the sphere dummy and the crisis dummy are one, and zero
otherwise.

We use robust standard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity. Since we use panel data, we do not have to
correct for clustering in the standard deviation, as this already is adjusted for.

14 We use the BtM in the beginning of the period (quarter), since it is more interesting to study how the BtM affected the
market performance during the period.

                                                                                                  16
First we run the model over the period 2006 quarter 1 to 2008 quarter 4, i.e. we exclude 2009 entirely, in three
variants. We do this because although we observe a market recovery in the beginning of 2009, the accounting
data we use as control variables possibly do not reflect this recovery. The rationale for testing the regressions
with the two different time periods is thus to see if the results are robust. In column (1), we regress the excess
stock return on all variables except from the difference-in-difference estimators to check for sphere-fixed
effects over the whole sample period. In column (2), we include these difference-in-difference dummies and
in column (3) we exclude the industry-fixed effects to check for robustness in the results.

The results are reported in Table 4. The R-squared for the variants range between 0.2269 and 0.2286, thus
fairly high given the volatility caused by the boom in 2006 and recession in 2008 we observed in Figure 1. We
observe that the sample firms follow the excess return of the market proxy; the sample average market beta is
estimated to 0.44 and different from zero on all levels of significance over the three variants. The
interpretation is that if the excess return on the market increases by 10%, the average effect will be an
increase in excess stock returns by 4.4%, keeping all other variables constant. However, it is reasonable to
believe that the sample firms are unequally exposed to fluctuations in the market excess returns, why we will
account for cyclicality using industry index returns and rather use the market excess return as a control
variable.

We cannot draw any definite conclusions concerning the book-to-market and size factors; data indicates that
large firms are associated with higher returns. However, we only find statistical support for this when we
exclude the industry dummies so we cannot confidently evaluate its actual impact on the sample firms’ stock
returns.

Not surprisingly, the constant before the crisis dummy is negative (between -8.73% and -9.17%) and highly
significant. We do not find any particular effects in any of the industry dummy variables which is reasonable,
since the dummy variables report fixed industry effects (averages over the period) and the industry index
returns have been volatile over the sample period.

In order to further investigate the crisis’ effect on the sphere firms, we also run the regressions with
difference-in-difference dummies for the three respective spheres. These will equal one for all observations
where the firm was owned by one of the spheres and it was recession. Here, we find support for the Investor
dummy and the Investor difference-in-difference dummy. The constant before the Investor dummy is
negative and significant on the 5% level in the second and third column. However, the coefficient before the
difference-in-difference dummy for Investor over the crisis period is positive and significant on the 1% level.
If we were to compare two companies – one non-sphere and one Investor controlled – of equal size, book-
to-market and that operate in the same industry during the crisis period, we would expect the Investor
controlled firm to have a 4.17% (the sum of the Investor and difference-in-difference estimator) higher

                                                                                                  17
quarterly excess return than the non-sphere firm. The coefficient before the Investor dummy is negative and
significant when we include the difference-in-difference estimator, which would suggest that Investor firms
sold on discount during the boom but on premium during the crisis.

We observe some changes when extending the sample period to 2009 quarter 3 (see Table 5). The model
loses explanatory power in terms of R-squared (between 0.1165 and 0.1257), which is reasonable due to the
high stock returns we observe during the market recovery in 2009. First, the reported intercept is logically
higher due to the market recovery starting after the fourth quarter 2008 although it is not valid on any of the
commonly used levels of significance. The book-to-market factor is now slightly positive; the effect is highly
significant and estimated to roughly 1.50%. The size factor, on the other hand is more insignificant than
before and the reported values lie around -0.1% and below. Therefore, we expect the size to be irrelevant for
estimating stock returns over the full sample period.

Regarding the sphere firm dummies and difference-in-difference dummies, we view a larger and still
significant positive effect of the Investor firms during the crisis. Actually, it even outweighs the negative
effect of the crisis. However, the constant before the Investor dummy in the third column where we do not
take the industry-fixed effects into account is still negative and significant. The interpretation is that the
Investor firms mostly sold on discount relative to comparable firms over the non-crisis period, but on
premium during the crisis. Interestingly, we note a negative effect on the Kinnevik dummy in the first variant
where we do not take the specific effect of being controlled by Kinnevik during the crisis into consideration.
This suggests that Kinnevik performed weakly over the sample period; we also find some weak support for
this in the other two variants, although none of these are significant on the 10% level.

Lastly, we will use an alternative to the dummy variables when controlling for industry effects, namely the
sensitivity to industry index returns. This is done in order to check for robustness of the previous results. We
use the same value-weighted indices as in Figure 1. The equation we are estimating now is:

𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ) + 𝛽2 × 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽3 × 𝑅𝑚 ,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑖 × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 +
𝛿5𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿6𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑣ä𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 + 𝛿7𝑖 × 𝐾𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑘 + 𝛿8𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑖,𝑡 + δ9i × Investor ×
Crisis + δ10i × Industrivärden × Crisis + δ11i × Kinnevik × Crisis + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 ,

Where

Ri,t = quarterly returns for firm i in quarter t,
Rf,t= the risk-free rate, the 3-months bonds issued by Riksbanken,
Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt,

                                                                                                  18
Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share

price; in this analysis we use the BtM observed in the beginning of the period15,

Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to quarter 4 and zero
otherwise.
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially
owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Industry return = the value-weighted industry index returns for the nine industries, in each period there is one
observation per industry that is reported for each firm within that industry.
Investor x Crisis, Industrivärden x Crisis, Kinnevik x Crisis = difference-in-difference dummy variables for each
sphere during the crisis; they equal one when both the sphere dummy and the crisis dummy are one, and zero
otherwise.

We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors.

The results from this regression are reported in Table 6. We immediately observe that the R-squared from the
regressions are very high: between 0.7932 and 0.7985, suggesting that these results are more reliable than
those we obtained in the previous model and that the usage of industry index returns instead of dummy
variables gave further strength to the estimation. We will therefore treat the findings here as our main results.

The usage of industry index return as control variable does not violate the positive and significant effect of
Investor ownerships during the crisis; the only effect is affirmative, namely a higher t-statistic bringing more
validity to the results. However, we can conclude that the sample firms are more exposed to industry-specific
risk than total market-specific risk, measured here as the return on the market proxy. The difference is both
economically substantial and statistically significant. When including the index variable, the strength in the
crisis variables decreases but is still significant on the 1% level, since part of its earlier reported effect is
absorbed by this new variable. Hence, our general conclusion from this regression is that the sample firms’
industry-specific risks are very high which makes it somewhat difficult to estimate the actual effects of the
crisis, yet we still observe that it is negative. We saw earlier that the average excess stock return during the
crisis was -17.52%. Here the effect during the crisis is about -5%, so the earlier regressions where we used
industry dummy variables were better at showing the crisis-specific effects whereas in the second
specification, the crisis-effect is incorporated in the industry indices. The first model specification, on the
other hand, loses the cyclicality dimension as it reports sample period average industry effects.

15 We use the BtM in the beginning of the period (quarter), since it is more interesting to study how the BtM affected the
market performance during the period.

                                                                                                  19
For Industrivärden, the difference-in-difference dummy is now significant on the 10% level and close to be
significant on the 5% level. The reported coefficient is 4.98%, suggesting that even the Industrivärden
controlled firms performed better than other firms during the crisis. Since this model specification with
industry indices instead of industry dummy variables takes cyclicality into account, we should view this result
as more reliable than the one we found in the previous tests.

    B. Profitability
We measure profitability as EBIT/total assets. The main equation we are estimating is:

 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t + δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i ×
Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + δ8i × Utilities + δ9i × Manufacturing + δ10i × Durables +
δ11i × Nondurables + δ12i × Health + δ13i × Financial + δ14i × IT + δ15i × Telecom + δ16i × Investor ×
Crisis + δ17i × Industrivärden × Crisis + δ18i × Kinnevik × Crisis + εi,t

Where

Profitability = earnings before interest and taxes divided by total assets for firm i in quarter t,
Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt,
Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share
price,
Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 calendar
quarter 3 and zero otherwise.
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially
owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Energy, Utilities, Manufacturing, Durables, Nondurables, Health, Financial, IT, Telecom = dummy variables for the
nine industries that equal one if the firm belongs to the industry and zero otherwise.
Investor x Crisis, Industrivärden x Crisis, Kinnevik x Crisis = difference-in-difference dummy variables for each
sphere during the crisis; they equal one when both the sphere dummy and the crisis dummy are one, and zero
otherwise.

We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors.

The results from the regression are found in Table 7. In column (1) we include the industry variables, whereas
we leave them out in column (2) in order to check for potential deviations and ensure the results in panel (1).

                                                                                                  20
First, we should note that the energy industry dummy is dropped due to multicollinearity among the industry
dummies. Data show that book-to-market had a statistically but not economically significant negative effect
on profitability over the sample period, whereas firm size had a significant positive effect. We can also see
that profitability fell by approximately 1%, keeping all other variables constant, during the crisis which lies in
line with the results from the mean-comparison test presented in Table 3.

In Table 2, the results indicated but could not statistically show that the sphere firms’ profitability is
somewhat lower than the other firms. In the first variant of the model, we now find that the Investor firms
were less operationally efficient during the sample period. The coefficient is both economically and
statistically significant (on the 5% and 10% level respectively). The other sphere dummies are also negative by
around 1%, but none of the others are significant on any of the significance levels, although the coefficients
are negative and weakly hints under-performance compared to non-sphere firms.

In order to further investigate the crisis’ effect on the sphere firms, we re-run the regressions but now include
the difference-in-difference dummies for the three respective spheres. Table 8 reports the results from these
regressions. There are no important changes from before; the Investor dummy is still significant and negative
when we take the industry dummies into account. None of the sphere difference-in-difference estimators
provide any statistical support. We can therefore not conclude that sphere control had any effect on firm
profitability during the crisis.

The general conclusion is that the profitability went down during the crisis and that the Investor firms had
lower profitability over the full sample-period when taking industry-specific effects into account. Moreover
we find that large firms are associated with higher profitability and firms with high book-to-market with lower
profitability. We found no clear pattern over industries when using the dummy variables. Therefore, we re-ran
the test with industry indices as in the previous section with stock returns to control for robustness in the
results. This did not bring any new results to the outcome, only affirmative to the previous tests.

Lastly, recall from the mean-comparison test that the sphere firms were larger than the non-sphere firms. If
we exclude the size factor from the regression here, we lose the significance on the Investor dummy. In that
light, we should be more careful in stating the under-performance of Investor firms; the reason for our
findings could be explained by the fact that the firm size factor was positive and significant. Moreover, to
comment on the low R-squared, the inclusion of industry dummy variables generates better explanatory
power to the model.

    C. Debt-to-Capital
Investigating firms’ financing decisions will now be carried out through the regression

                                                                                                  21
𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t + δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i ×
Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + δ8i × Utilities + δ9i × Manufacturing + δ10i × Durables +
δ11i × Nondurables + δ12i × Health + δ13i × Financial + δ14i × IT + δ15i × Telecom + δ16i × Investor ×
Crisis + δ17i × Industrivärden × Crisis + δ18i × Kinnevik × Crisis + εi,t

Where

Debt-rate = Interest-bearing debt divided by the sum of shareholders’ equity and interest-bearing debt,
Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt,
Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share
price,
Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and
zero otherwise,
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially
owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Energy, Utilities, Manufacturing, Durables, Nondurables, Health, Financial, IT, Telecom = dummy variables for the
nine industries that equal one if the firm belongs to the industry and zero otherwise.
Investor x Crisis, Industrivärden x Crisis, Kinnevik x Crisis = difference-in-difference dummy variables for each
sphere during the crisis; they equal one when both the sphere dummy and the crisis dummy are one, and zero
otherwise.

We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors.

Table 9 present the results from the regressions. In column (1), we include all control variables whereas we
have dropped the industry dummies in column (2) to check for potential differences. In column (1), the
industry dummy for energy is dropped due to of multicollinearity. Two of the explanatory variables are
statistically significant on the 0.1% level in both variants, namely firm size and crisis; also the constant before
the book-to-market factor is significant on the 5% level. Data suggests that debt-to-capital ratio increases by
approximately 3% as the natural logarithm firm size increase by 1.0, thus an increase in nominal value of the
firm by 2.72 billion SEK. Further, the coefficient before the crisis dummy is 4.28% in both models. This
indicates that the sample firms increasingly financed their assets by interest-bearing debt rather than equity
during the crisis. A higher book-to-market ratio has a slightly positive significant effect on debt-to-capital
ratios. However, the economic effect is conservative, so its importance in relation to the other factors is
small.

                                                                                                  22
The last variable we find statistical and economical significance for is the Investor variable. The results show
that firms owned by Investor have a higher debt-to-capital ratio of about 9% over the full sample period,
which is both economically and statistically strong. For the other two sphere variables, data does not support
any effect even on the 10% significance level. Thus, when ignoring difference-in-difference effects, we cannot
draw any general conclusions for the sphere firms collectively, but for Investor as an individual sphere.

In the next step, we will further investigate how the sphere firms’ debt-levels were affected during the crisis.
The results are summarized in Table 10. We do this by regressing the debt-to-capital ratio on the same
variables as in Table 9 but we add on the three difference-in-difference dummies that equals one when there
was crisis and the observed firm was owned by one of the spheres. In column (2) we re-run it but leave out
the industry variables.

We find the same results for the variables firm size, book-to-market, crisis and Investor as before. When we
study the sphere dummies and difference-in-difference dummies, however, the conclusion is extended. The
constant before the Investor dummy is still positive and significant, but the difference-in-difference dummy is
not significant on all commonly used levels of significance. This suggests that Investor firms do have higher
debt-to-capital ratios, but they did not necessarily increase their debt-to-capital ratio more than other firms
during the crisis. Hence, Investor firms’ financing decisions were robust to the downturn in the economic
climate. The constant on the Industrivärden difference-in-difference variable is positive and significant on the
0.01% level for both model (1) and (2). We can therefore conclude that firms owned by Industrivärden
increased their levels of interest-bearing debts during the crisis, which also is what we have observed

qualitatively16. Though, this does not necessarily imply that they deviate from the other firms in general over

the full period when we do not take the sphere’s crisis-specific effects into account. One reason for this can
be explained by the banking-relationships theory; since Industrivärden is related to Handelsbanken, who did
not exhibit as large losses as other Swedish banks, they should in general have better access to interest-bearing
debt than other firms and during the crisis also better than the Investor sphere since SEB was more exposed

to credit risks17. However, SEB received support from several sources: from the government through the

national credit guarantee program, from a new stocks issue in 2009 that largely was financed through cash

from Investor18.

16 Mellqvist, Gabriel (2008).
17 See e.g. Lucas, Dan (2009) and Handelsbanken (2010): SEB and Swedbank had the highest exposures to credit risks of
the four most important Swedish banks. SEB joined the government's guarantee program, which they initially did not
intend to but as the profit fell rapidly and they had to reserve cash to secure for potential future losses they eventually
decided to join it. A lot of the explanation lies in their heavy exposure to the Baltic States and Eastern Europe who were
heavily affected in the early crisis period. Handelsbanken on the other hand did not participate in the program, which
clearly shows that they were financially more stable and could lend out more than SEB.
18 SEB (2009), Rawet, Peter (2009) and Svenska Dagbladet (2009).

                                                                                                  23
We also run the test on debt-to-assets instead of debt-to-capital to investigate differences in effects when
including working capital (non-interest-bearing debt) and obtain results very similar to the previous ones. We
can therefore conclude that the effect of including working capital in the regression is conservative and only
provides robustness to our findings above. Given the higher observed R-squared when including industry
dummy variables, we can also conclude that these seem to carry some degree of explanatory power although
none of them individually are significant even on the 10% level.

In order to obtain a better understanding of the crisis effect on debt-to-capital ratios, we perform mean
comparison tests for the value-weighted average nominal booked equity and for the value-weighted amount
of interesting-bearing debt, to observe the actual average levels during the crisis period compared to the non-
crisis period. We find that interesting-bearing debt went up by almost 25% during the crisis (with t-statistic -
21.20) whereas the booked equity only went up by 10% (-25.12). We can therefore conclude that the increase
in debt-to-capital ratios during the crisis is well explained by firms signing debt contracts rather than using
equity to finance the capital, although they seem to have done both to various extents. Hence, it is
appropriate to draw the conclusion that the firms were more leveraged during the crisis than before.

   D. Investment Rate
We will now analyze the sample firms’ investment rate. As most firms only report investment data in their
annual reports and not in their interim reports, we will use fiscal year as time variable and only study annual
data from the fourth fiscal quarter.

The model we are estimating is

𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t + δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor +
δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + δ8i × Utilities + δ9i × Manufacturing + δ10i ×
Durables + δ11i × Nondurables + δ12i × Health + δ13i × Financial + δ14i × IT + δ15i × Telecom + δ16i ×
Investor × Crisis + δ17i × Industrivärden × Crisis + δ18i × Kinnevik × Crisis + εi,t ,

Where

Investment rate = capital expenditure (CAPEX) divided by total assets for firm i in year t,
Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt,
Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share
price,
Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 and zero otherwise.

                                                                                                  24
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially
owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Energy, Utilities, Manufacturing, Durables, Nondurables, Health, Financial, IT, Telecom = dummy variables for the
nine industries that equal one if the firm belongs to the industry and zero otherwise.
Investor x Crisis, Industrivärden x Crisis, Kinnevik x Crisis = difference-in-difference dummy variables for each
sphere during the crisis; they equal one when both the sphere dummy and the crisis dummy are one, and zero
otherwise.

We use robust standard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity.

The results from the regression are presented in Table 11. The energy dummy is left out in order to avoid
multicollinearity.

In the first regression, where we estimate the presented equation, we obtain significance for most of the
industry dummies. This is a bit misleading; the energy variable is dropped due to multicollinearity which is
included in the intercept. Seemingly, the energy firms (three in the sample) have invested more during the
sample period than firms in other industries which is natural as all three are in the oil business which requires
large tangible assets. None of the spheres own shares in energy firms. The constants before the crisis and the
sphere firm dummies are not significant on any of the commonly used levels of significance. When we
exclude the industry dummies, we still do not find any statistical indication for the determinants of
investment rates.

One reason for the weak statistical results can be the low number of observations compared to the other
performance measures. Other explanations could be the sample firms varying access to capital together with
the uncertainty in investment benefits during the crisis leading them to dedicate existing resources on
maintaining operational business. We also tested for difference-in-difference dummies in this model, but
these did not provide any statistical guidance, so from these findings we cannot tell whether the sphere firms
changed their investment patterns.

When we use industry investment rates19 instead of dummies as in Table 12, we observe that the sample

firms’ investment rates are highly correlated with the industry indices; the average coefficient is 0.572. None
of the other variables are significant, which suggests that firms’ investment patterns are unrelated to size,
crisis, book-to-market and sphere ownership.

19 We calculate these for each firm by taking each firm’s share of the industry’s total market equity and multiplying by its
investment rate in the end of that year.

                                                                                                  25
When calculating the means of the industry investment indices, three of the industries report deviating data.
Financials and IT firms have very low investment rates; the explanation for the low mean for financials is that
many of the firms might have disposed shares in their investments and for both financials and IT that their
businesses do not require large tangible assets. The energy industry, on the contrary, presents a very high
mean (18.6% compared to the overall sample mean of 3.6%) which is not very surprising since there are only
three energy firms in our sample with all of them engaging in oil production which relies heavily on tangible
assets. We therefore run a last regression (see Table 13) without these outliers and find weak significance (t-
statistic -1.68 corresponding to a p-value of 9.40%) for the Investor difference-in-difference estimator. The
interpretation would in this case be that Investor firms except from the financials who are excluded here had
a 2% lower investment rate during the crisis, which is an economically important decrease. This might be in
line with the previous argument that instability on the market made investment opportunities uncertain. Yet,
they should have access to investment capital despite the economic recession given their relationship to SEB
and Investor AB (investment firm). However, the number of observations is now even lower than before and
we ignore the outlier industries and the significance level is higher than we usually accept in this study, so the
analysis rests on weaker data set-up for the results.

It is difficult to investigate the possible existence of cross-subsidization in the data. Therefore, we analyze
each sphere individually by dividing the groups into the investment firm and the portfolio firms and graphing
their investment rates over the sample period (see Figure 2a to Figure 2c). We find that Investor invested
more when their portfolio firms invested less and vice versa; the correlation between Investor’s investment
rate and their portfolio firms’ value-weighted average investment rate equals -0.9053, thus strongly negative.
If this is interpreted as Investor spending less cash on external firms when the investment rate in the portfolio
firms was high, this could possibly be explained by cross-subsidization. However, we cannot state that there is
an inefficient allocation of capital without further investigation of how Investor AB (investment firm)
distributes its investments. Still it is obvious that Investor AB (investment firm) disposed rather than acquired
shares during the sample period, which could be explained by the uncertainty on the market. Moreover, their
sphere bank SEB was highly affected by the crisis so instead of exploiting possible investment projects, they
might have prioritized to accumulate back-up finances in case of further credit losses for SEB. Given that

they have long investment horizons20 and the stock prices were low during the crisis, they should have

perceived the investment opportunities as attractive. This suggests that they, despite their large cash balance,
were restricted by their portfolio firms’ performances from acquiring new shares. Though, we have found

20 See Strandberg, Hans (2010): Investor AB’s CEO Börje Ekholm claims that they can take short-term losses, since they
aim at keeping their investments long and with his own words “could regard owning them forever”.

                                                                                                  26
qualitative evidence that the investment firms have financed their investments in some portfolio firms by

reducing the holdings in others21.

For Industrivärden, the graph does not provide any particular pattern in investment rates. Lastly, for
Kinnevik, we observe that the investment rate for the portfolio firms constantly rose over the entire sample
period, but the pattern the investment firm followed does not reveal anything fruitful about the validity of the
cross-subsidization hypothesis.

In general the investment firms decreased their investment rates in 2008 compared to 2007, which talks
against theories suggesting that family firms have extended horizons and therefore should be indifferent to
the state of the economy when deciding on efficient investment opportunities. Rather, it seems like the
spheres acted very conservatively and did not take on additional risks or alternatively, that they did not view
many investments as efficient. This can have given the spheres a more reliable image among other investors
on the market, which could be another explanation for why Investor and Industrivärden’s firms offered
higher returns during the crisis period. On the other hand, as pointed out, they might have missed long-term
efficient opportunities by following this conservative investment strategy.

   V. Robustness and Validity of Results

One possible remark on the tested models could be the decision not to separate the investment firms (i.e.
Investor, Industrivärden and Kinnevik) from their portfolio firms. As we found when separating them in the
investment rates analysis, there were some important differences and it is possible that they also generate
different returns on the market, have different capital structure and exhibit different levels of profitability. In
this section we will discuss and clarify these potential implications on the results. First, we test for potential
differences in results if we separate the investment firms from their respective portfolio firms. Second, we
investigate how firms who had high investment rates before the crisis were affected during the crisis and if
there were any industry or sphere ownership patterns. Third, we test for potential deviations when excluding
the financial firms who report accounting differently from the other industries. Fourth, we re-run the
regressions but exclude outliers in the firm size and book-to-market variables. Lastly, we discuss endogeneity
in the sample data and in the tests.

21 Dagens Industri (2009).

                                                                                                  27
    A. Exclusion of the Investment Firms from the Sphere Groups
We test for this by, for each sphere, separating and analyzing the investment firms and their portfolio firms’
performances. First we do this for the market performance measure: we form an index based on the portfolio
firms’ value-weighted stock returns over the period. The results are found in Figure 3a to Figure 3c.
Obviously, the portfolio indices follow the investment firms’ market performances very closely. Hence,
nothing points to the direction that cross-subsidization, if they do cross-subsidize, has any negative impact on
the market’s perceived value.

For the debt-to-capital we find when separating the investment firms from the sphere groups and tabulating
the sample average ratios that the investment firms were less leveraged during all periods. This would by the
fact the investment firms do not possess any important tangible assets and as such do not need debt to
finance their assets side. It motivates a re-test of the debt-to-capital ratios to check for potential deviations
from the results presented. The results from the robustness test does however not implicate on our previous
results; hence, we can just conclude that the investment firms are less leveraged, but that exclusion of these in
the model does not have any effect on the coefficients of the sphere dummy variables. Possibly, the
difference in leverage in the investment firms could be absorbed by other control variables in the model
specification.

Lastly, we investigate differences in profitability, as reported in Figure 4a to Figure 4c. For Investor and
Industrivärden’s portfolio firms we observe a stable average level over the period, whereas their investment
firms report more volatility in profitability. The same counts for Kinnevik, with the exception that the
portfolio firms’ average performance is somewhat volatile at the beginning of the sample period. Another
remark for Kinnevik is that there was only one observation below 0%, namely for the investment firm in
2006.

    B. High Investment Firms
For the investment rate test, it is also interesting to study if the firms who invested more than the sample
average before the crisis changed their investment behavior during the crisis. The rationale here is that these
firms should require more tangible assets and therefore it should be easier to observe crisis-specific effects.
We do this by calculating the pre-crisis mean of investment rate, which is 4.24%. Then we split the sample
and study only the high-investment firms over the full sample period, to check (i) if they were particularly
affected by the crisis and (ii) if sphere ownership caused any significant differences. We then have 51 firms
left out of which two are controlled by Investor, five by Industrivärden and three by Kinnevik. This answers
to 19.6% sphere firms in this test as compared to 20.5% in the entire sample; thus, the distribution is fairly
similar when viewing all sphere firms as a group, yet Investor is underrepresented and the other spheres

                                                                                                  28
overrepresented. We run this test first without controlling for industry indices and then by including it.
However, this does not result in any significant factors, apart from the intercept and the industry index factor
in the first regression.

We then exclude the IT, energy and financial sectors since, as we have already concluded, these industries
deviate largely from the overall market average. The result then is that the Investor firms who had high
investment rates before the crisis decreased their investment rate by 4.2% during the crisis. However, this
group is small (two firms) and the number of observations in this version is only 127, so we should be very
cautious with these findings.

    C. Exclusion of Financial Firms
Financial firms’ annual reports are quite different from other industries’, because of the nature of their
business. A common practice in many finance papers is to exclude financial firms and institutions. However,
financial firms constitute a substantial part of the Stockholm Stock Exchange and the spheres we have chosen
to focus on possess many important financial firms, so we still found it reasonable not to ignore these in the
multivariate analysis. The control and performance measures extracted from the financial firms were chosen
so that they corresponded well to the other firms’ variables and we controlled for industry-specific risks in all
parts of the analysis. The results might yet have been different if we had excluded these from the sample,
which motivates further robustness tests to control for this.

Concerning stock returns, we first re-run the tests from Table 5, i.e. when we study the full sample period,
treat the four quarters of 2008 as the crisis period on the market and control for industry-specific effects
using dummies. In the second version, where we include all industry dummy variables and the difference-in-
difference estimators, the results look somewhat different. The Investor dummy is still negative (-4.1%) but
the p-value is now 12.6% compared to 5.7% when we included financials and the Investor difference-in-
difference dummy is more positive (12.2%) and still significant on all commonly used levels. The Kinnevik
dummy is also negative in this test and the p-value is now 6.9% compared to 11.5% before; in the Kinnevik
group, we had however only one financial firm, namely the investment firm Investments AB Kinnevik. In the
previous section where we graphed the performances for the investment firms and their portfolio firms
separately, however, we found a high correlation between the two so the results are somewhat surprising.

We then re-run the test presented in Table 12 i.e. when we instead control for industry indices. The results are
largely similar to before; the Investor difference-in-difference estimator is also here more positive and
significant. The same counts for the Industrivärden difference-in-difference estimator which now has a p-
value of 6.1% and the constant is 6.3%. To sum up the effects from excluding financial firms, we now see

                                                                                                  29
even stronger indications that Investor and Industrivärden’s portfolio firms performed better than the rest of
the sample firms on the market, yet the results do not deviate particularly much when we ignore the financial
firms.

For the profitability analysis, we obtain some interesting results that can infer on our previous findings. When
we test profitability and control for size, book-to-market, industry dummies and sphere dummies we find
significance for the Investor and Industrivärden dummies who are negative (-1.9% and -1.6% respectively). If
we exclude all industry dummies, the results are very similar. When we in the multivariate analysis section
investigated all industries, we only found significance for the Investor dummy in the first of these regressions.
Hence, we can conclude that exclusion of financial firms would generate a somewhat different analysis with
even stronger evidence for Investor and Industrivärden’s under-performance compared to other sample
firms.

When we include the difference-in-difference dummies, we find that both the Industrivärden dummy and
difference-in-difference estimator is negative and significant on the 5% level, whereas only the Investor
dummy is negative but the difference-in-difference estimator is now positive and close to significant on the
10% level. Although this last variable is not significant, it seems like the Investor firms (excluding financial
firms) performed somewhat worse than the other sample firms during the pre-crisis period, which mostly was
characterized by the economic boom, but their performance did not decrease very much during the crisis.

Since we have already excluded the financial firms in the analysis of investment rates, we will not treat it
further in this section. The last performance measure we will test for robustness on is the debt-to-capital
ratio. There we do not find any deviating results from before, apart from some minor differences in t-
statistics. The constant before firm size, which previously was significant on all levels of significance, is now
significant on the 5% level.

To conclude the robustness tests where we exclude the financial firms, we mostly find further support for the
earlier findings, which suggests that the choice of corresponding measures for the financial firms was
appropriately chosen. One deviation is found for stock returns, namely that the Kinnevik firms at average
sold on discount over the entire sample period compared to non-Kinnevik firms.

   D. Exclusion of Outliers
In this part we test if the exclusion of outliers in the sample data could implicate on our findings. Table 2
showed that the min-max spreads in ln(Firm Size) and Book-to-Market were large. When examining the 5%
tails for these variables we find that there exists some outliers for Book-to-Market in both tails, especially in
the 95th centile which was reported to 2.09 whereas the maximum is 43.45 for Lundin Mining in 2008 quarter

                                                                                                  30
4 where their adjusted stock price heavily dropped by 69%. Regarding firm size, there are outliers particularly
in the 5th centile, which is reported to 7.21 compared to the mean 9.43 and the sample minimum 4.76.

We first re-run our main equation for estimating excess stock returns, i.e. with difference-in-difference
dummies and industry index returns as reported in Table 6 column (2). The results are reported in Table 14.
The number of observations left is now 1 450 compared to 1 782 and the R-squared has decreased from
0.7985 to 0.4696. The book-to-market coefficient is now more positive and significant, 0.17 (t-statistic 7.32)
instead of 0.01 (2.74), suggesting that an increase in book-to-market ratio by 0.1 in the beginning of the
quarter would generate a 1.7% higher return at the end of the period. The Investor difference-in-difference
dummy is now slightly less positive with p-value 0.2% and the Investor dummy does no longer have any
statistical significance. This gives more robustness to previous results indicating Investor’s superior market
performance and it also indicates that the Investor firms not necessarily performed worse in the non-crisis
period when excluding these outliers.

We then re-run the regression on profitability as in Table 8 column (1). The results from this test shows that
the Investor firms not necessarily performed worse, neither in the crisis nor the non-crisis period compared
to other firms. Of the industry dummies, durables is now significant on the 10% level and its coefficient is
0.028 suggesting that this industry performed better than others when excluding outliers. The crisis dummy is
now significant on the 1% level and less negative, whereas the firm size factor loses explanatory power.
Lastly, the book-to-market is more negative and significant on the 1% level.

Lastly, for investment returns, we re-run the test where we use industry investment value-weighted indices.
This does not bring anything new to our previous findings, apart from that the industry investment return
variable is more significant.

    E. Endogeneity in the Sample Data
It is difficult to first identify and then eliminate potential endogeneity in statistical analyses. The area of
interest in this study is the performance of large Swedish investment companies’ portfolio firms. We have
found some evidence of superior performance in our data; however, the relationship between ownership and
firm performance is somewhat unclear, i.e. if firm performance is determined by sphere ownership or vice
versa.

We find that Investor’s portfolio firms performed better than the other sample firms during the crisis. The
immediate conclusion one might draw is that they do so because of their ownership structure, i.e. that the
shareholders benefit from the Investor influence. Conclusions of this kind are however superficial and do not
take into account the fact that the large investment companies might only choose to invest in stable and well-

                                                                                                  31
performing firms. If this is the case, which is difficult to prove, is true, the interpretation of the results should
be that Investor AB has been successful in acquiring good firms, rather than that they perform well because
Investor AB owns substantial shares in these.

Sias (1997) partly addresses this problem, when he argues that closed-end funds to a larger extent are held by
individual investors whereas the portfolio firms are to a higher degree are owned by institutional investors.
Naturally, individual investors are more sensitive to market fluctuations, and as Hjelström (2007) notes,
Swedish closed-end investment companies with large control via high shares seldom liquidate or dispose
ownership. This can be partly shown in a study of the trading activity in these firms over the crisis period,
although it will not fully cover whether the spheres’ long-term investment horizon affects the firm
performance. Future research on this endogeneity problem could investigate differences in trading volume
during recessions between sphere and non-sphere firms to see if this has any determining effect on stock
returns.

The existence of this endogeneity is not certain, due to the difficulties in identifying it, but the awareness of
its potential impact on the results ought to be regarded in order to avoid rapid and biased conclusions.

   VI. Conclusions

The empirical results from our multivariate analyses bring some interesting findings for the market
performance of the sample firms. The excess stock returns for Investor’s portfolio firms seem to have been
less volatile and rather unaffected by the market recession; however, with this follows also that they did not
offer particularly high returns in the non-crisis period. This result is robust to exclusion of 2009 in the sample
period and the use of industry index returns. In one of the tests we find that the Industrivärden sphere also
had a more balanced development on the market. This clearly lies in line with the argument that the presence
of large shareholders is associated with more stable prices, thus confirming Hypothesis I. In that sense, holding
stocks issued by sphere firms can be regarded as a form of insurance; investors do not experience as high
returns in booms, however they are compensated by not experiencing as heavy drops in economic recessions.
We did not find equivalent results for Kinnevik. One possible reason for this could be the composition of its
portfolio which is less diversified and heavier on more modern industries, whereas Investor’s and
Industrivärden’s possessions are dominated by large, old industry firms. This could also be a matter of
reputational aspects, although this is difficult to control for. We do not find any evidence for the
conglomerate discount theorem, since the investment firms seem to have performed equally as their portfolio
firms.

                                                                                                  32
Earlier studies of Swedish spheres have suggested that the investment firms aim at forming their portfolio
firms’ strategies. If we apply the theory of decreased agency costs in family firms where managers also own
shares, we would expect the sphere firms to have higher managerial efficiency and be more profitable than
the other sample firms. However, we do not find any support for this argument; instead, we find that the
Investor sphere presented less profitability when controlling for industry-fixed effects. We can therefore not
regard Hypothesis II as valid in our data. Concerning the crisis, we cannot draw any conclusions for how the
spheres performed in comparison with the others; the overall effect for all sample firms were not surprisingly
lower profitability. We also saw that exclusion of financial firms would generate an even stronger evidence for
the under-performance of Investor and Industrivärden compared to other sample firms, however we found
no deviation during the crisis.

Two of the spheres, Investor and Industrivärden, own large shares in important banks. If their portfolio firms
benefit from this in terms of better access to capital, which we have assumed based on previous literature, the
theory of banking-relationships can be explained in our data. The Investor firms present substantially higher
debt-to-capital ratios over the sample period and the Industrivärden firms raised their ratio more than the
other sample firms did at average during the crisis. The results for Investor are robust to the exclusion of the
difference-in-difference estimator for the Investor effect during the crisis and both spheres are robust to the
exclusion of industry control variables. We do not find any evidence for Kinnevik financing their capital
differently from the non-sphere firms, which lead us to suggest that the presence of an internal sphere bank is
associated with higher leverage ratio, thus supporting Hypothesis III. It must also be noted that the debt-to-
capital ratio on average went up for all firms during the crisis, keeping all other variables constant, which we
saw was an effect of a higher increase in interest-bearing debt than in booked equity during the crisis period.
This violates previous empirical results that the supply of credit diminished and resulted in lower leverage
ratios.

The firms invest in general in accordance with the industry they belong to; three of the industry indices
deviated largely from the overall average. When excluding these we found a weak indication that the Investor
firms invested less during the crisis; for the sample firms in general we did not find that they invested
differently from other firms, neither during the crisis nor before. From the findings in earlier studies, we
would expect the spheres to be indifferent to the economic climate due to having longer investment horizons.
In the case of the investment firm Investor we would expect them to have an even higher investment rate
than before the crisis, as they had hoarded much cash and the prices on the market prices went down.
However, we observe the opposite, namely a drop in investment rate. The evaluation of these findings lies in
the definition of what an efficient investment was during the crisis. The reason for contradictive results could
be conservativeness in deciding on investment projects due to the uncertainty in their portfolio firms’
performances, forcing them to hold back-up finances. This constitutes a form of an alternative lock-in effect,

                                                                                                  33
other than that previous scholars have found in banking relationships. Therefore, our data supports the
Hypothesis IV for Industrivärden and Kinnevik, where the investment rates were unaffected by the crisis. For
Investor though, we cannot support Hypothesis IV, as they showed a deviating investment pattern during the
crisis and the underlying reasons for that would need further investigation.

   VII. Future Research

Despite the heavy amount of work dedicated to corporate governance effects on firm performance, there are
still many areas to yet to be discussed, particularly within the Swedish spheres.

First, our study could be developed and made broader. We have not taken the degree of ownership into
account, but just defined all investment firms’ core investments as sphere firms, and not studied valuation
measures other than stock returns. As Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1988) find, the effect on the firm value
varies within different intervals, so it could be of interest to investigate if their findings also apply on the
Swedish spheres or if their characteristics are very different.

Moreover, in order to generalize the conclusions concerning the crisis-specific effects, the sample period
could be extended to explore whether there are similarities with other crises historically. The financial crisis
was unique, just like all crises, in the sense that the Swedish banks were in focus which might have had certain
implications on how the spheres were affected and responded. We have partly referred to this in our analysis,
especially for the debt-to-capital ratio and investment rate, but longer research periods are required in order
to identify these unique characteristics. In addition to this, it would also be interesting to empirically analyze
the importance of holding a large cash buffer which we qualitatively have found that at least Investor did.

In previous literature, scholars have addressed several interesting questions that would need more detailed
data to answer. The impact of banking relationships is difficult to assess, as it requires lists of where the firms
borrow from. However, costs on interest-bearing loans could proxy for this under the assumption that
banking relationships generate beneficial terms of credit. We cannot either draw any conclusions about the
existence and effect of cross-subsidization. Since the firms both acquire and divest shares we observe a net
effect of investment and thus do not distinguish where each investment is made. Swedish business media
have reported that the spheres, at least Industrivärden, did cross-subsidize by rearranging the portfolio

composition in order to maintain performance in some of the firms22. Scholars could, if they manage to

22 Dagens Industri (2010).

                                                                                                  34
design good research models, further study how spheres allocate capital and what effects that have on
performance.

         References

Almeida, Heitor, Campello, Murillo, Laranjeira, Bruno and Weisbenner Scott (2009), “Corporate debt
maturity and the real effects of the 2007 credit crisis”, (working paper), National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ang, James S., Cole, Rebel and James Wuh Lin (2000), “Agency Costs and Ownership Structure”, Journal of
Finance, Vol. 55, No. 1, pp. 81-106.

BBC News (2007), “Northern Rock gets bank bail out”, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6994099.stm
(10/05/04).

Blackwell, David and Winters, Drew (1997), “Banking relationships and the effect of monitoring on loan
pricing”, The Journal of Financial Research Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 275-289.

Cole, Rebel (1998), “The importance of relationships to the availability of credit”, The Journal of Banking and
Finance Vol. 22 No. 6-8, pp. 959-977.

Cronqvist, Henrik and Nilsson, Mattias (2003), “Agency Costs of Controlling Minority Shareholder”, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 38, No. 4, pp. 695-719.

Dagens Industri (2008), “Industrivärden har ökat i Volvo - men minskar i övriga aktier”, Dagens Industri
October 31, 2008.

Gaspar, José-Miguel, Massa, Massimo and Matos, Pedro (2004), “Favoritism in Mutual Fund Families?
Evidence on Strategic Cross-Fund Subsidization” (working paper), European Financial Management Association
2004 Meetings in Maastricht.

Gompers, Paul, Ishii, Joy and Andrew Metrick (2003), “Corporate governance and equity prices”, The quarterly
Journal of Economics Vol. 118, No. 1, pp. 107-155.

Greenbaum, Stuart, Kanatas, George and Itzhak Venezia (1989), “Equilibrium loan pricing under the bank-
client relationship”, The Journal of Banking and Finance Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 221-235.

Guedj, Ilan and Papastaikoudi, Jeannette (2003), “Can Mutual Fund Families Affect the Performance of Their
Funds?” (working paper), European Financial Management Association 2004 Meetings in Basel.

Handelsbanken (2010), Årsredovisning 2009.

Hjelström, Tomas (2007), The Closed-End Investment Company Premium Puzzle – Model development and empirical tests
on Swedish and British data. Stockholm: Stockholm School of Economics.

Investor AB (2010), “Kärninnehav”,
http://www.investorab.com/sv/VaraInvesteringar/karninvesteringar.htm (10/04/19).

                                                                                                  35
Ivashina, Victoria and Scharfstein, David (2009), “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008”
(working paper), European Financial Management Association 2009 Meetings in Bergen.

Jensen, Michael C. and Meckling, William H. (1976), “Theory of the Firm – Managerial Behaviour , Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure”, Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 305-360.

James, Harvey (1999), “Owner as manager, extended horizons and the family firm”, The international Journal of
the Economics of Business Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 41-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio and Shleifer Andrei (1998), “Corporate Ownership Around the
World” (working paper), Boston: Harvard University.

Lucas, Dan (2009), “SEB går med i garantiprogrammet”, Dagens Nyheter April 24, 2009.

McConaughy, Daniel L. et al. (1998), “Founding family controlled firms: Efficiency and value”, Review of
Financial Economics, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 1-19.

Mellqvist, Gabriel (2008), “Industrivärden ökar skulden”, Dagens Industri February 13, 2008.

Morck, Randall, Shleifer Andrei and Vishny Robert (1988), “Management Ownership and Market Valuation:
An Empirical Analysis”, Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 20, pp. 293-315.

Ollevik, Nils-Olof (2008), “Bäst ta rygg på försiktiga proffs”, Svenska Dagbladet December 16, 2008.

Rajan, Raghuram (1992), “Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm’s-length debt”, The
Journal of Finance Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 1367-1400

Rawt, Peter (2009), “Investor drar åt svångremmen”,
http://svt.se/svt/jsp/Crosslink.jsp?d=22577&a=1401818&queryArt549588=swedbank&sortOrder549588=
0&doneSearch=true&sd=22634&from=siteSearch&pageArt549588=0 (10/05/12).

Scharfstein, David and Stein, Jeremy (2000), “The dark side of internal capital markets: Divisional rent-
seeking and inefficient investment”, The Journal of Finance Vol. 44, No. 6, pp. 1335-1350.

SEB (2009), Kursen i SEB:s nyemission satt till 10 kronor,
http://www.seb.se/pow/wcp/index.asp?ss=/pow/wcp/templates/sebarticle.cfmc.asp%3FDUID%3DDUID_CE2148936
B267BB3C125756F0049AF4E%26sitekey%3Dseb.se%26lang%3D (10/05/12).

Shleifer, Andrei and Vishny, Robert (1986), “Large shareholders and corporate control”, The Journal of Political
Economy Vol. 94 No. 3, pp. 461-488.

Stein, Jeremy (1989), “Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate behavior”,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 104 No. 4, pp. 655-669.

Strandberg, Hans (2010), ”Ekholm till försvar”, Dagens Industri April 15, 2010.

Svenska Dagbladet (2009), “Emissioner gav Investor miljarder”, Svenska Dagbladet May 6, 2009.

Villalonga, Belen and Amit, Raphael H. (2006), “How do Family Ownership, Control and Management
Affect Firm Value?”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 385-417.

                                                                                                  36
Whited, Toni (2001), “Is it inefficient investment that causes the diversification discount?”, The Journal of
Finance Vol. 56, No. 5, pp. 1667-1691.

                                                                                                  37
        Appendix

                                                        Table 1.
                              Distribution of Firms over Industry Groups and Owners
Panel A: Number of firms by owner (columns) and by industries (rows). The industry categories are commonly used in
Swedish Business Press One firm in the sample, L M Ericsson AB, is owned by both Investor and Industrivärden.
Panel B: The division of controlled companies in the sphere portfolios’ sorted on industry. Here reported in percentages.

                                     Panel A: Number of Firms per Category
                                                            Investor/                                      All
                       Industrivärden Investor      Industrivärden Kinnevik Non-sphere    Owners
 Durables 0 2 0 2 14 18
 Energy 0 0 0 0 3 3
 Financials 2 2 0 1 26 31
 Health 0 2 0 0 7 9
 IT 0 0 1 0 9 10
 Manufacturing 5 3 0 1 31 40
 Nondurables 0 0 0 0 5 5
 Telecom 0 0 0 2 1 3
 Utilities 3 0 0 0 5 8
 TOTAL 10 9 1 6 101 127

                                      Panel B: Distribution of Controlled Firms
                                                            Investor/                                       All
                       Industrivärden Investor      Industrivärden Kinnevik Non-sphere    owners
                 n 10 9 1 6 101         127
 Durables 0.0% 22.2% 0.0% 33.3% 13.9% 14.2%
 Energy 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 3.0% 2.4%
 Financials 20.0% 22.2% 0.0% 16.7% 25.7% 24.4%
 Health 0.0% 22.2% 0.0% 0.0% 6.9% 7.1%
 IT 0.0% 0.0% 100.0% 0.0% 8.9% 7.9%
 Manufacturing 50.0% 33.3% 0.0% 16.7% 30.7% 31.5%
 Nondurables 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 5.0% 3.9%
 Telecom 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 33.3% 1.0% 2.4%
 Utilities 30.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 5.0% 6.3%

                                                                                                  38
                                                   Table 2.
          Descriptive Statistics for the Full Sample and Comparison between Ownership Structures
Panel A: Presenting summary statistics of the performance measures and control variables of the full sample. Firm Size is
the sum of interest-bearing debt and market equity, where market equity is calculated as the number of shares
outstanding at time t times the unadjusted price at time t. Book-to-Market is the booked shareholder’s equity divided by
the market equity at time t. Market Return is the quarterly change in Affärvärldens Generalindex, reported in percentages.
Debt-to-Assets is total of interest-bearing debt divided by total assets. Debt-to-Capital is total interest-bearing debt divided
by the sum of interest-bearing debt and shareholder’s equity. Stock Return is the quarterly change in stock prices for each
firm; in case of dual-class shares, it is the value-weighted average return calculated as the fraction of A-shares times the
adjusted price of the A-share plus the fraction of B-shares (or equivalent) times the adjusted price of the B-share; this is
reported in percentages. Excess Stock Return is the Stock Return minus the Risk-free Rate, which is the 3-month bond rate
issued by the Swedish Central Bank Riksbanken. Profitability (Assets) is earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) divided by
total assets, reported in percentages. Investment Rate is capital expenditures (CAPEX) divided by total assets, reported in
percentages.
Panel B: The results from a mean comparison test between the sub-groups Sphere Firms (i.e. firms partially controlled
by Investor AB, Industrivärden AB or Investments AB Kinnevik) and Non-Sphere Firms.
Panel C: Correlation matrix with the variables Sphere Firm, Firm Size, Book-to-Market, Debt-to-Assets, Excess Stock Returns and
Profitability.

        Panel A: Summary Statistics for the Dependent and Independent Variables in the Full Sample

 Variable Data period Mean Std. Dev. Min Max

 Ln(Firm Size) Quarterly 9.43 1.60 4.76 14.10
 Book-to-Market Quarterly 0.81 1.86 (0.01) 43.45
 Market Return (%) Quarterly (0.48) 12.23 (25.00) 15.86

 Debt-to-Assets Quarterly 0.26 0.18 0.00 0.81
 Debt-to-Capital Quarterly 0.38 0.25 0.00 1.04

 Stock Return (%) Quarterly 2.29 24.66 (69.56) 212.50
 Excess Stock Return (%) Quarterly (0.27) 25.10 (70.41) 209.25
 Risk-free Rate (%) Quarterly 2.57 1.49 0.16 4.41

 Profitability (%)                     Quarterly          2.40      4.65            (45.46)        35.61

 Investment Rate (%)                  Annually          4.15      6.40            (32.07)        38.80

                                                                                                  39
                   Panel B : Mean Comparison Test for Sphere and Non-Sphere Firms
 Variables Data Period Non-Sphere Firms Sphere Firms t-statistic

 Ln(Firm Size) Quarterly 9.03 10.90 (23.60)****
 Book-to-Market                  Quarterly               0.77                  0.95             (1.73)*
 Ln(Total Assets)                Quarterly              8.84                10.87         (21.12)****

 Debt-to-Assets                    Quarterly                0.26                  0.24               1.93
 Debt-to-Capital                    Quarterly                0.38                  0.39              (1.01)

 Stock Return (%)                Quarterly              2.56                1.32             0.87
 Excess Stock Return (%)          Quarterly              0.00                (1.24)             0.87

 Profitability (%) Quarterly 2.47 2.10 1.42

 Investment Rate (%) Annually 4.36 3.34 1.38
                                    * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01, **** p<0.001

                                        Panel C: Correlation Matrix
                              Sphere                       Book-to-       Debt-to-       Excess Stock
                         Firm Firm Size     Market       Assets         Return Profitability
Sphere Firm 1.00
Firm Size 0.48 1.00
Book-to-Market 0.04 (0.03) 1.00
Debt-to-Assets (0.04) 0.22 (0.10) 1.00
Excess Stock Return (0.02) 0.00 (0.07) (0.03) 1.00
Profitability (0.03) 0.03 (0.09) (0.18) 0.10 1.00

                                                                                                 40
                                                   Table 3.
                         Comparison between Before and During the Crisis Period.
The results from a mean comparison test between the sub-groups Crisis (defined as the period 2008 quarter 1 to 2009
quarter 3, except from Stock Return, Excess Stock Return and Market Return where the period is 2008 quarter 1 to 2008
quarter 4) and Non-Crisis.

                              Mean Comparison Test for Crisis and Not Crisis.
  Variables Data Period Not Crisis Crisis t-statistic

  Ln(Firm Size) Quarterly 9.52 9.33 2.54**
  Book-to-Market                  Quarterly                 0.56               1.10            (6.50)***
  Ln(Total Assets)                Quarterly                9.24               9.31             (0.85)

  Debt-to-Assets Quarterly 0.25 0.27 (2.71)**
  Debt-to-Capital Quarterly 0.37 0.40 (2.71)**

  Stock Return (%) Quarterly 8.73 -14.45 19.61***
  Excess Stock Return (%) Quarterly 6.36 -17.52 19.91***
  Market Return (%) Quarterly 5.55 -16.21 56.02***

  Profitability (Assets) (%) Quarterly 2.94 1.81 5.19**

  Investment Rate (%) Annually 4.23 3.93 0.46

                                                                                                  41
                                                    Figure 1.
                                Index Returns (Quarterly) 2006:Q1-2009:Q3
The graph shows the industry index returns over the sample period. 2005 quarter 4 is base period with return equal to
0% for all industries. The indices are value-weighted and were calculated by dividing each firm’s market equity by the
total market equity of its industry, summing all those values together and calculating returns as the industry market
equity in period t divided by the industry market equity in period t-1 and withdrawing 1. The graph reports the returns in
decimals; hence the vertical axis ranges from -50% to +100%.

                                                                                                  42
                                                    Table 4.
                             Excess Stock Returns 2006 Quarter 1 to 2008 Quarter 4.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ) + 𝛽2 × 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1 +
𝛽3 × 𝑅𝑚 ,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑖 × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 + 𝛿5𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿6𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑣ä𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 + 𝛿7𝑖 × 𝐾𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑘 + 𝛿8𝑖 × 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 + ⋯ + 𝛿16𝑖 ×
𝑇𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 , where Ri,t = quarterly returns for firm i in period t, Rf,t= the risk-free rate, here the 3-mo bonds issued by
Riksbanken, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number
of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price; in this analysis we use the BtM observed in the beginning of the
period, Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to quarter 4 and zero
otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned
by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise, Energy, Utilities, Manufacturing, Durables, Nondurables, Health, Financial, IT, Telecom =
dummy variables for the nine industries that equal one if the firm belongs to the industry and zero otherwise. Investor+crisis,
Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the crisis
dummy. We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to multicollinearity.
                                        (1) (2) (3)
                             Exc. Stock Return Exc. Stock Return Exc. Stock Return
  Intercept -0.0483                     -0.0470                     -0.0683
                                           (-0.72)                          (-0.71)                          (-1.66)
  Book-to-market -0.00576                   -0.00498                   -0.00605
                                           (-1.14)                          (-0.96)                          (-1.24)
  Firm size 0.00571 0.00572 0.00810*
                                     (1.28) (1.28) (1.96)
  Exc Market Return 0.440***                       0.440***                       0.440***
                                           (6.73)                          (6.73)                          (6.71)
  Utilities -0.0141 -0.0155
                                      (-0.24) (-0.27)
  Manufacturing 0.00246 0.00225
                                      (0.05) (0.04)
  Durables -0.0247 -0.0249
                                      (-0.45) (-0.45)
  Nondurables 0.0106 0.0106
                                      (0.19) (0.19)
  Health 0.00319 0.00327
                                      (0.06) (0.06)
  Financials 0.0102 0.00989
                                      (0.19) (0.18)
  IT -0.00198 -0.00203
                                      (-0.03) (-0.03)
  Telecom 0.0488 0.0494
                                      (0.77) (0.78)
  Investor -0.0144 -0.0434* -0.0517*
                                     (-0.76) (-1.99) (-2.52)
  Industrivärden -0.0108 -0.0124 -0.0179
                                     (-0.45) (-0.41) (-0.64)
  Kinnevik -0.0230 -0.00685 0.00234
                                     (-0.92) (-0.24) (0.08)
  Crisis -0.0873*** -0.0917*** -0.0912***
                                     (-5.12) (-5.14) (-5.11)
  Investor+crisis 0.0851** 0.0845**
                                                                   (2.83) (2.82)
  Industrivärden+crisis 0.00581                    0.00597
                                                                           (0.17)                          (0.18)
  Kinnevik+crisis -0.0522                     -0.0510
                                                                            (-1.20)                          (-1.15)
 N 1408 1408 1408
  R-squared 0.2286 0.2269 0.2285
  t statistics in parentheses
  * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                    43
                                                        Table 5.
                   Excess Stock Returns 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3 with Industry Dummies.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ) + 𝛽2 × 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽3 ×
 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑖 × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 + 𝛿5𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿6𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑣ä𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 + 𝛿7𝑖 × 𝐾𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑘 + 𝛿8𝑖 × 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 + ⋯ + 𝛿16𝑖 × 𝑇𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 ,
where Ri,t = quarterly returns for firm i in period t, Rf,t= the risk-free rate, here the 3-mo bonds issued by Riksbanken, Firm Size
= market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding
times the unadjusted share price; in this analysis we use the BtM observed in the beginning of the period, Crisis = dummy
variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to quarter 4 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden,
Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero
otherwise, Energy, Utilities, Manufacturing, Durables, Nondurables, Health, Financial, IT, Telecom = dummy variables for the nine
industries that equal one if the firm belongs to the industry and zero otherwise. Investor+crisis, Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis
= difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the crisis dummy. We correct for heteroskedasticity
using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to multicollinearity.
                                        (1) (2) (3)
                              Exc. Stock Return Exc. Stock Return Exc. Stock Return
   Intercept 0.0552 0.0576 0.0443
                                     (0.87) (0.90) (1.16)
    Book-to-market 0.0149***                       0.0151***                       0.0126***
                                           (3.97)                           (4.05)                           (3.53)
   Firm size -0.000614                   -0.000647                   -0.000494
                                           (-0.14)                           (-0.14)                           (-0.12)
    Exc Market Return 0.641***                        0.641***                        0.643***
                                         (10.11)                         (10.11)                         (10.10)
   Utilities -0.0443 -0.0451
                                      (-0.80) (-0.81)
   Manufacturing -0.0115 -0.0119
                                      (-0.24) (-0.24)
   Durables -0.0156 -0.0161
                                      (-0.31) (-0.32)
   Nondurables -0.0214 -0.0217
                                      (-0.41) (-0.41)
   Health -0.0147 -0.0143
                                      (-0.29) (-0.28)
   Financials -0.0135 -0.0139
                                      (-0.28) (-0.28)
   IT 0.000513 0.000456
                                      (0.01) (0.01)
   Telecom 0.0451 0.0451
                                      (0.78) (0.77)
   Investor -0.0155 -0.0426 -0.0416*
                                      (-0.78) (-1.90) (-2.06)
   Industrivärden -0.00385 -0.00969 -0.0170
                                      (-0.17) (-0.36) (-0.73)
   Kinnevik -0.0610* -0.0479 -0.0256
                                      (-2.34) (-1.57) (-0.92)
    Crisis -0.0956*** -0.103*** -0.102***
                                      (-5.54) (-5.65) (-5.61)
    Investor+crisis 0.102*** 0.102***
                                                                    (3.38) (3.39)
   Industrivärden+crisis 0.0223                      0.0223
                                                                            (0.72)                           (0.72)
   Kinnevik+crisis -0.0508                     -0.0496
                                                                             (-1.15)                           (-1.10)
   N                         1783                   1783                   1783
   R-squared                         0.1257                       0.1235                       0.1145
    t statistics in parentheses
   * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                     44
                                                        Table 6.
                     Excess Stock Returns 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3 with Industry Indices.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ) + 𝛽2 × 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽3 ×
 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑖 × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 + 𝛿5𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿6𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑣ä𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 + 𝛿7𝑖 × 𝐾𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑘 + 𝛿8𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 , where Ri,t =
quarterly returns for firm i in period t, Rf,t= the risk-free rate, here the 3-mo bonds issued by Riksbanken, Firm Size = market
equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the
unadjusted share price; in this analysis we use the BtM observed in the beginning of the period, Crisis = dummy variable that
equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to quarter 4 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik =
dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Investor+crisis, Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the
crisis dummy. Industry return = the value-weighted industry index returns for the nine industries. We correct for
heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors.

                                             (1) (2)
                                  Exc. Stock Return Exc. Stock Return
   Intercept 0.0388 0.0423
                                          (1.10) (1.20)
    Book-to-Market 0.00942**                      0.00946**
                                               (2.70)                           (2.74)
   Firm size -0.00172 -0.00182
                                                 (-0.48) (-0.51)
    Exc Market Return 0.245***                       0.245***
                                               (4.20)                           (4.19)
    Industry return 0.780*** 0.781***
                                         (19.56) (19.56)
    Investor -0.00871 -0.0327*
                                                 (-0.63) (-2.18)
   Industrivärden -0.00592 -0.0192
                                                 (-0.34) (-0.91)
   Kinnevik -0.0345 -0.0254
                                                 (-1.61) (-1.02)
    Crisis -0.0481** -0.0576***
                                                 (-3.21) (-3.67)
    Investor+crisis 0.0911***
                                                                                (3.93)
   Industrivärden+crisis 0.0498
                                                                                (1.80)
   Kinnevik+crisis -0.0346
                                                                                         (-0.78)
  N                           1782                  1782
   R-squared                             0.7933                       0.7895
    t statistics in parentheses
   * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                     45
                                                    Table 7.
                                   Profitability 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t +
δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + ⋯ + δ15i × Telecom + εi,t where Profitability =
EBIT divided by total assets, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity
divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for
the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy
variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise. We
correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to multicollinearity.

                                    (1) (2)
                                Profitability Profitability
Intercept -0.0274 -0.00679
                                       (-1.25) (-0.42)
Book-to-Market -0.00204***                -0.00205***
                                          (-4.43)                       (-4.55)
Firm Size 0.00585*** 0.00420**
                                  (3.46) (2.66)
Utilities 0.00670
                                      (0.40)
Manufacturing 0.0101
                                      (0.68)
Durables 0.0212
                                      (1.34)
Nondurables 0.0127
                                      (0.79)
Health -0.0149
                                          (-0.65)
IT 0.0287
                                      (1.72)
Telecom 0.00102
                                      (0.06)
Financials -0.00974
                                          (-0.57)
Kinnevik -0.0105 -0.00727
                                       (-1.06) (-0.83)
Investor -0.0166* -0.0117
                                       (-2.24) (-1.67)
Industrivärden -0.0163 -0.0118
                                       (-1.30) (-1.04)
Crisis -0.00970*** -0.01000***
                                       (-5.29) (-5.36)
N                       1804              1804
R-squared                        0.1323                  0.0048
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  46
                                                    Table 8.
             Profitability 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3 with Difference-in-Difference Estimators.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t +
δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + ⋯ + δ15i × Telecom+ εi,t where Profitability =
EBIT divided by total assets, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity
divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis = dummy variable that equals one
for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik =
dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero
otherwise, Industry return = the value-weighted average return within each index. Investor+crisis, Industrivärden+crisis,
Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the crisis dummy. We correct
for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to multicollinearity.

                                    (1) (2)
                                Profitability Profitability
Intercept -0.0278 -0.00699
                                       (-1.26) (-0.43)
Book-to-market -0.00214***                    -0.00215***
                                          (-4.41)                            (-4.54)
Firm size 0.00589*** 0.00423**
                                  (3.47) (2.66)
Utilities 0.00698
                                      (0.42)
Manufacturing 0.0103
                                      (0.68)
Durables 0.0213
                                      (1.34)
Nondurables 0.0128
                                      (0.79)
Health -0.0149
                                          (-0.64)
IT 0.0288
                                      (1.72)
Telecom 0.000861
                                      (0.05)
Financials -0.00965
                                          (-0.57)
Kinnevik -0.0138 -0.0106
                                       (-1.29) (-1.11)
Investor -0.0187* -0.0137
                                       (-2.41) (-1.86)
Industrivärden -0.0132 -0.00859
                                       (-1.14) (-0.83)
Crisis -0.00966*** -0.00991***
                                       (-4.65) (-4.72)
Investor+crisis 0.00374 0.00341
                                  (0.75) (0.69)
Industrivärden+crisis -0.00697                     -0.00706
                                          (-0.96)                            (-0.97)
Kinnevik+crisis 0.00743 0.00732
                                  (1.32) (1.33)
N                       1803                 1803
R-squared                         0.1323                      0.0049
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  47
                                              Table 9.
                       Debt-to-Capital Ratio 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t + δ3i ×
Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + ⋯ + δ15i × Telecom+ εi,t where Debt-rate = Debt-
to-Capital, i.e. interest-bearing debt divided by the sum of shareholders’ equity and interest-bearing debt, Firm
Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares
outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008
calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three
spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise. We correct for
heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Telecom is dropped due to multicollinearity.

                               (1) (2)
                         Debt-to-Capital Debt-to-Capital
Intercept 0.0420 0.0494
                            (0.24) (0.68)
Firm size 0.0291*** 0.0318***
                            (3.87) (4.38)
Book-to-Market 0.00466*                 0.00474*
                                (2.18)                      (2.12)
Crisis 0.0428*** 0.0428***
                            (9.67) (9.72)
Utilities -0.0311
                                   (-0.19)
Manufacturing 0.0742
                                (0.49)
Durables -0.0120
                                   (-0.08)
Nondurables 0.0723
                                (0.39)
Health -0.0494
                                   (-0.30)
Financials 0.110
                                (0.73)
IT -0.169
                                   (-1.06)
Energy -0.00771
                                   (-0.05)
Investor 0.0909* 0.0860*
                            (2.22) (2.26)
Industrivärden -0.0218 -0.0283
                                 (-0.32) (-0.40)
Kinnevik 0.00233 -0.00482
                                (0.02) (-0.04)
N                   1804              1804
R-squared                   0.1812                  0.0752
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  48
                                              Table 10.
  Debt-to-Capital Ratio 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3 with Difference-in-Difference Estimators.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t + δ3i ×
Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + ⋯ + δ15i × Telecom+ εi,t , where Debt-rate = Debt-
to-Capital, i.e. interest-bearing debt divided by the sum of shareholders’ equity and interest-bearing debt, Firm
Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares
outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008
calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three
spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise, Investor+crisis,
Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the crisis
dummy. We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to multicollinearity.

                                  (1) (2)
                             Debt-to-Capital Debt-to-Capital
Intercept 0.0395 0.0483
                                (0.23) (0.67)
Firm Size 0.0296*** 0.0322***
                                (3.91) (4.42)
Book-to-Market 0.00496*                 0.00504*
                                    (2.20)                      (2.15)
Utilities -0.00536
                                        (-0.03)
Manufacturing -0.0312
                                        (-0.19)
Durables 0.0751
                                    (0.49)
Nondurables -0.0115
                                        (-0.07)
Health 0.0732
                                    (0.39)
Financials -0.0485
                                        (-0.29)
IT 0.111
                                    (0.74)
Telecom -0.166
                                        (-1.04)
Crisis 0.0368*** 0.0367***
                                (7.87) (7.87)
Investor 0.0812* 0.0789*
                                (2.05) (2.18)
Industrivärden -0.0465 -0.0534
                                     (-0.67) (-0.74)
Kinnevik 0.00211 -0.00582
                                    (0.02) (-0.05)
Investor+crisis 0.0149 0.0155
                                (0.80) (0.83)
Industrivärden+crisis 0.0512***                 0.0517***
                                    (3.72)                      (3.75)
Kinnevik+crisis -0.00102                -0.000525
                                        (-0.04)                       (-0.02)
N                      1804              1804
R-squared                       0.1820                  0.0767
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  49
                                               Table 11.
                                   Investment Rate 2005 to 2008.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t +
δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + ⋯ + δ15i × Telecom+ εi,t where Investment rate
= capital expenditure (CAPEX) divided by total assets, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-
to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis =
dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise.
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by
the relevant sphere and zero otherwise. We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped
due to multicollinearity.
                               (1) (2)
                      Investment rate Investment rate
Intercept 0.227*** 0.0695*
                            (5.49) (2.29)
Firm size -0.00552 -0.00269
                                 (-1.67) (-0.82)
Book-to-market 0.000665                0.000637
                                (0.61)                      (0.58)
Utilities -0.116***
                                   (-3.45)
Manufacturing -0.140***
                                   (-4.88)
Durables -0.137***
                                   (-4.54)
Nondurables -0.127***
                                   (-3.50)
Health -0.149***
                                   (-4.60)
Financials -0.134***
                                   (-4.63)
IT -0.152***
                                   (-4.63)
Telecom -0.0512
                                   (-1.16)
Kinnevik -0.00425 0.0170
                               (-0.17) (0.72)
Investor 0.00135 -0.0148
                                (0.07) (-0.69)
Industrivärden 0.00262 -0.00290
                                (0.14) (-0.16)
Crisis -0.00654 -0.00547
                                 (-1.34) (-1.12)
N                    467               467
R-squared                   0.2240                  0.0153
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  50
                                              Table 12.
    Investment Rate 2005 to 2008 with Difference-in-Difference Estimators and Industry Indices.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t +
δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Industry investment rate + εi,t where Investment rate =
capital expenditure (CAPEX) divided by total assets, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-
Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis =
dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise.
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by
the relevant sphere and zero otherwise, Industry investment rate = the value-weighted average investment rate within the
industry, Investor+crisis, Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere
dummies and the crisis dummy. We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to
multicollinearity.
                                             (1)
                                 Investment rate
Intercept 0.0440
                                          (1.16)
Firm size -0.00220
                                              (-0.59)
Book-to-market 0.000718
                                          (1.50)
Crisis -0.00526
                                              (-0.95)
Industry investment rate 0.572***
                                          (4.15)
Kinnevik 0.00942
                                          (0.63)
Investor -0.0126
                                              (-0.93)
Industrivärden -0.00322
                                              (-0.35)
Investor+crisis -0.00475
                                              (-0.59)
Industrivärden+crisis 0.00185
                                          (0.27)
Kinnevik+crisis -0.00867
                                              (-0.35)
N                        467
R-squared                            0.1545
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  51
                                              Table 13.
    Investment Rate 2005 to 2008 with Difference-in-Difference Estimators, Industry Indices and
                                   Exclusion of Outlier Industries.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t +
δ3i × Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Industry Investment rate + εi,t where Investment rate =
capital expenditure (CAPEX) divided by total assets, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-
Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis =
dummy variable that equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise.
Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by
the relevant sphere and zero otherwise, Industry investment rate = the value-weighted average investment rate within the
industry, Investor+crisis, Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere
dummies and the crisis dummy. We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors.

                                         (1)
                             Investment rate
Intercept 0.0306
                                      (0.93)
Firm size -0.00260
                                      (-0.55)
Book-to-market 0.000422
                                      (0.87)
Crisis 0.00286
                                      (0.54)
Industry investment                0.480**
rate                                  (2.81)
Kinnevik 0.0107
                                      (0.60)
Investor -0.0122
                                      (-0.74)
Industrivärden -0.00255
                                      (-0.23)
Investor+crisis -0.0139
                                      (-1.68)
Industrivärden+crisis -0.00267
                                      (-0.43)
Kinnevik+crisis -0.00608
                                      (-0.24)
N                      423
R-squared                         0.1086
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  52
                                                  Figure 2a.
      Separation of Investor AB (investment firm) from the Investor Portfolio Firms – Investment Rate.
The graph shows the investment rate for Investor AB (red line) and the value-weighted investment rate for the portfolio
firms (blue line, calculated as each Investor portfolio firm’s investment rate times its fraction of the total market equity
in the portfolio, excluding Investor AB). The results are reported in decimals, hence the vertical axis ranges from -4% to
+4%.

                                                                                                  53
                                                 Figure 2b.
Separation of Industrivärden AB (investment firm) from the Industrivärden Portfolio Firms – Investment Rate.
The graph shows the investment rate for Industrivärden AB (red line) and the value-weighted investment rate for the
portfolio firms (blue line, calculated as each Industrivärden portfolio firm’s investment rate times its fraction of the total
market equity in the portfolio, excluding Industrivärden AB). The results are reported in decimals, hence the vertical axis
ranges from -5% to +10%.

                                                                                                  54
                                                  Figure 2c.
  Separation of Investments AB Kinnevik (investment firm) from the Kinnevik Portfolio Firms – Investment
                                                  Rate.
The graph shows the investment rate for Investment AB Kinnevik (red line) and the value-weighted investment rate for
the portfolio firms (blue line, calculated as each Kinnevik portfolio firm’s investment rate times its fraction of the total
market equity in the portfolio, excluding Investment AB Kinnevik). The results are reported in decimals, hence the
vertical axis ranges from -5% to +15%.

                                                                                                  55
                                                  Figure 3a.
       Separation of Investor AB (investment firm) from the Investor Portfolio Firms – Stock Returns
The graph shows the stock return for Investor AB (red line) and the value-weighted stock return for the portfolio firms
(blue line, calculated as each Investor portfolio firm’s stock return times its fraction of the total market equity in the
portfolio, excluding Investor AB). The results are reported in decimals, hence the vertical axis ranges from -20% to
+20%. The base period is 2005 quarter 4.

                                                                                                  56
                                                 Figure 3b.
  Separation of Industrivärden AB (investment firm) from the Industrivärden Portfolio Firms – Stock Returns
The graph shows the stock return for Industrivärden AB (red line) and the value-weighted stock return for the portfolio
firms (blue line, calculated as each Industrivärden portfolio firm’s stock return times its fraction of the total market
equity in the portfolio, excluding Industrivärden AB). The results are reported in decimals, hence the vertical axis ranges
from -30% to +20%. The base period is 2005 quarter 4.

                                                                                                  57
                                                  Figure 3c.
 Separation of Investment AB Kinnevik (investment firm) from the Kinnevik Portfolio Firms – Stock Returns
The graph shows the stock return for Investment AB Kinnevik (red line) and the value-weighted stock return for the
portfolio firms (blue line, calculated as each Kinnevik portfolio firm’s stock return times its fraction of the total market
equity in the portfolio, excluding Investment AB Kinnevik). The results are reported in decimals, hence the vertical axis
ranges from -40% to +40%. The base period is 2005 quarter 4.

                                                                                                  58
                                                  Figure 4a.
         Separation of Investor AB (investment firm) from the Investor Portfolio Firms – Profitability
The graph shows the profitability (EBIT divided by total assets) for Investor AB (red line) and the value-weighted
profitability for the portfolio firms (blue line, calculated as each Investor portfolio firm’s profitability times its fraction of
the total market equity in the portfolio, excluding Investor AB). The results are reported in decimals, hence the vertical
axis ranges from -10% to +10%. The base period is 2005 quarter 4.

                                                                                                  59
                                                 Figure 4b.
   Separation of Industrivärden AB (investment firm) from the Industrivärden Portfolio Firms – Profitability
The graph shows the profitability (EBIT divided by total assets) for Industrivärden AB (red line) and the value-weighted
profitability for the portfolio firms (blue line, calculated as each Industrivärden portfolio firm’s profitability times its
fraction of the total market equity in the portfolio, excluding Industrivärden AB). The results are reported in decimals,
hence the vertical axis ranges from -30% to +20%. The base period is 2005 quarter 4.

                                                                                                  60
                                                  Figure 4c.
  Separation of Investments AB Kinnevik (investment firm) from the Kinnevik Portfolio Firms – Profitability
The graph shows the profitability (EBIT divided by total assets) for Investments AB Kinnevik (red line) and the value-
weighted profitability for the portfolio firms (blue line, calculated as each Kinnevik portfolio firm’s profitability times its
fraction of the total market equity in the portfolio, excluding Investments AB Kinnevik). The results are reported in
decimals, hence the vertical axis ranges from 0% to +15%. The base period is 2005 quarter 4.

                                                                                                  61
                                                        Table 14.
  Excess Stock Returns 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3 with Industry Indices and Exclusion of Firm Size and Book-
                                                 to-Market Outliers.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 ) + 𝛽2 × 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽3 ×
 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓,𝑡 + 𝛿4𝑖 × 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 + 𝛿5𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟 + 𝛿6𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑣ä𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 + 𝛿7𝑖 × 𝐾𝑖𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑣𝑖𝑘 + 𝛿8𝑖 × 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 , where Ri,t =
quarterly returns for firm i in period t, Rf,t= the risk-free rate, here the 3-mo bonds issued by Riksbanken, Firm Size = market
equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding times the
unadjusted share price; in this analysis we use the BtM observed in the beginning of the period, Crisis = dummy variable that
equals one for the observations in 2008 calendar quarter 1 to quarter 4 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik =
dummy variables for the three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise,
Investor+crisis, Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the
crisis dummy. Industry return = the value-weighted industry index returns for the nine industries. We correct for
heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors.

                                               (1)
                                Exc. Stock Returns
   Intercept -0.0209
                                                (-0.29)
   Book-to-Market 0.172***
                                           (7.32)
   Ln(Firm Size) -0.00393
                                                (-0.54)
   Exc Market Return 0.172**
                                           (2.90)
   Industry retu 0.697***
                                         (16.84)
   Investor -0.0217
                                                (-0.78)
   Industrivärden -0.0250
                                                (-0.64)
   Kinnevik 0.00439
                                           (0.10)
    Crisis -0.0720***
                                                (-4.34)
   Investor+crisis 0.0884**
                                           (3.15)
   Industrivärden+crisis 0.0271
                                           (0.86)
   Kinnevik+crisis -0.0621
                                                (-1.46)
  N                      1450
   R-squared                          0.4696
    t statistics in parentheses
   * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                     62
                                              Table 15.
Debt-to-Capital Ratio 2006 Quarter 1 to 2009 Quarter 3 with Difference-in-Difference Estimators and
                            Exclusion of Firm Size and Book-to-Market Outliers.
The table reports the results from the main regression: 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑙𝑛 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × Book to Marketi,t + δ3i ×
Crisis + δ4i × Investor + δ5i × Industrivärden + δ6i × Kinnevik + δ7i × Energy + ⋯ + δ15i × Telecom+ εi,t , where Debt-rate =
Debt-to-Capital, i.e. interest-bearing debt divided by the sum of shareholders’ equity and interest-bearing
debt, Firm Size = market equity plus interest-bearing debt, Book-to-Market = shareholders’ equity divided by the number
of shares outstanding times the unadjusted share price, Crisis = dummy variable that equals one for the observations in
2008 calendar quarter 1 to 2009 quarter 3 and zero otherwise. Investor, Industrivärden, Kinnevik = dummy variables for the
three spheres that equal one if the firm is partially owned by the relevant sphere and zero otherwise, Investor+crisis,
Industrivärden+crisis, Kinnevik+crisis = difference-in-difference estimators, the factor of the sphere dummies and the crisis
dummy. We correct for heteroskedasticity using robust standard errors. Energy is dropped due to multicollinearity.

                                       (1)
                             Debt-to-Capital
Intercept -0.0430
                                        (-0.36)
Firm Size 0.0382**
                                       (3.26)
Book-to-Market 0.0142
                                       (1.21)
Utilities -0.00883
                                      (-0.13)
Manufacturing 0.0830
                                       (1.62)
Durables -0.0131
                                        (-0.24)
Nondurables -0.0129
                                        (-0.10)
Health -0.0419
                                      (-0.65)
Financials 0.0564
                                       (1.11)
IT -0.156***
                                        (-2.65)
Telecom -0.0520
                                        (-0.31)
Crisis 0.0437***
                                       (8.21)
Investor 0.0902*
                                       (2.21)
Industrivärden -0.0936
                                        (-1.05)
Kinnevik 0.0658
                                    (0.42)
Investor+crisis 0.0154
                                       (0.74)
Industrivärden+crisis 0.0264
                                    (1.71)
Kinnevik+crisis -0.0717**
                                        (-2.79)
N                    1468
R-squared                       0.0965
t statistics in parentheses
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

                                                                                                  63