Stockholm School of Economics

Bachelor Thesis Finance, May 2010

   Ingredient hedging and firm value

 - A study of agricultural commodity price exposures

            Caroline Garph1 Linn Markryd2

                                               Abstract

Hedging in all respects, is one of the most fundamental tools when it comes to fulfilling the principal aim of
corporate finance – maximizing shareholder value. Also the research about how to calculate risk and how to hedge
against it has been meticulously assessed in famous research papers that cover almost every detail of risk
management. Nonetheless, the missing part in the risk management field seems to be a more practically-oriented and
general framework that answers more specific and narrow questions when it comes to such as what types of risks
one should hedge and to what extent. This paper assesses the production input price exposure of corporations that
use agricultural commodities as inputs in production, something that have yet not been done in previous research.
The analysis is performed by comparing the linear relationship between fluctuations in a stock price with fluctuations
in the commodity price, for companies that practice commodity hedging and companies that do not. In order to
affirm whether or not commodity hedging has a value enhancing effect on equity in addition of having a value-
stabilizing effect we use the Tobin’s q-statistic as a proxy for firm value and study how it is affected by hedging. In
addition, we try to explain why hedging enhances the value by analyzing how it affect the internally generated cash
flow that can be used for value-creating activities such as investing in profitable projects. Our findings indicate that
hedging companies’ stock prices are unaffected by fluctuations in the commodity price and also that these companies
are more valuable in terms of the Tobin’s q-statistic. Our recommendations for companies exposed to price
fluctuations in agricultural commodities are thus to hedge.

1 BSc Student in Business and Economics, 21264@student.hhs.se

2 BSc Student in Business and Economics, 21214@student.hhs.se

Tutor: Professor Per Strömberg
Date: 28 May, 2010
Location: SIFR, Drottninggatan 89, Stockholm
Discussants: Carlsson, Elin and Martinsson, Douglas

                                                                  - 1 -
   I. INTRODUCTION

Hedging in all respects, is one of the most fundamental tools when it comes to fulfilling the
principal aim of corporate finance – maximizing shareholder value. Maximizing shareholder value
has several implications whereof the consensus appears to be to maximize the present and future
cash flows of the business, something that according to relevant research can be achieved by
implementing various types of hedges. Also the research about how to calculate risk and how to
hedge against it has been meticulously assessed in famous research papers that cover almost every
detail of risk management. Nonetheless, the missing part in the risk management field is a more
practically-oriented framework that answers more specific and narrow questions such as what
types of risks one should hedge and how much of that risk one should hedge. In addition, the
research field of risk management has not yet covered how the various types of hedges impact
different industries and sectors. Especially superseded is the management of commodity related
risks – probably because it affects different industries in different ways. The management of risks
related to foreign exchange rates and to interest rates has in comparison been widely assessed in a
manner that is applicable to most industries and sectors.

The purpose of the paper is to assess the production ingredient price exposure of corporations
that use agricultural commodities as inputs in production, as it is one of the major industries that
yet have not been covered in practical risk management research. In this study we cover for
example the sugar price exposure of companies such as Coca-Cola Enterprises and PepsiCo.
Particularly interesting with these two very similar companies, is that Coca-Cola Enterprises
hedges while PepsiCo do not even though they are exposed to the very same input price, namely
the price on sugar. More closely, our study covers the exposure to production ingredient price
fluctuations for companies registered under the SIC codes 514 and 515 in the Zephyr database.
Companies registered under SIC-code 514 are referred to as wholesale dealing in groceries and
related products (“groceries and related products wholesale dealing in”), while SIC-code 515
refers to companies wholesale dealing with farm-product raw materials (“Farm-product raw
materials wholesale dealing in”). Exposure will in this context serve as a proxy for sensitivity of
the stock price to unanticipated changes in the price of the production ingredients. Moreover,
sensitivity to commodity price changes is in the paper measured as the coefficient of the
commodity price change in the linear regression of the stock price change (i.e. the change in firm
value). As a second step in the study, we assess the impact of hedging on company’s cash flows
and investment levels. Subsequently we investigate the impact of hedging on firm value by
comparing it, using Tobin’s Q as a proxy, between companies that hedge and companies that do

                                                                  - 2 -
not hedge. Therefore, in extension we seek to conclude or to get an indication of whether or not
hedging, when it comes to agricultural commodities as inputs in production; can be priced in an
arbitrage pricing framework.

The analysis is performed by comparing the linear relationship between fluctuations in a
company’s stock price with fluctuations in the commodity price- first for all companies within
our sample one by one and subsequently for the companies that practice commodity hedging
altogether with the companies that do not. In order to affirm whether or not commodity hedges
have a value-enhancing effect on equity in excess of having a value-stabilizing effect, the
procedure used in Allayannis and Weston (2001) has been performed using the so called Tobin’s
q-statistic as a proxy for firm value. We also expand our research by investigating an eventual
reverse causation, i.e. that firms with high Tobin’s Q have stronger incentives to hedge than firms
with low Tobin’s Q, instead of the other way around. If this is true it is hard to make any
conclusions regarding whether hedging leads to high values of Tobin’s Q or not. In addition, we
try to explain why hedging enhances the value by analyzing how hedging affects the internally
generated cash flow that can be used for value-creating activities such as investing in profitable
projects.

For the sake of delimitation, this particular study focuses on listed American companies found in
the deal research database Zephyr. The commodity price is proxied by S&P Goldman Sachs
Agricultural and Livestock Commodity Index that includes wheat, red wheat, corn, soybeans,
cotton, sugar, coffee, cocoa, live cattle, feeder cattle and lean hogs. In the beginning of our
research our sample consisted of 130 companies listed on American stock exchanges, covered by
Zephyr and registered under the SIC codes 514 and 515. After further research and screening, 53
companies remained. Several companies were removed from our sample because their hedging
activities did not cover the specific commodities included in the commodity composite index.
Furthermore, a number of companies were excluded because they, during the period of time
studied, altered their hedging strategy. Our sample of 53 firms consequently includes companies
that consistently did or did not hedge during the sample period. Our data includes daily stock

                               th                                th
prices during the period 1  of April 2004 until the 30  of March 2010. In order to determine if
the companies practice commodity hedging or not, data from item 7A (Quantitative and
qualitative disclosures about market risk) in the 10-K reports was collected. 10 K-reports were
available for all companies in the sample. (See part (i) in appendix for an example of an abstract.)

                                                                  - 3 -
The assumed value-increasing effects of various hedges and its impacts on a corporation’s cash
flow and stock price have been assessed and debated over the years. One of the most recent
articles that validates the findings of Allayannis and Weston (2001) – that hedging results in a
higher firm value, is the one that assesses the effect of commodity hedging on firm value among
US airline companies (Carter, Rogers and Simkins, 2006). However, this is in complete contrast
to the findings by Jin and Jorion (2004) that do not find any relation between firm value and
hedging when it comes to oil and gas producers. Similar results were found by Tufano (1998)
who studied the impact of hedging on American gold mining firms. More interesting from the
standpoint of this paper are perhaps the findings of Gagnon, Lypny and McCurdy (1998) whose
research resulted in evidence for the risk-reducing effects of currency hedging strategies.

The framework used in our article and in most of the above mentioned articles, is the framework
developed by Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993). The framework creates a link between different
hedging rationales and the value they may generate. Furthermore, Froot et al discuss the
shortcomings in previous literature for not having succeeded in developing practical guidelines
regarding risk management by hedging. What is missing in risk management research, as
discussed in Froot et al., is a practical assessment of how hedging affects stock price and firm
value. We therefore believe that our study fills an empty hole in this area of research as our
results have practical implications and answer important questions when it comes to agricultural
ingredient hedging. Our findings indicate that investors value hedging activities within firms
higher than they value firms where there is a prevailing lack of hedging. This means that investors
prefer the smooth stock prices that hedging results in, over the upside and downside risk of stock
price movements that a non-hedging company is characterized by, even if these cash flows on
average are higher than the average cash flow in a hedging firm.

The paper is organized as follows. Previous research findings are discussed in section II. Hedging
theory and its incentives are discoursed in section III. In section IV we discuss our sample of 53
firms, eventual weaknesses in how the data was obtained and the sample selection bias that might
be the result of how the data was gathered. This part is then followed by our empirical study of
how hedging affects stock price, cash flows and finally, firm value. The empirical study is divided
into three parts, where the section V of this paper discourses the effects of hedging on stock
price. Section VI covers the effects of hedging on the free cash flows which, as discussed above,
is the fundament to understanding why and how hedging affects firm value in a somewhat
simplified manner. The empirical analysis is finalized with the assessment of the impact of

                                                                  - 4 -
hedging on firm value, discoursed in section VII. The section that follows, VIII, discusses the
results of section V-VII in relation to theory and to previous research. The paper is
consummated with our conclusions in section IX. The findings of each empirical sub-study are in
addition contrasted to existing theory in each relevant section.
   II. HEDGING THEORY AND INCENTIVES

Hedging theory i.e. that hedging smoothes cash flows and enhances value is widely debated. The
problem that every firm faces when making decisions regarding hedging strategies is how to
tackle and form a solid balance between the uncertainty of future commodity prices and the risk
of opportunity loss. One can claim that there are three major risks prevailing in this context of
producing firms that are players on the global market. First they face transactional risk, i.e. the
uncertainty regarding the interest rate that will affect eventual debt conditions. Secondly they face
a translation risk that can be explained as the change in the value of a foreign asset as a
consequence to changes in the foreign exchange rate. Finally, producing firms also need to
consider the economic exposure risk, known as the risk of a negative impact of fluctuations in
commodity prices on the firm’s core business (Sooran, 2010). We thus highlight the latter risk
that puts firms that use commodities as an ingredient in their core production, in the spotlight.
Companies might engage in commodity hedging for several reasons where some of the reasons
are induced by external factors. For example, lenders might require that borrowing firms hedge
some of their production activities to increase the probability that commodity price fluctuations
will not affect the firm’s ability to pay interest and amortisement on outstanding debt. Hedging
decisions might also be affected when venture capitalists provide firms with capital, who
therefore most certainly will base their hedging strategy on the capitalists’ risk awareness and
wishes (King, Williams, 2003). Also, hedging is in general said to serve as an indicator of
managerial ability to investors (DeMarzo and Duffie, 1995).

The main underlying reason why companies choose to hedge their exposure to commodity price
fluctuations is to stabilize cash flows (King, Williams, 2003) and to avoid volatility of the cash
flows aggravated by the tax regime (Chang, Hong and Kuan, 2005). One can talk about four
additional rationales why firms chose to hedge, linked to internal conditions and attitudes within
each particular company. First there are managerial motives, namely that managers covered by
result-based rewarding systems might find an incentive to hedge to protect their future earnings
from steep downturns. This is based on the assumption that managers in general are risk averse
and also that it is cheaper to engage in hedging activities within a company than do so as a private
person (Froot et al 1993). Empirical research has showed that managers of North American gold

                                                                  - 5 -
mining companies that are in possession of many stocks use risk management, such as hedging
tools, to a larger extent than managers with less stocks (Tufano, 1996). Secondly, taxes play a big
part on hedging strategies. If taxes are a convex function of earnings, hedging will be optimal for
companies. Higher earnings do lead to higher taxes and smoothing earnings can be done through
hedging tools. The convexity therefore justifies the hedging activities as a way to minimize tax
expenditures. (Smith and Stulz, 1985) Furthermore, hedging might increase debt capacity by
smoothing cash flows and keep them from being unmanageably low. The fourth rationale for
hedging is capital market imperfections. (Froot et al 1993) According to the Modigliani-Miller
theorem, managers should not be able to add value to a firm by hedging if the assumption of a
prevailing perfect financial market holds. However, the assumption of a perfect financial market
is violated due to prevailing asymmetric information, transaction costs and taxes (Chang, Hong
and Kuan, 2006). Hedging tools can therefore be used for speculative objectives where gains and
arbitrage opportunities are to be found. Firms speculate by engaging in hedging contracts that are
not designed to offset the firm’s risk associated with its core business. This increases the firms’
risk, instead of reducing it, and is a totally different approach to hedging (Berk and DeMarzo
2007). We have therefore chosen to disregard such activities within firms and we do not treat
companies that only hedge for speculative reasons as hedging companies in the further analysis.

The trade-off between uncertainty and opportunity is composed differently from firm to firm.
Some companies stay out of hedging tools and hope to be able to encounter a big upside
potential that occurs when commodity prices moves in a direction that is in favour for the
company’s core production, while other firms get involved in hedging activities to lock-in a
future profit (King and Williams, 2003). Companies that operate within industries where the core
activity is directly linked to the supply and demand for commodities will face volatile earnings
because of macroeconomic factors. Such firms will notice how their cash flows and earnings
track the appropriate commodities’ price movements (Damodaran, 2009). Companies using
commodities as inputs in production always need to take macroeconomic factors that per
definition are out of their control, into consideration when predicting cash flows and profits. In
this case, in addition to business cyclical explanations for price changes, such factors include
occurrences that can be characterized as force majeure or economic anomalies. (King, Williams,
2003). When it comes to agricultural commodities such as corn, sugar and wheat, the weather and
culture conditions play a big part that is impossible to influence or predict.

                                                                  - 6 -
Many firms use hedging tools since changes in the price of the raw materials they use as
ingredients in production often entail the largest source of risk to their profitability. Such hedges
need actions from management in terms of both acquirements of knowledge and hedging long-
term contracts or futures contracts. In this paper we study only companies that do not employ
natural hedges, which might be the case when firms can carry over increased ingredient prices to
their customers through massive increases in the prices of the final products. (Berk, DeMarzo,
2007) Commodity companies are said to be price takers. Regardless of the company’s market
share, it has to sell the output at the prevailing market price. (Damodaran, 2009) Applying this
theory on our sample renders the conclusion that the 53 companies are all price takers, which
makes it hard for them to compensate for high commodity input costs by increasing the price of
their final goods. These companies might therefore be incentivized to employ agricultural
commodity hedges.

                                                                  - 7 -
   III. PREVIOUS LITERATURE

The existing research to be found within this particular area is quite covering. We have in spite of
this succeeded with our aim to find a small gap which we strive to fill. The existing work mostly
covers the relation between hedging against other risk exposures but commodities, and firm value
or stock price. Many researchers within hedging activities keep hedging strategies as the core
issue throughout their work and therefore make conclusions about how to ascertain firms’
optimal hedging levels given their specific risk exposures. E.g. Peck (1975) and Thompson &
Bond (1987) both investigate optimal hedging strategies against commodity risks.

More applicable for our aim of this thesis is the work by Jorion (1990), where he has chosen to
examine the exposure and impact of changes in a trade-weighted exchange rate on the stock
returns of 287 nonoil U.S. multinational companies. He is basing his implications on what the
following linear regression indicates:

Rit = β0,i + β2,i Rst + β3,i Rmt + εi,t
We have chosen to adopt this technical procedure and therefore replace Jorion’s Rst, that accounts
for the exchange rate changes, with the returns in our agricultural commodity index. Apart from
that, the framework is the same, since the dependent variable of interest is the firm’s stock return
and the other independent factor is the market return. Jorion states in his conclusion that the
correlation between exchange rate risk exposure and a company’s degree of foreign involvement
is positive and significant. He does not, which distinguish our article from his even more,
examine hedging activities in particular but suggests that currency risk is diversifiable through
hedging.

Further we have been inspired by Tufano (1998) who investigates the determinants of the stock
price exposure. He chooses to do so among gold mining firms in North America. The main study
in this article is therefore made with a different approach than we have, since many factors are
taken into consideration when investigating how the effect on the gold beta varies. He starts off
by applying the same regression as Jorion developed, namely the multifactor market model (a
version of the CAPM). Tufano performs, as a minor part in his work, the regression for each
firm in his sample (48 gold mining firms from 1990 through March 1994). This article is though
carried on in another angle where Tufano can be able to ascertain a negative impact of the
percent hedged on the gold beta. This is in line with our conclusion.

                                                                  - 8 -
Moreover we adopt the approach of Chang, Hong and Kuan (2005) as they investigate the
impact of hedging activities on both stock returns and the proxy Tobin’s Q for firm market
value, but by using a total different sample (namely 33 Canadian oil and gas companies during
2000-2002). They perform regressions based on monthly data, in line with what we do, but their
main contribution to the previous work is their decision to use non-linear regressions and also to
take the fraction hedged, based on a notional dollar value of each firm’s hedging contracts, into
consideration. They state e.g. in their conclusion that stock return in their sample responds to
commodity price changes in a non-linear way. They also account for the firms’ reserves of
physical commodities and therefore ascertain that a higher gas reserve in relation to gas
production, given a level of hedging, leads to higher Tobin’s Q. These findings are in detail not
applicable to our work since our methodology differs in many aspects.

We have been able to adopt both the methodology and framework used in the article by
Allayannis and Weston (2001). They do not address the question of how derivatives against
commodity price fluctuations affect the firm market value (proxied by Tobin’s Q), but instead
look at derivatives against foreign currency fluctuations. Thus, we can follow their adopted
technique and apply parts of it to our question formulation. They find a positive relation between
Tobin’s Q and the use of hedging tools, which we also are able to ascertain. Allayannis et al use
the same period length as we do, namely six years (1990-1995), but they handle a much bigger
sample containing 720 firms (nonfinancial and in the U.S.). They therefore have the advantage of
being able to apply a relative big amount of control variables in the linear regression of Tobin’s
Q, such as dummies controlling for industry effects and industrial diversification. All firms in our
sample operate within the same industry and the majority within the same segment, why the
adoption of such dummies would not be able to contribute to our findings. Allayannis et al
perform a pooled OLS regression using the natural logarithm of Tobin’s Q as the dependent
variable, thus we have had the possibility to adopt their reasoning to our research.

When it comes to assessing the value-increasing effects of investing in profitable investment
projects, the framework developed in Froot et al (1993) has been used and has to a certain extent
been extended. In the article, the authors state four different types of rationales for hedging;
namely managerial motives, taxes, costs of financial distress and debt capacity, and finally, capital
market imperfections and inefficient investment. Another major concept in their article is how
capital expenditure, which is essential for the value of the company as the company has to invest
to grow, is affected by hedging and how the value of the hedge depends on the stochastic process
of available investment projects. Based on limitations in obtainable data and measurement issues

                                                                  - 9 -
we decide to limit the scope of our study to evaluating only the two hedging rationales described
in their article that we find most important and relevant for firm value analysis, namely the debt
capacity and investment levels, both which can be augmented by increasing the free cash flow.
The free cash flow is in turn the most important means to create value and is thus the
fundamental to assessing the effects of hedging on firm value. Because the free cash flow can be
measured without bias from the 10-K reports we will focus on assessing the impacts of hedging
on the free cash flow before we study the impact of hedging on relative firm value, i.e. Tobin’s Q.
The hedging rationales that stem from managerial motives and the tax benefits, which first were
assessed in an article by Smith and Stulz (1985), are not evaluated in detail because of the
complexity related to their measurement as opposed to measuring the free cash flow and capital
expenditures of the firms in our sample. The results from evaluating the impact of hedging on
free cash flow, capital expenditure and relative firm value (Tobin’s Q) are hence determined to be
enough to get indicative results of how hedging influences important aspects of a firm’s value-
enhancing activities. To sum up, our approach is thus based on the theoretical framework
developed by Froot et al (1993) but is extended in part, by the applications of their framework
developed in articles by e.g. Carter et al (2003).

   IV. SAMPLE

    i. Description

Our data consists of daily stock prices for 53 American publicly held companies found in the
database Zephyr under SIC codes 514 and 515. These companies are categorized into hedging
and non-hedging companies based on whether or not agricultural commodity risk hedging is
undertaken. This means that companies that hedge against foreign exchange rate changes and
interest rate changes, but do not hedge their commodity risks, are categorized as non-hedging
firms. These companies are hereafter referred to as “non-hedging companies”, even though they
may hedge other types of risks. The broad selection of available hedging tools and their qualities
are out of the scope and relevance for this thesis, even though it is of importance to keep in mind
that the choice of hedging strategies within a firm can be more or less effective, which in turn can
lead to different levels of impact on factors such as firm value. In addition some of the firms in
our sample have chosen to hedge a bigger fraction of their commodity exposure than others,
something we do not consider either. The implication of this is discussed more thoroughly in the
section VII.

                                                           - 10 -
For each of the 53 companies we have gathered annual accounting data, from the year 2000 to
2009, such as book value of assets, shareholders’ equity, net debt, free cash flow, capital

                                                                                                               th
expenditures and earnings in addition to the market capitalization value of each firm as of 8  of
April 2010. However, in the cross-sectional regressions run in section V and VI, data from 2004
and onwards is used in order to make the implications of the study up to date. For different
reasons there were missing data for some of the companies during the period from 2000 up until
2004, most certainly the reason for that is that some of the firms were not listed then. We were
able to obtain the annual accounting data for all chosen companies from the start of 2004. Thus
our selected data that creates our sample starts in that year since we then had a comprehensive set
of values for all firms and dates. For the time-series regression run in section V, daily data from

      st                             th
the 1  of April 2005 to the 30  of March 2010 is used to calculate monthly average returns.

The commodity price is proxied by the S&P Goldman Sachs Agricultural and Livestock
Commodity Index which is a composite index that includes wheat, red wheat, corn, soybeans,
cotton, sugar, coffee, cocoa, live cattle, feeder cattle and lean hogs. The rationale for using a
composite index is that the majority of the firms in our sample hedges against price fluctuations
in several agricultural commodities. For example, the chicken processor Pilgrim’s Pride Corp
hedges against the commodity risk that stems from fluctuations in the price of both corn and
soybean. If we were to measure the exposure to only one of these commodities, we risk weaker
results because the complete agricultural commodity risk is not measured. Moreover, because
agricultural commodities tend to be highly correlated, using a composite average rather than a
single commodity makes sense.

Stock prices along with commodity prices and inflation data were obtained from DataStream,
while the accounting data was retrieved from FactSet and Compustat depending on in what
database the respective firms were covered. Important to note is that some companies lack
accounting data for certain years. Those observations have been excluded from the cross-
sectional regressions even though observations from the same companies but for other years
have been included in the regression sample. However, as our sample is large in our cross-
sectional regressions (n=258) and only a few of the observations are excluded, this does not have
any critical implications for the results.

                                                           - 11 -
    ii. Sample selection issues

As previously mentioned, the list of American publicly held companies was retrieved from the
deal database Zephyr. This implies that the list of companies only includes companies that have
been involved in mergers and acquisitions, something that might lead to sample selection bias if
their involvement in mergers and acquisitions meant diversifying the operations, thus decreasing
the sensitivity towards the prices of certain agricultural commodities or in worst case towards
commodities in general. This should mean that the effect of derivative hedges is increasingly
prevalent for the average company on the market than what our results indicate. However, since
the commodity price used in the regressions in fact is proxied by a composite commodity index
this bias is to an extent overcome. Also, we believe that mergers and acquisitions between entities
with substantially differing operations are somewhat unusual. This could mean that the risk of a
prevailing case where the sensitivity toward commodity price per se has decreased for a firm in
our sample is small. Thus, we do not judge the sample selection bias to be of significant
importance for the implications of our findings.

   V. IMPACT OF COMMODITY PRICES ON FIRM STOCK PRICE

            i. Empirical models

The study is commenced by assessing the impact of commodity return on stock return and how
hedging companies compared to non-hedging companies are affected by changes in commodity
price. According to theory, hedging should protect shareholders from unexpected losses (and
also prevent the potential for unexpected gains, i.e. the upside risk). In other words, hedging
should smooth stock returns (Chang et al 2005). Investors do to a great extent obtain shares in a
company to take advantage of the company’s core business expertise. (Sooran, 2010). Previous
research show how stock returns are used as a measure of firm value (Jorion, 1990) which is
something we have decided to take to a further level later on in this thesis. For example, Tufano
(1998) examines the determinants of stock price exposure in the gold mining industry in North
America. As a part of his work, he regress the daily returns on stocks for the companies within
the sample on the daily return on the CRSP NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq index and on the return on
gold. This is similar to the regression we perform and it is based on the well known framework of
the Capital Asset Pricing Model, where the expected return of a company is said to depend on
the risk free rate and the market portfolio’s excess return (Berk and Demarzo 2007). We thus
mimic Tufano’s approach of expanding the CAPM by including a variable that accounts for the
returns on the agricultural commodity index. Furthermore, we use the CAPM framework to

                                                           - 12 -
assess the relationship between realized returns instead of expected returns. Tufano (1998)
ascertains with his sample of 48 North American gold mining firms that the beta of the gold
price is negatively affected by an increase in the hedging variable. Tufano (1996) also finds that
the use of derivative hedging tools against commodity price fluctuations is positively related to
the stock price. The type of regression model used in Tufano (1996) is commonly used in
research with this particular approach and is also to be found in the work of Chang, Hong and
Kuan (2005) and Jin and Jorion (2005). By using an expanded version of the CAPM we ultimately
assume that the market beta is the same for all hedging companies since we perform a regression
using a subsample containing only hedging firms. The same is assumed for non-hedging
companies. The coefficient on the market excess return variable in the CAPM is theoretically
computed as the ratio of the covariance between a specific security’s return and the return from
an approximated market portfolio, and the variance of the market portfolio’s returns (Berk and
Demarzo 2007).

Thus, in the study of how hedging impacts stock price returns, we initially assume that the market
beta is the same for all companies within each subsample by performing a regression where we
do not consider each company separately. This assumption is legitimatized by pointing out that
all 53 firms are in the same business, which most probably makes them more homogenous in
their exposure towards the Market Portfolio. Finally, by evaluating the exposures and coefficients
for all the firms within our sample on an individual level we apply the CAPM once again. Now
we consider the fact that, in reality, the firms in our sample may have had different market betas
during our sample period. This will theoretically result in more reliable coefficients and thus a
more reliable analysis of the coefficients.

We expect, based on theories and previous research, that hedging firms’ stock price and return
should be weakly but possibly positively dependent on the commodity return or even
independent of the commodity return. Furthermore, in accordance with hedging theory we
expect to see tendencies of this by both investigating each firm’s exposure to the commodity
return individually, but also by one regression each using the two sub-samples consisting of
hedging companies and non-hedging companies. That would entail the conclusion that hedging
does make firms’ stock returns independent of commodity price fluctuations and thus only
dependent on other factors such as the market portfolio (but also most likely management
competence and the competitiveness of the company’s business idea). We expect to see that
stock prices appear to be smoothed when hedging is employed.

                                                           - 13 -
           ii. Sample

Our sample consists of 53 companies of which 25 pursue such hedging activities as mentioned
initially in the paper. The average stock return for all 53 companies is in our study equally

                                                                                          st
weighted and computed on a monthly basis, with starting day on the 1  of April 2005 and ending

            st
on the 31  of March 2010. This leaves us with 59 months and thus 59 observations, one average
stock return per month. The mean of the 59 average stock returns is 0.06%, with a standard
deviation of 0.21%, a minimum value of -0.52% and the maximum value is 0.60%. The frequency
used, i.e. monthly data, is in line with previous research that use the same methodology to
investigate the impact of hedging, for example Chang, Hong and Kuan (2005).

The sample is subsequently divided into two subsamples where we in the same manner compute
average stock returns on a monthly basis, but for the 25 hedging firms and the 28 non-hedging
firms separately. We use the same time period and obtain 59 observations per sub-sample. The
mean value for the hedging companies’ average returns is 0.07% with a standard deviation of
0.22%. Minimum value equals -0.66% and maximum value equals 0.52%. Regarding the non-
hedging subsample our mean value for the average stock returns is 0.06%, standard deviation is
0.22%, minimum value -0.53% and maximum value is 0.68%. The monthly average commodity
return has mean value 0.04%, standard deviation 0.26%, minimum value -0.69% and maximum
value 0.61%. See table Vd in appendix for a summation of the variables statistics used in this part.
The monthly prices of the two equally-weighted portfolios of hedging companies and non-

                                                                                                          st
hedging companies along with monthly commodity prices are rebased on the 1  of April and
plotted in graph Va.

                                                           - 14 -
           Average prices rebased as per 2005/04

   1,04

   1,03

   1,02

   1,01

     1

   0,99
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

                rebased commodity price rebased hedging rebased non-hedging

  Graph Va. Commodity prices along with average stock prices for the portfolio of hedging companies and non-
  hedging companies, respectively. Commodity prices along with portfolio prices have been rebased as per 2005-
  04-01. As can be seen with the naked eye, stock prices of non-hedging companies are inversely related to
  commodity prices to a greater extent (as indicated by the dashed boxes).

            iii. Method and Results

The results from the three regressions based on average monthly returns are in line with our
expectations based on theoretical models and predictions. Three linear OLS (optimal least
squared) time-series regressions were performed, based on monthly data with the first regression
based on the whole sample (53 firms) and the other two on the two sub-samples of hedging and
non-hedging firms.

Rit = αt + β1 rft + β2 (Rmt - rft) + β3 Rct
Rit = realized average monthly return on stock, sample i, time t
rft = risk-free rate, time t
(Rmt - rft) = realized market excess return, time t
Rct = realized average monthly return on commodity index, time t

The first regression using monthly average returns for the whole sample of 53 firms yields a
significant relation between the stock returns and; the risk-free rate (significant on a 0% level),
the market excess return (significant on a 0% level) and also the commodity index return
(significant on a 2.5% level). We obtained a coefficient of the risk-free rate of 0.9168 and a
coefficient of the market excess return of 0.8858. The coefficient of the greatest interest here is
the beta of the commodity return which is -0.0989, and as mentioned statistically significant.

                                                           - 15 -
This implies that if the commodity index return increases by 1% the average stock return
decreases by 9.89%, holding all other variables fixed. Thus we find a negative impact of the
commodity returns on the firms’ stock returns, which implies that stock prices are inversely
influenced by increases in commodity prices. This is in line with our expectations, since we are
investigating firms that use the agricultural commodities as ingredients in their production and
thus face these prices as expenses. The R-squared value obtained is 0.8180. See table Va in
appendix for an overview.

The results based on the regression using monthly average stock returns for hedging firms
implies that the relation between stock returns and the risk-free is statistically significant on a 0%
level with a coefficient of 0.9482. The same is true when it comes to the significance level of the
coefficient on the market excess return that measures 0.9395. What is interesting and also in line
with theory is the insignificant relation between commodity return and stock return for hedging
companies. The significance level of the coefficient on commodity index return is 55.4%, which
implies that stock returns are more or less unaffected by the prevailing agricultural commodity
returns. Hedging firms’ stock prices thus do not depend on the price of the ingredient
commodity used in the core production, thus hedging tools offset the impact of commodity price
fluctuations and smoothes stock returns. The R-squared obtained of the regression is 0.8178. We
refer to table Vb in appendix.

The non-hedging firms’ stock returns are significantly related with the risk-free rate on a 0%
level, with a coefficient of 0.8854. As in the regressions above, the market excess return is still
statistically significant on a 0% level, with a coefficient of 0.8321 for the sub-sample of only non-
hedging firms. We do in addition ascertain a significant relation between stock returns and
commodity index returns when it comes to non-hedging firms. The significance level is 3% and
the coefficient is –0.1677. This implies that non-hedging firms’ stock prices are related and
affected by the price of the ingredient commodities in their production and in addition in a
negative way. The conclusion is perfectly in line with theory and the conclusion is therefore that
an increase in the price of the commodity used in production decreases the firms’ stock price.
The R-squared measure of the regression is 0.6928. Table Vc in appendix shows these findings.

Next we expand our research by performing the following regression on firm level, i.e. using
average realized monthly returns for each specific company instead of using average values within
the whole sample or one of the two subsamples as done above.

                                                           - 16 -
Rit = αit + β1 rft + β2 (Rmt - rft) + β3 Rct
Rit = realized average monthly return on stock, firm i, time t
rft = risk-free rate, time t
(Rmt - rft) = realized market excess return, time t
Rct = realized average monthly return on commodity index, time t

The complete result of the obtained coefficients from the 53 regressions is to be found in
appendix (table Ve). With reference to these regressions, it appears that to a great extent, hedging
firms enjoy a stock return that is statistically insignificant related to the commodity index return.
80% of the coefficients on the commodity index return variables are statistically insignificant. The
average value of the hedging firms’ betas of the commodity index return is 0.013916. Thus, in
general the hedging firms have an insignificant and slightly positive beta. We also notice that the
majority of the non-hedging firms experience a statistically insignificant relationship between
their stock returns and the commodity index returns as well. This can be explained by many
factors, e.g. by the possibility of prevailing hedging activities that we do not consider as hedging
in this research. The average beta value for the non-hedging firms is -0.15203, i.e. when the
commodity index return increases by 1% the average non-hedging firm’s stock return decreases
by more than 15% holding all others factors fixed. By presuming the same situation for the
hedging firms; the average hedging firm in our sample then experience a subtle increase of the
stock return, namely 0.14%.

To statistically verify whether or not the difference between the average betas is statistically
significant, a student’s t-test, also known as an unpaired t-test, is performed. The validity of the
test depends upon several factors that all are judged to be fulfilled, namely; the difference
between the sub-samples’ betas is normally distributed and the variance is homogenous in the
two sub-samples. The validity of the distribution is confirmed by comparing the averages with
the median values which in this case are close (the difference between the average value and
median value is 0.07 for the sample of hedging firms, 0.01 for non-hedging firms and less than
0.004 for the whole sample). Moreover, the standard deviations for the two sub-samples are
similar in size; 0.363 and 0.288, respectively. Hence, the utilization of the student’s t-test is
legitimate.

The t-statistic used is;

                         𝑋𝑛 − 𝜇   0,01392 − −0,15202 − 0
                      𝑡 =       =                        = 3,6223
                               𝑠𝑛 𝑛            0,3335 53

                                                           - 17 -
With n-1 (52) degrees of freedom, the obtained t-statistic implies that the difference between the
average betas for hedging companies and non-hedging companies is statistically different from
zero on a 0% level. We have thus found additional and actually even stronger evidence in favour
of our hypothesis that hedging companies are less exposed to commodity prices than non-
hedging companies are.

Thus, from these regressions performed with the aim to examine the impact of hedging activities
on stock price, we can ascertain the following. Hedging activities make the stock price returns
less dependent on the price fluctuations in the agricultural commodity index. This can be stated
by the statistically insignificant coefficient of the commodity index return in the regression based
on the sub-sample with hedging firms only. The corresponding regression for the sub-sample
with the non-hedging firms points in the opposite direction, namely at a significant and negative
beta meaning that these firms’ stock prices are exposed and negatively correlated with changes in
the prices of the commodities. These results along with its implications are confirmed using the
extended CAPM without the assumption that all firms in each sub-sample have the same market
beta which is done by performing regressions for all firms separately – even though this result is
to some extent sprawling. Some of the regressions, for reasons we cannot know, do show
statistically insignificant relationships between the non-hedging firms’ stock returns and the
commodity index return. In spite of this, a big negative magnitude of the average beta for the
non-hedging companies along with a positive average beta for the hedging companies indicate
that hedging activities against commodity price fluctuations lowers the negative impact of such
price fluctuations on the stock returns of a firm.

   VI. IMPACT OF HEDGING ON INVESTMENT LEVELS

            i. Empirical models

As in the previous assessment of stock price sensitivity to commodity prices, the analysis of the
impact of hedging on investment levels covers the publicly held firms with SIC codes 514 and
515 listed in the Zephyr-database. These companies, because of their exposure to fluctuations in
the price of their agricultural production ingredients, are incentivized to employ commodity
hedging to protect their earnings from fluctuations. As shown in the previous section, the theory
of hedging, i.e. that hedging smoothes fluctuations in stock price, seems to hold true in reality.

                                                           - 18 -
However, this fact does not equate that hedging increases firm value. Before an assessment of the
effect of hedging on firm value, we chose to study the value creating activity known as investing.

With the starting point in the framework developed by Froot et al (1993) where investment
projects are assumed to be a non-stochastic process, hedges are assumed to be valuable only
when there is no relationship between the timing of investment projects with positive net present
values and low cash flows as a result of high production input prices. Applied on the industry
studied in this particular paper, the theory would imply that a hedge that protects against input
price fluctuations, does maintain the internally created cash flow streams of the company
regardless of increasing input prices. These preserved streams in turn enable the company to fund
essential investment projects whenever beneficial investment opportunities exist. The investment
expenditures generate future benefits for the company and hence increase the value of the firm.
Consequently, for a hedge to be valuable for a firm under the assumption that the timing of
profitable investment projects is a non-stochastic process, timing of these projects has to
coincide with high commodity prices which, if a hedge was not employed, would result in low
cash flows and therefore in an inability to invest in the available investment opportunity that
otherwise would increase the value of the company.

The process to assess the eventual value-enhancing effect of ingredient hedging therefore
commences by evaluating the relationship between the timing of the industry’s investment
projects and the commodity prices. Moreover, an important assumption we make initially but
eventually deviate from is that profitable investment projects follow a non-stochastic process,
thus that the availability of positive net present value projects is constant and that all investments
undertaken thus are profitable. Therefore, it will consequently be assumed that the companies
that invest the most and on a constant level create the largest future benefits which should, with
respect to valuation theory, be reflected in an increased firm value. This means that for hedging
to be valuable in an investment context, hedging companies should on average invest more than
non-hedging companies when commodity prices are high.

What also possibly makes smooth cash flow before capital expenditures more valuable for a firm
is that internally generated funds, i.e. free cash flow before capital expenditures, are cheaper than
externally raised funds because of an augmenting marginal cost which increases with the amount
of external funds raised, as mentioned in Froot et al (1993). As a result, if it increases the free
cash flow generated, hedging could be more valuable than not hedging even if the capital

                                                           - 19 -
expenditure is on the same level for both hedging and non-hedging companies. Both size and
standard deviation of the free cash flow will therefore be relevant to evaluate along with size and
standard deviation of capital expenditures. Hence, as a first step in the investigation of the effect
of hedging on the value creating activities i.e. engaging in profitable investment projects, we will
assess the impact of hedging on the generating of cheap funds (to fund these investments with).
This is done by studying the linear relationship between lagged asset-scaled free cash flow before
capital expenditures generated by the firm and; inflation adjusted commodity price, the natural
logarithm of lagged Tobin’s Q, a hedging dummy and the natural logarithm of lagged assets. The
rationale for using the natural logarithm of lagged assets along with lagged Tobin’s Q is because
these two metrics appear to not be normally distributed as their median and mean values differ
substantially. Using the natural logarithm of these metrics instead of their absolute values is also
in line with recent previous studies such as Carter et al (2003) (who study the input price
exposure of US Airline companies). The prediction for this regression is that the free cash flow
before capital expenditures decreases when commodity prices increases, thus that the coefficient
on commodity price is negative. When it comes to the coefficient on the logarithm of lagged
Tobin’s Q, it should according to corporate valuation theory be positive as firm value represent
all future earnings, thus the more valuable a company is, the higher is the cash flow that the
company is predicted to generate. Regarding the coefficient on the natural logarithm of the
lagged total assets the results from earlier research differ among authors, why we do not have any
predictions other than that the variable should affect cash flows.

As a second step in this part of the study, the effects of hedging on the actual investment levels
will be assessed. This is done by estimating the linear relationship between lagged asset-scaled
capital expenditures and; inflation adjusted commodity price, the natural logarithm of lagged
Tobin’s Q, a hedging dummy, the natural logarithm of lagged assets, dividend payout ratio,
lagged asset-scaled free cash flow before capital expenditures and leverage in terms of net debt to
equity ratio. Our predictions of this outcome of a linear OLS regression are basically the very
same as for the earlier coefficients of the commodity price, the Tobin’s Q-variable, the hedging
dummy and the lagged assets variable because of the same reasons as discussed above. Hedging
companies are thus assumed to invest more because of their presumed higher stability in
internally generated cash flows. When it comes to the dividend payout ratio, theory suggests that
capital expenditures should decrease with dividend payouts since the cash flow generated
internally either can be paid out or be retained in the company and thus be used to fund
investment projects. Moreover, the relationship between the lagged asset-scaled free cash flow

                                                           - 20 -
before capital expenditures and the lagged asset-scaled capital expenditure is hypothesised to be
positive since the more cheap funds available, the more the company can afford to invest in
available investment projects. The same holds true for leverage- the more debt undertaken the
more funds are available for profitable investment projects.

           ii. Sample

Annually reported capital expenditure, along with annual free cash flow, book value of total
assets and net debt are retrieved from both Compustat and FactSet as some of the firms in the
sample were not covered in the respective databases. Free cash flow is per definition computed as
net income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization but less changes in net working
capital and capital expenditures. Free cash flow is a metric used for expressing the real net cash
flow that is generated by the firm as it takes into account the changes in working capital and
capital expenditures that are balance sheet items (and otherwise are disregarded when just looking
at the income statement earnings). Since working capital consists of short-term, mostly interest-
free net debt, free cash flow is a much cheaper source of funds than externally gathered money –
for example long-term debt and new issuance. For our study we use free cash flow before capital
expenditure. The resulting metric therefore expresses the amount of cash available for investing
in future benefits. Hence, the metric, hereafter referred to as “Free cash flow before capex”, can
be used in order to assess how much of the free cash flow available for investments that is spent
on available projects. Table VIa shows the annual patterns of the commodity price, total assets,
free cash flow before capital expenditures and capital expenditures on a stand-alone basis. All
numbers are in millions of dollars except for the commodity price which is reported in dollars.

 Table VIa

        Commodit                                  FCF
         y price              Total               FCF      before    FCF
          (annual    Total      assets     Total      before     capex     before                Capex
 Year     average)   assets (H) (NH)     assets (all) capex (H) (NH)     capex (all) Capex (H) (NH) Capex (all)
 2000 165,2 7313,3 2394,5 4853,9 389,0 302,5 345,8 283,9 161,7 222,8
 2001 160,4 8313,6 2764,8 5539,2 460,6 336,0 398,3 269,0 202,9 236,0
 2002 162,7 8617,9 2917,3 5767,6 604,1 371,3 487,7 267,6 195,3 231,5
 2003 179,5 8291,3 3022,1 5656,7 467,2 353,8 410,5 244,8 203,5 224,2
 2004 192,8 8154,7 3325,7 5740,2 490,2 387,7 439,0 245,9 194,5 220,2
 2005 188,2 8004,3 3609,6 5807,0 567,9 422,4 495,2 290,2 197,5 243,9
 2006 212,1 8228,8 3623,9 5926,4 464,6 393,4 429,0 301,5 235,0 268,3
 2007 259,8 9818,4 4013,3 6915,9 429,8 371,0 400,4 368,4 271,0 319,7
 2008 317,7 9961,9 4301,0 7131,5 377,2 422,6 399,9 413,8 278,4 346,1
 2009 260,5 10631,8 4698,3 7665,1 838,9 492,2 665,6 424,5 274,9 349,7
  Table VIa. This table shows the average annual agricultural commodity index prices in dollars along with average annual
   reported total assets, free cash flow and capital expenditures in millions of dollars for both the hedging (as indicated by H)
   and the non-hedging (as indicated by NH) companies in our sample. The figures covering the total sample of the 53 firms are
   indicated by (all).

                                                           - 21 -
Interestingly, the total assets are substantially higher for the hedging companies within our
sample than for the non-hedging companies. However, since the sample includes all publicly
listed American companies registered under the SIC code 514 and 515 in the Zephyr database,
these findings should not be the result of data mining. Because total assets differ so significantly,
comparing free cash flows and capital expenditure for hedging companies and non-hedging
companies is not relevant on a stand-alone basis. These financial figures should instead be
compared in relation to the size of the companies. Table VIb summarizes annual free cash flow
and capital expenditure scaled by lagged assets in order to make comparable the free cash flows
and capital expenditures.

Also worthy to point out is that hedging companies in 2008 on average invested more than they
generated in funds internally. Hence they needed to access other sources than internal funds to
finance their investments.

 Table VIb

                FCF    FCF    FCF                            Capex-to-Capex-to-Capex-to-
        Commod before   before   before                          FCF    FCF    FCF
          ity price  capex-to- capex-to- capex-to- Capex-to-Capex-to-Capex-to-before    before    before
           (annual   assets    assets    assets    assets    assets    assets    capex    capex    capex
 Year     average) (H)      (NH)    (all)     (H)      (NH)    (all)     (H)      (NH)    (all)
 2000 165,2 5,3% 12,6% 7,1% 3,9% 6,8% 4,6% 73,0% 53,5% 64,4%
 2001 160,4 5,5% 12,2% 7,2% 3,2% 7,3% 4,3% 58,4% 60,4% 59,2%
 2002 162,7 7,0% 12,7% 8,5% 3,1% 6,7% 4,0% 44,3% 52,6% 47,5%
 2003 179,5 5,6% 11,7% 7,3% 3,0% 6,7% 4,0% 52,4% 57,5% 54,6%
 2004 192,8 6,0% 11,7% 7,6% 3,0% 5,8% 3,8% 50,2% 50,2% 50,2%
 2005 188,2 7,1% 11,7% 8,5% 3,6% 5,5% 4,2% 51,1% 46,8% 49,2%
 2006 212,1 5,6% 10,9% 7,2% 3,7% 6,5% 4,5% 64,9% 59,7% 62,5%
 2007 259,8 4,4% 9,2% 5,8% 3,8% 6,8% 4,6% 85,7% 73,0% 79,8%
 2008 317,7 3,8% 9,8% 5,6% 4,2% 6,5% 4,9% 109,7% 65,9% 86,5%
 2009 260,5 7,9% 10,5% 8,7% 4,0% 5,9% 4,6% 50,6% 55,9% 52,5%
  Table VIb. This table shows lagged assets-scaled free cash flow before capital expenditures and lagged assets-scaled capital
   expenditures for the years 2000-2009. The last three columns show how much of the internally generated free cash flow
   before capital expenditures that is used for capital expenditures. The year 2008 for hedging companies is remarkably high in
  the sense that hedging companies invested more than they generated internally.

As can be seen in table VIb, hedging companies appear to have a constantly lower cash flow-to-
assets ratio along with a slightly lower capital expenditure-to-assets ratio. The average hedging
firm consequently invests less than the average non-hedging firm. Also, hedging companies seem
to have substantially lower free cash flows before capital expenditures scaled by lagged assets.

                                                           - 22 -
            iii. Method and Results

Assuming that available investment projects are a non-stochastic process, non-hedging
companies seem to have an advantage in creating value by investing in profitable projects
(expressed by capital expenditures) and also in generating cheap funds as these companies do
have higher free cash flow before capital expenditures. However, only comparing annual averages
is not relevant without comparing standard deviations for the whole sample. Table VIc shows the
standard deviations of free cash flow before capital expenditures and capital expenditures, both
scaled by total assets on an annual basis for the whole sample of 53 firms.

               Table Vc
                  Table VIc

                                                                    FCF before
                                   FCF before Capex-to-   Capex-to-   capex-to-   Capex-to-
                       Capex-to-   capex-to-   FCF before Assets      assets       FCF before
              Year  Assets (H)  assets (H)  capex (H)  (NH)      (NH)      capex (NH)
             2004 0% 4% 2% 3% 12% 149%
             2005 0% 4% 1% 5% 10% 84%
             2006 0% 4% 2% 6% 9% 454%
             2007 0% 4% 1% 4% 9% 1156%
             2008 0% 9% 0% 5% 9% 1075%
             2009 3% 6% 18% 4% 7% 226%
                  Table VIc. This table shows standard deviations for the metrics as indicated by the
                   headlines. As can be seen, all averaged items can be reliably compared to each other
                      except for the capex-to-FCF before capex as that measure is characterized by a too high
                    standard deviation among firms.

As can be seen, the standard deviation is on a fairly low level for all measures except for the
capital expenditure to free cash flow before capital expenditure. Therefore, only averages for
capital expenditure to assets and free cash flow to assets are comparable among hedging and non-
hedging companies.

Because non-hedging companies have higher free cash flow before capital expenditure and higher
capital expenditures for all years covered, non-hedging companies appear to have an advantage in
creating firm value by investing more and investing using cheaper funds. This evidence thus
points towards the fact that non-hedging companies could be more valuable. However, in order
to determine whether this higher asset-scaled free cash flow before capital expenditure and the
capital expenditures per se depends on hedging or not, their linear relationship to hedging has to
be assessed using an OLS regression.

                                                           - 23 -
The linear dependency of hedging on the free cash flow before capital expenditures is derived via
a cross-sectional regression using lagged asset-scaled free cash flow before capital expenditure as
dependent variable and inflation-adjusted commodity price, lagged Tobin’s Q and a hedging
dummy variable as independent variables. Tobin’s Q is used as a proxy for firm market value and
will be explained closer in the next section. As previously discussed, we have here assumed that
available investment projects can be explained as a non-stochastic process.

The regression equation is thus;

 𝐹𝐶𝐹 𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥                                                                             ′
                     = 𝛼𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽1 × 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑙𝑛 𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑛 𝑠𝑄𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽3 × 𝑕𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖,𝑡
    𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑡−1
                       + 𝛽4 × 𝑙𝑛 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡

Since heteroskedasticity could be present in our sample we choose to perform a least squared
regression using robust standard errors and adjusting for cluster effects. For this regression an R-
squared value of only 4.05% is reached. The only control variables that generate statistically
significant results are the natural logarithm of lagged Tobin’s Q and lagged assets, which means
that no conclusions in favour of our hypothesis can be made. (Appendix, table VI.d) Because of
the low R-squared value we are reluctant to draw any conclusions at all, even though it appears
that the free cash flow generated internally that can be used to cost-efficiently fund available
investment projects are completely independent of both the prevailing inflation adjusted
commodity price and of the company’s hedging. Since it seems that the free cash flow generated
by the company in large is unaffected by the commodity input price exposure in terms of the
insignificant coefficient on both the commodity price per se and the hedging dummy, employing
hedges might not be a valuable decision for firms in this industry. The internally generated cash
flow therefore appears to be dependent on other factors. Presumably the top-line income
statement items, such as the sales figure which is not assessed in this study, have a greater impact
on the cash flow generated than the costs of the goods sold (i.e. the commodity input prices)
have.

Next, we assess the effects of hedging on capital expenditures with the following OLS regression;

      𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥                                                                                               ′
                = 𝛼𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽1 × 𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑙𝑛 𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑛 𝑠𝑄𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽3 × 𝑕𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽4
 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑡−1
                                                                                                                                 𝐹𝐶𝐹 𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥𝑖,𝑡
                    × 𝑙𝑛 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽5 × 𝑙𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑦𝑜𝑢𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽6 × 𝑙𝑛                      + 𝛽7
                                                                                                                                             𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,𝑡−1
                                                 𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1
                      × 𝑙𝑛         ′              + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡
                                                  𝑆𝑕𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑕𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,𝑡−1

                                                           - 24 -
Also in this regression heteroskedasticity could be present meaning it is desirable to perform an
OLS regression using robust standard errors and adjusting for cluster effects. For this regression
an R-squared value of 67.1% is reached that yields significance on the inflation adjusted
commodity price, the hedging dummy and the lagged assets-scaled cash flow before capital
expenditures.

In line with theory is the negative and significant (on a 5.6% level) coefficient on the inflation-
adjusted commodity price that equals a value of -0.0006982. Firms thus appear to adjust their
capital expenditures after the commodity price. However, what might be surprising are the
negative coefficients on the hedging dummy and on the cash flow to assets variable. According to
the outcomes of this regression hedging companies tend to invest less than non-hedging
companies do. What is more astonishing is the strongly negative coefficient on the cash flow to
assets control variable that measures -1.70 and is significant on a 0.3% level. (Please see appendix,
table VI.e, for further details.) This implies that companies invest distinctly less the more cash
flow they have available which in relation to theory is rather counterintuitive. However, as the
control variables used yield a rather high R-squared value and as we adjust for heteroskedasticity
and cluster effects, the results are nonetheless valid. There must thus be a logical explanation.
Because of the findings from the previous OLS regression, where we found the cash flows’
exposures to the commodity price and to the hedging dummy, to both be insignificant, the only
logical explanation to the decreases in capital expenditure levels when the commodity prices
increase must be that available profitable investment projects on average coincide with low
commodity prices. Available investment projects are thus a stochastic process as opposed to
being a non-stochastic process as assumed initially. The stochastic nature of the availability of
profitable investment projects could as well explain the slightly negative coefficient on the
hedging dummy. Hedging companies might simply face less profitable investment opportunities
or at least decide to invest less if they judge the investment projects to be less profitable than
non-hedging companies do. The difference in investment levels could thus be explained by a risk-
averse behaviour of hedging companies- perfectly in line with the risk averseness inherent in the
decision to hedge instead of liquidity constraints. However, to the negative coefficient on the
cash flow variable we find no rational explanation and therefore exclude a potential existence of
applicable theories to such explanations from the scope of this bachelor thesis.

                                                           - 25 -
Moreover, the fact that hedging companies seem to invest less does not necessarily imply that
hedging companies are less valuable. It is possible that the decision to not invest is rewarding if
the available investment projects on average are unprofitable. If so, investors are better off if
management decides to not invest and instead use the funds available for dividends or save the
funds for future more profitable projects that might arise. This reasoning is increasingly credible
when ascertaining that the most recent financial crisis is included in our time period. On the
other hand, as can be seen in table VIa, hedging companies invest less than non-hedging
companies during all years included in the study, which logically cannot be a value-maximizing
strategy. This however, assumes that all companies can hedge to the extent they wish, i.e. that
companies face no constraints when it comes to hedging.

Because profitable investment projects are a stochastic process, and the particular stochastic
process faced by each firm therefore differs among firms, it is plausible to assume that each
company decides to hedge (or not to) to the extent that maximizes the value. If for example, as
indicated by the regression above, profitable investment projects for company A coincide with
low commodity prices, then it can be assumed that company A decides not to hedge in order to
benefit from the upside risk of not hedging, i.e. enjoying a period of lower input prices than
hedgers would do if commodity prices were to decrease. Similarly, company B would choose to
hedge if management knew or predicted that profitable investment projects will be present when
commodity input prices are high. All companies are thus assumed to be able to hedge how much
or how little as they judge to be relevant. However, as discoursed in Geczy, Minton and Schrand
(1996), small companies, as opposed to large companies, tend to get excluded from the hedging
market because of their assumed size-related liquidity constraints and increased costs associated
with undertaking hedging arrangements. If this is true for our sample, the above reasoning when
it comes to risk-averseness of the companies and the decisions to hedge or not becomes slightly
hirpling, though still might hold true. This can be tested via the below cross-sectional regression;

                             𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥
                            = 𝛼𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽1 × 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑕𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝑖,𝑡 + 𝛽3 × 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝑖,𝑡
                𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑡−1
                                     × 𝑛𝑜𝑛𝑕𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 𝑖,𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖,𝑡

The “small dummy” is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the size of the company, i.e.
the book value of total assets of a certain company is higher than the median of all the firms’
book value of assets which measure 14,102 millions of dollars, and takes on the value 0 else wise.
The variable called “nonhedging dummy” takes on the value 1 if the company is a non-hedging
company and the value 0 if it is a hedging company. The interaction variable is the product of the

                                                           - 26 -
above discussed variables. If the findings of Gezcy et al holds true for our sample, i.e. that there
are companies that are unable to get access to the hedging market and consequently invest less
than they desire, the interaction variable should yield a negative coefficient.

When regressing the above regression equation, adjusting for heteroskedastic standard errors and
cluster effects, we find a negative coefficient (-0.1086682) on the interaction variable that is
significant on a 7% level. This means that there are companies that invest less than they desire
because they are excluded from the hedging market. This invalidates the assumption that
companies invest as much as they want with respect to available profitable investment projects.
However, as our findings indicate that hedging companies invested less during our sample period
the fact that there are small firms that desire to hedge in order to increase their capital
expenditures, i.e. that these firms currently are categorized as non-hedging companies and invests
less than they desire to, does not have any severe implications for our results. It is still true that
among our sample companies, hedging companies invested less and the commodity price did not
affect the internal cash flows in any direction.

                                                           - 27 -
   VII. DOES HEDGING AFFECT FIRM VALUE?

            i. Empirical models

As previously mentioned, one of the motives behind hedging suggests that hedging tools are used
by managers to maximize shareholder value, i.e. to maximize firm value. There are several
previous studies made with the main objective to examine the link between hedging and firm
value, even though the approach to the question formulation differs between studies and authors.
To use derivatives to hedge against the exchange rate risk exposure is for instance a value-
increasing strategy (Allayannis and Ofek, 2000). As we have been able to ascertain above, the free
cash flow is, in our sample, insignificantly related to a hedging dummy, implying that cash flows
are independent of whether firms hedge or not and instead fluctuates depending on other factors.
In addition, we saw a higher capital expenditure for the non-hedging firms as explained in the
section above. Still we find it interesting to carry out further regressions to address the relation
between hedging activities and firm value. We assumed investment opportunities to be a
stochastic process and further highlights a potential situation where there have been a lack of
interesting projects that corresponds to a positive net present value during the recent years. Thus,
it might have been a smart and conscious move when a firm, with a predicted cash flow based on
other factors than hedging contracts etc., decides to not engage in new projects. Our aim to
investigate the firm market value is encouraged by these previous findings since hedging firms
might have been taking on higher firm values by adopting a wise investment strategy during the
recent financial crisis.

To address this question one first need to decide how to define firm value. The ratio of market
value of the enterprise to replacement cost of assets is known as a proxy for the market value of a
firm. (Allayannis and Weston, 2001) The ratio is known as ”Tobin’s Q” after its originator James
Tobin who claimed that if asset prices are set correctly in the capital market, the combined
market value of all firms on the stock market should equal their replacement costs (Tobin, 1969).
Tobin’s Q ratio per each firm and year is calculated as per;

                             ′               𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑛𝑒𝑡 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡
                      𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑛 𝑠 𝑄 =                         ′
                                      𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑕𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑕𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠 𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦 + 𝑛𝑒𝑡 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡

                                                           - 28 -
The utilization of Tobin’s Q as a proxy for firm market value is common within literature where
the impact of hedging on firm value is studied as it measures relative firm value and thus can be
compared between firms of differing size. We refer to both Allayannis and Weston (2001) and
Chang, Hong and Kuan (2005). To obtain a reliable indication of how hedging activities affect
firm value it is of great importance to isolate the influence that other variables might have on the
Tobin’s Q. We therefore add variables that might have an impact on firm value, namely; a) the
yearly opening balance of leverage, computed as net debt divided by shareholder’s equity, which
is assumed to be related to the firm’s value, b) Return on assets, computed by dividing net
income (at time t) with total assets (opening balance, t-1) and is used as a measure for
profitability. The assumption behind the utilization of this variable is that if hedging generates
higher profits, such firms will also experience higher values of Tobin’s Q, c) Investment growth
is the third variable taken into account when studying firm value under the assumption that
investment opportunities are higher for firms that use hedging tools (Froot et al, 1993). It is
proxied as capital expenditures (“capex”) divided by free cash flow; d) Dividend payout policy, as
firms’ attitude towards paying dividends according to previous research have an impact on
Tobin’s Q. A dividend-paying firm is probably less capital constrained than a non-dividend
paying firm and one can thus expect a dividend-paying firm to have a higher Tobin’s Q.
Dividend payout ratio is taken accounted for by including the dividend payout ratio in the
regression, e) the size of a firm ought to have an impact on its value. Larger firms might find it
more feasible to use hedging tools, which sometimes implies extensive start-up costs. As a proxy
for firm size we use the natural logarithm of total assets because they are assumed to not be
normally distributed as their median and average value differs substantially, f) a dummy variable
as the focus of study is how/if eventual hedging activities against agricultural commodities’ price
fluctuations affect firms’ value. Thus, we use a dummy variable for hedging. (Allayannis and
Weston, 2001)

In addition we expand our research by taking the phenomena reverse causation into
consideration. Companies with high Tobin’s Q might have high investment opportunities, in
particular high free cash flows, and thus strong incentives to hedge. If this is the case, firms with
high market values chose to hedge in a bigger extent than firms with lower market values.
(Allayannis and Weston, 2001) This would thus imply that the Tobin’s Q decides the hedging
strategy and not the reversal that hedging strategies affect the Tobin’s Q. One way to examine
this is to perform a time-series regression with a lagged variable under the assumption that firms
with a high market value in this period engage in a hedging strategy in the next period. To

                                                           - 29 -
perform this one need data on exactly when new hedging contracts signs or increases in hedging
activities takes place, which we do not have had access to. We therefore perform a regression
where the Tobin’s Q is an independent variable and thus the dummy for hedging is the
dependent variable. We expect our results of this extended analysis to be in line with what
Allayannis and Weston (2001) were able to verify, namely that hedging causes firm values to
increase and that there is no reverse causation in this setting.

           ii. Sample

The sample used is the same as for the regressions in part V, that is, 53 U.S. listed companies use
agricultural commodities as ingredients in production. Apart from previous sample processing,
we here keep the 53 companies in one sample and perform a regression where we compare the
effect on Tobin’s Q of hedging activities by introducing a dummy variable (that takes on value 1
if the company hedges, 0 else wise). All variables are constructed per each firm on a yearly basis.
We stretch the timeline back six years and thus include the years from 2004 up and until 2009.
The cross-sectional regression includes 262 observations.

The dependent variable in our regression is the natural logarithm (the natural log value in
parenthesis) of our computed proxy for firm value, Tobin’s Q. We observed a mean value of
Tobin’s Q that equals 3.0643 (0.8607), a standard deviation of 3.4559 (0.6334), minimum value of
0.7549 (-0.2812) and maximum value of 32.6974 (3.4873). See table VII.c in appendix. Since we
obtained a median value of the Tobin’s Q that equals 2.2163 the decision to use to the natural
logarithm of the variable is legitimate. The higher mean value, 3.0643, indicates a skewed
distribution of the variable and to correct for this we address the employment of the natural
logarithm that makes the distribution more symmetric. Theoretically, the Tobin’s Q proxy is in
fact a skewed distributed variable. (Lang and Stulz (1994), Servaes (1996))

The variable leverage has a mean value of 0.0356 and a standard deviation of 17.6696 (min. value
-265.2258 and max. value 102.206). Return on assets (ROA) has a mean value of 0.0762, a
standard deviation that equals 0.0642, the lowest ROA in our sample is 0.0030 and the highest
obtained equals 0.7404. Investment growth’s mean value is 0.6561 and its standard deviation is
25.2382 with minimum value being -238.6364 and maximum value being 312.50. The variable
dividend (payout ratio) has got a mean value in our sample that equals 26.7333 and a standard
deviation of 35.6097. 17 (32.08%) of the 53 companies in the sample don’t pay out dividends at
all during our sample period. Meanwhile the maximum value for this is 336.3636. The size

                                                           - 30 -
measures (the natural log value in parenthesis) on average 6854.929 (7.5821), with standard
deviation being 11461.57 (1.7832), minimum value 40.1173 (3.6918) and maximum value 67993
(11.1272). (We refer to table VII.c in appendix for an overview.)

            iii. Method and Results

We perform the following regression as an OLS cross-sectional regression with 262 observations.

ln(Tobin’s Q)i,t-1 = α + β1 (leverage) i,t-1+ β2 (ROA)i,t+ β3 (growth)i,t + β4 (div)i,t + β5 (hedging)i,t +
β6 (ln(size) i,t-1

ln(Tobin’s Q) i,t-1 = natural logarithm of Tobin’s Q, firm i, time (t-1)
leverage i,t-1 = leverage, firm i, time (t-1)
ROAi,t = return on assets, firm i, time t
growthi,t = investment growth, firm i, time t
divi,t = payout ratio, firm i, time t
hedgingi,t = hedging dummy, firm i, time t
ln(size) i,t-1 = natural logarithm of firm size, firm i, time (t-1)

The regressions yield statistically significant coefficients on the variables for return on assets,
dividend-payments and hedging on a <5% level. In addition, the variable for leverage is
statistically significant on a 10% level. We also find that growth and the logarithm for size are
both statistically insignificant.

The variable of greatest interest for the subsequent analysis is the dummy for hedging, which is
significant below a 1% level. The coefficient is 0.1413 and thus implies an increase in the proxy
for firm value when the hedging-dummy equals 1, holding all other variables fixed. The control
variable in this context that has the biggest impact on the dependent variable is return on assets
with a coefficient of 6.9919. Thus, return on assets, i.e. profitability, is highly and significant
related to firms’ market value. Leverage, computed to control for the firms’ capital structures, has
a weak negative impact on the firms’ market values as the coefficient is -0.0007. The factor
containing the payout ratio, dividends, has a positive but small impact on Tobin’s Q with a

                                                                 2
coefficient that equals 0.0019. The reached R -value is 0.4128. We can thus ascertain that there is
a prevailing positive relationship between the implementation of hedging activities within the
firms in our sample and their corresponding proxies for market firm value. See appendix, table
VII.a for an overview of these findings.

                                                           - 31 -
In addition we perform the following regression to test for reverse causation.

(hedging)i,t = α + β1 (leverage) i,t-1 + β2 (ln(size) i,t-1 + β3 ln(Tobin’s Q)i,t-1

We find that the size variable is statistically significant at 0% and have a positive impact (β2 equals
0.1194) on the hedging dummy. (Further results from this regression are presented in appendix,
table VII.b.) This should be interpreted as follows: an increase in ln(size), i.e. an increase in the
size of the firm, makes it more likely that the firm undertakes hedging activities. I.e. size seems to
have an impact on hedging decisions, making it more likely that large firms use hedging tools.
This is line with theory that, as mentioned earlier, states how fixed costs associated with the
entering phase of hedging contracts could make it more difficult for smaller firms to afford to
employ derivative hedging strategies (Allayannis and Weston 2001). The variables leverage and
the natural logarithm of Tobin’s Q is though statistically insignificant at a significance level of
10%, which would indicate that there is no such reverse causation influencing the relationship
between hedging and firm market value. That is, based on our sample, we cannot for sure assert
that firms with a higher market value possess a greater probability of undertaking hedging
activities. We therefore keep our conclusions stated based on our first regression where the proxy
for firm market value is used as the dependent variable. We can walk out on this section with the
conclusion that hedging activities influence the firms’, in our sample, market values in a positive
and statistically significant way. In addition, as it appears in section VI (table VI.d) the cash flow
is significantly and positively related to the natural logarithm of Tobin’s Q. This implies that as
the Tobin’s Q for a firm increases so does the cash flow, holding other factors fixed. As stated in
the last two regressions; hedging affects Tobin’s Q in a positive way, i.e. hedging could lead to
higher cash flows. This is though a weak conclusion as we have not been able to prove it
technically. Another dimension of how to explain a firm’s market value is to consider the
common view on hedging strategies on the market. Hedging companies might be valued at a
higher level due to irrationalism and risk-aversion among investors that hence prefer hedging
companies before non-hedging companies, based on hedging tools’ capacity to smooth earnings
and reduce unfeasible downturns.

                                                           - 32 -
   VIII. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

The findings of the empirical studies carried out in this paper indicate that hedging increases firm
value and smoothes stock price movements. However, when it comes to the impact of hedging,
we find a negative relationship between hedging and investment levels for our sample period.
The relationship between hedging and cash flows available for such value-enhancing activities as
investment projects were found to be insignificant for our sample. The explanations for the
puzzling results when it comes to the coefficient and significance on independent variables on
the cash flow and investment levels are many.

First of all, we only study the linear relationship between hedging and companies’ cash flows and
investment levels and the linear relationship between stock price returns and commodity prices,
respectively. There might also be a non-linear relationship between the variables that describes
the exposures more closely. For instance, Chang, Hong and Kuan (2005), find a significant non-
linear relationship between Canadian Oil companies’ stock prices and oil prices.

Moreover, the decision to assess the exposure of the stock price to a commodity index might
have been a less beneficial trade-off between having a sample consisting of fewer firms that
hedge their exposure to the very same commodity and having a large sample of 53 firms like we
do, and measure their exposure to a composite index. Since the firms’ respective ingredient
commodity is included in the composite index, we do not regard this probable bias to be of
significant importance.

Our sample period (2004-2009) is fairly short when one takes into account that our sample
period includes the most severe recession since the Great Depression during the 1930’s. Since the
latest recession has been included and not adjusted for, the bias induced by this massive
downturn in the world economy can be of considerable importance. Furthermore, in the
regressions where annual data is used, using low-frequency data for such short period of time
could be the reason for some of the counterintuitive and contradictive results, even though we
prioritize including only recent data in our sample period in order to make the results up to date.

Furthermore, when it comes to identifying the companies as hedging or non-hedging and thus
creating two sub-samples, we might to an extent have misidentified some companies as non-
hedgers because they do not hedge using derivatives. For instance, we do not take into account if
companies hedge by using storage to any extent. Physical reserves in commodities can be
regarded as a type of hedge. In addition, this type of hedging has proven to lead to a higher
Tobin’s Q in some cases (Chang, Hong and Kuan, 2005). Also, the fact that the quantity hedged

                                                           - 33 -
is completely overlooked and disregarded in our study may have had impacts on the results. As
the quantity hedged almost never is reported in detail in the 10-K reports, such an evaluation
would need accessing information not available for the average investor.

In general, all regressions performed could possibly be extended with more independent variables
in order to minimize the omitted variables bias thus increase the explanatory power in terms of
the R-squared values. For example, an extended model for evaluating the impact of hedging on
Tobin’s Q could be used to get even more reliable results. There are multiple factors that are said
to affect firm market value and thus could be used as control variables. For instance, one could
expand the research and cover firms active in different industries (i.e. not only cover agricultural
commodities) to be able to control for industry effects. Allayannis and Weston (2001) and Lang
and Stulz (1994) suggest that if the hedging firms are active in an industry that for different
reasons enjoys a high Tobin’s Q in general, the firms’ values will not be high because of the
hedging but because of industry specific circumstances. In this study we have only regarded firms
operating in the same industry. Thus we have not been able to control for industry effects.
Analogically, a control variable for geographic diversification could be included since theories
suggest that it increases value (Coase, 1937 and Dunning, 1973).

For basically all statistical tests of this study, the reversed causality, i.e. that the relationship
between cause and effect is reversed has to be taken into account. That means that the effect
might in some of the cases be preceded by the cause. E.g., hedging companies might not be more
valuable in terms of higher Tobin’s Q than non-hedging companies. Rather, it could be the other
way around, i.e. that companies that have higher Tobin’s Q and thus have a higher relative value,
hedges because of their higher value. We address this issue by testing for reversed causality when
it comes to Tobin’s Q and we are able to ascertain an absence of it, even though the same
question remains and applies to the cash flow and capital expenditures’ cross sectional
regressions.

What is important to bear in mind when reviewing the results from our study is that they are
based on historical data and thus the certain circumstances that prevailed during our sample
period. That might imply that the findings are not applicable on any other period of time, neither
in the future or in the past. In spite of these possible short-comings of our study, we are certain
that our results at least indicate that a high relative firm value is related to the employment of
agricultural commodity hedging derivatives. Because we find no relationship between hedging
and investment levels we decide to explain the augmented relative firm value in terms of higher
Tobin’s Q for companies that hedge by pleading investors irrational. With reference to our

                                                           - 34 -
results, investors appear to irrationally value hedging companies higher than they value non-
hedging companies.

   IX. CONCLUSION

We have been able to ascertain how producing firms (buyers of agricultural commodities that are
listed on the U.S. stock exchanges) using hedging tools to protect them from their exposure to
price fluctuations of agricultural commodities smooth their stock price and increase their firm
market value. As we have been unable to identify any significant relationship between hedging
and the value-increasing activities of investing in profitable investment projects, we explain the
higher value of companies that do hedge by pleading investors risk averse and thus irrational in
attaching a higher value to hedging companies despite the fact that there are no associated higher
levels of neither cash flows or capital expenditures in hedging companies. Data on hedging
behaviour among firms together with data on relevant commodity prices can thus be used in
arbitrage pricing.

   X. SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH

As we conclude that hedging firms, in accordance with hedging theory, are less sensitive to
fluctuations in the underlying commodity price and that hedging firms, perhaps because of this,
are more valuable than non-hedging firms without being able to find any other reason for this
than risk aversion among investors we believe that there are yet many questions unanswered. For
example, an interesting research could be explaining in detail how the cash flows were affected by
the changes in commodity prices by taking into account all other income statement items that
affect cash flows. Also, a more qualitative approach to this field of research could be taken on.
For instance, qualitatively taking into account the risk averseness could yield apprehensive
conclusions.

Moreover, as an augmented valuation of hedging companies is found in this study, an aspect
completely overlooked in this piece of research that could further be assessed is the utilization of
natural hedges in terms of keeping stock and the negotiation with suppliers. Also the quantity
hedged could here be explored in order to gain further insights of the implications of hedging as
a means to reduce risk and make stock holders better off.

                                                           - 35 -
   XI. REFERENCES

Allayannis, G., and E., Ofek (2000), “Exchange-Rate Exposure, Hedging, and the Use of Foreign
Currency Derivatives”. Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Apr. 2001),
pp. 273-296

Allayannis, George and James P. Weston (2001), “The use of foreign currency derivatives and
firm market value". Review of Financial Studies 14, 243-276.

Berk, J., and P. DeMarzo, (2007), “Corporate Finance”. Pearson Addison Wesley, Pearson
International Ed., USA

Carter, David A., Daniel A. Rogers, and Betty J. Simkins (2003), “Does hedging affect firm value?
Evidence from the US airline industry”. Financial Management, Vol 35, No 1 (Spring 2006), pp.
53-86.

Chang, D., Hong, G., and Kuan, X. (2005), “The Impact of Hedging on Stock Return and Firm
Value: New Evidence from Canadian Oil and Gas Companies”. The Department of Economics
and Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, (Aug. 2005).

Coase, R. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm”. Economica, Vol. 4, No. 16 (Nov. 1937), pp. 386-405

Damodaran, A., (2009), “Ups and Downs: Valuing Cyclical and Commodity Companies”. Stern
School of Business, New York University, Sept. 2009.

DeMarzo, P., and D. Duffie (1995), “Corporate incentives for hedging accounting”. Review of
Financial Studies 95 (1995) pp. 743-771.

Dunning, J. (1973), “The Determinants of International Product”. Oxford Economic Papers,
Vol. 25 (1973), pp. 289-336

Froot, K., D. Scharfstein, and J. Stein (1993), "Risk Management: Coordinating Investment and
Financing Policies," Journal of Finance 48, 1629-1658

Gagnon, Louis, Gregory J. Lypny, and Thomas H. McCurdy (1998), “Hedging foreign currency
portfolio.” Journal of Empirical Finance 5, 197-220.

Geczy, C. C., Minton, B. A. and Schrand, C. M. (1996), “Why Firms Use Currency Derivatives”.
WP No. 96-4.

Jin, Y., and P. Jorion (2005), “Firm value and hedging: Evidence from U.S oil and gas
producers”. The journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Jorion, Philippe (1990), “The Exchange-Rate Exposure of U.S. Multinationals”. The Journal of
Business, Vol. 63, No. 3 (Jul. 1990), pp. 331-345.

King, C., R., and B., A. Williams, (2003) “To Hedge or Not to Hedge, that is the question for
E&P Companies”. Houston Business Journal, Friday June 27, 2003

                                                           - 36 -
Lang, L., and R. Stulz (1994), “Tobin’s Q, Corporate Diversification and Firm Performance”.
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102, No. 6 (Dec. 1994), pp. 1248-80

Peck, Anne E. (1975), “Hedging and Income Stability: Concepts, Implications, and an Example”.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 57, No. 3 (Aug. 1975), pp. 410-419.

Servaes, H., (1996), “The Value of Diversification During the Conglomerate Merger Wave”.
Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 4 (Sept. 1996), pp. 1201-25

Smith, Clifford W., and Rene, Stulz (1985), The determinants of firms' hedging policies, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 391-405.

Sooran, C., “What is hedging? Why do companies hedge?”. Victory Risk Management Consulting
Inc. Published at: http://www.finpipe.com/hedge.htm

Thompson, Stanley, R., and Bond, Gary, E. (1987), “Offshore Commodity Hedging under
Floating Exchange Rates”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 69, No. 1 (Feb.
1987), pp. 46-55.

Tobin, J., (1969), “A general equilibrium approach to monetary policy”. Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, No. 1, (1969), pp. 15-29

Tufano, Peter (1996), “Who manages risk? An empirical examination of risk management
practices in the gold mining industry”. Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 4, (Sept. 1996), pp. 1097-
1137.

Tufano, Peter (1998), “The determinants of stock price exposure: Financial engineering and the
gold mining industry”. The journal of finance, Vol 53, No 3 (June 1998), pp. 1015-1052.

                                                           - 37 -
   XII. APPENDICES

i. Abstract from the year 2006 10-K filings of Pilgrim’s Pride Corp

“Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risks

       Market Risk. Our principal market risks are exposure to changes in broiler and commodity prices and interest rates on borrowings.
Although we have international sales and related accounts receivable from foreign customers, there is no foreign currency exchange risk as all sales
are denominated in U.S. dollars.

        Commodities Risk. We are a purchaser of certain agricultural commodities used for the manufacture of poultry feeds. We use commodity
futures and options for economic hedging purposes to reduce the effect of changing commodity prices. In addition, we enter into forward
purchase contracts to ensure a sufficient supply of our feed ingredient inventories. Feed ingredient futures and option contracts, primarily corn
and soybean meal, are accounted for at fair value. Changes in fair value of these commodity futures and options are recorded as a component of
product cost in the consolidated statements of operations. As of September 30, 2006, the notional amounts and fair value of our outstanding
commodity futures and options positions were not material.

        Feed ingredient forward purchase commitments for corn and soybean meal in the ordinary course of business were $68.8 million at
September 30, 2006. These commitments include both priced and unpriced contracts. Unpriced feed ingredient commitments are valued at
market for the month of delivery as of September 30, 2006.

        Based on estimated annual feed usage, a 10% increase in the weighted average cost of feed ingredients would increase our annualized cost
of sales by an estimated $60 million to $70 million. The sensitivity analysis presented above is the measure of margin reduction resulting from a
hypothetical increase in market prices related to corn and soybean meal. Sensitivity analyses do not consider the actions management may take to
mitigate exposure to changes, nor do they consider the effects that such hypothetical adverse changes may have on overall economic activity. In
addition, actual changes in market prices may differ from hypothetical changes.

        Interest Rate Risk. We have exposure to changes in interest rates on certain debt obligations. The interest rates on our amended senior
credit facilities fluctuate based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). Assuming the $250.0 million revolver was fully drawn, a 1%
change in LIBOR would increase annual interest expense by approximately $2.5 million.”

                                                           - 38 -
ii. Tables

 Table Va
  y=sample average return β (coef.) Std. Err. (robust) t-stat P> | t |
 rf (risk-free rate) 0.9168024 0.0586698 15.63 0.000
 market excess ret. 0.8857618 0.0645267 13.73 0.000
 commodity index ret. -0.0988557 0.0430219 -2.3 0.025
 _cons 0.0005603 0.0001141 4.91 0.000
 R-squared: 0.8180
 No obs: 59

 Table Vb
   y=hedging firms' ave ret β (coef.) Std. Err. (robust) t-stat P> | t |
 rf (risk-free rate) 0.9481932 0.0527697 17.97 0.000
 market excess ret. 0.9394502 0.0514214 18.27 0.000
 commodity index ret. -0.0299996 0.0504591 -0.59 0.554
 _cons 0.0005408 0.0001217 4.44 0.000
 R-squared: 0.8178
 No obs: 59

 Table Vc
  y=non-hedging firms' ave
              ret β (coef.) Std. Err. (robust) t-stat P> | t |
 rf (risk-free rate) 0.8854115 0.0907574 9.76 0.000
 market excess ret. 0.8320733 0.0964081 8.63 0.000
 commodity index ret. -0.1677117 0.0546992 -3.07 0.003
 _cons 0.0005798 0.0001536 3.78 0.000
 R-squared: 0.6928
 No obs: 59

 Table Vd
      Summarize Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
 date 60 200504 201003
 rf (risk-free rate) 59 -0.0000622 0.0038805 -0.0150421 0.0117003
 rm (market return) 60 0.0001044 0.0021438 -0.0070431 0.0044399
 commodity index ret. 60 0.0003787 0.0026163 -0.0068595 0.0061333
 hedging firms' ave ret 60 0.0006556 0.0022438 -0.0065667 0.005239
 non-hedging firms' ave
 ret 60 0.0006432 0.0021607 -0.0053304 0.0068016
 whole sample ave ret 60 0.0006494 0.0021054 0.0051558 0.0059938
 market excess rer. 59 0.0001257 0.0042895 -0.0154448 0.0119868

                                                           - 39 -
 Table Ve
 Hedging      β (com index      Non-hedging     β (com index
 firm:           ret.)                firm:               ret.)
            1 0.126 1 -0.248
            2 0.694** 2 0.361
            3 -0.0756 3 -0.284
            4 -0.0237 4 -0.352
            5 -0.0807 5 -0.19
            6 0.318 6 -0.0186
            7 -0.334 7 -0.379
             8 -0.23 8 -0.337*
             9 -0.404** 9 -0.327
           10 -0.389 10 -0.194
           11 0.01 11 -0.0753
           12 0.138 12 -0.391*
           13 -0.0616 13 -0.142
           14 -0.0579 14 -0.595***
           15 0.0683 15 -0.0716
           16 0.386* 16 0.0199
          17 1.044 17 0.144
            18 -0.5** 18 -0.2
           19 -0.261 19 -0.0777
          20 0.227 20 0.227
           21 -0.215 21 -0.719*
           22 0.469 22 -0.041
           23 -0.163 23 -0.243
           24 -0.391* 24 0.007
          25 0.0541 25 0.492
 Average: 0.013916 26 -0.0844
                                            27 0.195
                                                  28 -0.733*
                                  Average: -0.15203

*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

                                                           - 40 -
Table VI.d
                                                    Std. Err.
 y=cash flow to assets β (coef.)        (robust) t-stat P> | t |
infl. adj. commodity
price -0.00000736 0.0002818 -0.03 0.980
ln(Tobin's Q) 0.0548333 0.0184155 2.98 0.031
hedging -0.0127352 0.0146982 -0.87 0.426
ln(assets) 0.0238222 0.0112125 2.12 0.087
_cons -0.2536481 0.153975 -1.65 0.160
R-squared: 0.0405
No obs: 258

Table VI.e
                                                    Std. Err.
   y=capex to assets β (coef.)        (robust) t-stat P> | t |
infl. adj. commodity
price -0.0006982 0.0002815 -2.48 0.056
ln(Tobin's Q) -0.0134423 0.0431705 -0.31 0.768
hedging -0.0631836 0.0225669 -2.8 0.038
ln(assets) -0.0307987 0.0226403 -1.36 0.232
div payout ratio 0.1779548 0.1387139 1.28 0.256
cash flow to assets -1.696656 0.3091963 -5.49 0.003
leverage -0.0001796 0.0003049 -0.59 0.581
_cons 0.4538411 0.2610259 1.74 0.143
R-squared: 0.6711
No obs: 258

Table VI.f
                                                    Std. Err.
   y=capex to assets β (coef.)        (robust) t-stat P> | t |
small(dummy) -0.0065184 0.0015817 -4.12 0.009
nonhedging(dummy) 0.1345185 0.0384449 3.5 0.017
small*nonhedging -0.1086682 0.0473725 -2.29 0.070
_cons 0.0512099 0.0014148 36.19 0.000
R-squared: 0.0143
No obs: 258

                                                          - 41 -
Table VI.g
     Summarize Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
tobin's q 258 3.055827 3.480121 0.7548938 32.69743
assets 258 6858.233 11540.3 40.11729 67993
leverage 258 0.0316904 17.80647 -265.2258 102.206
ROA 258 0.0760001 0.0646498 0.0030312 0.7403795
growth 258 .6555971 25.43383 -238.6364 312.5
div 258 26.62938 35.7842 0 336.3636
hedging 258 .4689922 .5000075 0 1
year 258 2004 2009
infl. adj. commodity
price 258 234.849 45.33834 188.1737 317.7242
free cash flow 258 187.0144 630.6832 -5299 3096
capex 258 295.8453 483.8173 .035684 2446
small(dummy) 258 .120155 .3257747 0 1
nonhedging(dummy) 258 .5310078 .5000075 0 1
cash flow 258 -108.831 620.8419 -7078 1198
ln(assets) 258 7.568764 1.789153 3.691807 11.12716
ln(tobin's q) 258 .8546147 .6356265 -.2811782 3.487297
cash flow to assets 258 -.0341836 .2578585 -2.815423 .4989124
capex to assets 258 .1210147 .5688769 3.97e-06 5.106811
div payout ratio 258 .2662938 .357842 0 3.363636
small*nonhedging 258 .0077519 .0878736 0 1

Table VII.a
   y=ln(Tobin's Q) β (coef.) Std. Err. (robust) t-stat P> | t |
leverage -0.0006594 0.0003267 -2.02 0.100
ROA 6.991938 1.273636 5.49 0.003
growth 0.0059044 0.0047035 1.26 0.265
div 0.0018529 0.0005849 3.17 0.025
hedging 0.141288 0.0271149 5.21 0.003
ln(size) -0.0187749 0.0114171 -1.64 0.161
_cons 0.3507204 0.1667386 2.10 0.089
R-squared: 0.4128
No obs: 262

Table VII.b
 y=hedging(dummy) β (coef.) Std. Err. (robust) t-stat P> | t |
leverage -0.0015383 0.0007728 -1.99 0.103
ln(size) 0.1194267 0.006163 19.38 0.000
ln(Tobin's Q) 0.0049645 0.0158111 0.31 0.766
_cons -0.4402576 0.0505919 -8.7 0.000
R-squared: 0.1863
No obs: 262

                                                          - 42 -
Table VII.c
  Summarize Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
tobin's q 262 3.064272 3.455863 0.7548938 32.69743
size 262 6854.929 11461.57 40.11729 67993
leverage 262 0.0356123 17.66955 -265.2258 102.206
ROA 262 0.0761741 0.0642129 0.0030312 0.7403795
growth 262 0.6560546 25.23819 -238.6364 312.5
div 262 26.73334 35.6097 0 336.3636
hedging 262 0.4694656 0.5000219 0 1
year 262 2004 2009
                                                                            -
ln(Tobin's Q) 262 0.860685 0.6333738 0.2811782 3.487297
ln(size) 262 7.582102 1.783178 3.691807 11.12716

                                                          - 43 -
Table VII.d
            Hedging firm: Non-hedging firm:
         1 Archer Daniels Midland Company 1 Alberto-Culver Company (Old)
         2 Bunge Ltd 2 Amcon Distributing Company
         3 Campbell Soup Company 3 Chiquita Brands International Inc.
         4 Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. 4 Sanderson Farms Inc.
         5 ConAgra Foods Inc. 5 BJ's Wholesale Club Inc.
         6 Corn Products International Inc. 6 Calavo Growers Inc.
         7 Del Monte Foods Company 7 Dean Foods Company
         8 Farmer Bros. Co 8 Dollar Tree Stores Inc.
         9 Flowers Foods Inc. 9 Hain Celestial Group Inc., The
        10 Green Mountain Coffee Inc. 10 Hansen Natural Corporation
        11 HJ Heinz Company 11 Inventure Group Inc., The
        12 Hormel Foods Corporation 12 J & J Snack Foods Corporation
        13 Kellogg Company 13 Kroger Company, The
        14 Kraft Foods Inc. 14 Lance Inc.
        15 Krispy Kreme Doughnuts Inc. 15 McCormick & Company Inc.
        16 Monsanto Company 16 NBTY Inc.
                                                     Nutraceutical International
        17 Origin Agritech Ltd 17 Corporation
        18 Ralcorp Holdings Inc 18 Peet's Coffee & Tea Inc.
        19 Sara Lee Corporation 19 PepsiCo Inc.
        20 Smithfield Foods Inc. 20 Pilgrim's Pride Corporation (old)
        21 Starbucks Coffee Company, The 21 Scotts Company, The
        22 Synutra International Inc. 22 Seaboard Corporation
        23 Tootsie Roll Industries Inc. 23 Seneca Foods Corporation
        24 TreeHouse Foods Inc. 24 Supervalu Inc.
        25 Tyson Foods Inc. 25 Synergy Brands Inc.
                                         26 Sysco Corporation
                                         27 Tasty Baking Comp.
                                          28 United Natural Foods Inc.

                                                          - 44 -