 Stockholm School of Economics

 Bachelor Thesis, spring 2010

The impact of a firm’s payout policy on stock
performance during economic crises

                                             α                      β
                       YINJIE WANG         VIKTOR SUNDBERG

      This paper measures the effect of payout policies on stock returns in times of economic
      turbulence. We go through the most recent financial crisis from 2007 to the end of 2009 as
      well as the dotcom bubble in the end of 2000. We also look at an older crisis that took place
      in the late 1980’s, cumulating with the Black Monday stock market crash in 1987. We
      extract our sample from the S&P 500 Index constituents listed on the US stock market and
      sort these companies into portfolios separated by their payout policy. The portfolios are
      categorized before each crisis and their returns performance are monitored over a five-year
      period. Our research finds evidence for that paying out more cash to shareholders in terms
      of both stock repurchase programs as well as dividends has a clear positive effect on
      returns even during crisis times. We also take into account other variables e.g. size, capital
      expenditure, earnings beta and book to market variables in order to see if they can explain
      the returns performed by each payout portfolio.

Keywords: Payout Policy, Dividends, Stock performance, Financial Crisis

Tutor: Prof. Per Strömberg
Date: May 28, 2010
Location: SIFR, Drottninggatan 89, Stockholm
Discussants: Caroline Garph (21264) and Linn Markryd (21214)

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank our tutor Per Strömberg for his valuable guidance with our
thesis.

α
 21401
β
 21411
1. Introduction
The area of payout policy has been widely researched all around the world. Academics have argued both
for and against the benefits of the payout to shareholders. In the early days academics looked in to the
best form of payout and how companies should allocate payout versus investments decisions. In recent
years most of the research has covered the area of stock return predictability by looking at their respective
dividend yields. We aim to continue this research but with a different approach than many other of the
published papers in this field. Many people have questioned the generous payout policies gaining
shareholders during the recent financial crisis. Critiques have argued that companies that pay out their
cash reserves to shareholders are worse off when the crisis hits them. However, little research has been
done in this field thus leaving these arguments with weak theoretical backgrounds. We therefore aim to
research if it is in fact true that companies that have generous payout policies actually handle times of
economic crisis worse than companies that are more restrictive with their cash reserves.

1.1 Purpose of study
Our purpose of this study is to examine the effect of payout policy on stock returns during financial crisis.
The study on correlation between dividend policy and stock return predictability has been a frequently
discussed subject. However, following the recent financial crisis starting in 2007, a number of institutions
have raised their arguments against a too generous payout policy. The main argument is that firms with
higher dividend yields or repurchase rates are reserving less equity buffer, mostly in terms of cash, in
times of financial distress. We, however, wanted to test this hypothesis in a more academic way to see if
these arguments have any theoretical ground to stand on.

This approach is as far as we have understood it very unique in two ways. Firstly, the crisis perspective of
payout policies has never been tested in this way. Secondly, the whole payout policy has not been
researched as much as the dividend part. As we will show stock repurchases have grown dramatically
over the past years and its importance as a form of payout? Taking into account stock repurchases as a
predictor of returns further makes this study interesting and different from many previous works that only
took into account dividends.

This study will look at three different crisis to see if the conclusions that we draw can be generalized or if
it is in fact true in some crisis and in others not. We will look at the late 1980’s economic crisis that struck
the world. We will also look at the dot com bubble in the late 2000’s. Finally we will look into the most
recent financial crisis from 2007-2009.

We chose to look at the S&P 500 companies in the United States. These companies have very good and
qualitative data for our study. This will make the results more reliable and trustworthy. The purpose of
looking at this data is that since this is the first time this kind of study is performed we wanted to begin
researching the biggest and most common companies in the world and that resulted in our choice of the
S&P 500.

Since many other variables could affect returns in terms of crisis we also want to take into account
different control variables. Many academics have shown that many anomalies exist that affect returns for
example Banz (1981) and Fama and French (1995) such as Book-to-Market values, Size variables and
Market risk premium.

                                         1
1.2 Contribution
The contribution of our study is mainly that we show whether a generous payout policy in the face of an
economic crisis is affecting returns positively or negatively. By doing this our research could show
companies how they could design their payout policy in the most effective way. By taking the stock
repurchases into account as a form of payout we continue the approach to research more into this new
field and to show academics that stock repurchases is very important in today’s payout decisions. Our
study aims to look at the US market and we hope that we, with this unique approach, could inspire other
researchers to mimic this study on the other equity markets in order to see if the results we found can be
more generalized to all financial markets

1.3 Outline
This paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 goes through the previous literature regarding
payout policy and also is trying to show the reader the growing importance of stock repurchase programs
as a form of payout. In this section we also take up the most famous critique against the viewpoint that
returns can be predicted with payout policy. Section 3 explains the data that we have been using for
getting our results in this paper. Moving on to section 4 we explain the methodology of our essay. The
first part goes through how the data was organized and second part looks into the different regressions
models used. The next section, section 5 displays our results from the different data analysis and
regressions. We also try to give some kind of intuition of our results as well in this part of the paper.
Finally in section 6 and 7 we have the conclusion of essay and the main findings summarized as well as
the suggestions for further research in this field.

                                         2
2 Previous Literature
In this section we go through previous studies of payout policy that has been written. A lot of the
previous works examines dividend policy and not whole payout policy with repurchase programs
included.

In the first section we aim to go through the literature regarding dividend yields as predictors of future
stock returns. We also look into studies concerning the different strategies including dividends as a
component for getting returns. The next section gives another perspective looking at the critique against
dividend yields as a predictor of future returns.

Since our study also incorporates stock repurchases as a part of the whole payout policy we give the
reader the explanation of our approach by looking through recent studies showing the growing importance
of stock repurchase programs and the decline in dividend paying companies.

2.1 Dividend yields as a predictor of future stock returns
Many of the earlier works handling payout policy has been about dividends and their effect on future
returns, especially the aggregate dividend ratios as a predictor of returns. Michael O’Higgins popularized
this approach with his book, Beating the Dow (1991), where he argues that well-established companies do
not change their dividend to reflect the external economic conditions but on the other hand the company’s
                                                                                                         1
stock price fluctuates throughout business cycles. Therefore companies with high dividend yields  are
near the bottom of their cycle and therefore should expect their stock price to go up faster than companies
with a low dividend yield. Following this strategy should according to O’Higgins outperform the overall
market. His study was conducted on the Down Jones Industrial Index.

Other researcher have mimicked O’Higgins approach and applied it to other indices for example,
Visscher and Filbeck (2003) where they look at the Canadian stock market and performs an investment
strategy research on the Toronto 35 and the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSE) 300 Composite Index. They
then compared the returns for the 10 highest dividend yielding stocks in the Toronto 35 Index against
their benchmarks. Their findings were also in line with O’Higgins and their top then portfolios
outperformed the benchmark index also after taking into effect taxes and transaction costs. They also
looked at risk adjustments and found that their strategy produced a very high Sharpe ratio that measures
total risk. In conclusion they found this strategy highly successful.

Many studies have as shown above found this positive relationship between dividend yields and returns
but the question why this relationship exists has been debated more intensely between academics. One
theory explains this relationship as an effect of that dividend is taxed higher than capital gains in the US.

1

The yield is the current dividend divided with market capitalization of the beginning of the year. Another ratio is also the dividend price ratio that
is the dividend dividend with the price at the end of the year.

                                         3
Investors therefore should demand higher pre tax returns from companies that pay most of their cash in
dividends, Litzenberger Ramaswamy (1979). This paper finds a strong evidence of this hypothesis. Their
data indicates that for every dollar increase in return from dividends investors will demand an additional
23% in pre tax return.
Another study have looked more into the relation between size and dividends as well as calendar effects is
Keim (1985). First however he sorts companies into portfolios according to their dividend yield. He
constructs these portfolios by taking the largest 20% quintile of dividend payers, and then the next 20%
quintile of dividend payers and so on until he had formed 5 portfolios. He also adds a sixth portfolio that
consists of companies that do not pay any dividend during the period. When looking at the data he first of
all finds that the zero dividend paying portfolio has on average the largest return while dividend paying
portfolios tend to have a higher return as the portfolios dividend is increasing.

The paper then furthers examines this relationship by incorporating size variables into their research.
They see that the lowest dividend paying portfolio have on average larger market capitalization than the
portfolios that pay more dividends. This could indicate that it’s not a dividend effect that creates the
higher returns but it could be the characteristics of the companies paying more returns, for example that
they are smaller. Keim finds that this seems to be the case since 57% of the smallest firms are centered
into the zero dividends and highest dividend portfolio, those portfolios that also had the highest returns.

Keim is then further looking at seasonality effects, more specifically the January effect. He finds a
significant January effect in his sample and excluding observations from January actually takes away the
whole predictability effect of dividend yields on returns.

Morgan Thomas (1997) took this study to the UK market and replicated Keims methodology. The
interesting thing about their study is the tax system in the UK. In the US dividend is taxed higher than
capital gains but in the UK the tax system is the opposite. Tax is higher for capital gains than for
dividends. This is very interesting since you now can test whether divided yield predict returns and if they
do it means that the tax based explanation of this phenomenon actually can be rejected since if the tax
argument holds, investors should demand higher pre tax returns for dividend paying companies.
After having created 5 dividend portfolios and sorted them into quintiles of 20% and also created a non
dividend portfolio they run the same regression as Keim(1985) did. They find the same result that high
yielding stocks create positive risk adjusted returns and low yielding stocks create negative risk adjusted
returns. They also control for the size and seasonality effects documented by Keim(1985) but the result is
still the same. With these results they conclude that the tax based explanation can be rejected when
explaining why dividend yields can predict returns.

2.2 Critique
Many studies have shown this positive relationship between dividend yields and returns, however, two
important papers that have got a lot of attention criticize previous studies empirical methods as well as the
results.

Black Scholes (1974) questions earlier works empirical methods for testing the hypothesis that dividend
yields can predict returns. They argue that earlier works primarily have used cross sectional tests to see
this effect of dividend yields. They see a problem of controlling for other effects than dividends that

                                         4
might explain returns. Further, they argue that cross sectional regressions are hard for getting accurate
estimates of significance from the results obtained. Most importantly they point out the most crucial
weakness of the cross sectional tests performed earlier, that it is very difficult to determine in which
direction the casual relationship found between returns and dividends runs.

Black Scholes (1974) methodology was to change the initial hypothesis that others had used. Previous
works simply wanted to answer the question will increasing dividend increase the price of a companies
share. Black Scholes on the other hand turned the question to will an increase in dividend reduce the
expected return on a company’s shares.

With this new hypothesis they went on with getting around the previous unsatisfactory cross sectional
tests by constructing portfolios of stocks whose expected returns was the quantity they wanted to test. To
avoid bias, they selected stocks for the portfolio at each point in time with only information available and
that time. Finally they selected a portfolio with the smallest variance of return conditioned on the two
previous points in order to get an efficient estimator.

With these improved ways of testing their hypothesis the showed that they could not show any significant
differences between the return on companies with high dividend yields compared to companies with low
dividend yields.

Goetzmann Jorion (1995), also look into the previous studies performed. They take up the famous
problem of survivorship bias in samples used before. Survivorship bias is the problem that at the end of
sample period a lot of companies that have survived the whole period are very strong and successful and
they might distort the results. It might in fact be that their superior business model is creating good returns
and not dividend yields.

Like the Black Scholes (1974) study they also criticize the empirical methods used in many papers. The
correction of standard errors for example are only valid asymptotically and there is a lot of debate
whether you should see asymptotically correct in terms of years, decades or centuries.

They further critize the fact that many studies used data mining as a part of their procedure of getting
results that could prove predictability in returns from dividend yields. This could create a bias in the
results if for example the sample is too small for statistical inferences

Their testing’s made by using long data series from 1871 in both the UK and the US. To cope with the
biases in previous studies they used a method of reporting empirical marginal significance levels with a
fixed dividend procedure and a vector autorgression with stochastic prices and dividends. For both the
U.S. and U.K. data, they found little evidence dividend yields as a predictor of returns

2.3 The growing importance of stock repurchase and the decline in dividend
In recent years we have seen a surge of stock repurchase programs. Bagwell and Shoven (1989) with their
paper found that repurchases between 1977 and 1987 increased with an incredible 824 percent which
means that management is starting to see stock repurchases as a very important form of payout. The

                                         5
article further explains this surge with the fact that corporations are learning and adjusting to the fact that
stock repurchases generate lower-taxed capital gains.

Fama (2001) investigates dividends and comes to the conclusion that they have declined in percent of
firms paying cash dividends from 66,5 in 1978 to 20,8 in 1999. They also recognize the large increase in
share repurchases especially 1980s, but they don’t find the conclusion that it is a substitution between the
two payout methods. Why then are dividends decreasing as a form of payout methods? The article
explains this as mainly caused by the new listings on the US stock markets. For example they find that
one third of newly listed companies in 1973-1977 paid dividends on the new exchange, however in 1999
only 3,7% paid dividends. They explain this by looking at the specific characteristics of the new firms
listed in their sample period and they find that these new firms have the characteristics of firms that often
skip dividends. More companies with small size, low earnings, and a large investment ratio relative to
earnings have been more common on the traded exchanges. These companies in the past have been
known not to pay dividends.
In contradiction with Fama(2001) results Grullon and Michaely(2002) find a substitution effect between
dividends and share repurchases. However, most importantly the rest of their results that they find are
also in line with previous research. For their sample from 1980-2000 they see that repurchase
expenditures grew at an annual rate of 26,1% while dividends grew with a modest 6,8%. That meant that
share repurchases as a percent of total dividends surged from 13,1% in 1980 to 113,1% in 2000. Further
on they also find that the number of repurchasing firms increase from 31% in 1972 to 80% in 2000.

On the basis of many recent papers we think it is very important to recognize these findings and
incorporate these results in our study and look at repurchases as well in order to not miss out on an
important factor.

                                         6
3. Data
This section will describe the selection and adjustments of data used for this paper. We will start by
describing the specific data chosen for our study (S&P 500 firm-specific data) and present the motivation
of our selection along with the data source. Subsequently, we describe the essential data adjustments
applied in order to run the regression tests.

3.1 Data Selection Criteria
Our study aims to test the implied relationship between firms’ payout policies and stock returns for the
overall stock market. Thus, we aim to find a good proxy for the general stock market worldwide. This
proxy market should have well-functioning pricing mechanisms, which implies that it must satisfy the
criteria for liquidity, transparency, and trade volume as well as good access of domestic and international
capital.

We apply a top-down approach and first select the data on country level. Based on the stated criteria and
taking into account the availability of quality data, we decided to narrow our search within U.S. data
because the United States have the world’s largest stock market with good databases of historical price
information.

On the next level, we continue our selection through the major U.S. indices to find our proxy for the
general market. Here, we look for an index which is composed by firms from a wide range of industries
and contains a good number of firms. Historically, the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) Index was
once the most renowned index for U.S. Stocks. However, it contains only 30 companies which is too
small a sample for serious regression tests. In the end, we decided to extract our data from the Standard &
Poor’s 500 Index companies partly for the reason that it would generate far more cross-sectional
observations and better sample data.

3.2 Data Description of S&P 500 Index
The Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P 500) is one of the most commonly used benchmarks for the
overall U.S. stock market. The index is free-float capitalization-weighted of the prices of 500 large-cap
common stocks actively traded in the United State.

Part of the logic behind our decision to use the S&P 500 as our proxy market is associated with the
investor’s perspective. Since the proxy should reflect the general worldwide market, then investors should
also be expected to diversify their risks across nations and asset classes without substantial amount of
extra efforts or costs. This implies that the marginal investor is more likely to be an institutional investor,
for example pension funds. These investors are likely to invest a bigger proportion of their capital in
large-cap firms due to stability and liquidity reasons among others, and this is also why we selected this
index with large-cap companies.

                                         7
The Index characteristics are listed below:

             2
 Table 3.1
 No. of Constituents 500
 Adjusted Market Capitalization ($  9,688
 Billion)
 Constituent Market Capitalization
 (Adjusted $ Billion)
          - Average 19.38
           - Largest 284.83
           - Smallest 1.01
          - Median 8.61
 % Weight Largest Constituent 2.94%
 Top 10 Holdings(% Market Cap share) 18.98%

          3
Graph 3.1 gives an illustration over the S&P 500 firm’s industry types and the latter’s respective weights
of the index. As shown, the index incorporates a wide range of industries in relatively even proportions,
which gives us the diversification effect we searched for.

3.3 Description of Sample Periods
Our paper differs from previous work in the way we determine sample periods. In contrast to earlier
approaches to test the relationship between stock returns and firm payout ratios during both bull- and bear
markets, we focus only on the stock performance during economic downturns in order to better find the
impact of payout policy on stock prices.

                                                                                                                               4
According to US Business Cycle Data from The National Bureau of Economics Research (NBER ), the
previous 5 economic downturns have started at: December 2007, March 2001, July 1990 and July 1981
respectively. We have chosen to study the three most recent crises, although we begin our study of the
1990 crisis already in year 1987 to incorporate the effect of the Black Monday in October 1987 when the
US market fell over 20% in a single trading day.

We begin our sample period two years before each crisis for the purpose to generate payout ratios that can
be used to divide our sample firms into different payout portfolios at the starting point of the crisis. Then,
our sample period runs for 5 more years to generate return data for 5 years. We use quarterly data, which
generates a total of 28 time periods over 7 years for each crisis.

3.5 Data Description of Regression Factors
Our equity database is the COMPUSTAT FTP file dataset which delivers firm-specific data for our entire
sample. We obtain the risk-free rate and market return from the Fama-French factors list. From the
COMPUSTAT online database, we export quarterly input data such as Closing Price, Dividend per
Share, Repurchase Price, Number of Shares Repurchased, Number of Shares Outstanding, Book Value of

2
 Source: Standard& Poor’s official webpage. Link: www.standardandpoors.com
3
 Source: Standard& Poor’s official webpage. Link: www.standardandpoors.com
4
 Source: The National Bureau of Economic Research. Link: www.nber.org/cycles/cyclesmain.html

                                         8
Equity, Earning per Share and Capital Expenditure to generate the variables Total Return, Payout Yield,
Market Value, Earnings Ratio, Capex Ratio and Book-to-Market (BTM) rates.

The sample is subject to some survivorship bias due to the relatively large sizes of the S&P 500 firms
compared to market average. This size effect implies higher possibility to survive economic downturns
and may result in some upward pressure for our results. We have recorded cases stock price delisting
during our observation period, as result of bankruptcy and buyouts, but these data are excluded from the
panel regression due to lack of required information after the delisting. If our data is inaccurate, it is most
likely that the data is slightly overstated and that we have adjusted for the delisted firms in the panel
regression, although the returns of the delisted firms are still incorporated in the t-test.

3.6 Firm Data Adjustments
The following adjustments were made to the firm-specific data used to create the regression variables.
Firstly, we include only firms with continuous Closing Price and Market Capitalization information
starting from twelve month before each crisis’ date. This adjustment is made to generate the payout- and
return ratios that are required for categorization of firms at the starting point of each economic crisis.
Then, we take into account the effect of Stock Splits during the sample period in our returns calculation.
This is adjusted for by dividing the Closing Price and the Dividend per Share data with an adjustment
factor given by COMPUSTAT.

A major issue that must be adjusted for is the delisting of firms during the sample periods. Basically, we
exclude all delisted firms from our regressions due to lack of information such as Market Capitalization,
Earning Ratio and Book-to-Market rate which are necessary for running panel data regression. However,
we have tried to improve the data by searching each delisted firm’s acquisition price and calculate the
total return from the starting point of the crisis. In case of bankruptcy, the total return will be -100%.
These efforts lead to better data for running the t-tests between payout portfolios’ total returns over the
sample period.

                                         9
4. Methodology
In this section, we go through the methodology for creating the dataset of our thesis and also some
econometric and statistical methods used to test our hypothesis. In section 4.1 we explain the process to
creating the matrix and the different portfolios. The next section, 4.2 aims to look at our portfolio
approach and the calculation of the payout yields. In section 4.3 we go through the regression models
used to study the correlation between payout ratios and stock performance as well as the statistical tests
performed.

4.1 Modeling Strategy
This section aims to give a practical guide into the way we constructed our models in order to run the
previously described regression tests on our sample data, using Excel and the data analysis program
STATA.

Before describing our models for running specific regression tests, we would like to present the necessary
calculations and adjustments of the raw data that were required before constructing any of the models.

Step 1: Generating the Required Variables

 Once extracted the raw data from COMPUSTAT, all the S&P 500 firms are listed first according to
Ticker Symbol alphabetically and then chronologically starting exactly two years before the crisis we
look at. This two-year gap fulfils the purpose to categorize firms into payout portfolios at the beginning of
each crisis by calculating their payout yields during these two years.

Below is a list over the required variables and their sources:

 Variables Required Calculation Using COMPUSTAT Input Data
 Adjusted Closing Price Closing Price (t) / Adjustment Factor Pay-date (t)
 Adjusted Dividend Dividend per Share/ Adjustment Factor Pay-date (t)
 Market Capitalization Closing Price (t) * Number of Shares Outstanding
 Total Return (t), n years [Adj. Closing Price (t+n) + Sum Adj. Dividend (t: t+n)]/Adj. Closing Price(t) - 1
 Total Dividend Dividend per Share * Number of Shares Outstanding
 Total Repurchase Total Repurchased Shares * Average Repurchase Price
 Total Payout Total Dividend + Total Repurchase
 Payout Ratio Total Payout (t)/Market Capitalization(t-1)
 Payout Ratio (Avg LTM) Average of Payout Ratio in the Last Twelve Month Period, 4 Quarters
 Total Earnings Earnings per Share * Common Shares Used to Calculate Earnings per Share
 Earnings Ratio Total Earnings (LTM)/ Average of Market Capitalization (LTM)
 Capex Ratio Capex(LTM)/Average Total Assets (LTM)
 Book-to-Market Ratio Average Common Equity (LTM) / Average Market Capitalization (LTM)

The use of last-twelve-month (LTM) averages is to smooth the calculated ratios since single-period ratios
will inevitably result in higher volatility in the ratio development. In addition, the COMPUSTAT
database has missing values for a considerable number of firms and time periods, which will result in

                                         10
error values if using single-period calculations. Nevertheless, this issue solves itself to a high extent when
using average values since there are higher chances that at least one of the four quarters do not have
missing value. In conclusion, the use of LTM averages is very useful in researches that have a limited
amount of observations, and we believe this will benefit us significantly by reducing the occurrence of
errors and extreme values across our sample.

Taking into consideration the needs for more advanced models in later stages, we have decided to add
more variables in this first stage to make the modeling process less rigorous. These variables are the same
ones that we have previously calculated, such as Annual- and Total Returns, but are listed side-by-side
with previous variables. In this way, we would only need to refer to one single Excel row in order to get
time-series data.

Step 2: Preparation for Data Sorting

For further modeling requirements, the newly generated variables must be able to be sorted according to
modeling needs. At the same time, it is essential in a research like this to have a flexible model built on
links that all eventually refer to the input sheet.

Consequently, we leave the original input sheet and the calculations for generating new variables
untouched in all further work. Instead, we make a copy of the required data and paste their respective
links to a new Excel sheet. In this way, only the columns (variable name) are fixed while the rows
(variable data) can be freely moved. To lower the probability of mistakes, we have a separate Excel file
for each of the three crises we have chosen to study.

For easier use of data, the new sheet will be sorted first chronologically and then alphabetically. With
that, we can now extract information about the S&P 500 firms in any of the specific quarters we decide to
         5
look at . For easier reference, we will name this Excel sheet as “Data Sort” forth going.

Step 3: Calculation of Firm Betas in the Starting Period

Beta is an interesting variable with is generally acknowledged to affect stock returns. This effect is well-
described in the CAPM theories. In our case, we decide to measure how firm-level betas affect the returns
and for that we need to calculate firm-level beta values for the base period of our study.

To run a regression with satisfactory results, we need more observation periods. Thus, we look up to four
quarters back in time and obtain the total return values for the same companies. This requires some
adjustment efforts since previous periods usually have a larger number of firms, which in our base period
might have been erased as error data due to bankruptcy or acquisition.

Once obtained the returns data for same companies for 4 time periods, we regress the returns versus
market return in STATA and received the firms’ respective betas.

5
 However, the first year of the sample period will not have correct variable ratios since they will be using
information from the firm listed above. This is not an issue since our researched time period starts first in the
second year.

                                         11
4.1.1 Construction of Return Matrix for T-tests
 In order to effectively run the T-tests, it is preferred to have a two-dimensional matrix constituted of
return values. This will give a clear view overlooking the differences of returns data between different
categories and sub-groups. By repeating the same process and creating a return matrix for each time
period, it will also be easy to follow the development of the returns data and its differences between sub-
groups over time. At the end, the data from different matrixes can be used to increase the number of
observations for the tested variables and improve the test results.

Step 1: Generating Payout Portfolios

        As we aim to follow the total returns starting from the economic peak, which is also the same
        calendar quarter or at most one quarter before each crisis, we extract the S&P 500 firm variables
        from previously sorted links described above. We copy the firm specifics in each crisis starting
        point, which is the end of June 1987, March 2001 and December 2007, and then paste the links to
         a separate sheet.

        In this new sheet, firms are sorted according to their average Payout Yields (LTM). We then
        separate the zero-payout firms and categorize them as the Zero Payout group. Other firms are
        then divided into five groups with circa equal number of observations, ranging from the 20%
        (quintile) with lowest payout yields to the 20% (quintile) with highest payout yields.

Step 2: Generating Sub-Groups

       Subsequently, we will be looking at five other variables – Beta, Size, Capital Expenditures Ratio,
        Earnings Ratio and Book-to-Market Ratio. We create 6 worksheets for each of the five stated sub-
        group factors and paste the link of the 6 payout portfolios that was just created. In each
        worksheet, we sort the firms according to their respective values of sub-group factors. The firms
        are then divided into quintiles ranging from the lowest 20% to the highest 20%.

Step 3: Creation of Returns Matrixes

        We start by calculating each portfolios average total return in their respective worksheet. Once
        this is done, we can simply link their values into a new worksheet where the return values are
        listed as a two-dimensional matrix.

        Since we had previously created more variables that represented total returns for a larger number
        of time periods, we can now simply create return matrixes for up to 5-year total returns.

        This entire procedure of creating return matrixes is done three times, once for each crisis.

4.1.2 Construction of Payout Portfolio Specifics for Cross-Sectional Regressions
The cross-sectional regression aims to test the correlations and impacts that a number of tested variables
have on the payout portfolios’ return performance. For this regression, we need to divide firms into
payout portfolios as previously done and follow their annual returns over time. The tested variables are:

                                         12
Market Premium, Size, Earnings Ratio, Capital expenditure ratio and Book-to-Market Ratio. Since our
sample period is 5 years starting from each crisis, we will follow the portfolios’ average value of the
stated ratios over this 5 year period.

Step 1: Sort Data

       From previous modeling, we have already extracted the 5-year information required for the
        starting period of the crisis. However, the number of time-series observations is still too small for
        reaching satisfactory regression results. Thus, we decide to obtain similar 5-year annual data for
         each quarter up to four quarters before the crises’ staring periods.

        For this, we apply a similar approach to how we adjusted the data for beta calculation. This time,
        we place the observations from different time periods next to each other and sort out the firms
        that do not exist in the starting point. In the end, we will have 5-year return from 4 quarters which
        have same constituents as the starting period. This increases our observation periods four-folds.

Step 2: Fama French Risk-free Rate and Market Premium

        To calculate excess return and market premium, we need the risk-free rate and market return rate
        from a reliable source. We have chosen to use the Fama French Factors that have been frequently
         used in other studies and in course literatures.

        Some adjustments are still necessary for our data, because our time periods start in different
        months. Since the Fama French factors are given on monthly basis, we are able to calculate a
        geometric annual total for each of our four quarters, up to five years ahead.

Step 3: Summary for Regression

        The sorted variables are then listed horizontally with annual rates on the vertical line. This Table
        is repeated four times, each with a starting point from a different calendar quarter. Putting them
        together as columns, we now have many enough observations for STATA regression. (see section
         4.3 for a detailed description of the regression)

        This process is done once for each payout portfolio and repeated for two crises. The 2007 crisis
        had simply too few observations for any use other than the t-test.

                                         13
4.1.3 Generation of Firm Specifics for Panel Data Regressions
With the panel data regression, we aim to test the impacts of a number of variables on excess returns.
What is unique from previous regression is that we now test this relationship on firm-level across the
entire sample and also take into account the beta for each year.

Step 1: Sort Data

        The firm specific data are generated in a similar way as for the cross-sectional regression.
        However, instead of using previous quarters’ data, we now sort the data forward in time using
        annual variables and make sure that the number and constitution of firms are constant across the
        5-year period we look at based on the starting period.

Step 2: Beta Calculation

        Here we decided to add the firm-level beta into consideration since it can explain a large portion
        of the movement in firm-level returns across the years. We have now already sorted the data
        forward in time starting from the quarter closest to the crisis, and can extract annual return for
       each of the five years we look at. Nevertheless, to increase the number of time period
        observations we need to incorporate the sorted data from the cross-sectional regression. Basically,
        we sort out the firms that exist in the cross-sectional regression observations but that do not
        longer exist in our forward-looking data list. In this way, we have always a four-period rolling
        time period for each of the five year we look at and can generate the beta for each year of the 5-
        year period.

Step 3: Regression

        What is noticeable in this regression is the need to adjust for cluster effects. Otherwise it is quite
         similar to the previous regression. (see section 4.3 for a detailed description of the regression)

        This procedure is also done for only the 1987 and 2001 crises, since the 2007 crisis has only two
        years data which is not enough for running effective time-series regression.

4.2 Payout portfolios
The purpose of categorizing our sample firms into Payout Portfolios is to follow the stock performance of
these firms over the sample period of 5 years. During the time, we can use different regression methods to
test the significance of impact which payout yields have on stock performance during the crisis period.

The determination of Payout Yield is as following:

                                         14
Nevertheless, many times the firm’s future dividend- or repurchase plans are already declared before the
actual payments, for example at shareholders’ meetings one year or a few quarters in advance. This is the
reason we want to test the effect of the Expected Payout Yields in the panel regression. This ratio is
simply the Payout Yield of the next period, calculated as:

4.3 Models of Performance Measurement
We employ a number of performance measurement tests: t-test on return matrixes with sub-variables,
cross-sectional regression on payout portfolios and panel regression on every firm in the sample. The
details are described below.

4.3.1 T-test on Return Matrixes
T-test is a statistical hypothesis test method which assesses whether the means of two groups are
statistically different from each other. We apply this test on the return matrixes we extract from the
sample data. The matrixes are constructed to be divided according to payout portfolios horizontally and
then divided vertically by other variables (Beta, BTM, Earnings- and Capex ratio). In the matrixes are
values for total returns for the different groups, and each matrix represents total return data for each year
starting from the crisis period. Our hypotheses are as follows

                                                 ,

Even if we can see a difference in return between different portfolios over the years but fail to reject the
null hypothesis we cannot make a conclusion from the matrix about our results since it is not statistically
significant.

4.3.2 Cross-sectional Regression on Payout Portfolios
Cross-sectional regressions are applied in our study for the purpose to test the impact of payout yields and
other factors on the stock returns, which is determined as both dividend gain and capital gain.

In the Payout Portfolio cross-sectional regression, we run a regression for each of the payout portfolios.
We run this test with different control variables such as size, capital expenditure ratio, earnings ratio and
book to market rates against the excess returns of the specific payout portfolio over the 5 year period. The
regression coefficients and the t-stat will show the impact of the variables on return and their respective
explanatory powers. The regression equation is displayed as follows.

                                         15
4.3.3 Panel Regression on the S&P 500 firms
The panel regression that we run on our sample is for each and every stock on the S&P 500. We set our
panel with calendar year as our time dimension and each firm as our cross sectional dimension. We then
perform the regression taking into account a cluster analysis. The cluster correction takes into account that
standard errors tend to be highly correlated in times of crisis and by correcting for them we get a more
correct measure of our significance. The equation by which we test our panel data is:

Important to note is that the unobserved effect in our sample is treated with fixed effect since we
anticipate this effect to be correlated with our explanatory variables.

                                         16
5. Results

In this section we go through the findings of our research. In the first section we evaluate the general
findings over the crisis period of 1985-1992, 1999-2006 and 2007-2009. We examine the pooled cross
sectional regression during the crisis period with the control variables. The next section shows the result
of our unique way of sorting up the S&P 500 data into payout organized portfolios. Here we show how
these portfolios performed during the 5 years after the introduction of the crisis. We show both the
statistical tests and the performance of these portfolios in tables and graphs. Finally in the last section the
portfolio performance of the 5 year after the crisis is regressed using a time series regression with control
variables for size, capital expenditure and book to market variables. For the panel regression and the
portfolio regression only results from the two earliest crises are presented since we have too few
observations for the late 2007’s crisis. However, for the matrix results we have decided to take into
account the latest financial crisis and present the results under that section.

All tables with the variables can be found in the appendix.

5.1 Panel regressions for the S&P500

In this section we present the panel regression performed on the whole sample of the S&P 500 companies.
We have two approaches of this test with one testing the last twelve months payout yield and the other
tests the expected payout yield. Both regressions’ results will be presented below.

To begin with we look at the 1987 crisis starting with the year of 1985 to 1992 and with last twelve
months dividends. From Table 14 we can clearly see that the payout variable has a slightly negative beta
of and it is insignificant. Thus we cannot draw any conclusion about the validity of the result in this case.
Other variables in this regression that significantly affect the return on the S&P 500 companies are the
return on the overall market as well as the book to market ratio both displaying a positive relation. For the
market variable this indicates that companies move in the same direction as the market in the crisis period
and for the book to market variable it means that undervalued companies perform relative better than
overvalued companies.

Changing the assumption about dividends to expected payout yield we can see in Table 14 that the market
variable has a beta of 0, 86 and it is significantly different from zero. This again indicates that our
companies move into the same direction as the market in the crisis time. Looking at the most important
variable for our research we can see that the payout variable has a beta of 0,43 and it is significantly
different from zero. This indicates that a higher payout generates a higher return for the companies in our
sample. The rest of our control variables are all insignificant except the book to market ration that display
the same trend as in the previous regression

                                         17
For the late 2000’s crisis with a payout yield calculated over the last twelve months we can conclude by
looking at Table 14 that the return on the market variable has a beta of 1,2 and is significant at the 5
percent level. As the previous economic crisis this shows a positive relationship between the market
return and the companies at the S&P 500. Looking at the payout variable we have a positive relationship
against the stock returns but and it is insignificantly different from zero. Hence we cannot draw any
conclusion for the payout variable in this crisis. For our different control variables we clearly see that beta
has a significant negative effect on returns telling us that a smaller beta affect returns positively. Looking
at other variables, the size variable interestingly shows a negative relationship with returns for this
particular crisis and that indicates that companies with smaller market capitalization perform better than
bigger ones in line with Banz (1981). Capital expenditure, book to market and earnings variables in the
table all show insignificant effects on returns so we cannot draw any conclusion about these variables.

Changing the assumption again so we have expected payout rate we still cannot get a significant effect
from the payout yield on the return on the S&P 500 index as shown in Table 14. Hence, the conclusion
from this result is that payout yield doesn’t significantly affect the return for the S&P 500 companies. For
the beta variable we have a significant negative relationship between the value of this variable and the
return on different companies for the S&P 500. As before, we have shown that lower beta companies
seem to perform better than higher beta companies. For the return on the market we have a beta of 1,2 and
it is significantly different from zero. Looking at other control variables we can see that size still has a
negative relationship with S&P 500 returns telling us that smaller companies perform better than larger
ones. Earnings, capital expenditure and book to market ones again have insignificant effects on the S&P
500 companies.

5.2 Payout Portfolio Matrixes
In this section we present the findings of our analysis of the different payout portfolios as well as the
analysis of the zero payout portfolios. This is our main section and it shows whether companies with
higher payout perform worse or better than lower payout companies during crisis which is our initial
research question.

We begin by looking at the late 1980’s crisis. In Table 1-3 you can see the matrixes that we constructed
for determining different payout returns. Looking at the payout data graphically (see Figure 1), we can see
that the lowest payout portfolio seem to outperform the other payout portfolios during the first years but
drops during the last years. However, even if this effect seems to be present looking at the data, we further
perform a t-test to statistically prove this. Looking at Table 9 you can see that we fail to reject the null
hypothesis that the highest payout portfolio is statistically different from the zero payout portfolio sorted
by beta values, however, among the payout portfolios the lowest payout portfolio is statistically different
from the highest payout portfolio.

In Table 1-3 we also present different ways of sorting the portfolios looking at size, beta, capital
expenditure, earnings and book to market values. Interestingly to notice is that all portfolios seem to
demonstrate a rising trend for the higher the value of the variable is in each portfolio. For the beta
portfolios, size portfolios and the book to market portfolio we can significantly say that a higher value on
each of these variables creates a higher return in our matrix (see Table 9 for t-statistics).

                                         18
When we look at the market capitalization or size for our different portfolios we can conclude that the
smallest companies are located in the lowest payout portfolios. Portfolio 5 arguably has the largest
companies represented. This could indicate that size explains the high returns of the zero payout portfolio
in our sample however we did not find a small firm effect on returns when we regressed all our 500
companies (see Figure 4).

Looking at capital expenditure we see a clear decreasing trend for the portfolios. Zero payout companies
seem to spend a lot more on capital expenditure relative to their assets compared to the high payout
companies. In our first panel regression we also got an insignificant value for our coefficient regarding
capital expenditure so we cannot say for sure that it determines the performance of our portfolios (see
figure 4).

Finally we look at the different beta values for our different portfolios. Interestingly the lowest beta
portfolio performs very well looking at our first graph. This is quite interesting since you would expect
the opposite result. Once again we can also refer to our first panel regression where we found that beta did
not have a significant effect on our securities returns (see Figure 4).

In Table 4-6, you can see the matrix that we constructed in order to find out whether higher payout
portfolios perform better than low payout portfolio and the zero payout portfolios in the late 2000’s crisis.
In the matrix you can obviously see that the higher payout portfolios perform better than the lower payout
portfolios and the zero payout portfolios as well. This trend seems to be holding on over the whole 5 year
period after the initial crisis as well which is very interesting to see. Looking further down in the matrixes
we can see how size, capital expenditure, earnings and book to market have affected returns. Companies
with a smaller size clearly outperform the bigger companies in the 5 year horizon that we are looking at
and the same goes for higher beta companies. The matrix data over the capital expenditure is hard to
interpret and we cannot draw any conclusion about its effect on returns from only looking at the matrix in
Table 4-6. Earnings on the other hand show a positive relationship between more earnings and better
returns. All tests showed a significant difference between the biggest portfolio and the smallest one except
capital expenditure and earnings.

For the late 2000’s recession our results can also be shown graphically (see Figure 2) over time as follows
looking at payout portfolios.

What you clearly see from the graph is that the zero payout portfolios perform worst during the crisis year
and also after the crisis and before the crisis. This is a clear statement that paying no cash to shareholders
was not a good strategy for a company during the crisis that occurred in the late 2000’s. Another bad
strategy seemed to be having low payout for a company. The lowest payout portfolio performed slightly
better than the zero payout portfolios but far worse than the other portfolios paying more cash to
investors. The high payout portfolios unambiguously performs the best during these years and We can
see this relationship graphically as shown above but we also want to prove this statistically. In order to
perform these tests we do a students t-test between the highest payout portfolios compared to the lowest
payout portfolio. Looking at table 10 we see that the highest payout portfolio significantly performs better
than the lowest payout portfolio with a t statistics of -2,5 . This confirms the above findings statistically as
well.

                                         19
Looking at size, figure 3 tells us that the smallest companies are located in the portfolios with the highest
payout. This could indicate that a size effect is present and could explain some of the better return for
companies in this portfolio as found by Keim(1985). We also find evidence of this in our previous panel
regression for this time period. The size variable significantly explained return with a negative coefficient
telling us that smaller companies affect returns positively while larger companies have the opposite effect.

Looking further on in figure 3 at our capital expenditure ratio we can see that the smaller the expenditure
is the higher payout the company seems to have. We found this effect in our first regression over all of the
S&P 500 companies in the previous section as well but as in the previous crisis this effect is insignificant
so we cannot draw any conclusion from this graph.

Finally looking how the beta of the companies is distributed between our portfolios we can see the
following relationship presented in figure 3. The lowest beta stocks are all placed in the zero portfolio and
the highest beta stocks are all placed in the highest payout portfolio. This proofs that the higher payout
portfolios perform better than the lower payout portfolios and we saw in the previous panel regression
that the effect from beta on returns proved to be significantly different from zero.

Since our last economic crisis that started in 2007 not has lasted for five years, we don’t have complete
data of a five year period after the start of the crisis. Despite this, we will at least present our findings for
2 years after this last crisis in our essay.

First we have the general findings over the two year period of our six portfolios. In graph xxx and table
7-8 we can draw the conclusion that the zero payout portfolio performed worst during the 2 year period
after the initial crisis period. We can also see that the next highest payout portfolio performed best of all
paying portfolios. Next we want to test if this apparent fining is statistically significant by performing t-
tests. In table 11 you can see that the lowest payout portfolio is statistically different from the highest
paying portfolio. This is in line with the other crisis and shows a consistent result that higher paying
companies perform better during all the crises. Looking at other ways of sorting the matrix in table 7-8 we
can conclude in table 11 that the beta in the different portfolios is significantly different for the highest
values compared to the lowest. The same effect can be seen for the book to market factor in the same
table and it is significantly different

5.3 Portfolios
We begin by looking at the late 1980’s crisis. Looking at table 13 we can see that for the zero payout
portfolio we can see that the market coefficient has a positive relation with the return on the portfolio. The
book to market factor is also significant but its relationship with the portfolio is negative indicating that a
low book to market ratio affect returns positively. Portfolio 1 also shows a positive and significant
relationship with the market return and it is slightly higher than the relation observed in the zero payout
portfolio. All other variables have an insignificant effect on the portfolio. For portfolio 2 until portfolio 5
we can see that the market return coefficient is always positive and significant. The size factor also seems
to be significant and display a negative effect on returns indicating that smaller size generates larger
returns on the portfolios. Earnings also affect returns significantly and also show a negative relationship
on portfolio return but for the highest payout portfolio the earnings coefficient is positive and that
indicates that more earnings is positive for the individual portfolio return.

                                         20
 Moving on to look at the late 2000’s crisis table 13 explains our results. Similar to the late 1980’s crisis
we can conclude by looking at the table that all portfolios except portfolio 4 have significant coefficients
for the market return. For the size variable we can see that for portfolio 1 there is a very small but
significant positive relationship between the variable and the portfolio’s excess return. For the rest of the
portfolios this effect is insignificant for the size variable. The other control variables also have
insignificant effects on the excess return on each portfolio.

6. Conclusion

In this study we have studied the performance of companies on the S&P 500 by looking at their
payout policy. This is a unique study that tries to answer the question whether companies that have a
generous payout policy are worse off or better in times of economic crisis. We have also incorporated
stock repurchase programs as a part of the whole payout policy in order to acknowledge the growing
importance of this form of payout.

Generally when we looked at the S&P 500 companies we could not find any significant effect from
payout policy on stock returns when we used the approach of calculating payout policies twelve
months back in time for both crises. On the other hand calculating the payout policy in the second
way using the payout expectation approach we found that payout policy did have a significant
positive effect on returns for the late 1980’s crisis. However, when we did the same test for the late
2000’s crisis this effect had disappeared.

The main test of this essay was our unique approach of sorting the S&P 500 companies into a matrix
with different sorting criteria’s such as beta values on the S&P 500 companies just before the crisis,
size variables, capital expenditure, earnings and book to market. The conclusions from these tests are
that among the companies actually paying cash to shareholders we can see that the portfolios that
paid more cash to shareholders actually performed better during the late 1980’s crisis, the late 2000’s
crisis and in the late 2007’s crisis than the portfolio with the smallest payout yield. Looking at the
zero payout portfolio compared to the highest paying portfolios we did not find a stable relationship
that the zero portfolio performs worse than the highest paying portfolios. This could be due to the
specific firm characteristics of these companies for example that they constitute or companies with a
smaller market capitalization and could this be affected by the small firm effect documented by Banz
(1981).

Finally we looked at the specific characteristics of the different portfolios as for example book to
market values in the portfolios, their respective market capitalization etc in order to find out whether
it was in fact their characteristics that explained their return or only the their different payout yields
Here we did not find any consistent evidence that a specific characteristic such as size for example
could explain the difference in return between the portfolios. Between the crises we did not either
find any consistent results showing that specific characteristics dominated as an explanation to the
difference in returns between the portfolios.

In conclusion, we have shown with our approach of testing whether higher payout yields predict
returns in economic crisis that among payout portfolios actually paying cash companies perform

                                         21
better if they pay out more during crisis. On one hand, our results are not consistent since the initial
panel regression that disregards the portfolio approach showed no significant effects from payout
yields on returns for the late 2000’s crisis. On the other hand, we could not find any statistical
support for the argument against having a generous payout policy either.

7. Further research

As discussed above our results show inconsistent evidence of that companies paying a higher amount of
cash to their shareholders in crisis are worse off than companies being more restrictive with their cash
reserves. One of the more interesting things with our essay is the zero payout portfolios that had very
inconsistent returns in the crisis both in the specific crisis and between crises. It could be interesting to go
more deeply into the reasons for this as well as testing more hypothesizes about zero paying companies.
Secondly, since the last financial crisis just have occurred it could be interesting to perform more tests
after a couple of years to test the effect on payout portfolios on this the most recent economic crisis.
Finally, our sample is only concentrated to the largest US companies and a study incorporating other
countries as well as market capitalizations of the companies could be very interesting for further research.

                                         22
References

Donald.B.KEIM, 1985,“Dividend yields and stock returns: Implications of abnormal January returns”,
Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research Working Papers, 14-18

Eugene F. FAMA and Kenneth R. FRENCH, 2000, “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm
Characteristics or Lower Propensity to Pay?”, The Center for Research in Security Prices Working Paper
No. 509

Eugene F. FAMA and Kenneth R. FRENCH, 1995, "Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and
returns", Journal of Finance 50, pp. 131-155.

Fischer BLACK and Myron SCHOLES, 1973, “The effects of dividend yield and dividend policy on
common stock prices and returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol 1(1974), pp.1-22

Gareth MORGAN and Stephen THOMAS, 1998, “Taxes, dividend yields and returns in the UK equity
market”, Journal of Banking&Finance, vol 22, pp. 405-423

Gustavo GRULLON and Roni MICHAELY,2002,”Dividends, Share Repurchases, and the Substitution
Hyphothesis”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 57 pp.1649 - 1684

Michael O’HIGGINS, 2000, Beating the Dow (Revised edition), Harperbusiness

Robert H. LITZENBERGER and Krishna RAMASWAMY, 1979, “The Effect of Personal Taxes and
Dividends on Capital Asset Prices”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol.7, pp. 163-195

Rogers, W. H. 1993,”Regression standard errors in clustered samples”, Stata Technical Bulletin 13: 19–
23. Reprinted in Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints, vol. 3, pp.88–94.

R.W BANZ., “The Relationship Between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks, 1981,” Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 9, pp. 3-18.

Sue VISSCHER and Greg FILBECK, 2003, “Dividend-Yield Strategies in the Canadian Stock Market”,
Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 59, pp. 99-106

William N. GOETZMANN and Philippe JORION, 1995, “A Longer Look at Dividend Yields”, Journal
of Business, 1995, vol. 68.

                                         23
APPENDIX

                                    Figure 1
                Payout Portfolio Total Return Chart 1987 – 1992
The figure below illustrates the total return for the six payout portfolios starting in the end of June 1987 to June 1992. The
                                                          nd
figure below covers the five-year period with the base point in 2  quarter 1987, including two financial crisis – one in October
1987 (the “Black Monday”) and one in the beginning of the 1990’s. The time periods are listed on quarterly basis because the
measure Total Return incorporates dividend payments which only occur on quarterly basis. The Zero Payout line represents
returns for the firms with zero payouts between 1985 and 1987. PO 1 represents the quintile of the payout firms with lowest
payout yields, while PO 5 represents the quintile with highest yields.

                                    Figure 2
                Payout Portfolio Total Return Chart 2001 – 2006
The figure below illustrates the total return for the six payout portfolios starting in the end of March 2001 to March 2006. This
period covers the burst of the famous Dot-Com bubblein March 2001. The time periods are listed on quarterly basis because
the measure Total Return incorporates dividend payments which only occur on quarterly basis. The Zero Payout line represents
returns for the firms with zero payouts between 1999 and 2001. PO 1 represents the quintile of the payout firms with lowest
payout yields, while PO 5 represents the quintile with highest yields.

                                         24
                                    Figure 3
                Payout Portfolio Total Return Chart 2007 - 2009
The figure below illustrates the total return for the six payout portfolios starting in the end of March 2001 to March 2006. This
period covers the burst of the famous Dot-Com bubblein March 2001. The time periods are listed on quarterly basis because
the measure Total Return incorporates dividend payments which only occur on quarterly basis. The Zero Payout line represents
returns for the firms with zero payouts between 2005 and 2007. PO 1 represents the quintile of the payout firms with lowest
payout yields, while PO 5 represents the quintile with highest yields.

                                         25
                                    Figure 4
                     Payout Portfolio Specifics 1987 & 2001
The combined figures below illustrate the firm specifics of the respective payout portfolios for the period 1987-Q2 and 2001-
Q1. The variables described are Capex Ratio, which is the combined capital expenditure of the previous twelve-month period
divided by the average value of the firms’ total asset value over that period. Beta values are calculated in STATA using LTM
Total Return values.

                                         26
                                Table 1
                 1-Year Total Return Matrix 1987 - 1988
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                            rd
below, this starting point is July 1987 or the beginning of the 3  quarter.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                               1 Year Total Return, July 1987 - June 1988
                       Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
             Avg PO -0,8% -13,1% -7,7% -9,2% -5,2% -3,1%
             No. Firms 44 82 82 81 82 82
  Beta Portfolios
  Lowest BT 1 -10,8% -12,9% -0,8% -19,0% -1,9% -13,9% -10%
             BT 2 18,0% -21,7% -11,2% -2,9% -7,4% 1,6% -4%
             BT 3 -14,0% -14,1% -10,0% -12,2% -5,9% -0,4% -9%
             BT 4 -6,8% -9,2% -8,1% -2,1% -2,4% 4,8% -4%
  Highest BT 5 11,5% -7,8% -8,5% -9,4% -8,6% -7,0% -5%
   Size Portfolios
  Lowest S 1 -6,5% -10,3% -13,1% -12,8% 0,1% -3,8% -8%
             S 2 3,7% -15,5% -6,5% -2,6% 4,2% -5,4% -4%
             S 3 5,5% -6,3% -0,9% -7,6% -6,4% -3,9% -3%
             S 4 5,4% -23,5% -6,7% -5,4% -10,0% -1,0% -7%
  Highest S 5 -10,1% -10,8% -11,3% -17,7% -14,3% -1,3% -11%
  Capex Portfolios
  Lowest C 1 4,3% -6,2% -8,8% -13,5% -6,2% -7,1% -6%
             C 2 1,7% -18,5% -11,5% -12,1% -3,3% -3,1% -8%
             C 3 -2,4% -18,9% -15,8% -9,5% -6,4% 4,1% -8%
             C 4 -5,1% -10,9% -1,4% -0,7% -10,3% -3,3% -5%
  Highest C 5 -1,2% -11,8% -1,1% -10,9% 0,4% -5,7% -5%
  Earnings Portfolios
  Lowest E 1 -14,4% -1,5% -4,7% -6,5% -6,8% 8,9% -4%
             E 2 11,4% -16,3% 1,9% -6,5% -6,8% -3,9% -3%
             E 3 -0,8% -2,1% -9,0% -14,4% -8,5% -6,2% -7%
             E 4 7,6% -29,1% -17,9% -5,0% -4,1% -9,5% -10%
  Highest E 5 -7,4% -17,1% -8,6% -13,5% -0,1% -4,5% -9%
  BTM Portfolios
  Lowest BM 1 15,8% -7,1% 1,6% -5,1% -7,4% -7,6% -2%
             BM 2 -7,3% -19,7% -16,5% -16,2% -2,0% -4,7% -11%
             BM 3 -12,8% -18,5% -3,0% -13,0% -9,0% 5,0% -9%
             BM 4 10,4% -7,0% -9,4% -1,8% -9,1% -6,2% -4%
  Highest BM 5 -9,2% -13,4% -10,4% -9,8% 1,5% -1,7% -7%

                                     27
                                Table 2
                 3-Year Total Return Matrix 1987 - 1990
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                            rd
below, this starting point is July 1987 or the beginning of the 3  quarter.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                                3 Year Total Return, July 1987 - June 1990
                       Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
             Avg PO 22,8% 13,0% 13,8% 16,4% 16,3% 22,1%
             No. Firms 44 82 82 81 82 82
   Beta Portfolios
  Lowest BT 1 0,6% 1,4% 1,4% 8,0% 8,9% 16,6% 6%
             BT 2 36,8% -0,8% 13,0% 30,4% 12,8% 20,6% 19%
             BT 3 -0,8% 4,2% 21,5% 22,0% 19,1% 31,8% 16%
             BT 4 6,6% 47,8% 2,7% 13,9% 31,4% 26,2% 21%
  Highest BT 5 72,0% 13,8% 30,6% 8,0% 9,4% 14,9% 25%
   Size Portfolios
  Lowest S 1 18,8% 4,4% -10,8% 14,3% 14,9% 16,7% 10%
             S 2 16,8% 14,3% 20,1% 4,8% 20,6% 12,8% 15%
             S 3 10,8% 21,7% 20,6% 12,5% 12,1% 18,2% 16%
             S 4 60,0% -10,1% 11,3% 29,7% 15,5% 25,7% 22%
  Highest S 5 5,7% 34,8% 28,9% 20,6% 18,6% 37,4% 24%
   Capex Portfolios
  Lowest C 1 7,5% 1,8% 7,7% 26,8% 16,4% 13,7% 12%
             C 2 23,8% 27,8% 18,0% 13,6% 10,3% 21,0% 19%
             C 3 63,9% 13,5% 22,2% 2,2% 18,1% 37,1% 26%
             C 4 8,1% 17,9% 14,7% 21,4% 8,4% 12,8% 14%
  Highest C 5 8,8% 4,5% 6,7% 17,4% 28,6% 26,7% 15%
   Earnings Portfolios
  Lowest E 1 -9,6% 33,4% 17,7% 15,4% -3,6% 49,4% 17%
             E 2 43,9% 15,0% 24,2% 6,1% 28,5% 15,5% 22%
             E 3 43,9% 16,3% 10,2% 9,6% 15,7% 13,5% 18%
             E 4 21,7% -4,2% 7,1% 39,6% 8,4% 15,2% 15%
  Highest E 5 9,9% 4,8% 10,2% 11,5% 31,4% 17,5% 14%
   BTM Portfolios
  Lowest BM 1 31,1% 12,2% 17,9% 10,1% 15,2% 7,7% 16%
             BM 2 15,5% 23,1% 15,8% 25,8% 45,5% 21,5% 25%
             BM 3 15,4% 3,9% 24,1% 23,9% 11,5% 43,6% 20%
             BM 4 73,3% 22,7% -5,1% 19,6% -16,2% 22,1% 19%
  Highest BM 5 -16,0% 2,1% 17,3% 1,9% 25,6% 15,3% 8%

                                     28
                                Table 3
                5-Year Total Return Matrix 1987 – 1992
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                            rd
below, this starting point is July 1987 or the beginning of the 3  quarter.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                               5 Year Total Return, July 1987 - June 1992
                      Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
             Avg PO 27,1% 27,5% 23,4% 38,9% 45,9% 39,9%
             No. Firms 44 82 82 81 82 82
  Beta Portfolios
  Lowest BT 1 -12,1% -2,2% 3,6% 29,7% 33,5% 24,5% 13%
            BT 2 33,4% 27,8% 21,6% 59,7% 27,7% 34,1% 34%
            BT 3 14,0% 41,2% 29,7% 57,8% 40,3% 56,2% 40%
            BT 4 -4,4% 42,2% 38,4% 21,7% 77,5% 61,0% 39%
  Highest BT 5 108,0% 29,5% 24,5% 26,3% 51,8% 23,5% 44%
  Size Portfolios
  Lowest S 1 38,4% -7,9% -6,5% 35,0% 41,0% 33,0% 22%
            S 2 2,9% 12,3% 19,7% 19,7% 37,9% 32,8% 21%
            S 3 29,9% 66,6% 38,5% 29,4% 43,1% 43,5% 42%
            S 4 47,7% 12,7% 15,2% 63,9% 48,3% 39,2% 38%
  Highest S 5 12,8% 53,5% 51,0% 47,0% 59,8% 51,1% 46%
  Capex Portfolios
  Lowest C 1 1,6% 23,7% 17,7% 54,7% 45,6% 30,2% 29%
            C 2 15,6% 44,8% 32,5% 23,0% 31,5% 35,8% 31%
            C 3 68,5% 29,3% 13,1% 27,5% 54,2% 50,9% 41%
            C 4 12,9% 30,9% 22,4% 34,9% 42,9% 30,0% 29%
  Highest C 5 36,5% 8,8% 31,6% 54,8% 55,7% 53,8% 40%
  Earnings Portfolios
  Lowest E 1 -2,9% 61,2% 36,2% 35,2% 33,0% 87,2% 42%
            E 2 45,1% 26,8% 27,5% 21,2% 71,1% 37,3% 38%
            E 3 38,2% 4,0% 13,5% 23,3% 27,3% 16,7% 21%
            E 4 70,4% 39,2% 10,0% 63,6% 38,0% 20,2% 40%
  Highest E 5 -16,8% 8,8% 30,0% 52,3% 60,3% 39,6% 29%
  BTM Portfolios
  Lowest BM 1 62,2% 0,1% 14,2% 20,1% 55,3% 14,2% 28%
            BM 2 -11,4% 37,3% 31,0% 64,9% 99,2% 44,2% 44%
            BM 3 36,5% 34,6% 33,9% 41,6% 27,7% 62,7% 39%
            BM 4 69,5% 43,8% 4,5% 39,7% 5,2% 41,4% 34%
  Highest BM 5 -11,4% 20,1% 34,2% 26,8% 41,5% 36,6% 25%

                                     29
                                Table 4
                1-Year Total Return Matrix 2001 – 2002
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                             rd
below, this starting point is April 2001 or the beginning of the 2  quarter.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                              1 Year Total Return, Apr 2001 - Mar 2002
                      Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
            Avg PO 1,0% 2,6% 14,3% 16,8% 20,3% 13,1%
            No. Firms 67 71 71 70 71 71
  Beta Portfolios
  Lowest BT 1 -26,4% -14,5% 14,7% 8,9% 18,9% 23,3% 4%
            BT 2 -3,4% -5,3% 16,4% 16,6% 10,0% 20,3% 9%
            BT 3 15,4% 11,2% 18,5% 16,5% 0,4% 3,2% 11%
            BT 4 13,9% 2,2% 8,4% 11,2% 48,0% 8,1% 15%
  Highest BT 5 6,5% 20,6% 13,7% 31,5% 24,5% 9,7% 18%
  Size Portfolios
  Lowest S 1 9,6% 24,4% 40,2% 36,0% 50,4% 10,6% 29%
            S 2 20,9% 7,6% 18,8% 16,1% 27,5% 22,6% 19%
            S 3 11,5% 0,1% 15,3% 15,4% 18,0% 28,6% 15%
            S 4 -22,4% -12,5% 3,7% 12,3% 2,9% 7,7% -1%
  Highest S 5 -16,0% -8,3% -8,2% 2,9% 0,7% -4,0% -5%
  Capex Portfolios
  Lowest C 1 11,8% -3,6% 7,7% 6,1% 8,4% 4,8% 6%
            C 2 8,9% 12,5% 16,7% 37,4% 27,0% 20,8% 21%
            C 3 1,5% -6,1% 6,4% 23,3% 19,1% 22,7% 11%
            C 4 -16,1% 8,4% 11,6% 17,9% 31,6% 16,6% 12%
  Highest C 5 -2,0% 2,1% 29,7% 0,6% 16,4% 1,1% 8%
  Earnings Portfolios
  Lowest E 1 -12,8% -6,9% 13,8% 17,9% 47,1% 13,7% 12%
            E 2 -1,2% 6,1% 6,6% 11,0% 8,6% 13,0% 7%
            E 3 -9,8% -6,0% 11,4% 14,7% 14,4% -1,1% 4%
            E 4 12,4% 9,7% 17,8% 13,8% 19,3% 15,3% 15%
  Highest E 5 18,3% 10,8% 22,0% 26,5% 10,2% 24,4% 19%
  BTM Portfolios
  Lowest BM 1 -15,0% -12,4% 0,9% 19,0% 0,5% 8,1% 0%
            BM 2 -13,2% -1,7% -9,2% 16,5% 12,1% -0,6% 1%
            BM 3 22,4% -0,9% 14,9% 14,2% 13,0% 17,8% 14%
            BM 4 -4,6% 4,4% 35,5% 16,4% 14,9% 19,5% 14%
  Highest BM 5 15,0% 24,6% 30,5% 17,6% 62,6% 20,9% 29%

                                     30
                                Table 5
                3-Year Total Return Matrix 2001 – 2004
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                             rd
below, this starting point is April 2001 or the beginning of the 2  quarter.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                               3 Year Total Return, Apr 2001 - Mar 2004
                      Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
             Avg PO 14,4% 17,4% 31,4% 24,6% 36,3% 30,4%
             No. Firms 67 71 71 70 71 71
  Beta Portfolios
  Lowest BT 1 -14,6% -1,1% 8,1% 10,3% 25,2% 50,6% 13%
            BT 2 -14,9% 12,0% 27,7% 31,8% 14,7% 40,1% 19%
            BT 3 37,4% 17,5% 38,7% 27,6% 3,9% 31,8% 26%
            BT 4 49,6% 11,4% 41,1% 19,4% 68,8% 2,7% 32%
  Highest BT 5 15,0% 48,7% 42,8% 35,3% 69,4% 25,3% 39%
  Size Portfolios
  Lowest S 1 38,8% 61,2% 74,9% 55,9% 99,0% 41,0% 62%
            S 2 45,5% 34,9% 61,6% 23,0% 43,4% 40,3% 41%
            S 3 18,4% 5,2% 32,4% 42,5% 18,3% 47,9% 27%
            S 4 -7,2% -9,0% 3,4% 5,9% 8,8% 17,0% 3%
  Highest S 5 -25,5% -8,2% -18,5% -5,1% 7,3% 5,1% -7%
  Capex Portfolios
  Lowest C 1 18,0% 36,8% 41,8% 6,4% 10,7% 24,5% 23%
            C 2 63,4% 29,8% 27,4% 64,8% 46,4% 32,4% 44%
            C 3 7,6% -2,1% 26,4% 39,9% 19,8% 43,6% 23%
            C 4 -15,3% 4,7% 34,7% 21,1% 85,5% 27,6% 26%
  Highest C 5 -1,2% 16,5% 25,7% -6,6% 20,7% 24,3% 13%
  Earnings Portfolios
  Lowest E 1 3,0% 13,6% 34,7% 13,8% 105,8% 48,5% 37%
            E 2 -8,3% 8,8% 2,3% 26,5% 8,7% 19,1% 10%
            E 3 27,1% 3,4% 30,0% 27,2% 22,6% 6,3% 19%
            E 4 18,4% 10,7% 24,9% 18,1% 30,4% 29,7% 22%
  Highest E 5 31,8% 51,0% 64,6% 38,6% 9,0% 47,1% 40%
  BTM Portfolios
  Lowest BM 1 13,0% -8,1% -5,0% 25,5% 4,4% 7,5% 6%
            BM 2 -15,4% 2,9% -7,2% 24,2% 17,1% 15,2% 6%
            BM 3 48,5% 14,3% 29,8% 27,5% 34,3% 37,8% 32%
            BM 4 10,1% 10,8% 64,6% 28,3% 18,3% 47,9% 30%
  Highest BM 5 13,5% 69,0% 77,1% 17,9% 109,7% 45,2% 55%

                                     31
                                Table 6
                5-Year Total Return Matrix 2001 – 2006
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                             rd
below, this starting point is April 2001 or the beginning of the 2  quarter.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                               5 Year Total Return, Apr 2001 - Mar 2006
                       Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
             Avg PO 52,0% 43,3% 94,6% 54,0% 63,3% 71,3%
             No. Firms 67 71 71 70 71 71
  Beta Portfolios
  Lowest BT 1 75,1% 17,0% 45,4% 19,5% 41,8% 117,9% 53%
            BT 2 -13,8% 40,7% 111,2% 63,7% 77,3% 84,0% 60%
            BT 3 65,8% 51,6% 90,9% 50,6% 22,5% 55,9% 56%
            BT 4 71,3% 26,5% 109,3% 65,7% 89,7% 46,5% 68%
  Highest BT 5 58,6% 82,5% 119,8% 73,0% 86,5% 49,2% 78%
   Size Portfolios
  Lowest S 1 128,0% 117,4% 198,3% 85,2% 130,6% 84,3% 124%
             S 2 81,4% 61,7% 154,8% 48,1% 82,6% 94,9% 87%
             S 3 59,8% 41,9% 83,2% 83,0% 50,5% 98,6% 70%
             S 4 11,6% 12,7% 29,0% 51,0% 33,9% 65,0% 34%
  Highest S 5 -27,5% -22,5% 0,3% 2,7% 13,9% 13,0% -3%
  Capex Portfolios
  Lowest C 1 52,4% 92,1% 94,5% 32,9% 30,7% 38,9% 57%
            C 2 107,0% 46,8% 90,1% 118,1% 63,7% 83,8% 85%
            C 3 44,5% 9,9% 55,7% 72,1% 52,1% 90,6% 54%
            C 4 9,3% 27,0% 89,1% 41,7% 129,7% 66,5% 61%
  Highest C 5 47,2% 37,1% 143,6% 8,2% 42,5% 79,2% 60%
  Earnings Portfolios
  Lowest E 1 46,6% 38,4% 145,0% 43,2% 117,9% 99,8% 82%
            E 2 17,3% 21,3% 19,2% 55,1% 35,6% 46,1% 32%
            E 3 60,6% 8,6% 73,0% 44,9% 71,2% 37,1% 49%
            E 4 66,6% 27,0% 68,9% 50,9% 51,1% 61,2% 54%
  Highest E 5 68,4% 121,6% 163,4% 76,1% 36,7% 110,4% 96%
  BTM Portfolios
  Lowest BM 1 75,0% 7,3% 8,0% 32,1% 16,9% 18,4% 26%
            BM 2 2,2% -7,6% 50,8% 47,4% 60,2% 42,7% 33%
            BM 3 48,2% 44,5% 52,8% 63,9% 49,8% 88,5% 58%
            BM 4 55,1% 43,4% 126,1% 76,2% 63,5% 94,4% 76%
  Highest BM 5 77,8% 131,5% 241,4% 52,9% 129,1% 116,5% 125%

                                     32
                                Table 7
                 1-Year Total Return Matrix 2007 - 2008
 Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                                       st
 below, this starting point is end of Dec 2007 or the beginning of the 1  quarter 2008.

 The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
 starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
 multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                             1 Year Total Return, Dec 2007 - Dec 2008
                     Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
           Avg PO -51,9% -42,1% -36,2% -37,2% -35,1% -36,2%
           No. Firms 17 85 85 86 85 85

Beta Portfolios
Lowest BT 1 -49,4% -35,5% -31,2% -37,8% -37,3% -35,8% -38%
           BT 2 -70,4% -40,4% -30,8% -26,0% -31,3% -23,3% -37%
           BT 3 -43,4% -36,3% -28,1% -31,9% -19,8% -37,6% -33%
           BT 4 -40,3% -46,6% -38,6% -33,7% -40,3% -38,9% -40%
Highest BT 5 -59,5% -51,9% -52,1% -56,8% -45,9% -45,6% -52%

Size Portfolios
Lowest S 1 -62,8% -42,3% -43,6% -46,4% -32,7% -33,1% -43%
           S 2 -32,4% -52,0% -31,6% -31,7% -33,5% -31,3% -35%
           S 3 -58,8% -35,4% -37,8% -34,0% -42,9% -48,3% -43%
           S 4 -48,5% -41,2% -31,4% -41,6% -30,5% -33,9% -38%
Highest S 5 -51,0% -39,4% -36,3% -31,8% -36,7% -35,2% -38%

Capex Portfolios
Lowest C 1 -31,4% -36,1% -44,4% -49,3% -43,0% -44,8% -42%
           C 2 -45,8% -41,4% -30,0% -33,7% -40,1% -39,8% -38%
           C 3 -70,7% -49,4% -33,3% -33,4% -27,3% -32,2% -41%
           C 4 -58,7% -38,7% -33,9% -37,0% -34,2% -31,4% -39%
Highest C 5 -53,2% -45,8% -38,7% -32,1% -30,1% -32,1% -39%

Earnings Portfolios
Lowest E 1 -61,2% -48,7% -54,5% -49,7% -44,5% -38,1% -49%
           E 2 -43,8% -52,3% -26,4% -27,9% -26,2% -31,7% -35%
           E 3 -52,4% -35,9% -35,0% -29,1% -27,8% -40,2% -37%
           E 4 -32,2% -36,2% -27,1% -44,1% -34,6% -31,1% -34%
Highest E 5 -66,6% -37,0% -36,8% -34,5% -41,6% -40,0% -43%

BTM Portfolios
Lowest BM 1 -66,0% -32,1% -33,3% -30,1% -23,8% -39,9% -38%
           BM 2 -59,7% -47,5% -36,1% -32,4% -23,2% -27,6% -38%
           BM 3 -35,1% -43,9% -34,9% -32,8% -32,7% -21,8% -34%
           BM 4 -61,0% -39,5% -35,5% -44,7% -47,3% -44,8% -45%
Highest BM 5 -38,5% -48,3% 33 -41,3% -46,5% -49,2% -45,8% -45%
                                Table 8
                 2-Year Total Return Matrix 2007 - 2009
Total returns of observed S&P 500 firms are listed below according to the period specified by the table, with the
starting date just at/before the economic peak stated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the table
                                                                      st
below, this starting point is end of Dec 2007 or the beginning of the 1  quarter 2008.

The sample observations are sorted horizontally according to their respective payout yields in the two-year period
starting two years before the economic peak. Subsequently, the observations are sorted as a single group with no
payouts, named Zero Payout, and five groups consisting of quintiles (20% of sample) of which PO 1 represents the
quintile with lowest payout yields and PO 5 the highest. Then, the observations are sorted vertically with regard to
multiple factors such as the Beta value, Market Capitalization (Size), Capital Expenditure Rate, Earnings Ratio and
Book-to-Market Ratio, where BT1, S1, C1, E1 & BM1 represent the quintiles with lowest ratios and BT5, S5, C5, E5 &
BM5 are the highest quintiles.

                             2 Year Total Return, Dec 2007 - Dec 2009
                     Zero Payout PO 1 PO 2 PO 3 PO 4 PO 5 Average
           Avg PO -12,0% -22,3% -16,0% -17,3% -17,0% -12,9%
           No. Firms 17 85 85 86 85 85

Beta Portfolios
Lowest BT 1 -15,1% -14,7% -9,9% -20,6% -18,5% -16,1% -16%
           BT 2 -13,5% -29,8% -18,0% 1,3% -16,4% -7,8% -14%
           BT 3 -6,2% -12,3% -11,5% -14,0% -8,1% -13,2% -11%
           BT 4 -7,0% -29,3% -11,9% -11,2% -18,7% -11,8% -15%
Highest BT 5 -19,4% -24,9% -28,8% -41,6% -22,9% -15,2% -25%

Size Portfolios
Lowest S 1 -7,0% -12,6% -13,7% -18,1% -3,0% 0,4% -9%
           S 2 15,9% -33,5% -14,3% -9,0% -18,0% -4,7% -11%
           S 3 -29,3% -18,3% -15,0% -17,1% -24,7% -27,8% -22%
           S 4 -34,0% -26,9% -16,8% -22,3% -18,5% -19,7% -23%
Highest S 5 -1,7% -20,2% -20,3% -19,6% -22,3% -14,1% -16%

Capex Portfolios
Lowest C 1 13,0% -19,0% -27,8% -41,0% -33,0% -31,3% -23%
           C 2 13,1% -27,3% -16,4% -5,9% -25,0% -17,6% -13%
           C 3 -33,2% -21,3% -5,9% -11,5% 0,7% 1,4% -12%
           C 4 -44,5% -13,8% -9,3% -12,3% -9,8% -5,0% -16%
Highest C 5 -9,9% -30,0% -19,3% -14,2% -16,1% -9,8% -17%

Earnings Portfolios
Lowest E 1 -19,0% -16,4% -30,4% -37,0% -19,1% -17,6% -23%
           E 2 20,8% -34,8% -8,8% 0,6% -8,1% -9,2% -7%
           E 3 -3,9% -20,5% -17,3% -13,4% -13,0% -18,3% -14%
           E 4 -13,8% -22,2% -9,3% -17,3% -16,1% -2,0% -13%
Highest E 5 -44,6% -17,7% -13,4% -18,1% -28,6% -17,2% -23%

BTM Portfolios
Lowest BM 1 -1,5% -13,2% -12,2% -5,9% -6,3% -6,4% -8%
           BM 2 -30,7% -27,4% -12,0% -3,5% -7,5% -9,5% -15%
           BM 3 5,2% -33,4% -18,6% -11,6% -10,9% 3,5% -11%
           BM 4 -46,1% -15,3%34 -17,3% -30,0% -27,5% -22,3% -26%
Highest BM 5 3,6% -23,3% -20,3% -35,9% -33,2% -29,0% -23%
                                   Table 9
                    T-Tests on Payout Portfolio Total Returns
      The table below lists the t-test results generated by the data analysis program STATA. In the test, five years of total
      returns data are used to generate 25 respective 30 observations. Test number 1 tests the difference between total
      returns of Zero Payout portfolios and PO5 portfolios across the 5-year period, etc. Results with T-value higher than
      |2| are proof for significance.

                                              T-Tests Matrix Returns
                                           Time period: Jun 1987 - Jun 1992
  Test No. Tested Variables Obs. Mean Std.Err. Std.Dev Results
     1. ZeroPayout 25 .1946933 .0641763 .3208815 T = -0.0652
                 PO5 25 .1995002 .0348646 .174323
     2. PO1 25 .110801 .0408364 .2041818 T = -3.2786
                 PO5 25 .1995002 .0348646 .174323
     3. Beta1 30 .0419047 .0232646 .1274252 T= -3.5538
                Beta5 30 .2257359 .0503436 .2757435
     4. Size1 30 .0942699 .0311678 .1707133 T = -2.1952
                 Size5 30 .1916341 .0423305 .2318538
     5. Capex1 30 .1279376 .0302128 .1654821 T = -1.8086
               Capex5 30 .163339 .0352259 .1929402
     6. Earning1 30 .1931462 .0474092 .259671 T = 1.5425
               Earning5 30 .1285111 .0363894 .1993128
     7. BTM1 30 .1459378 .0327469 .1793622 T = 1.1814
                BTM5 30 .0933179 .0305261 .1671981

                                  Table 10
                    T-Tests on Payout Portfolio Total Returns
The table below lists the t-test results generated by the data analysis program STATA. In the test, five years of total returns data
are used to generate 25 respective 30 observations. Test number 1 tests the difference between total returns of Zero Payout
portfolios and PO5 portfolios across the 5-year period, etc. Results with T-value higher than |2| are proof for significance.

                                              T-Tests Matrix Returns
                                         Time Period: Mar 2001 - Mar 2006
  Test No. Tested Variables Obs. Mean Std.Err. Std.Dev Results
     1. ZeroPayout 25 .1355302 .0723107 .3615535 T = -2.4450
                 PO5 25 .3176197 .0682971 .3414854
     2. PO1 25 .1516999 .0560526 .280263 T = -2.5479
                 PO5 25 .3176197 .0682971 .3414854
     3. Beta1 30 .1525244 .0666361 .3649811 T = -3.7517
                Beta5 30 .3826388 .0622026 .3406974
     4. Size1 30 .5764106 .0935766 .5125403 T = 7.9379
                 Size5 30 -.0959317 .0273869 .1500042
     5. Capex1 30 .2110037 .0544523 .2982474 T = 0.6299
               Capex5 30 .1859663 .0648688 .3553008
     6. Earning1 30 .3258403 .0840479 .4603495 T = -1.5323
               Earning5 30 .4355342 .0802679 .4396452
     7. BTM1 30 .0654442 .0410759 .224982 T = -4.6860
                BTM5 30 .5552706 .1074212 .58837

                                         35
                                  Table 11
                    T-Tests on Payout Portfolio Total Returns
The table below lists the t-test results generated by the data analysis program STATA. In the test, five years of total returns data
are used to generate 25 respective 30 observations. Test number 1 tests the difference between total returns of Zero Payout
portfolios and PO5 portfolios across the 5-year period, etc. Results with T-value higher than |2| are proof for significance.

                                              T-Tests Matrix Returns
                                          Time Period: Dec 2007 - Dec 2009
  Test No. Tested Variables Obs. Mean Std.Err. Std.Dev Results
     1. ZeroPayout 10 -.3240978 .0731297 .2312563 T = -1.6184
                 PO5 10 -.2452877 .0431526 .1364604
     2. PO1 10 -.3218683 .0402758 .1273632 T = -2.7589
                 PO5 10 -.2452877 .0431526 .1364604
     3. Beta1 12 -.2681515 .0359667 .1245925 T = 5.6721
                Beta5 12 -.3872435 .0450785 .1561566
     4. Size1 12 -.2626005 .0578354 .2003476 T = 0.3863
                 Size5 12 -.2739008 .0386818 .1339976
     5. Capex1 12 -.3234162 .0480617 .1664907 T = -0.9686
               Capex5 12 -.2761956 .0405874 .140599
     6. Earning1 12 -.3635703 .0454881 .1575753 T = -0.8658
               Earning5 12 -.3300318 .0437341 .1514993
     7. BTM1 12 -.225593 .05434 .1882392 T = 2.4774
                BTM5 12 -.3397332 .0439938 .1523991

                                         36
                                       Table 12
                Cross-Sectional Regression on Payout Portfolios 1987 - 1992
        The cross-sectional regressions below test the impact that the tested variables (Market Premium, Size, Earnings Ratio, Capex
        Ratio and BTM Ratio) have on the dependant variable (Portfolio Excess Return). The degree of the impact is showed by the Beta
         value listed below. The regressions also test the significance of the impact, which is captured by the T-values which a T-value
        over or below 2.0 means the result is significant and valid. The R-squared values explain the explanatory power of the
         regression, of which 1.00 is the highest grade with 100% explanatory power.

                                                   Cross-Sectional Regression Analysis
                                                         Time period: 1987 - 1992
Tested Portfolio Dependant Variable Tested Variables No. Obs. Beta Std.Err. T-value R2
  Zero Payout Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 24 1.121382 .1294048 8.67 0.9069
                       (Annual) Size 24 -.000099 .0000843 -1.17
                                           Earnings Ratio 24 .1169063 .2942123 0.40
                                            Capex Ratio 24 -1.499732 1.03298 -1.45
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 24 -.4533805 .2062082 -2.20
     PO 1 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 24 1.179925 .0986308 11.96 0.9192
                       (Annual) Size 24 -3.36e-06 8.39e-06 -0.40
                                           Earnings Ratio 24 -2.172381 1.137849 -1.91
                                            Capex Ratio 24 .1805675 .9264324 0.19
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 24 .1954967 .25101 0.78
     PO 2 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 24 .9507507 .0656229 14.49 0.9112
                       (Annual) Size 24 -.0000659 .000021 -3.13
                                           Earnings Ratio 24 -4.24161 1.016787 -4.17
                                            Capex Ratio 24 -.2539563 .8722862 -0.29
                                       Book-to-Market Ratio 24 .4783562 .3567647 1.34
     PO 3 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 24 1.055083 .0613202 17.21 0.9595
                       (Annual) Size 24 -.0000374 .0000125 -2.99
                                           Earnings Ratio 24 -1.619958 1.086917 -1.49
                                            Capex Ratio 24 -.1936857 .6373522 -0.30
                                       Book-to-Market Ratio 24 .2020743 .209244 0.97
     PO 4 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 24 1.102805 .0627325 17.58 0.9355
                       (Annual) Size 24 -.0000306 .0000187 -1.64
                                           Earnings Ratio 24 -2.238378 .5845354 -3.83
                                            Capex Ratio 24 .4658751 .9071903 0.51
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 24 -.063276 .2232385 -0.28
     PO 5 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 24 .9272524 .061582 15.06 0.9355
                       (Annual) Size 24 -.0000172 .0000141 -1.22
                                           Earnings Ratio 24 1.3457 .3263498 4.12
                                            Capex Ratio 24 .1216282 .9594724 0.13
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 24 -.4853641 .2233608 -2.17

                                              37
                                       Table 13
              Cross-Sectional Regression on Payout Portfolios 2001 – 2005
       The cross-sectional regressions below test the impact that the tested variables (Market Premium, Size, Earnings Ratio, Capex
       Ratio and BTM Ratio) have on the dependant variable (Portfolio Excess Return). The degree of the impact is showed by the Beta
       value listed below. The regressions also test the significance of the impact, which is captured by the T-values which a T-value
       over or below 2.0 means the result is significant and valid. The R-squared values explain the explanatory power of the
         regression, of which 1.00 is the highest grade with 100% explanatory power.

                                                   Cross-Sectional Regression Analysis
                                                         Time period: 2001 - 2006

Tested Portfolio Dependant Variable Tested Variables No. Obs. Beta Std.Err. T-value R2
  Zero Payout Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 20 1.207429 .1724384 7.00 0.9039
                       (Annual) Size 20 2.35e-06 4.92e-06 0.48
                                           Earnings Ratio 20 -.6464836 1.411547 -0.46
                                            Capex Ratio 20 -.0129794 1.865379 -0.01
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 20 -.2738109 .9318089 -0.29
     PO 1 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 20 .4438431 .1507616 2.94 0.6823
                       (Annual) Size 20 .0000232 6.41e-06 3.61
                                           Earnings Ratio 20 1.379838 .9867749 1.40
                                           Capex Ratio 20 1.182 1.968682 0.60
                                       Book-to-Market Ratio 20 1.492942 1.124644 1.33
     PO 2 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 20 .4942723 .1370572 3.61 0.6642
                       (Annual) Size 20 .0000107 6.88e-06 1.56
                                           Earnings Ratio 20 1.108078 1.994229 0.56
                                           Capex Ratio 20 1.602906 3.312072 0.48
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 20 -1.522975 1.182754 -1.29
     PO 3 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 20 .4490184 .1255721 3.58 0.5871
                       (Annual) Size 20 .0000207 .000018 1.15
                                           Earnings Ratio 20 -2.106427 2.731088 -0.77
                                           Capex Ratio 20 1.947587 3.481007 0.56
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 20 -.7596431 1.398976 -0.54
     PO 4 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 20 .2867618 .1757198 1.63 0.5442
                       (Annual) Size 20 .0000262 .0000167 1.57
                                           Earnings Ratio 20 -1.136667 1.155946 -0.98
                                           Capex Ratio 20 3.082484 4.956672 0.62
                                        Book-to-Market Ratio 20 -.188109 .4808192 -0.39
     PO 5 Portfolio Excess Return Market Premium 20 .7141361 .2609013 2.74 0.5952
                       (Annual) Size 20 -1.32e-06 .0000123 -0.11
                                           Earnings Ratio 20 .1822044 .2502765 0.73
                                            Capex Ratio 20 -1.451373 2.739539 -0.53
                                       Book-to-Market Ratio 20 .0928836 .1836032 0.51

                                              38
                                  Table 14
                     Panel Regression on Payout Portfolios
The panel regressions below test the impact and correlation which the tested variables have on the depandant variable, or the
firm-level excess return. The Beta coefficients describe the amount of the impact while the z-value describe the validity of the
test. Z-values over or under the absolute vaule of 2.0 mean the regression show significant evidence.

                                        Panel Regression Analysis

  Tested Periods Dependant Variable Tested Variables No. Obs. Beta Coef. Std.Err. Z-value
    1987 - 1992 Firm Excess Return Payout Yield 424 -0,0275211 0,129659 -0.21
                        (Total) (Last-Twelve-Month)
                                          Beta (firm) 424 0,0319306 0,027828 1.15
                                      Market Premium 424 0,8649505 0,101297 8.54
                                             Size 424 3,08E-07 9,89E-07 0.31
                                         Earnings Ratio 424 -0,0935072 0,122435 -0.76
                                         Capex Ratio 424 0,3007886 0,306999 0.98
                                     Book-to-Market Ratio 424 0,05108 0,021927 2.33
    1987 - 1992 Firm Excess Return Payout Yield 424 0,438083 0,157571 2.78
                         (Total) (Expected Rate)
                                          Beta (firm) 424 0,0283571 0,027687 1.02
                                      Market Premium 424 0,8619041 0,101384 8.50
                                             Size 424 1,31E-07 9,84E-07 0.13
                                         Earnings Ratio 424 -0,1008778 0,123574 -0.82
                                         Capex Ratio 424 0,3452014 0,306784 1.13
                                     Book-to-Market Ratio 424 0,0485409 0,022407 2.17
    2001 - 2006 Firm Excess Return Payout Yield 395 0,0336944 0,416278 0.08
                        (Total) (Last-Twelve-Month)
                                          Beta (firm) 395 -0,0341493 0,016338 -2.09
                                      Market Premium 395 1,201757 0,059458 20.21
                                              Size 395 -1,34E-06 2,95E-07 -4.54
                                         Earnings Ratio 395 0,1373549 -1,04 0.300
                                         Capex Ratio 395 -0,2057084 0,356123 -0.58
                                     Book-to-Market Ratio 395 0,0368003 0,02904 1.27
    2001 - 2006 Firm Excess Return Payout Yield 395 0,0596667 0,308288 0.19
                         (Total) (Expected Rate)
                                          Beta (firm) 395 -0,0335529 0,015243 -2.20
                                      Market Premium 395 1,199665 0,061526 19.50
                                              Size 395 -1,33E-06 2,90E-07 -4.58
                                         Earnings Ratio 395 0,1385453 -1,03 0.30
                                         Capex Ratio 395 -0,1752112 0,364185 -0.48
                                     Book-to-Market Ratio 395 0,0369229 0,029163 1.27

                                         39