  Stockholm School of Economics
  Department of Finance

   Momentum under different market climates: Evidence
              from the South African market

         Lars Gustafsson♠                Joakim Lundqvist♦

                        Bachelor’s Thesis in Finance 2010
                           Tutor: Magnus Dahlquist

                                    Abstract

  In this study, we examine the existence and persistence of return momentum in the South
  African market between March 1995 and December 2009. We investigate three different
  momentum strategies, and examine their risk-return  relationship under different market
  climates. We mainly use a one-factor market model to identify possible differences in
  systematic risk exposure conditional on the market  climate. We find momentum to be
   positive and economically significant in the South  African market. The best strategy, based
   on the previous 12 months returns and held for 3 months, generate an average annual return
  of 29.84 percent, however trading costs diminishes  the profits. While there seems to be a
  relationship between negative market climate and increased correlation between momentum
   returns and the market factor, our results only give weak evidence for that the market climate
  has impact on the magnitude of momentum returns.

♠ 21226@student.hhs.se
♦ 21414@student.hhs.se

    
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


Examining trading patterns is always of interest since their returns affect investors in
deciding investment strategies and portfolio selection. Today, many stock market analysts
and  portfolio  managers  believe  that  momentum  strategies  earn  significant  returns.  A
momentum strategy buys the best performing stocks,  and sells the worst performing stocks,
based on their returns over a chosen period of time. The positions are then held for a
predetermined time before the pattern is repeated.  While the evidence on momentum profits
under  different  market  conditions  is  contradictory,  interesting  characteristics  has  been
revealed about the return patterns. For example, Griffin, Ji and Martin (2003) suggests that
momentum  strategies  earn  positive  abnormal  returns  and  show  no  increased  market
correlation in negative market climates. We find the last suggestion especially noteworthy,
since increased market correlation in economic downturns makes investors miss out on the
benefits of diversification when they need them the  most. If this doesn’t apply to momentum,
the use of momentum strategies could reach beyond simply trying to beat the market.

      The purpose of our study is to further investigate  the nature of return momentum under
different market climates. We examine the profitability and risk-return relationship of return
momentum in the South African market between March  1995 and December 2009. In
general, there are few studies on return momentum from the African markets. As far as we
know, there are none with the approach of describing the risk-return relationship of return
momentum under different market climates. We have chosen to study the South African
market since it is by far the most developed African market in terms of number of listed
companies, trading volume, liquidity and so forth.  These characteristics are important to us
since we don’t want our results to be attributable  to illiquid stocks in a malfunctioning
market.

      We assess three different momentum strategies; 3 month evaluation period held for 3
months, 6 month evaluation period held for 6 months  and 12 month evaluation period held
for 3  months.  First  we examine their return  patterns;  we compare  their profitability,
investigate trading costs and evaluate the strategies performance under different market
climates. Second, we study the strategies’ exposure  to systematic risk and estimate the risk
measurements conditional on the market climate. The  main contribution of this paper is on
the evidence of how momentum returns and market risk are related under different market
climates. Potential findings can be used as starting point for further studies with more
complex models, or as base for a better understanding of return momentum. We also
contribute by constructing momentum portfolios that  can be used for future studies, and by
extending the research on momentum both cross-sectional and in the time dimension.

      To preview our findings, we find that momentum is persistent and significant in the
South African market. The magnitude of momentum profits are of economic significance and
our best strategy earns an average annual return of  29.8 percent. We find little evidence for
differences in momentum returns conditional on the  market climate. There is however weak
evidence for increased market correlation in negative market climates, suggesting that our
momentum strategies are more risky than implied by  a one factor market model. Trading
costs appear to be an important issue in evaluating  momentum profits, but we think there is a
need for more reliable measurements in order to make a fair analysis. High portfolio turnover
ratios make trading costs, even at very low levels,  economically significant. We also find
evidence for higher momentum profits among portfolios containing smaller sized stocks, thus

                                                                          2
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

we believe that the Fama and French three factor model might be a better approach to
explaining momentum returns.

      The rest of our paper will be outlined as follows;  we begin with a review on previous
research related to our paper (Section II). In section III we give a detailed description of the
dataset. Section IV describes our empirical methodology; how we set up and evaluate the
momentum strategies, how we control for systematic  risk factors and how we measure
momentum performance under different market climates. In section V we discuss problems
associated with our dataset and methodology. We present our results in section VI and
section VII concludes the paper.

                                                                          3
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


Return momentum - a tendency for past winner stocks  to outperform past losers, was
revealed by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). They found  that between 1965 and 1989, their
strategy based on 6-month returns and held for 6-month, on average earned an excess return
of 12.01 percent annually in the U.S market. Their  results persisted after adjustments for
systematic risk and trading costs had been made. Jegadeesh and Titman believed the market
to under react to information in the short run while over reacting in the long run, a view in
line with their further findings of a reversal trend subsequent to the holding period, along
with the long-term reversal effect identified by DeBondt and Thaler (1985). A common
criticism to Jegadeesh and Titman’s early work was  that their return pattern was due to data
mining, a problem hard to overcome in a non-experimental setting, when limited by data
availability.  However,  Jegadeesh  and  Titman  (2001)  found  their momentum  strategies
continuously profitable in the 1990 to 1998 sample  period. Contrary to other market
anomalies, such as the size effect discovered by Banz (1981), momentum seemed to be
persistent in sample periods subsequent to the original study.

      Multiple other studies find momentum present and significant in a numbers of markets.
Rouwenhorst (1998, 1999) and Chui, Titman and Wei (2000) find momentum in many of the
European markets, Emerging markets and five Asian markets. Griffin, Ji and Martin (2003)
find significant momentum profits in the African, American, Asian and European markets.

      Besides return momentum, several profitable momentum strategies seem present in the
                                                                                                                                        1
market. Vandell and Parrino (1986) find that a model with earnings momentum  largely
outperformed the U.S. market. Chan, Jegadeesh, and  Lakonishok (1996) show that return
momentum coexists with earnings momentum while Scott, Stumpp, and Xu (2003) document
                                                                           2
earnings  momentum  in  all  major  markets  they  examine .  However  Hong,  Lee,  and
Swaminathan (2003) only find positive and significant earnings momentum in six of the
eleven international markets they examine. Griffin,  Ji and Martin (2005) find that both price
and earnings momentum yields high profits in a range of markets. They also find that price
and earnings momentum are correlated but that a strategy using both earns higher profits than
                                                                                                                      3
each one alone. Grinblatt and Moskowitz (1999) find  industry momentum to be significant.

      Studies also show higher momentum profits for certain types of stocks. Lee and
Swaminathan (2000) find momentum to be stronger among stocks with high turnover. Hong,
Lim, and Stein (2000) find small firms with low analyst coverage to earn higher momentum
profits than large firms. Grinblatt and Moskowitz (2003) give a profound research on the
matter and show that momentum is higher for growth  firms, firms with high volume and
small firms with few institutional owners.

      The explanations for momentum are mainly behavioral. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
concludes that momentum profits are not due to systematic risk or delayed stock price
reactions to common factors. However they claim it’s possible that the market under reacts to
information about the short-term prospect of firms  while overacting in the long-term. More

1
 Firms with unexpectedly high earnings outperform firms with unexpectedly low earnings in periods subsequent to the
earnings announcement.
2
 France, Germany, Japan, U.K, U.S
3
 Strategies that buy stocks from past winning industries and sell stock from past losing industries

                                                                          4
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

over- and under reaction theories are presented by  Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998),
Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998), and Hong and Stein (1999). They focus on
how investors form expectations about the future prospects of firms, how they respond to
new information and their overconfidence in private  information. Conrad and Kaul (1998)
argue that momentum profits are due to cross-sectional differences in expected returns rather
than because of time-series patterns in data, a hypothesis rejected by Jegadeesh and Titman
(2001) who find that momentum profits are due to delayed overreaction that eventually
reverses. Fama and French (1996) demonstrate that their three-factor model cannot explain
momentum. Griffin, Ji and Martin (2003) find no evidence that macroeconomic risk variables
based on the Chen, Roll and Ross (1986) model can explain phenomenon. Neither do Cooper,
Gutierrez and Hameed (2004) find evidence that macroeconomic risk drives momentum.
Like Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) they find that momentum profits tend to reverse over a
longer time horizon.

      The research closest related to our paper is on the  evidence of momentum profits under
different market climates. Griffin, Ji and Martin (2003) show that momentum profits are
statistically large in good and bad economic states  and that the co-movement between
momentum strategies and markets are weak. Contrary,  Cooper, Gutierrez and Hameed (2004)
find that momentum depends critically on the state  of the market and only is profitable
following up-market trends. However, later research  by Griffin, Ji and Martin (2005) gives
further evidence of momentum in both up and down markets. They also find foreign
momentum  strategies  much  less  correlated  with  US  momentum  strategies  than  their
respective market indices. Contrary to market indices, they find momentum profits to be no
more highly correlated in down-markets. In addition  they also find momentum strategies less
volatile than their corresponding market indices.

                                                                          5
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


This section describes how we obtain and modify the  data that is used throughout the study.
All stock data is provided by Thomson Datastream Advance.

South Africa is a medium-developed country that in  2008 had a GDP per capita of EUR
        4,  5
4,040   according to World Economic Forum (2009). The same  study ranked the country
   nd
32  out of 55 in financial stability among the world’s  leading economies - taking measures
as financial policies, financial institutions and financial access into account. Johannesburg
Stock Exchange (JSE) was established in 1887 and became a member of the World
Federation of Exchanges in 1963. Mkhize and Msweli-Mbanga (2006) tells that JSE was
deregulated to its present standards beginning in 1995, mainly as an attempt to attract foreign
investors and increase market activity.

      On December 31, 2009, the JSE had 396 companies listed with a total market
                                                                                                                                 6
capitalization of EUR 550bn, and a total trading volume in 2009 of EUR 260bn . This can be
compared  to  NASDAQ  OMX  Nordic  that  had  797  listed  companies  with  a  market
capitalization of EUR 570bn and a trading volume in  2009 of EUR 560bn according to World
Federation of Exchanges (2010).

      The original dataset contains daily data on all stocks on the JSE considered major
securities and primary quotes, from January 1994 until December 2009. For each security we
                                                   7
obtain daily  Total Return Index as well as market capitalization. All values are measured in
South African Rand (ZAR). The sample consists of a  total of over 1000 companies and
includes both dead and active stocks. We note that  many stocks get delisted during the
period,   only   104   of   the   companies   listed   in   1994   remains   in   the   sample   by
2009.
                            TABLE 1: Final sample descriptives
                        This table shows the characteristics of the final sample. Volatility,
                     average return and number of observations are calculated for each stock
                      in our final sample, over the whole sample period (quoted monthly).
                  Reported is the equal-weighted average value of the  sample, independent
                                      of number of observations per stock.
                         No of stocks                         Monthly Average
               Max          461            Return                  1.05%
                Min          225            Volatility                64.27%
                Average       329            No obs                     89

      Our final sample consists of data on a total of 710  stocks. This leaves us with a
minimum of 225 cross-sectional observations per month, which will ensure well-diversified
momentum portfolios. The characteristics of the final sample are reported in Table 1.

4
 Originally quoted in US Dollar, EUR/USD=0.7094 (Oanda.com, Dec 31, 2008)
5
 Compared to Sweden, GDP/capita EUR 37,450
6
 Originally quoted in South African Rand, EUR/ZAR=0.0942 (Oanda.com, Dec 31, 2009)
7
 Total Return Index is a measure provided by Thomson  Datastream that includes price level increase and dividends
reinvested.

                                                                          6
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

      All observations without valid return data, or stocks with price data showing no return
over six following months is deleted from the original data set. Since the volatility of some
                     8
stocks is extreme , we suspect data input error and have chosen to exclude the stocks with the
5 percent highest and 5 percent lowest volatility over the entire sample period. We limit the
sample period to reach between March 1995 and December 2009 because of insufficient data
on the risk free rate prior the period. The limitation also fits well considering the time when
the South African market was deregulated to its present standards. To simplify the portfolio
construction procedure, we calculate the monthly return as the cumulative return over each
calendar month.
                                                     Pi,d − Pi,d−1
     (1)                               ri , d =             − 1
                                                            Pi,d −1

                                                                            9
Equation 1 shows the daily return calculations, Pi,d  and ri,d  is the price  and return for stocki  in day d
respectively.

     (2)                       r i ,t = (1 + rd )(1 + ri,d+1 ),.., (1 + ri,d+n ) − 1

Equation 2 shows the monthly return calculations. n  is the number of days, and   ri,t  the return for stock i in
month t.

      As proxy for the risk-free rate we use the rate on  3-month bonds issued by the South
African Reserve bank. We calculate the monthly rate  according to the following formula.

                                                                       1 /12
    (3)                           r month = (1  + ryear )   −1

      We calculate the return on an equal-weighted index  containing all stocks from our final
sample and use this as proxy for the common risk factor in the market.

                                                                      n
                                      1
     (4)                                     r index ,t =    ri,t
                                                            n i=1
From Equation 4 follows that the return on the equal-weighted index in month t simply is the arithmetic average
return of all stocks in the final sample in month t.

8
  Some stocks in the sample show a volatility exceeding 1000% annually, while other has almost zero volatility. Our
proposed restriction assures the sample volatility  to be in parity with previous research on the South  African market. Bae,
Lim and Wei (2006) measure the average annual volatility among South African stocks to 57,38%, which makes our sample
volatility of 64.27% reasonable.
9
  All prices are obtained from the total return index in order to calculate the dividend-adjusted returns.

                                                                          7
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


In this section, we describe the empirical methodology used for setting up and evaluating the
momentum strategies. We begin with describing how the strategies are constructed and how
we estimate trading costs. We continue with describing how we define market climates and
how we measure the return on our momentum strategies. Finally, we lay out the methodology
used for describing the relationship between risk and momentum returns.


We evaluate three momentum strategies with different evaluation period (J) and holding
period (K).

                  A. 3 months evaluation period, 3 months holding period (3/3).

                  B. 6 months evaluation period, 6 months holding period (6/6).

                  C. 12 months evaluation period, 3 months holding period. (12/3)

       Strategy A is chosen since we find it interesting to evaluate a shorter strategy. Strategy
B is studied by Jegadeesh and Titman and is one of  the most examined by others. We chose
strategy C since it was the most profitable in the  Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) study.

      In every month t, all stocks in our final sample are ranked (worst to best) by their
return during the previous months J, that is their  performance during the period t-J to t. The
stocks in the first decile form the  loser portfolio  while the  winner portfolio  contains the tenth
decile of companies ranked by stock market performance. The  zero-cost portfolio  is formed
out of the winner portfolio minus the loser portfolio. All portfolios are equal-weighted. To
avoid issues associated with lagged reaction effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread we
                                                                                                                                     10
leave out one week between the portfolio formation  period and the holding period . Further,
due to illiquidity reasons we exclude the 5 percent  smallest stocks according to market
capitalization in each period.

      In any given time t≥t0+J, where t0  is the beginning of our sample period and J the
evaluation period, we adopt our strategies by buying the winner portfolio and selling short the
loser portfolio. In line with Jegadeesh and Titman  (1993) we hold overlapping portfolios.
This means that in any given month the winner-portfolio consists of K equal-weighted
portfolios of stocks evaluated over J months, and held for K months. The same holds for the
loser- and zero-cost portfolios. The strategies exhibits their first return in t*=t0+J+K, when
they hold K equal-weighted momentum portfolios. For  example, our strategy based on the
previous 12 months returns and held for 3 months will show its first return observation 15
months subsequent to the beginning of the sample period. The winner-, loser-, and zero-cost
portfolios’ will each consist of three equal-weighted portfolios; the first based on the returns
over t0-t11, the second of the returns between t1-t12, and the third portfolio will be based on the
returns from t2-t13. Since we hold overlapping portfolios we will revise the weights of 1/K of
the securities in each portfolio every month. By doing this, we reduce the importance of
market timing and decrease the impact of the noisy  return pattern of individual stocks on
portfolio return (i.e. diversifiable risk). In the  beginning of each month, we will ensure that

10
   We follow the methodology suggested by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) that is in line with previous findings of Jegadeesh
(1990) and Lehman (1990).

                                                                          8
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

the strategies maintain equal-weighted. This is done to simplify the modeling procedure.
Previous evidence by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) show only minor differences if the
portfolios are not rebalanced.

                           TABLE 2: Portfolio formation
                                   The strategies are quoted J/K. Each portfolio
                                contains K equal-weighted (1/K), overlapping
                                 momentum portfolios. The stocks in each of
                                    the K portfolios are chosen based on their
                                       returns over the previous J months.

                                                        Portfolio
                            Strategy    Winner    Loser      W-L
                            3/3       AW     AL     Aw-AL
                             6/6       BW      BL      Bw-BL
                             12/3       CW      CL      Cw-CL
                                                                                                                                                                

We use the measurement of  one-way equity trading costs for active managers in South
Africa, estimated by Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000) to calculate the average trading
cost for each strategy. We calculate the average turnover for the winner-, loser- and zero-cost
portfolios as the weighted average turnover for the  K portfolios they contain. Since the
portfolios are equal-weighted, that is simply the number of new stocks in the portfolio in
month t divided by the total number of stocks at t-1. As we hold overlapping portfolios, every
sell order is associated with a buy order. Hence we  use two-way trading cost in our
calculations.

                                            K
                                1
     (5)                          TP  ,t =     (2 (TOp,t ⋅ 0,81))
                                        K p=1
In Equation 5, 0.81 is the Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000) measurement for one-way equity trading costs
in the South African market, quoted in percent of portfolio turnover. TOp,t  and Tp,t  are the turnover and trading
cost respectively for each of the p=1,…,K overlapping portfolios in month t. TP,t  is the average trading cost for
the P=winner-, loser-, and zero-cost portfolios in  month t. The trading cost measurement is quoted in  percent to
simplify the comparison with strategy return.

      We define  Up-months  as months when the market return is positive and  Down-months
as months when the market return is negative.  Bull  is defined as months when the return of
our equal-weighted market index is above its 6-months simple moving average, while  Bear  is
the months when it is below.

     (6)
                                     1
                                      RMAt =   (r index,t  ,..., rindex,t−6 )
                                  6
In Equation 6 ,rindex,t  and RMAt  is the return and simple moving average of our equal-weighted index
respectively in month t.

      In this way, we make a difference between periods with a negative  market state  and
periods with a negative  market trend  in order to capture two different effects. We use  the first
definition to measure the momentum strategies correlation with the market factor when the

                                                                          9
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

market return is negative. The other definition allows us to determine if momentum strategies
exhibit higher (or lower) market exposure in pessimistic market trends. Our approach also
enables us to examine if the strategies are able to  generate positive returns conditional on the
market climate.

       For each strategy, returns are measured for the winner-, loser- and zero-cost portfolios
respectively. The returns are measured from t*=t0+J+K, that is the month when the strategy is
completed, to the end of the sample period.

      We first calculate the monthly returns for all the  K lagged portfolios that form each
part of the momentum strategies.
                                                                 n
                                    1
     (7)                                   r p ,t =    ri,t
                                                        n i=1
In Equation 7, ri,t  is the return on stocki  in month t in the p=1,…,K portfolios. Since we hold equal weighted
portfolios, rp,t is simply the arithmetic average return of the n stocks in the portfolio.

      We then calculate monthly returns for the winner-,  loser-, and zero-cost portfolios as
the average monthly return on the K overlapping portfolios.

                                                 K
    (8)                                  1
                                          rP  ,t =     rp,t
                                              K p=1

In Equation 8, rP,t is the return on each of the P=winner-, loser- and  zero-cost portfolios in month t while rp,t is
the return on each of the p=1,…,K overlapping portfolios. We maintain equal weights of stocks in the
overlapping portfolios as well as equal weights between the overlapping portfolios.

      By definition, all returns are measured in percentage per month. We do not attempt to
calculate the returns adjusted for exchange rate fluctuations to any other currency. The reason
for this is that we primarily are interested in the  relationship between momentum return and
the domestic market climate, and do not want our returns to be affected by fluctuating
exchange rates.


We perform two tests to assess if the momentum returns are due to conventional risk
measurements. First, we use a one-factor model with  the excess return of our equal-weighted
index as proxy for the market factor. The model is  also estimated allowing for different
intercepts and factor loadings conditional on the market climate. Based on those results, we
test if return differences among strategies can be  related to differences in stock size between
the momentum strategies.

      We perform the following regression in the time-series for each strategy’s winner-,
loser- and zero-cost portfolio. We interpret the regression intercept (αp) as the portfolios
abnormal return, and the slope coefficient (βp) as the portfolios exposure to the systematic
risk factor.

                                  rP  ,t − rf ,t = α P + β P (rindex,t − rf ,t ) + ε P,t
     (9)

In Equation 9, rP,t  and rf,t is the return on portfolio P and the rate on 3-month bonds issued by the South African
Reserve bank in month t respectively. rindex,t is the return on our equal-weighted index in month  t. βp is the factor

                                                                         10
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

loading, or the portfolios sensitivity to the market factor. αp is the portfolio’s risk-adjusted or abnormal return,
and εp,t  is the error term.

      Next, we use the regression model in  Equation 10  to allow for different intercepts and
factor loadings conditional on the market climate.  From our definitions of market climate
follows that we run two subsets of regressions. In  the first set, Dt  is a dummy-variable taking
a value of one in  down-months. That is months when the market return is negative. In the
second set of regressions, Dt  takes the value of one if the market return is below its 6-month
simple moving average, our definition of  bear  months. We run the two sets of regressions for
the winner-, loser- and zero-cost portfolio of each  strategy.

    (10)        rP  ,t − rf ,t = α 1,P + Dtα diff ,P + (β 1,P + Dt βdiff ,P )(r index,t − rf ,t ) + ε P,t

In Equation 10, α1,P and β1,P are interpreted as the abnormal return and factor loading respectively when the
market climate is Up or Bull. In opposition α1,p  + αdiff,P  andβ1,P+βdiff,P  are the abnormal return and factor
loading when the market climate is Down or Bear.

      We are especially interested in  αdiff,P  and  βdiff,P  from the two regression sets. These
estimators will tell us if the momentum strategies  tend to earn lower (or higher) abnormal
returns and exhibit increased (or decreased) market  correlation when the market climate is
negative.

       Based on the results from our one-factor model, we  test if differences in the strategies’
returns can be related to differences in median firm size among the momentum portfolios. We
test the hypothesis that the average median firm size for the different winner-, loser-, and
zero-cost portfolios’ are equal to the median market firm size against a two-sided alternative
with a paired t-test.
                                       H 0 : MedianP,t − MedianIndex,t = 0
   (11)
                                       H1 : MedianP,t − MedianIndex,t ≠ 0

        Equation 11 shows the null-hypothesis under which the difference between the average median firm size
of the momentum portfolios and the median firm size  of our equal-weighted index is equal.

      The median is in our opinion a better estimator of  portfolio firm size than a simple
average for two reasons. Since portfolio returns are equal-weighted among the included
stocks, using the median gives each firm’s size the  same weight. Also, Fama and French
(1996) did use firm ranking to construct the factor  portfolios that lay ground for their findings
on firm size return differences.

       We calculate the median firm size for all the K lagged portfolios that form each part of
the momentum strategies.

    (12)                               Median p,t = (n  + 1) / 2

In Equation 12,Medianp,t is the median size for each of the K portfolios in  month t.

      We then calculate the average median firm size for  the winner-, loser-, and zero-cost
portfolios’ as the average of the K portfolio’s they contain.

                                                                         11
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

                                                    K
   (13)                                   1
                                   Median P ,t =     Medianp,t
                                                K p=1

Equation 13 show that the average median size of the winner-, loser-, and zero-cost portfolios are equal to the
average median size of the K lagged portfolios they  contain.

      The median firm size of the market in month t is calculated according to  Equation 14

   (14)                           Median Index,t = (N + 1) / 2

                                                                         12
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


In this section, we discuss problems related to our  dataset and empirical methodology. The
busy reader proceeds to the next section with full  understanding of our results. We begin with
problems related to the characteristics of our dataset and continue with a motivation to our
strategy selection. We then discuss our trading cost measurement and market climate
definitions along with tax related issues. The section is completed with theoretical and
empirical evidence supporting our risk measurements  and a discussion of the econometric
issues.


The median firm size of the momentum portfolios is  biased upwards since we exclude stocks
from the final sample based on firm size when constructing the portfolios. This bias results in
problems with comparing the median firm size of the  portfolios with the median firm size of
the market. As a result, there is a chance that we  underestimate the strategies ability to
systematically pick small stocks.

      All portfolios are based on calendar months rather  than trading days. This is done
mainly to simplify the portfolio construction procedure. When skipping a week between the
portfolio formation period and the holding period,  there is a small possibility of striking
several holidays in a row. This will diminish the intended effect. Since there are an unequal
number of trading days per month, the rating system  will overstate the performance of longer
months. Also, due to the large sample size, we have  not had time to manually verify that all
data is correct. However, since the descriptive statistics of our final sample seems reasonable
and our tests give good results, we have no reason  to suspect data errors.

      Since we are concerned with survivorship bias in the index series provided by
Thomson Datastream, we have chosen to construct an  equal weighted index that each month
contains all stocks in our final sample. That will  eliminate the problem and ensure that the
average beta among the stocks is one.

       In theory, the risk-free rate is the rate on an investment with zero default- and interest
rate risk. In practice government bonds with short  maturity dates are used as a proxy for the
risk-free rate. The short maturity date ensures low  interest rate risk while the issuer, in our
case the South African Reserve Bank, exhibit the lowest possible default risk in the market.
We note that the risk-free rate in South Africa has  been high during our sample period (Table
A.1 Appendix). This is reasonable since data provided by Statistics South Africa (2010)
suggests that the inflation rate in the country has  been relatively high over the last twenty
years. Since we use nominal values in our calculations, the performance of the South African
market and our momentum strategies are probably overestimated in real terms.


There are by definition an infinite number of possible momentum strategies. Most of the
explanations for momentum are based on investor’s short-term reaction to information about
firms. The evidence also suggests an opposite long-term pattern, where momentum returns
                                                                     11
eventually reverses and become negative . Since we are interested in the profitability of
momentum strategies under different market climates, we have chosen to evaluate strategies

11
   See section II

                                                                         13
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

that previously have been proven significant. To get good results for the comparison we have
chosen not to evaluate extremely short or long strategies since their returns might disappear
due to trading costs or reversion effects.

      A simple way to measure trading costs is to use the  bid-ask spread as a rough
estimation. We have chosen to use the Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000) measurement
since it incorporates both  explicit  and  implicit  components of asset trading. Explicit costs are
the direct cost of trading, for example taxes and broker commissions. Implicit costs represent
the indirect costs of trading, where the most important is the price impact of large trades.
Since bid-ask spread measurements fails to capture  the price impact, Domowitz, Glen,
Madhavan (2000) have chosen to use the volume-weighted average price (VWAP) over the
trading day to measure implicit costs. VWAP is calculated as the mean of the day’s open,
close, high and low prices. The price impact is then measured as the percentage difference
between the effective price and this benchmark.

      We are aware of that short-selling impose additional costs beyond those associated
with long position in stocks. When taking negative  position, investors are usually required to
post cash or equity as collateral. If the short positions rise in value, the investor then needs to
borrow in order to maintain the margin requirements. The interest cost associated with this
potential loan is not included in our trading cost  measurement. However, we consider the buy
side as equity collateral for the sell side of our  zero-cost portfolios. This implies that the issue
of interest costs only arises when the value of the  loser portfolio falls by a greater amount
than the value of the winner portfolio raises. Nevertheless, since we show that most of the
returns of our zero-cost portfolios come from the sell side, interest costs are probably
significant. Beyond this cost, short-selling is also associated with the cost of paying back
dividends, inverse price impacts and broker fees. Since we use the Total Return Index, we
indirect calculate for dividends since it is incorporated in the stock price movements. The
inverse price impact is captured by the Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000) measurement,
so are the broker fees even if there sometimes are  additional fees to borrowing stocks.
Altogether, we see that our trading costs measurement have some limitations but that it suits
our purpose of giving a rough estimation of whether  or not it’s interesting to further
investigate the profitability of return momentum in  the South African market.


Kim and Zumwalt (1979) use a conditional dual-beta  model to describe stock returns. They
regress stock excess returns on the market excess return, separating positive and negative
market returns. In this way, they are able to separate up-market and down-market betas. Kim
and Zumwaltuse months when the average market return exceeds the risk-free rate, the
average long run market return, or zero as cut-off  levels for up-and down-markets. Since they
show that the results for the three measurements are similar, we use months when the market
return exceeds zero as our definition of up-months.

      Neftci (1984) suggests that monthly observations of  return series have been suggested
to be too noisy to reveal cyclical trends. Hence, other measurements than monthly index
returns have been used in the literature to differentiate market climates. When defining bull-
and bear markets, Bowlin, Dukes, and MacDonald (1987) use periods when the market
increase or decrease by at least 20 percent from peak to peak. Pagan and Sossounov (2000)
use trend based definitions of bull and bear markets that focus on systematic movements in
the market, ignoring short-term effects. Stock market analysts often use simple moving
averages (SMAs) of various lengths to capture market trends. To be able to capture a mid- to

                                                                         14
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

long-term trend in the market, we have chosen to use the 6-months simple moving average as
cut-off point for bull and bear periods.


In order to give a somewhat more fair view the real  world applicability of our strategies it
makes sense to give a brief discussion of tax considerations. Even if regulations differ among
countries, we can conclude that our strategies would force investors to continuously realize
wins and losses. This implies that the investable amount each year would be reduced by tax
payments. However, as previously mentioned, taxes are included among explicit trading costs
in the Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000) measurement for equity trading costs.


Previous research conducted by Fama and MacBeth (1973), Banz (1981) and Fama and
French (1993) indicate that beta and size are related to both risk and expected returns.

      We use a single-factor model to describe the returns from our momentum strategies.
The single-factor model divides security returns into a common, systematic, and a firm
specific part. A frequently used approach to making  the single-factor model useable is to use
the return on a broad based index of securities as  proxy for the common factor. The
systematic part of portfolio risk is determined by  the portfolios exposure to the variance of
the common factor. The exposure of all assets in the portfolio will be reflected by this
systematic component. In contrast to the systematic  risk, the firm-specific part of portfolio
variance is independent and uncorrelated across securities. This implies that the firm-specific
risk can be diversified away and hence is not priced in the market. When the number of
securities in the portfolio gets  large,  the firm-specific component  become small. Our
momentum portfolios hold a sufficiently large number of individual stocks to be well
diversified. This is an important implication since  momentum strategies based on a small
subset of securities can exhibit high firm-specific, nonmarket risk. We think that our factor
model with the return on the market index as factor  suits the purpose of investigating the risk
return relationship of momentum returns.

      Kim and Zumwalt (1979), and Tang and Shum (2004), suggest that securities may
respond differently in up- and down- markets. We use a dual-beta model to capture
differences in factor loadings and abnormal returns  conditional on the market climate. Our
approach captures both short-term and trend based effects. The methodology of dividing the
sample period in subsamples depending on the market  climate has previously been used by
Kim and Zumwalt (1979) and Pettengill, Sundaram and  Mathur (1995) to name a few. We
chose to use dummy-variables to simplify the interpretation of, and comparison between,
regression estimates.

      An increasingly used model for describing asset returns is the Fama and French three-
factor model. The model suggests that firm size and  book-to-market ratio in combination
with the market factor does a better job of describing cross-sectional differences in expected
returns than the excess return of the market alone.  Fama and French (1996) state that the only
anomaly the model fully can’t explain is short-term  momentum. Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993) also find that momentum is not due to picking small stocks. We are aware that the
Fama and French three-factor model can be an alternative approach to study momentum in
the South African market. However, time limitations  make such an analysis beyond the scope
of this paper.

                                                                         15
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


We test for serial correlation in the error terms using the Durbin and Watson (1950)
alternative test with lags up to 6-months. We use this test since it allows for non-strictly
exogenous explanatory variables and works even if the explanatory variable would happen to
be strictly exogenous. The results from the tests are presented in Table A.2 in appendix and
show that serial correlation is not a problem for statistical inference. Time series regressions
are sensitive to serial correlation among the error  terms. The most important implication is
that when serial correlation is present, the usual  OLS standard errors and test statistics are not
valid. The effect is usually that the regression estimators appear overly significant. However,
serial correlation robust standard errors can be poorly behaved even when the sample size is
large as 100 observations. Nevertheless, as a robustness test of our results, we did perform a
regression with serial correlation and heteroscedasticity robust Newey-West standard errors.
These results are reported in Table A.3 and A.4 in  appendix, but show very little deviation
from the ordinary regression statistics.

       We use heteroscedasticity robust standard errors and t-statistics in all our regressions
sinceSchewert and Seguin (1990) give evidence on heteroscedasticity in stock returns.
Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are normally used when the problem is suspected,
since the standard errors have good properties in large samples.

                                                                         16
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


Average monthly excess returns give evidence of economically significant momentum profits
in the South African market (Table 3). Our best portfolio, that is the winner-loser portfolio
from our 12/3 strategy, earns an average return of  2.20 percent per month (29.84 percent
annually) over the sample period. This can be compared to the average return of the equal-
weighted index, which is 0.95 percent per month (12.01 percent per annually). Our results
suggest relatively high momentum returns compared to the findings of Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993). They find their 12/3 strategy earning a return of 1.31 percent per month (16.90
percent annually) in the U.S market. Also Griffin,  Ji and Martin (2003) find large momentum
profits in the South African market. Their 6/6 strategy earns an average monthly return of
1.82 percent in the 1990 to 2000 sample period. There are small differences in average
returns between our strategies. However, the 12/3 strategy shows a return that appears higher
but is not statistically significant at a five percent level. Raw momentum returns suggest that
the winner portfolios provide the main contribution  to zero-cost portfolio returns, the same
result as found by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). We  note that all loser portfolios actually
have positive average returns, they are however not  significantly different from zero at a five
percent level. Since they are all less than the risk-free rate, it appears as if they make a small
contribution to zero-cost portfolio return. All zero-cost portfolios show average returns that
are higher than the average index return. The result is significant at the five percent level.
Griffin, Ji and Martin (2005) find their strategies  to be less volatile than the corresponding
market index. Our volatility measures imply that the winner portfolios have lower volatility
than the loser portfolios while the volatility of the zero-cost portfolios falls in between. Their
volatility is slightly higher than that of the equal-weighted index, but differences are fairly
small.

                 TABLE 3: Average monthly excess returns and volatility
   In every month t, all stocks in our final sample are ranked (worst to best) by their return during the  previous
 months J, that is their performance during the period t-J to t. The stocks in the first decile form the  loser-portfolio
 while the  winner-portfolio  contains the tenth decile of companies ranked by stock market performance. The  zero-
 cost portfolio  is formed out of the winner portfolio minus the loser portfolio. All portfolios are equal- weighted.
 To avoid issues associated with lagged reaction effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread we leave out one week
 between the portfolio formation period and the holding period. Each portfolio is held for K months and  consists
                                           of K overlapping portfolios.
   In this table,  Excess return  is the strategy return less the risk-free rate. All values are measured on a monthly
                                                          basis.
     Strategy           Average         Winner      Loser        Winner-Loser        Index
                       Excess return        0.0176       -0.0016           0.0192           0.0095
        3/3
                         (Volatility)        (0.0620)      (0.0753)          (0.0626)          (0.0529)
                       Excess return        0.0176       -0.0010           0.0187
        6/6
                         (Volatility)        (0.0676)      (0.0712)          (0.0612)
                       Excess return        0.0191       -0.0029           0.0220
       12/3
                         (Volatility)        (0.0677)      (0.0732)          (0.0619)

      When accounting for trading costs, the magnitude of  zero-cost momentum profits are
diminished by on average 0.6 percent per month. Differences among strategies are due to
differences in average portfolio turnover, which vary from 13 to 29 percent per month. Our
most actively traded strategy, the 3/3 strategy, has an average portfolio turnover of 28 percent

                                                                         17
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

            CHART 1: Performance over time (trading costs accounted for)

             Chart 1 shows the theoretical development of an investment of 100 South
          African Rand in the zero-cost portfolios, from March 1, 1995 until December
                31, 2009. Momentum returns have been adjusted for trading costs.

                    Strategy 3/3          Strategy 6/6          Strategy 12/3          Index
per month (~80 percent for each of the three overlapping portfolios per month), which
implies a total trading cost of 0.9 percent per month on the zero-cost portfolio (10.8 percent
per year).

      After adjusting for trading costs, momentum strategies still tend to outperform the
index even if the differences are not statistically  significant on a monthly basis. However, as
seen in Chart 1, accumulated overa longer horizon both the 12/3 and 6/6 strategies largely
outperform the index.

      Our trading cost measurement is higher than the measurement used by Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993). As suggested by Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000) trading costs are
higher in emerging- and less developed markets. Therefore, it makes sense that the trading
costs are higher for the South African market than  for example the U.S market. In fact,
Lesmond, Schill and Zhou (2004) means that trading  costs actually are even higher than our
measurement. Our results show that trading costs are a factor to count with when measuring
the profitability of momentum.


The results in this section are based on the regression model with the excess return of the
equal-weighted index as the only factor. Recall Equation 9. The intercept is interpreted as the
portfolio’s abnormal return and we consider the factor loadings as the portfolio’s exposure
to systematic risk. All values are reported on a monthly basis.

                                 rP  , t − rf ,t = α P + βP (rindex,t − rf ,t ) + ε P,t

                                                                         18
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

       All single portfolios, winners-, and losers, show alphas and betas that are statistically
different from zero with at least 98 percent certainty. The average zero-cost alpha of 2.08
percent suggests that the observed raw returns are  not due to high exposure to the systematic
risk component captured by our one-factor model. The winner- and loser portfolios have beta
values higher than one, suggesting that they are more risky than the market. But, since both
have roughly the same betas, all zero-cost portfolios have non-significant betas at the five
percent level. They appear to lack systematic risk.  We can see a small deviation on the 3/3
strategy, where the loser portfolio has a slightly  higher beta leading to a small but negative
zero-cost beta (P =0.11 compared to P=0.97 on 6/6 and 12/3). In line with Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993) we find significant alphas and betas  when the equal-weighted index is used as
market proxy. Our monthly alpha of 1.86 percent for  the zero-cost portfolio of our 6/6
strategy is slightly larger than the corresponding  value from the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)
study,  yet  again  suggesting  higher  momentum  returns  in  the  South  African  market.
Furthermore, the pattern of slightly negative- to zero-betas for the winner-loser portfolios
seems applicable for the South African market. Contrary to what was suggested by the raw
return data, it appears as if the loser portfolios  contribute the most to abnormal returns with
an average alpha of -1.27 percent. All alphas show  strong significance. The alpha for the
zero-cost portfolio of our 6/6 strategy is significant at the 1.8 percent level, and all other
alphas below the 0.5 percent level of significance.

                                                   

          TABLE 4: Monthly abnormal returns and systematic risk measurements
   In every month t, all stocks in our final sample are ranked, worst to best, by their return during the  previous
    months J, that is their performance during the period t-J to t. The stocks in the first decile form the  loser-
  portfolio  while the  winner-portfolio  contains the tenth decile of stocks ranked by stock market performance.
    The  zero-cost portfolio  is formed out of the winner portfolio minus the loser portfolio. All portfolios are
   equal-weighted. To avoid issues associated with lagged reaction effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread
  we leave out one week between the portfolio formation period and the holding period. Each portfolio is  held
                             for K months and consists of K overlapping portfolios.
      In this table,  Alpha  is the abnormal return adjusted for systematic risk while  Beta  is each strategy’s
             individual exposure to systematic risk. All values  are measured on a monthly basis.

        Strategy                     Winner       Loser            Winner-Loser
                           Alpha        0.0086        -0.0132               0.0218
                            (p-value)       (0.005)        (0.000)                (0.000)
            3/3
                            Beta        0.9430        1.2191               -0.2760
                            (p-value)       (0.000)        (0.000)                (0.109)
                           Alpha        0.0071        -0.0115               0.0186
                            (p-value)       (0.018)        (0.000)                (0.000)
            6/6
                            Beta        1.1041        1.0990                0.0051
                            (p-value)       (0.000)        (0.000)                (0.975)
                           Alpha        0.0086        -0.0134               0.0220
                            (p-value)       (0.003)        (0.000)                (0.000)
           12/3
                            Beta        1.1110        1.1061                0.0049
                            (p-value)       (0.000)        (0.000)                (0.974)

                                                                         19
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


The results in this section are based on the two regression sets using the conditional dual-
beta model. Recall Equation 10. In the first regression set, Dt  is a dummy-variable taking a
value of one in down-months. In the second regression set, Dt  is a dummy-variable taking a
value of one in bear-months. αdiff,p  and βdiff,p  are interpreted as the differences in abnormal
return and factor loading respectively for portfolio p depending on the market climate. All
values are reported on a monthly basis. We begin each subset with some descriptive statistics
of the raw momentum returns.

                   rP  ,t − rf ,t = α 1,P + Dtα diff ,P + (β 1,P + Dt βdiff ,P )(r m,t − rf ,t ) + ε P,t

      We find that both winner- and loser-portfolios show positive average returns when the
market goes up, and negative average returns when the market goes down. However, all zero-
cost strategies show positive average returns regardless of the market state. The volatility of
winner portfolios tends to be higher in down markets while loser portfolios tend to have
about the same volatility unconditional of the market state.

      The results from the up/down regression (see Table  5) suggest momentum profits
regardless of the market state. However the correlation with the market factor seems to
increase when the market is down. The winner portfolio of our 6/6 strategy shows increased
down market correlation with a p-value of 0.058. The corresponding portfolios for the 3/3-
and 12/3 strategies show the same, but weaker, results with p-values of 0.402 and 0.165
respectively. All loser portfolios shows decreased  down market correlations with betadiff  of -
0.377, -0.427 and -0.422 and p-values of 0.068, 0.074 and 0.070 for the 3/3, 6/6 and 12/3
strategies. All zero-cost portfolios show increased  down market betas. The evidence for the
6/6 and 12/3 strategies are strong, with p-values of 0.032 and 0.052 respectively. Regarding
the winner portfolios, it’s only the one of the 6/6  strategy that shows evidence of a different
alpha when the market is down. Interestingly, the results suggest a higher alpha with a p-
value of 0.020. None of the loser portfolios show any evidence of differences in alpha
estimates depending on the market state. As for the  corresponding winner portfolio, the zero-
cost portfolio of the 6/6 strategy shows a higher return in down markets. The p-value is
0.071. The two other strategies show similar results but with p-values suggesting low levels
of significance. Altogether, there seem to be a relationship between the market state and
differences in beta while we find very little evidence for differences in abnormal returns
conditional on the market climate. Griffin, Ji and  Martin (2003) suggested that momentum
profits are higher in down markets, a result which  is true only for our 6/6 strategy.

                                                                         20
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

                        TABLE 5: Regression coefficients Up/Down

       In every month t, all stocks in our final sample are ranked (worst to best) by their return during the
       previous months J, that is their performance during  the period t-J to t. The stocks in the first decile
      form the loser-portfolio while the winner-portfolio  contains the tenth decile of companies ranked by
       stock market performance. The zero-cost portfolio is formed out of the winner portfolio minus the
       loser portfolio. All portfolios are equal-weighted.  To avoid issues associated with lagged reaction
       effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread we leave  out one week between the portfolio formation
        period and the holding period. Each portfolio is held for K months and consists of K overlapping
                                                      portfolios.
        Up is defined as a month t when the market return is positive, while Down is a month t when the
                                            market return is negative.

      In this table, Betadiff  is the estimated difference in exposure to systematic risk between Up and Down
     periods. Respectively, Alphadiff  is the estimated difference in abnormal return. All values are measured
                                              on a monthly basis.

                                                 Portfolio 3/3
                               Winner             Loser            Winner-Loser
             Betaup                0.844                1.383                 -0.539
            Betadown               1.091                0.961                 0.130
             Betadiff                0.246                -0.422                  0.668
            P-valuediff               0.402                0.068                  0.168
            Alphaup               0.012                -0.019                 0.031
           Alphadown              0.015                -0.025                 0.041
            Alphadiff               0.003                -0.006                  0.010
            P-valuediff               0.778                0.541                  0.608
                                                 Portfolio 6/6
                               Winner             Loser            Winner-Loser
             Betaup                1.039                1.238                 -0.199
            Betadown               1.491                0.861                 0.630
             Betadiff                0.452                -0.377                  0.829
            P-valuediff               0.058                0.074                  0.032
            Alphaup               0.007                -0.016                 0.023
           Alphadown              0.030                -0.023                 0.053
            Alphadiff               0.023                -0.007                  0.030
            P-valuediff               0.020                0.498                  0.071
                                               Portfolio 12/3
                               Winner             Loser            Winner-Loser
             Betaup                0.989                1.274                 -0.285
            Betadown               1.309                0.847                 0.462
             Betadiff                0.319                -0.427                  0.746
            P-valuediff               0.165                0.070                  0.052
            Alphaup               0.013                -0.019                 0.032
           Alphadown              0.018                -0.026                 0.044
            Alphadiff               0.005                -0.006                  0.011
            P-valuediff               0.612                0.555                  0.494

                                                                         21
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

      As for up- and down markets, the winner- and loser  portfolios show positive average
returns in bull markets and negative average returns in bear markets. However, the zero-cost
portfolios earn positive and economically significant momentum returns regardless of the
market trend. Contrary to up- and down markets, the  winner portfolio seems to be less
volatile in bull markets while the loser portfolios  show higher volatility in bull markets.
However, differences are small and not statistically significant at the five percent level. For
the zero-cost portfolios, the results are ambiguous  even though it seems like they are more
volatile in bull- than in bear markets.

      The results from the bull/bear regression are in general weaker than the results from
the up/down regression. In line with previous findings, there is some evidence for increased
market correlation in negative market trends. However, the relationship is weak; the highest
p-value is only 12.0 percent. Contrary to the evidence from up- and down markets, there
seems to be a correlation between lower risk-adjusted momentum returns and negative
market trends. All winner portfolios show positive  betadiff  even if the corresponding p-values
are low. The strongest evidence is from the 12/3 strategy where the winner portfolio has a
betadiff  of 0.223 with a p-value of 0.218. All loser portfolios have negative betadiff. The
significance among the loser portfolios is in general higher than for the winner portfolios.
The 3/3, 6/6 and 12/3 strategies have p-values of 0.120, 0.188 and 0.332 respectively. All
zero-cost portfolios have positive betadiff  suggesting increased market correlation in bear
markets. However, the relationship is weaker than suggested by the results based on the
market state. The 3/3, 6/6 and 12/3 strategies have  betadiff  of 0.545, 0.495 and 0.460
respectively with corresponding p-values of 0.180,  0.184 and 0.198. The alphadiff  coefficients
for all winner portfolios are negative, suggesting  that the abnormal return is lower in bear
markets. For the 3/3 and 12/3 portfolios, alphadiff  is equal to -1.4 percent and -1.1 percent
respectively with corresponding p-values of 0.069 and 0.164. For the loser portfolios,
differences in alpha values are smaller. It appears  as if the loser portfolios earn higher returns
in bear markets, but none of the alphadiff  are significant at reasonable levels. All zero-cost
portfolios show evidence of lower abnormal returns  in bear markets. The relationship is
however very weak, the most significant difference  is shown by the 3/3 strategy with an
alphadiff  of -2.0 percent and a p-value of 0.116.

      Our trend measurement is not perfectly comparable to the one of Cooper, Gutierrez
and Hameed (2004). They define positive market trends as when the three years lagged
market return is positive, while we use the 6-months SMA hence capturing a shorter trend.
They only find momentum profitable following up markets while our evidence (see Table 6)
suggests positive momentum profits regardless of the market trend.

                                                                         22
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

                        TABLE 6: Regression coefficients Bull/Bear

      In every month t, all stocks in our final sample are ranked (worst to best) by their return during the
      previous months J, that is their performance during  the period t-J to t. The stocks in the first decile
     form the loser-portfolio while the winner-portfolio  contains the tenth decile of companies ranked by
      stock market performance. The zero-cost portfolio is formed out of the winner portfolio minus the
      loser portfolio. All portfolios are equal-weighted.  To avoid issues associated with lagged reaction
      effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread we leave  out one week between the portfolio formation
       period and the holding period. Each portfolio is held for K months and consists of K overlapping
                                                     portfolios.
      Bull is defined as a month t when the market return  is above its 6-month simple moving average
        while Bear is a month t when the market return is below its 6-month simple moving average.
        In this table, Betadiff  is the estimated difference in exposure to systematic risk between Bull and
      Bear periods. Respectively, Alphadiff  is the estimated difference in abnormal return. All values are
                                      measured on a monthly basis.

                                               Portfolio 3/3
                              Winner              Loser            Winner-Loser
            Betabull               0.752                 1.424                  -0.672
            Betabear              0.970                1.097                  -0.127
             Betadiff               0.218                -0.327                  0.545
           P-valuediff              0.350                 0.120                  0.180
            Alphabull              0.020                -0.022                  0.042
           Alphabear              0.006                -0.016                  0.022
            Alphadiff              -0.014                0.007                  -0.020
           P-valuediff              0.069                 0.417                  0.116
                                               Portfolio 6/6
                              Winner              Loser            Winner-Loser
            Betabull               0.988                 1.282                  -0.294
            Betabear              1.211                1.009                  0.202
             Betadiff               0.222                -0.273                  0.495
           P-valuediff              0.310                 0.188                  0.184
            Alphabull              0.011                -0.020                  0.032
           Alphabear              0.011                -0.013                  0.023
            Alphadiff              -0.001                0.008                  -0.008
           P-valuediff              0.924                 0.386                  0.539
                                              Portfolio 12/3
                              Winner              Loser            Winner-Loser
            Betabull               0.930                 1.235                  -0.305
            Betabear              1.163                1.008                  0.154
             Betadiff               0.233                -0.227                  0.460
           P-valuediff              0.218                 0.332                  0.198
            Alphabull              0.018                -0.019                  0.037
           Alphabear              0.008                -0.016                  0.024
            Alphadiff              -0.011                0.003                  -0.013
           P-valuediff              0.164                 0.785                  0.333
                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                         23
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


The adjusted R-square value increases with added variables (market state/market trend) for
all strategies and portfolios except the 12/3 loser  portfolio (see Table 7). This points to the
fact that the dual-beta model does a better job in  explaining momentum returns than the
simple one-factor model. In general, the dual-beta  model that takes market state into account
has a slightly higher adjusted R-square than the model that is based on market trend.

                                    TABLE 7: R-square

                                 This table shows the adjusted R-square values
                                             from all factor regressions.
                                 The adjusted R-square is a  goodness-of-fit
                                      measurement, stating the share of total
                                     variance explained by the dependent
                                       variable(s). In difference to ordinary R-
                                    square, the adjusted measure also takes the
                                 number of explanatory variables into account.

                               3/3      One-factor    State    Trend
                              Winner       0.644      0.645    0.649
                               Loser       0.731      0.738    0.736
                              W-L       0.049      0.074    0.074
                               6/6      One-factor    State    Trend
                              Winner       0.745      0.764    0.747
                               Loser       0.665      0.670    0.667
                              W-L       -0.006      0.054    0.009
                               12/3     One-factor    State    Trend
                              Winner       0.752      0.756    0.755
                               Loser       0.635      0.642    0.635
                              W-L       -0.006      0.029    0.007

                                                       

                                                                         24
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


As discussed earlier, it is possible that high exposure to the Fama and French size factor plays
a significant role in explaining abnormal returns provided by our momentum strategies.

      As seen in Table 8, our findings show that winner portfolios do tend to pick stocks
with a market value that is significantly higher than loser portfolios. We can also see that
loser portfolios appear to have significantly lower  average market values than the market
itself, where p-values for all strategies are below  0.1 percent. Findings also imply that winner
portfolios are larger than the market, with 2 out of 3 strategies showing p-values that are
significant on a 5 percent and 0.1 percent level respectively.

                                   TABLE 8: Average firm size
                       Firm size is measured as the average median market  value per
                      strategy and month, and is reported in million South African Rand.
                        The P-value reported is the p-value corresponding to a two-tailed,
                     paired independent t-test between median firm size  on the market,
                              and average median firm size per portfolio and month.

                    Firm Size       Winner        Loser      Winner-Loser
                        3/3            676           263           469
                        6/6            856           232           544
                       12/3           1160           213           687
                      Market                679
                     P-value        Winner        Loser      Winner-Loser
                        3/3           0.9563         0.0000         0.0000
                        6/6           0.0493         0.0000         0.0034
                        12/3          0.0001         0.0000         0.8980

                                                                         25
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


In this study, we have examined the existence and persistence of momentum profits on the
South African market. We have investigated three different strategies, and examined their
risk-return relationship under different market climates. We mainly used a one-factor market
model to identify possible differences in systematic risk between our strategies and the
market.

      In general, momentum strategies earn economically significant returns in the South
African market. We find that returns from zero-cost  momentum on average provides an
annual return of up to 29.84 percent (12/3 strategy). On the other hand, our momentum
portfolios tend to have slightly higher volatility  than the equal-weighted market proxy. All
zero-cost portfolios show returns that are significantly higher than the market.

      Trading costs seems to be an important issue considering the strategies’ real world
applicability. High portfolio turnovers make short  strategies more sensitive than long ones.
After adjustments for trading costs, we no longer find any significant differences between our
momentum strategies and the index portfolio. However, our momentum strategies still tend to
outperform the index in the long run. Our findings  are ambiguous and we believe that further
research is needed to draw clear conclusions.

      When using a single factor model with the excess return of the market as explanatory
variable, all portfolios show alphas and betas that  are statistically significant with at least 98
percent certainty. Abnormal returns are in parity with average returns, suggesting that
momentum returns are not due to picking stocks with  high market risk.

      We show that the beta values for the winner and loser portfolios are roughly equal,
leading to zero-cost portfolios with beta values around zero. This implies that the zero-cost
portfolios seem to lack systematic risk. In difference to Jegadeesh and Titman’s previous
findings and our general average return results, our findings show that loser portfolios
contribute more than winners to momentum profits. We find large differences in average firm
size between both portfolios and strategies. Since  our results suggests that the momentum
profits of our zero-cost strategies mainly comes from the short portfolio, one might expect
that a part of the returns come from the strategies  ability to pick small stocks. Hence, we
believe that the Fama and French three factor model  might be a better approach for further
research on momentum returns.

      Overall, we find little evidence for differences in  momentum returns conditional on the
market climate. While it is possible that there is  a weak relationship between negative market
          12
trends  and lower momentum returns, the same does not seem  to hold in negative market
         13
states . However, the correlation with the market factor for all zero-cost portfolios tends to
increase in bad market states while the evidence is  ambiguous for different market trends.
Altogether, our results indicate that momentum strategies might be more risky in negative
market climates than expected when considering a single beta model.
         

12
 Negative market trend  is when the market return is below its six month simple moving average.
13
 Negative market state  is when the market return is negative.

                                                                         26
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist


Banz, Rolf, 1981, "The relationship between return  and market value of common stocks",
Journal of Financial Economics,  Vol.9, No.1, pp. 3-18.

Bae, Kee-Hong, Chanwoo Lim and K. C. John Wei, 2006, “Corporate Governance and
Conditional Skewness in the World’s Stock Markets”,  Journal of Business,  Vol.79, No. 6, pp.
2999-3028.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Schleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, “A model of investor
sentiment”,  Journal of Financial Economics 49, pp. 307-343.

Bowlin, Oswald, William Dukes and Scott MacDonald,  1987, “The performance of beta in
forecasting portfolio returns in bull and bear markets using alternative market proxies”,
Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics 26, pp. 89-103.

Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef  Lakonishok, 1996, “Momentum
strategies”,  Journal of Finance 51, pp. 1681-1713.

Chen, Nai-Fu, Richard Roll and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, “Economic Forces and the Stock
Market”,  The Journal of Business, Vol.59, No. 3, pp. 383-40.

Chui, Andy C. W., Sheridan Titman, and K. C. John Wei, 2000, “Momentum, legal systems
and ownership structure: An analysis of Asian stock  markets”, Working paper, University of
Texas

Conrad, Jennifer and Gautam Kaul, 1998, “An Anatomy  of Trading Strategies”,  The Review
of Financial Studies, Vol.11, No. 3, pp. 489-519.

Cooper, Michael J., Roberto C. Gutierrez Jr. and Allaudeen Hameed, 2004, “Market States
and Momentum”  The Journal of Finance,  Vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 1345-1365.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, “Investor psychology
and security market under- and overreactions”,  Journal of Finance 53, pp. 1839-1886.

De Bondt, Werner and Richard Thaler, 1985, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?"  Journal of
Finance 40, pp. 793-805.

Domowitz, Ian, Jack Glen and Ananth Madhavan, 2000,  “Liquidity, Volatility, and Equity
Trading Costs Across  Countries and Over Time”, Working paper,  Pennsylvania State
University

Durbin, J., and G. S. Watson, 1950, “Testing for Serial Correlation in Least Squares
Regressions I”,  Biometrika 37, pp. 409–428.

Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1993, "Common Risk  Factors in the Returns on Stocks
and Bonds",  Journal of Financial Economics 33, pp. 3-56

Fama,  Eugene,  and  Kenneth  French,  1996,  “Multifactor  explanations  of  asset  pricing
anomalies”,  Journal of Finance 51,  pp. 55-84.

Fama, Eugene and James MacBeth, 1973, "Risk, Return  and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests",
Journal of Political Economy,  Vol. 81, No.3, pp. 606

                                                                         27
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

Griffin, John.M., Wiuqing Ji and Spencer Martin, 2003, “Momentum Investing and Business
Cycle Risk: Evidence from Pole to Pole”,  The Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, No. 6, pp. 2515-
2547.

Griffin, John.M., Wiuqing Ji and Spencer Martin, 2005, “Global Momentum Strategies” The
Journal of Portfolio Management, Winter 2005, pp. 23-39.

Grinblatt, Mark and Tobias Moskowitz, 1999, “Do industries explain momentum?”,  Journal
of Finance 54, pp. 1249-1290.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Tobias Moskowitz, 2003, “Predicting stock price movements from the
pattern of past returns” Working paper, University of Chicago.

Hong, Dong, Charles Lee, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan,  2003, “Earnings Momentum in
International Markets”, Working paper, Cornell University

Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999 “A unified theory of under reaction, momentum
trading and overreaction in asset markets”,  Journal of Finance 54, pp. 2143-2184.

Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, “Bad news travels slowly: Size,
analyst coverage, and the profitability of momentum  strategies”  Journal of Finance 55, pp.
265-295.

Jegadeesh,  Narasimhan,  1990,  “Evidence  of  predictable  behavior  of  security returns”,
Journal of Finance 45, pp.881-898.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, “Returns to buying winners and selling
losers: Implications for stock market efficiency”,  The Journal of Finance, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp.
65-91.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, 2001, “Profitability of Momentum Strategies:
An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations”,  The Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 699-
720.

Kim, Moon and Kenton Zumwalt, 1979, “An analysis of  risk in bull and bear markets”,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol.12, No. 5, pp. 1015-1025.

Lee, Charles, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2000, ”Price momentum and trading volume”,
Journal of Finance 55, pp. 2017–2069.

Lehmann, Bruce, 1990, “Fads, martingales and market  efficiency”,  Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105,  pp. 1-28.

Lesmond, David, Michael Schill and Chunsheng Zhou,  2004, “The Illusory Nature of
Momentum Profits”,  Journal of Financial Economics,  Vol. 71, No. 2, pp. 349-380.

Mkhize, Henry and Pumela Msweli-Mbanga, 2006, “A Critical Review of the Restructuring
of the South African Capital Market”,  International Review of Business Papers, Vol.2, No. 2,
pp. 80-91.

Neftci, Salih, 1984, “Are economic time series asymmetric over the business cycle?”  Journal
of Political Economy  92, pp. 307-328.

                                                                         28
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

Pagan, Adrian and Kirill Sossounov, 2000, “A simple  framework for analyzing bull and bear
markets”, Forthcoming in Journal of Applied Econometrics.

Pettengill, Glenn, Sridhar Sundaram, and  Ike Mathur, 1995, “The conditional relation
between beta and returns”,  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 30, pp. 101-116.

Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1998, “International momentum strategies”,  Journal of Finance 53,
pp. 267-284.

Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1999, “Local return factors  and turnover in emerging stock markets”,
Journal of Finance 54, pp. 1439-464.

Schwert, William and Paul Seguin, 1990, “Heteroskedasticity in Stock Returns”,  The Journal
of Finance, vol. XLV, NO.4, pp. 1129-1155

Scott, James, Margaret Stumpp, and Peter Xu, 2003,  “Overconfidence Bias in International
Stock Prices”,  The Journal of Portfolio Management, 29, no. 2, pp. 80-89.

Statistics   South   Africa   (2010),   “Annual   inflation   on   a   monthly   basis”,   URL:
http://www.statssa.gov.za/keyindicators/CPI/CPIHistory_rebased.pdf

Tang, Gordon and Wai Cheong Shum, 2004, “The risk-return relations in the Singapore stock
market”, Pacific-Basic Finance Journal 12, pp. 179-195.

Vandell, Robert F., and Robert Parrino, 1986, “A Purposeful Stride Down Wall Street”,  The
Journal of Portfolio Management, 12, no. 2, pp. 31-39.

World   Economic   Forum,   2009,   “Financial   Development   Report   2009”,   URL:
http://www.weforum.org/pdf/FinancialDevelopmentReport/Report2009.pdf, (Accessed 2010-
05-25)

World   Federation   of   Exchanges,   2010,   “Domestic   market   capitalization”,   URL:
http://www.world-exchanges.org/statistics/annual/2009/equity-markets, (Accessed 2010-05-
25)

World   Federation   of   Exchanges,   2010,   “Number   of   listed   companies”,   URL:
http://www.world-exchanges.org/statistics/annual/2009/equity-markets, (Accessed 2010-05-
25)

World   Federation   of   Exchanges,   2010,   “Total   value   of   share   trading”,   URL:
http://www.world-exchanges.org/statistics/annual/2009/equity-markets, (Accessed 2010-05-
25)

                                                                         29
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist



                TABLE A.1: Returns plotted by strategy and month
                   3/3                   6/6                  12/3           Index   Risk-free
                                                                                     Quoted
 Month    W     L    W-L    W     L    W-L    W     L    W-L
                                                                                         monthly
 Mar-95    0.027    0.032    -0.004    0.033    0.031    0.002    0.041    -0.006    0.048    0.026     0.010

  Apr-95    0.019    -0.008    0.028    0.017    0.015    0.002    -0.004    0.002    -0.007    0.024     0.010

 May-95    0.028    -0.060    0.088    0.021    0.015    0.006    0.030    -0.009    0.040    0.012     0.011

  Jun-95    0.044    -0.028    0.073    0.024    -0.013    0.038    0.029    -0.015    0.044    -0.010     0.011

  Jul-95    0.000    0.031    -0.031    0.013    0.000    0.013    0.020    0.018    0.002    0.016     0.011

  Aug-95    0.048    0.020    0.028    0.066    0.034    0.031    0.061    0.041    0.020    0.030     0.011

  Sep-95    0.036    0.040    -0.004    0.070    0.008    0.061    0.074    0.012    0.061    0.026     0.011

  Oct-95    0.034    0.003    0.031    0.043    -0.037    0.081    0.037    -0.063    0.100    0.029     0.011

  Nov-95    0.131    -0.026    0.157    0.089    -0.030    0.119    0.102    0.005    0.097    0.044     0.011

  Dec-95    0.057    0.099    -0.042    0.099    0.064    0.034    0.088    0.110    -0.021    0.055     0.011

  Jan-96    0.099    0.253    -0.154    0.110    0.290    -0.180    0.121    0.324    -0.203    0.133     0.011

  Feb-96    0.032    -0.041    0.072    0.033    -0.030    0.063    0.031    -0.063    0.095    -0.010     0.011

 Mar-96    -0.006    0.032    -0.038   -0.019    0.039    -0.058   -0.037   -0.008   -0.029    0.003     0.011

  Apr-96    0.063    0.005    0.058    0.024    0.081    -0.057    0.023    0.057    -0.034    0.020     0.011

 May-96    0.035    -0.002    0.037    0.028    0.001    0.027    -0.035   -0.009   -0.026   -0.004     0.013

  Jun-96    0.041    0.054    -0.014    0.084    -0.007    0.091    0.058    0.030    0.028    0.048     0.012

  Jul-96    0.018    -0.064    0.081    0.003    -0.022    0.025    -0.002   -0.047    0.045    -0.003     0.012

  Aug-96    0.000    -0.042    0.042    0.002    -0.029    0.032    0.013    -0.011    0.024    -0.018     0.013

  Sep-96    0.078    0.050    0.028    0.082    0.060    0.022    0.097    0.045    0.053    0.054     0.012

  Oct-96    0.007    -0.046    0.052    -0.009   -0.062    0.053    0.006    -0.066    0.072    0.000     0.012

  Nov-96    -0.013   -0.048    0.035    0.023    -0.061    0.084    0.028    -0.041    0.069    -0.018     0.012

  Dec-96    0.103    0.006    0.096    0.026    -0.005    0.031    0.109    0.001    0.108    0.010     0.012

  Jan-97    0.128    0.007    0.121    0.140    0.013    0.127    0.148    0.002    0.146    0.063     0.013

  Feb-97    0.044    0.031    0.013    0.066    0.001    0.065    0.072    -0.004    0.076    0.033     0.012

 Mar-97    0.022    0.010    0.012    0.020    0.010    0.010    0.006    0.027    -0.021    0.004     0.012

  Apr-97    -0.020    0.001    -0.020   -0.026    0.038    -0.064   -0.028    0.028    -0.056    0.005     0.012

 May-97    0.097    -0.023    0.120    0.088    -0.042    0.129    0.091    -0.043    0.134    0.024     0.012

  Jun-97    0.067    -0.044    0.111    0.028    0.036    -0.009    0.007    -0.015    0.021    0.008     0.012

  Jul-97    0.094    0.041    0.053    0.057    0.046    0.011    0.062    0.060    0.002    0.060     0.012

  Aug-97    0.023    0.022    0.001    0.008    -0.004    0.012    0.004    0.008    -0.004   -0.007     0.012

                                                                         30
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

  Sep-97    0.047    -0.020    0.067    0.010    -0.007    0.017    -0.082   -0.003   -0.078   -0.016     0.011

  Oct-97    -0.056   -0.105    0.048    -0.064   -0.088    0.024    -0.066   -0.090    0.025    -0.065     0.011

  Nov-97    -0.021   -0.172    0.150    0.009    -0.162    0.171    -0.007   -0.184    0.177    -0.066     0.011

  Dec-97    -0.018   -0.017   -0.001   -0.025   -0.002   -0.023   -0.026   -0.004   -0.021   -0.017     0.011

  Jan-98    0.057    0.013    0.044    0.093    0.032    0.061    0.096    0.032    0.064    0.048     0.011

  Feb-98    0.185    0.094    0.091    0.157    0.036    0.122    0.169    0.045    0.124    0.096     0.011

 Mar-98    0.154    0.117    0.036    0.134    0.097    0.037    0.150    0.151    -0.001    0.143     0.010

  Apr-98    0.101    0.081    0.020    0.056    0.080    -0.024    0.066    0.066    0.000    0.059     0.010

 May-98    0.038    -0.009    0.047    0.015    -0.002    0.016    0.033    0.000    0.033    -0.011     0.010

  Jun-98    0.009    -0.076    0.085    -0.087   -0.029   -0.058   -0.089   -0.030   -0.060   -0.056     0.013

  Jul-98    0.092    -0.060    0.152    0.044    -0.087    0.131    0.006    -0.103    0.109    -0.048     0.015

  Aug-98    -0.341   -0.182   -0.159   -0.412   -0.170   -0.242   -0.376   -0.177   -0.198   -0.229     0.015

  Sep-98    0.007    0.031    -0.024   -0.011    0.039    -0.050    0.007    0.054    -0.047    0.004     0.017

  Oct-98    0.014    0.287    -0.274    0.193    0.149    0.044    0.167    0.092    0.075    0.162     0.014

  Nov-98    -0.011   -0.176    0.165    -0.130   -0.135    0.005    -0.087   -0.102    0.014    -0.111     0.014

  Dec-98    0.061    0.100    -0.039    0.139    0.105    0.034    0.107    0.121    -0.015    0.080     0.013

  Jan-99    0.002    0.026    -0.023    0.004    0.009    -0.005    0.088    -0.021    0.109    0.015     0.013

  Feb-99    0.099    0.051    0.048    0.038    0.020    0.018    0.042    0.047    -0.005    0.058     0.012

 Mar-99    0.039    0.053    -0.014    0.036    0.044    -0.008    0.055    0.066    -0.011    0.062     0.011

  Apr-99    0.027    0.039    -0.011    0.083    0.038    0.045    0.030    0.069    -0.039    0.052     0.011

 May-99    0.001    -0.083    0.084    0.034    -0.097    0.130    0.026    -0.077    0.102    -0.029     0.011

  Jun-99    0.009    -0.121    0.130    0.018    -0.057    0.076    0.014    -0.054    0.068    0.002     0.010

  Jul-99    0.018    -0.081    0.099    -0.031   -0.014   -0.017   -0.002   -0.046    0.045    -0.036     0.009

  Aug-99    -0.048   -0.075    0.027    -0.010   -0.053    0.043    0.000    -0.045    0.045    -0.031     0.009

  Sep-99    0.066    -0.085    0.151    0.054    -0.110    0.165    0.047    -0.056    0.102    0.009     0.009

  Oct-99    0.024    -0.107    0.132    0.006    -0.104    0.110    -0.008   -0.068    0.060    -0.008     0.009

  Nov-99    0.044    0.017    0.027    0.066    0.039    0.027    0.055    0.030    0.024    0.049     0.009

  Dec-99    0.079    0.162    -0.083    0.075    0.136    -0.061    0.103    0.143    -0.040    0.107     0.009

  Jan-00    0.115    0.123    -0.008    0.072    0.105    -0.033    0.092    0.095    -0.003    0.084     0.008

  Feb-00    -0.036   -0.143    0.107    -0.030   -0.144    0.114    -0.037   -0.171    0.134    -0.076     0.008

 Mar-00    -0.092   -0.140    0.048    -0.097   -0.124    0.027    -0.067   -0.111    0.044    -0.065     0.008

  Apr-00    -0.119   -0.100   -0.019   -0.081   -0.099    0.018    -0.056   -0.066    0.010    -0.051     0.008

 May-00    0.006    0.016    -0.010   -0.005   -0.049    0.043    0.007    -0.012    0.020    -0.015     0.008

  Jun-00    0.020    -0.108    0.128    0.044    -0.098    0.142    0.028    -0.105    0.134    -0.012     0.008

  Jul-00    0.045    0.022    0.023    -0.001    0.044    -0.045    0.021    0.014    0.007    0.001     0.008

  Aug-00    0.077    0.009    0.068    0.052    0.044    0.008    0.082    0.087    -0.004    0.054     0.008

                                                                         31
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

  Sep-00    -0.047   -0.099    0.052    -0.030   -0.076    0.046    -0.038   -0.082    0.044    -0.041     0.008

  Oct-00    0.033    -0.072    0.105    0.039    -0.084    0.123    0.011    -0.079    0.090    -0.030     0.008

  Nov-00    -0.029    0.000    -0.028    0.004    -0.010    0.015    -0.037   -0.036    0.000    -0.009     0.008

  Dec-00    0.031    0.040    -0.009    0.019    0.007    0.012    0.034    0.027    0.007    0.043     0.008

  Jan-01    0.030    0.031    -0.001    0.041    0.095    -0.053    0.055    0.042    0.013    0.067     0.008

  Feb-01    0.025    -0.053    0.078    0.024    -0.048    0.072    0.002    -0.078    0.080    -0.016     0.008

 Mar-01    -0.076   -0.108    0.033    -0.066   -0.101    0.035    -0.043   -0.074    0.032    -0.055     0.008

  Apr-01    0.053    0.063    -0.010    0.054    0.048    0.006    0.096    0.041    0.055    0.066     0.008

 May-01    0.062    0.055    0.007    0.094    0.050    0.044    0.092    0.066    0.026    0.052     0.008

  Jun-01    -0.019   -0.054    0.035    -0.044   -0.047    0.002    -0.035   -0.065    0.030    -0.011     0.008

  Jul-01    0.044    0.031    0.013    0.016    0.063    -0.047    0.029    0.065    -0.036    0.046     0.008

  Aug-01    0.023    0.020    0.003    0.029    -0.009    0.038    0.051    -0.040    0.091    0.031     0.007

  Sep-01    -0.047   -0.074    0.027    -0.013   -0.112    0.099    -0.065   -0.109    0.044    -0.045     0.007

  Oct-01    0.011    0.019    -0.008    0.008    0.005    0.003    0.025    0.022    0.003    0.029     0.007

  Nov-01    0.069    0.180    -0.110    0.085    0.133    -0.048    0.151    0.175    -0.023    0.103     0.007

  Dec-01    0.108    0.041    0.068    0.042    0.104    -0.062    0.052    0.041    0.011    0.056     0.008

  Jan-02    0.005    -0.126    0.131    -0.004   -0.094    0.089    0.026    -0.132    0.159    -0.012     0.008

  Feb-02    -0.010    0.023    -0.034   -0.015   -0.006   -0.009    0.004    0.020    -0.015    0.004     0.008

 Mar-02    0.012    0.048    -0.036    0.018    0.042    -0.024    0.001    0.050    -0.049    0.024     0.008

  Apr-02    0.092    0.142    -0.050    0.149    0.170    -0.021    0.142    0.099    0.043    0.089     0.008

 May-02    0.053    0.125    -0.072    0.026    0.083    -0.058    0.051    0.127    -0.077    0.061     0.009

  Jun-02    -0.074   -0.047   -0.027   -0.028   -0.064    0.036    -0.062   -0.085    0.023    -0.022     0.009

  Jul-02    -0.056   -0.027   -0.029   -0.031   -0.036    0.005    -0.032   -0.055    0.023    -0.032     0.009

  Aug-02    0.029    0.014    0.015    0.081    -0.013    0.094    0.094    -0.019    0.113    0.032     0.009

  Sep-02    -0.012   -0.037    0.024    -0.004   -0.044    0.040    0.015    -0.043    0.058    0.014     0.010

  Oct-02    0.100    0.087    0.014    0.066    0.021    0.045    0.066    0.008    0.057    0.068     0.010

  Nov-02    0.038    0.033    0.005    0.091    -0.004    0.095    0.051    -0.002    0.053    0.059     0.010

  Dec-02    0.004    -0.016    0.019    -0.018   -0.020    0.002    0.018    -0.052    0.070    0.012     0.010

  Jan-03    -0.013   -0.047    0.035    0.024    0.003    0.022    0.041    -0.017    0.058    -0.017     0.010

  Feb-03    -0.047   -0.050    0.003    -0.019   -0.047    0.027    -0.052   -0.037   -0.015   -0.035     0.010

 Mar-03    -0.034   -0.062    0.029    -0.034   -0.045    0.011    -0.043   -0.040   -0.002   -0.008     0.010

  Apr-03    0.033    0.041    -0.007    0.011    0.014    -0.003    0.020    0.031    -0.011    0.013     0.010

 May-03    0.038    0.221    -0.183    0.073    0.213    -0.140    0.074    0.209    -0.135    0.104     0.010

  Jun-03    -0.002   -0.022    0.021    -0.008   -0.046    0.038    -0.044   -0.049    0.006    0.008     0.009

  Jul-03    0.132    0.049    0.083    0.052    0.117    -0.065    0.107    0.109    -0.002    0.062     0.009

  Aug-03    0.051    0.059    -0.007    0.061    0.043    0.018    0.062    0.046    0.016    0.066     0.008

                                                                         32
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

  Sep-03    0.035    0.010    0.026    0.041    -0.055    0.097    0.041    -0.041    0.082    0.015     0.007

  Oct-03    0.152    0.103    0.049    0.129    0.122    0.007    0.096    0.050    0.046    0.108     0.006

  Nov-03    0.042    0.030    0.012    0.009    -0.006    0.014    0.050    -0.013    0.063    0.022     0.006

  Dec-03    0.080    0.065    0.015    0.075    0.042    0.032    0.083    0.039    0.045    0.061     0.006

  Jan-04    0.036    0.073    -0.037    0.073    0.064    0.009    0.036    0.075    -0.039    0.042     0.006

  Feb-04    0.029    0.036    -0.007    0.038    0.052    -0.013    0.011    0.037    -0.026    0.019     0.006

 Mar-04    0.042    0.065    -0.023    0.003    0.088    -0.085    0.008    0.038    -0.031    0.032     0.006

  Apr-04    -0.059   -0.021   -0.038   -0.016   -0.018    0.001    -0.055   -0.044   -0.010   -0.007     0.006

 May-04    -0.029    0.007    -0.036   -0.049    0.015    -0.064   -0.029    0.068    -0.097   -0.001     0.006

  Jun-04    0.012    -0.065    0.076    0.010    -0.003    0.013    0.021    -0.053    0.074    0.002     0.006

  Jul-04    0.051    0.095    -0.044    0.089    0.016    0.073    0.114    0.004    0.110    0.045     0.006

  Aug-04    0.047    -0.004    0.051    0.072    0.008    0.064    0.088    -0.011    0.099    0.058     0.006

  Sep-04    0.068    0.051    0.018    0.061    0.037    0.024    0.085    0.048    0.037    0.069     0.006

  Oct-04    0.075    0.110    -0.035    0.090    0.100    -0.010    0.102    0.140    -0.038    0.101     0.006

  Nov-04    0.073    0.048    0.025    0.081    0.060    0.021    0.091    0.071    0.021    0.053     0.006

  Dec-04    0.052    0.022    0.030    0.057    -0.014    0.071    0.084    0.037    0.047    0.050     0.006

  Jan-05    0.030    0.027    0.002    0.051    0.002    0.049    0.044    -0.014    0.057    0.019     0.006

  Feb-05    0.026    0.003    0.023    0.022    0.032    -0.010    0.023    0.002    0.022    0.042     0.006

 Mar-05    0.008    0.090    -0.081   -0.018    0.107    -0.126   -0.007    0.076    -0.083   -0.009     0.006

  Apr-05    -0.009   -0.062    0.054    0.003    -0.057    0.060    0.012    -0.077    0.089    0.017     0.005

 May-05    0.097    0.115    -0.017    0.070    0.159    -0.090    0.060    0.134    -0.073    0.058     0.005

  Jun-05    0.061    0.001    0.061    0.037    0.050    -0.013    0.040    0.054    -0.014    0.030     0.005

  Jul-05    0.157    0.076    0.081    0.153    0.099    0.054    0.125    0.109    0.016    0.101     0.005

  Aug-05    0.063    0.011    0.052    0.048    0.041    0.007    0.046    0.041    0.005    0.044     0.005

  Sep-05    0.033    -0.005    0.038    0.038    -0.014    0.052    0.063    0.030    0.033    0.027     0.005

  Oct-05    -0.022    0.023    -0.045   -0.004    0.005    -0.009    0.006    -0.026    0.032    0.020     0.005

  Nov-05    0.030    0.069    -0.039    0.026    0.062    -0.036    0.041    0.086    -0.045    0.043     0.006

  Dec-05    0.119    0.038    0.081    0.095    0.094    0.002    0.106    0.080    0.026    0.082     0.005

  Jan-06    0.081    0.017    0.065    0.103    0.036    0.067    0.113    -0.024    0.136    0.080     0.005

  Feb-06    -0.017    0.005    -0.022    0.033    -0.015    0.048    0.041    -0.019    0.060    0.002     0.005

 Mar-06    0.102    0.026    0.077    0.100    0.018    0.083    0.108    0.013    0.095    0.063     0.005

  Apr-06    0.026    0.026    0.000    0.038    0.025    0.013    0.020    0.036    -0.015    0.031     0.005

 May-06    -0.040   -0.005   -0.035   -0.038   -0.002   -0.036   -0.023   -0.022   -0.001   -0.052     0.006

  Jun-06    0.010    -0.011    0.021    0.041    -0.004    0.045    0.012    0.013    -0.001   -0.006     0.006

  Jul-06    0.004    0.004    0.000    0.001    -0.011    0.013    0.018    -0.006    0.023    0.005     0.006

  Aug-06    0.012    0.073    -0.061    0.035    0.051    -0.015    0.058    0.046    0.011    0.058     0.006

                                                                         33
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

  Sep-06    0.070    0.025    0.045    0.048    0.021    0.027    -0.008    0.049    -0.057    0.032     0.006

  Oct-06    0.103    0.088    0.015    0.137    0.083    0.054    0.137    0.026    0.112    0.083     0.007

  Nov-06    0.020    0.022    -0.003    0.012    0.023    -0.011   -0.002    0.027    -0.029    0.017     0.007

  Dec-06    0.046    0.024    0.022    0.051    0.030    0.021    0.051    0.002    0.049    0.035     0.007

  Jan-07    0.110    0.063    0.046    0.086    0.072    0.014    0.090    0.071    0.019    0.111     0.007

  Feb-07    0.033    -0.004    0.037    0.047    0.012    0.035    0.012    0.020    -0.008   -0.001     0.007

 Mar-07    0.155    0.048    0.107    0.189    0.039    0.149    0.113    0.055    0.058    0.082     0.007

  Apr-07    0.114    0.062    0.051    0.086    0.051    0.035    0.086    0.039    0.046    0.117     0.007

 May-07    0.030    -0.013    0.043    0.013    0.016    -0.003    0.017    0.017    0.001    0.018     0.007

  Jun-07    -0.017   -0.006   -0.011    0.001    -0.003    0.005    -0.007   -0.026    0.019    -0.006     0.007

  Jul-07    -0.051   -0.054    0.003    -0.025   -0.070    0.046    -0.038   -0.070    0.032    -0.042     0.007

  Aug-07    0.044    0.010    0.034    0.074    0.028    0.046    0.078    0.041    0.037    0.038     0.007

  Sep-07    0.052    0.018    0.034    0.067    0.004    0.063    0.085    0.000    0.085    0.044     0.008

  Oct-07    0.052    -0.003    0.056    0.031    -0.015    0.046    0.069    -0.008    0.077    0.022     0.008

  Nov-07    -0.028   -0.043    0.015    -0.020   -0.048    0.027    -0.019   -0.022    0.003    -0.034     0.008

  Dec-07    -0.008   -0.042    0.035    0.011    0.009    0.002    0.002    0.007    -0.005   -0.016     0.008

  Jan-08    -0.092   -0.078   -0.014   -0.078   -0.066   -0.012   -0.087   -0.058   -0.029   -0.109     0.008

  Feb-08    0.082    0.027    0.055    0.099    -0.026    0.125    0.130    -0.007    0.137    0.021     0.008

 Mar-08    -0.031   -0.037    0.006    -0.027   -0.012   -0.015   -0.015   -0.008   -0.006   -0.001     0.008

  Apr-08    0.030    0.028    0.002    0.056    0.007    0.049    0.026    -0.013    0.039    -0.007     0.008

 May-08    0.009    -0.106    0.116    -0.004   -0.066    0.062    0.002    -0.070    0.072    -0.044     0.008

  Jun-08    -0.132   -0.137    0.006    -0.098   -0.144    0.046    -0.102   -0.132    0.030    -0.112     0.009

  Jul-08    -0.069    0.017    -0.085   -0.079    0.030    -0.109   -0.105    0.004    -0.110    0.020     0.009

  Aug-08    -0.001   -0.045    0.044    -0.008   -0.041    0.033    -0.009   -0.072    0.062    0.009     0.009

  Sep-08    -0.099   -0.145    0.046    -0.165   -0.124   -0.041   -0.172   -0.119   -0.053   -0.092     0.009

  Oct-08    -0.051   -0.050   -0.001   -0.111   -0.044   -0.068   -0.136   -0.027   -0.109   -0.079     0.009

  Nov-08    -0.007   -0.056    0.049    -0.087   -0.007   -0.080   -0.074    0.015    -0.089   -0.034     0.009

  Dec-08    0.052    0.148    -0.096    0.129    0.013    0.116    0.058    0.022    0.036    0.060     0.008

  Jan-09    -0.047   -0.034   -0.014   -0.057   -0.031   -0.026   -0.033   -0.077    0.043    -0.038     0.008

  Feb-09    -0.023   -0.137    0.115    -0.115   -0.100   -0.015   -0.078   -0.149    0.071    -0.102     0.007

 Mar-09    -0.013    0.099    -0.113    0.051    0.066    -0.014    0.071    0.060    0.011    0.052     0.007

  Apr-09    0.057    0.074    -0.016    0.032    0.069    -0.037    0.037    0.077    -0.041    0.052     0.007

 May-09    0.055    0.071    -0.015    0.045    0.159    -0.114    0.055    0.149    -0.094    0.060     0.006

  Jun-09    -0.049   -0.026   -0.023   -0.011   -0.053    0.042    0.002    -0.026    0.029    -0.008     0.006

  Jul-09    0.110    0.109    0.001    0.074    0.150    -0.076    0.064    0.188    -0.124    0.085     0.006

  Aug-09    0.006    0.041    -0.036    0.009    0.070    -0.061    0.028    0.063    -0.035    0.040     0.006

                                                                         34
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

  Sep-09    0.053    0.018    0.035    0.046    0.030    0.016    0.054    0.036    0.018    0.039     0.006

  Oct-09    -0.068   -0.023   -0.045   -0.017   -0.100    0.083    -0.022   -0.105    0.083    -0.012     0.006

  Nov-09    0.025    0.011    0.013    0.028    -0.008    0.035    0.037    -0.013    0.050    0.005     0.006

  Dec-09    0.024    0.041    -0.017    0.074    0.008    0.067    0.052    0.043    0.009    0.025     0.006

               TABLE A.2: Durbin's alternative statistic - H0: No serial correlation
      Durbin’s alternative statistic is a measure of the  existence of serial correlation in time series data. H0
           is no serial correlation, and this hypothesis is true at the probability P. Our table reports this
                        probability quoted per strategy and portfolio with  up to 6 lags.
                        3/3                      6/6                      12/3
                              Winner-                 Winner-                    Winner-
     Lags    Winner   Loser             Winner   Loser           Winner   Loser
                               Loser                    Loser                       Loser
       1       0.34     0.59      0.73      0.58    0.50     0.77     0.28     0.89       0.46
       2       0.32     0.53      0.88      0.85    0.65     0.94     0.17     0.19       0.62
       3       0.52     0.63      0.92      0.94    0.82     0.96     0.32     0.34       0.79
       4       0.68     0.73      0.95      0.87    0.64     0.86     0.46     0.50       0.90
       5       0.43     0.84      0.90      0.75    0.32     0.88     0.36     0.60       0.84
       6       0.56     0.84      0.95      0.81    0.44     0.94     0.48     0.69       0.84

                 TABLE A.3: Beta statistics with Newey-West standard  errors
       In every month T, all stocks in our final sample are ranked (worst to best) by their return during the
      previous months J, that is their performance during  the period T-J to T. The stocks in the first decile
      form the loser-portfolio while the winner-portfolio  contains the tenth decile of companies ranked by
        stock market performance. The zero-cost portfolio is formed out of the winner portfolio minus the
       loser portfolio. All portfolios are equal-weighted.  To avoid issues associated with lagged reaction
       effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread we leave  out one week between the portfolio formation
      period and the holding period. Each portfolio is then held for K months and consists of K overlapping
                                                       portfolios.
        Newey-West standard errors are used to prevent serial correlation. Beta in this table is the Newey-
                                    West robust exposure to systematic risk.
            Strategy                     Winner       Loser         Winner-Loser
                                Beta        0.9430        1.2191            -0.2760
               3/3
                               (P-value)       (0.000)        (0.000)            (0.0029)
                                Beta        1.1041        1.0990             0.0051
               6/6
                               (P-value)       (0.000)        (0.000)             (0.977)
                                Beta        1.1110        1.1061             0.0049
              12/3
                               (P-value)       (0.000)        (0.000)             (0.976)

                                                                         35
Momentum under different market climates                                     Gustafsson & Lundqvist

             TABLE A.4: Alpha statistics with Newey-West standard errors
    In every month T, all stocks in our final sample are ranked (worst to best) by their return during the
   previous months J, that is their performance during  the period T-J to T. The stocks in the first decile
   form the loser-portfolio while the winner-portfolio  contains the tenth decile of companies ranked by
    stock market performance. The zero-cost portfolio is formed out of the winner portfolio minus the
    loser portfolio. All portfolios are equally weighted. To avoid issues associated with lagged reaction
    effects, price pressure and bid-ask spread we leave  out one week between the portfolio formation
   period and the holding period. Each portfolio is then held for K months and consists of K overlapping
                                                   portfolios.
   Newey-West standard errors are used to prevent serial correlation. Alpha in this table is the Newey-
                                     West robust abnormal return.
         Strategy                     Winner       Loser          Winner-Loser
                            Alpha        0.0086        -0.0132             0.0218
            3/3
                            (P-value)       (0.003)        (0.000)             (0.000)
                            Alpha        0.0071        -0.0115             0.0186
            6/6
                            (P-value)       (0.022)        (0.001)             (0.001)
                            Alpha        0.0086        -0.0134             0.0220
           12/3
                            (P-value)       (0.007)        (0.000)             (0.000)

                       TABLE A.5: Average trading costs per month
                       We calculate average trading costs using the measurement for one
                        way equity trading costs in the South African market provided by
                    Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000). The measurement account
                      for both implicit and explicit costs of trading and  is estimated to 81
                                   basis point for 100 percent portfolio turnover.
                    Strategy      Average         Winner          Loser
                                Trading costs        0.0046          0.0043
                       3/3
                                   (Volatility)        (0.00038)        (0.00046)
                                Trading costs        0.0023          0.0022
                       6/6
                                   (Volatility)        (0.00022)        (0.00023)
                                Trading costs        0.0024          0.0022
                      12/3
                                   (Volatility)        (0.00053)        (0.00046)

      TABLE A.6: Average turnover         TABLE A.7: Average returns after trading costs
     Portfolio turnover is calculated as the          Each month, portfolio trading costs are subtracted
     number of new stocks divided by the            from monthly returns in order to calculate the
    total number of stocks in the beginning         average returns adjusted for trading costs. We use
     of the month. Averages are calculated         the measurement for one way equity trading costs
        over the whole sample period.           provided by Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (2000).
     Strategy      Winner     Loser        Strategy     Winner     Loser      W-L
        3/3          0.286       0.267           3/3        0.0129      0.0026      0.0103
        6/6          0.141       0.133           6/6        0.0153      0.0010      0.0143
       12/3         0.147       0.139           12/3        0.0167      -0.0006      0.0172

                                                                         36