    Dodging the Leveraged ETF Bullet - An
          Innovative Trading Strategy

                                            ∗                 †
                 David Boxi Hu, Henrik Bark

                         26 May, 2010

                        Bachelor Thesis
                Stockholm School of Economics

                              Abstract
          Two main parts, with separate purposes constitute this thesis. Firstly,
      ETFs and Leveraged ETFs are demystied in an indepth descriptive manor.
      In a short period of time ETFs have reached immense popularity, but in-
      vestor knowledge and sophistication is lagging. We attempt to ll that gap
      of knowledge in order to help investors make better informed investment
      decisions. Secondly, leveraged ETFs are known for their long-term un-
      der performance and tracking error. However, unsophisticated investors,
      might misunderstand the nature of leveraged ETF returns hoping to gain
      leveraged returns over time, ending up dissapointed and perplexed. There-
      fore we have invented and constructed a trading strategy that provides the
      same leveraged exposures to markets as leveraged ETF but is suitable for
      buy-and-hold investing. Hence, dodging the value trap of leveraged ETF
      under performance and providing investors with an alternative. Our sub-
      ject of study has been the ProShares UltraLong ETF SSO, providing two
      times the return of the S&P500 Index on a daily basis. By constructing
      a portfolio consisting of unleveraged ETFs, SPDR S&P500 SPY, tracking
      the same and gaining leverage on a portfolio level by borrowing funds,
      we will show both over performance realtive to the SSO and a far better
      market tracking leveraged position. The study is essentially a back test
      of our portfolio between 2006-06-22 and 2010-04-29.

Keywords S&P500, SPY, SSO, Leveraged ETF, ETF, Tracking Error, Trading
      Strategy, Buy-and-Hold, Portfolio Construction

Tutor: Magnus Dahlquist, Professor

Location: SIFR, Drottninggatan 89, Stockholm, Sweden

   ∗
    21310@live.hhs.se
   †
    21301@live.hhs.se

                                  1
Ackknowledgements: We would like to thank our tutor Professor Magnus
      Dahlquist for his support and guidance throughout this thesis process. He
     has provided incredible insight and much valuable input. Furthermore,
      we want to thank Professor Dahlquist for showing a great interest in our
      subject of research, thereby being very inspirational.

1 Introduction

In 1990 investors were introduced to the rst Exchange-Traded Fund (ETF).
Since then, the demand for ETFs has grown explosively and today the ETF
product range includes a multitude of asset classes and exposures, serving clients
searching for increasingly sophistcated investment possibilities. The U.S ETF
market is well established but still growing rapidly and although the rst Eu-
ropean ETF was not made available until 2000, in late 2008 the assets under
management of European ETFs amounted to around EUR 100 billion [8].
   As an investment vehicle, on a qualitative level, ETFs provide easy access to
many markets and asset classes at a relatively low cost. Also, unlike the units
of conventional index funds, ETF units trade on stock exchanges at market
determined prices combining the characteristics of mutual funds and common
stocks. Having gained immense popularity in the U.S, in less than ten years,
ETFs in the European markets have become a serious alternative to nancial
products such as futures and are at the moment venturing into more exotic
markets and asset classes such as emering markets and alternative investments.
   However, amidst its increasing popularity, issues have arised and will arise
such as the case with any cutting-edge product. Currently, a number of ETF
issuing rms in the U.S are being investigated by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) [7][8] where conicts have arisen between investor and issuer.
Those cases particulariy concern leveraged- and inverse ETF returns. However,
as we will demonstrate, rather than the problem stemming from the structure
of the ETF, it stems from the miscommunication between investor and ETF
issuer, leading to misconceptions and ultimately causing conict.
   While ETFs are clearly providing a multitude of benets for investors, many
issues still remain to be solved. Investors being well informed can be assertive
of ETFs meeting expectations, but if otherwise might end up dissapointed at
a high cost. Linking the double-edged nature of ETFs to their novelty in the
markets and their immense popularity amongst investors, we could not think of
a more interesting research topic for our thesis.

1.1 Purpose of Study
The study focuses on two main purposes. one decriptive purpose and a practical
purpose presenting a trading strategy.

                                  2
1.1.1 Descriptive Purpose
The rst purpose is to increase investor knowledge on ETFs. ETFs and par-
ticularily leveraged ETFs are realtively modern xtures in nancial markets
and while having quickly gained vast popularity, the level of investor knowledge
about these products is lagging. As simple as ETFs might seem, they are highly
sophisticated on a structural level incorporating risks and dynamics that are not
entirely evident at rst sight. [2] On a practical note, the perceived simplicity
risk bestowing a potential investor with an incomplete framwork for decision
making, potentially leading to an uninformed investment decision. In the U.S
retail investors comprise 60% of its ETF market and many of these investors
can be considered unsophisticated. Thus, the majority of U.S ETF investors
run the risk of making or having already made uninformed investment decisions.
The rst purpose will be to enlighten these investors who might use this paper
as a step in avoiding making uninformed decisions.

1.1.2 Trading Strategy
The second purpose is specically targeted to leveraged ETFs and by extension,
to a certain extent, inverse ETFs as well. The vast majority of leveraged- and
inverse ETFs aim to produce the leveraged/inverted return on a daily basis.
However, delivering leveraged returns on a daily basis is not equivalent to deliv-
ering the leveraged returns over any other arbitrary time period. Unfortunately
in many cases, unsophisticated investors have failed to identify this distinction,
becoming surprised and dissapointed when faced with underperformance of their
investment. [7] This misconception is especially unfortunate for investors ap-
plying buy-and-hold strategies, which most unsophisticated investors do. The
two possible causes for this misunderstanding of dierences in return pattern
are either the ETF issuer misinforming the investor or the investor lacking so-
phistication.
   Previous research on the performance of leveraged ETFs has shown that over
time there is a clear pattern of underperformance [5]. This underperformance is
a tracking error that is a consolidation of a few factors but essentially stems back
to ETF managers having to rebalance the fund at the end of the trading day
to maintain a constant leverage for the morning after. Especially periods with
high volatilty with no overall trending cause underperformace of leveraged ETFs.
Logically, maintaining constant leverage over these periods, the ETF manager
will lock in losses and cut prots, buying high and selling low. Ultimately, the
fund net asset value will decrease making it increasingly hard for the fund to
recover once the market turns up. Investors buying leveraged ETFs will see their
investments diminish over time due to the tracking error value decay. Thus, our
second purpose of the study will be to ourselves invent and evaluate alternative
strategies on the same underlying asset, providing the same leverage, deliver
better returns than a leveraged ETF while being more suitable for buy-and-
hold investors.
   To our knowledge there is no previous academic record of our strategies.

                                  3
Over a period of four years, 2006-2010, we have compared the cumulative daily
return of the ProShares Ultra S&P500 (SSO) against holding a portfolio of
SPDR S&P500 (SPY) where leverage is obtained by borrowing cash. The SSO
is two times leveraged and the SPY is unleveraged. In order to obtain a leverage
factor of two, our portfolio debt must initially and after each rebalancing event
constitute 50% of the portfolio. Our rebalancing rules are based on the cumu-
lative daily return of the underlying asset, in this case the S&P500 index. Four
dierent rebalancing rules applied to the portfolio and evaluated. Rebalancing
occurs either on a daily basis, or when the S&P500 cumulative daily return
reaches ±2%, ±5% or ±10%. Below is an example that illustrates the unerlying
intuition and under what circumstances the strategies theoretically would work.

Example:

When the underlying index trades up, the leverage of both the leveraged ETF
and our portfolio decrease. When the index trades down the opposite occurs.
This essentially creates a decreasing momentum due to leverage when the index
is gaining value while an increasing momentum when it trades down. For this
reason ETF managers will rebalance their leveraged ETF portfolio at end of
day. The leveraged ETF will thus maintain its leverage. However, maintain
constant leverage in order to conserve momentum come at a cost. If on day 1
the underlying index trades up, leverage is decreased and thus the ETF manager
will need to borrow additional funds and invest them in the markets. If the
underlying index on the consecutive day would trade down, leverage increases,
and the fund manager would have to sell part of the portfolio and amortize
debt to decrease leverage. Over the two days the manager due to rebalancing
ruels has bought high and sold low which is bad investing. In addition the
manager will incurr higher interest rate costs for the borrowed funds and higher
transaction costs. These factors combined with the general tracking error of
leveraged ETFs contribute to value lost for the investor.
   Now assume one of our rebalancing rules are used instead on a leveraged
portfolio using unleveraged ETFs. For the sake of the example we will assume a
rebalancing rule of ±2%. If the underlying index on day 1 trades up less than 2%
no rebalancing occurs, leaving our portfolio with decreased leverage. However,
when the underlying index trades down the day consequtive day, value in the
portfolio will be protected since no rebalancing occured the previous trading day.
Essentially, there is a trade o involved that ultimately decides which strategy
will be most protable. Generally we have understood that what one pays[gains]
for less frequent rebalancing is the loss of upward[downward] momentum when
the S&P500 Index trades up[down], but what one gains is the protection of value
if the S&P500 Index would be volatile.
    If our portfolio with alternative rebalancing rules are to provide better re-
turns than holding the leveraged ETF the gain from having less tracking error
by using unleveraged ETFs plus the gain from value protection must oset the
loss of lessend upward and increased downward momentum plus the cost of

                                  4
borrowing funds and rebalacing transaction costs.

                                  

   Having read about the cause of leveraged ETF long term under perfor-
mance[2][5][7], the strategy above is a construction of our own innovative thought
process. We therefore wish to summarize, in a very general hypothesized manor,
the underlying intuition behind why we believe that our strategy should be suc-
cessful:
      A portfolio where leverage is transferred to portfolio level by bor-
     rowing funds, holding unleveraged ETFs and thereby eliminating
      leveraged ETF tracking error, will over time render a higher cumu-
      lative return than holding a leveraged ETF. We suspect this strategy
      will ultimately be more suitable for buy-and-hold investors who wish
      to gain a leveraged exposure to the underlying market. If our notion
      is correct investors might have been provided with an alternative
     way to approach leveraged exposure in the market place /David
     Hu and Henrik Bark
The methodology behind the strategies are presented more thoroughly in section
5.
   In addition to the two main purposes, it is our hope that this paper will
lay ground to further research on the subject, wherefore we also will provide a
section describing future research and implications.

1.2 Contribution
ETFs are relative new xtures in nancial markets. It is widely documented and
used successfully with skill amongst professional practitioners and investors, but
academic research is lagging. To our knowledge published academically rooted
research relevant to ETFs is scarce. Most research made is published on various
internet sites or at best working papers. The cause of this is most likely the
novelty of ETFs. ETFs have existed for only 20 years and in Europe only since
2000. In addition, the essence of ETFs, tracking underlying assets, might not
present that many interesting topics for research since historically research on
the underlying assets already is extensive. Hence, from a research point of view,
ETFs tracking underlying assets appear merely a vehicle for investment rather
than an unique asset class. However, as true as that may be, the same does
account for leveraged- and inverse ETFs. These vehicles do not track under-
lying assets directly, but promise multiples on the returns of those assets. In
complexity the departure from unleveraged ETFs to leveraged ETFs presents a
binary leap in complexity. While leveraged and inverse ETFs are even newer,
their inherent complexity presents unique problems and characteristics to an-
alyze decoupled from the nature of the underlying asset. Hence, the bulk of
ETF research is concentrated to leveraged ETFs. Within the eld of leveraged
ETFs acadmic research is focused on performance analysis and explaining lever-
aged ETF tracking error. However, this paper aims to present a way investors

                                  5
might be able to capitalize on that understanding, providing some alternative
strategies.
   This paper has one minor and two main contribution. Firstly, the minor
contribution is the attempt to increase investor general knowledge on ETFs
helping them making increasingly informed decisions while trading ETFs. The
information and aspects we chose to present about the ETF's mechanics might
not be unique revelations but still rare in academic contexts.
   The rst of the two main contributions is the alternative strategies pre-
sented and evaluated. Our evaluation of the strategies cover a period of time
between 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29. For this paper we have presented the cumu-
lative daily return of our strategies and the leveraged ETF over this period and
applied the various rebalancing rules. Using the cumulative daily return our
strategy applies more to a buy-and-hold investor for the holding period. Our
results show that during the holding period each of our alternative strategies
consistently overperform holding the leveraged ETF taking into accounting in-
terest rate costs, but not transaction costs. Thus our portfolio with alternative
rebalancing rules prove to overperform while being more suitable for a buy-and-
hold strategy compared to holding leveraged ETF. We have thus provided an
alternative strategy for investors looking for a leveraged exposure while applying
a buy-and-hold strategy. In addition, we hope that this could provide further
insight for leveraged ETF managers who might consider input in methods of
rebalancing their funds.
   Lastly, having presented overperformance during this period several more
interesting follow-up studies can be made. The same strategies can be evalu-
ated during other time periods with clearer underlying market trends to ana-
lyze further characteristics. It would also be interesting to empirically study
what factors cause the portfolio excess returns. Understanding the conditions
and dynamics of overperformance one might attempt to create market neutral
strategies where one would hold one of our portfolios and short sell a leveraged
ETF against and capitalize on the spread. We have chosen to evaluate one ETFs
covering the S&P500 Index, but same studies can be applied to other ETFs both
in Europe and across other asset classes.

1.3 Outline of Study
In section 2 we will present previous research. The bulk will concern leveraged
ETFs, their performance dynamics and tracking error. However, for the sake
of completeness we will also present some sources on unleveraged ETFs and
ETFs in general. It might be of importance to note that some of our references
used and presented here are not published papers but information extracted
from dierent articles published on the internet. This is an eect of the scarce
supply of academic research on the subject. Hence, we have, at the cost of
rigour, chosen to trust some of the internet contents found. However, various
comparisons have been made in order to verify the likelihood of information
being correct.

                                  6
   In section 3 we provide an indepth description of both unleveraged ETFs
and leveraged ETFs in an attempt to demystify these new innovative products.
    In section 4, data used is described in detail.
   In section 5, we will discuss what, how and why some data has been calcu-
lated in order to provide a good understanding the underlying dynamics of the
strategies and how the strategies are constructed.
    Section 6 presents the results of performance evaluation of our strategies and
will also provide analysis of these results.
   Section 7 presents the conclusions drawn from the result in section 6.
   In section 8, having presented our results and conclusions, we open mindedly
discuss the eld of future research in this subject.
    Section 9 contains all references that have been used to write this thesis.

2 Previous Research

Because ETFs are a rather new xture to nancial markets, the amount of
previous research is scarce in comparison to the elds of asset pricing or the likes.
In this section, we will present the ndings from previous research on areas close
to our research purposes. Formally, we have not found a previous study that
specically answers to the purposes we strive for, and but research has been in
the vicinity. Because the strategies presented in the thesis concerns leveraged
ETFs the presentation of previous research will be focused on leveraged ETF s
and their dynamics.
   In 2009, Cheng and Madhavan [7] studied the impact of leveraged- and
inverse ETFs on market volatility and liquidity, unusual features of their product
design, and questions of investor suitability. Their results show that leveraged
funds are neither well understood amonst investors nor professionals. Some
investors do not understand the point that leveraged ETFs will not necessarily
replicate the leveraged index return over longer time periods. The authors
shows that generally, the greater the holding period and the higher the daily
volatility, the greater the deviation between the leveraged ETF's return and a
statistically levered position in the same index. They conclude that the gross
return of a leveraged or inverse ETF has an embedded path-dependent option
that under certain conditions can lead to value destruction for buy-and-hold
investors. The unsuitability of ETFs are according to the authors for long-term
investors reinforced by the drag on returns from high transaction costs and tax
ineciency. In essence, their paper claim that leveraged and inverse ETFs are
not suitable for buy-in-hold investors and that these products are not designed
to deliver long-term performance for volatile indices.
   In 2010, Dr. Giese [2] developed a general mathematical framework for as-
sessing the long-term performance of leveraged- and short ETFs. Dr. Giese
concludes that there is an optimal degree of leverage that maximizes the ex-
pected return of the daily re-balanced leveraged investment that depends on
observable market parameters. Since existing leveraged- and inverse ETFs use
a constant degree of leverage that does not respond to the market environment,

                                  7
the paper proposes an improved design of leveraged- and inverse investment
products. In particular, the theoretical and numerical results developed in this
paper call for leveraged- and inverse funds where the degree of leverage is not
constant in time but is adjusted according to the optimal leverage concept to
ensure suered by investors in adversely moving markets are limited.
   In 2009, Lu, Wang and Zhang [5] found that inverse leveraged ETFs may
deviate more from a benchmark over long time periods than a leveraged ETF.
Their results caution against the use of leveraged ETFs as long-term investment
substitutes for long or short position of the benchmark indices. The key ndings
are that since the quadric variation (further explained in section 3.2.1 ) is linearly
increasing with the length of the holding period, the long-term performances of
leveraged and inverse ETFs tend to underperform the multiples of the underlying
benchmark over long holding periods. In their paper they present six cases of
daily returns to see the dierent eect on the two day return of the double ETF
and the inverse double ETF. Conclusively, the three authors show that:

      Finally, the sequence of the returns in the two periods does not
      matter. As long as the product of the two returns is negative, the
     two-day return of the double (inverse double) ETF would be lower
      than double (negative double) of the return of the underlying bench-
      mark. If the product of the two returns is positive, then the two-day
     return of the double (inverse double) ETF would be higher than
      double (negative double) of the return of the underlying benchmark
      index. [5]

Essentially, this supports the idea that ranging and volatile markets make for
underperformance in leveraged and inverse ETFs, while trending provides supe-
rior returns. Lastly, Lu, Wang and Chang show in their appendix that the long
term performance of a leveraged ETF is negatively correlated with the quadratic
variation of the underlying index. The larger the quadratic variation the more
will the leveraged ETF track below the simple multiple of the underlying index
over the long term. Amenc, Goltz, Grigoriu and Schröder [8] concluded that
ETFs are not yet used to their full potential, most ETFs are largely limited to
passive holdings of broad market indices. They show that more than two-thirds
of all ETF users frequently use ETFs to obtain broad market exposure; and for
more than 50% ETFs are predominantly long-term or buy-and-hold investments.
Fewer than 50% of the respondents in their survey report that they frequently
rely on ETFs for short-term investment or for exposure to specic market sub-
segments, most practitioners do not trade options on ETFs, sell them short or
lend them out.

                                  8
3 Qualitative Description

3.1 The ETF
3.1.1 Background
ETFs oer investors the benets of stocks, whereas they can go in and out of
positions during trading hours. With ETFs as part of one's portfolio, investors
can get exposure towards new markets, sectors and securities, in addition, with
ETFs, investors are able to customize the diversication of their portfolios. ETFs
are like mutual funds, open ended, hence oering new shares to investors and
are obligated to buy back outstanding shares on investors' request. ETFs are
traded on the stock exchanges around the world, and their prices are determined
by the market. The majority of ETFs are index tracking and consist of a trust
of securities with the purpose of replicating the benchmark or index as close
as possible. [8] An EFT was rst traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange in
1990 and ten years later in April 2000 the rst ETF was launched in Europe
by Merrill Lynch to track the Euro Stoxx 50 index. Even though the European
ETF market was introduced later than the American, it now account for 33%,
in 2008 the European ETF market amounted to approximately USD 143 billion.
In 2009 about 650 dierent ETF products was listed in Europe and 700 in the
US. The most popular ETFs among investors are still equity ETFs, tracking
either sectors or national indices. They account for about 60% of the market.
Fixed-income ETFs account for about 30% and commodity ETFs account for
about 5%. ETFs and regular mutual funds have a lot of similarities, however,
there are some important dierences in how they issue and redeem shares to
investors. An ETF is registered as a fund company, the assets within the fund is
supported by a custodian which holds the assets. The administrator is updating
the net asset value (NAV) on a regular basis and the management company
handles the operations. An ETF is created when institutional investors or other
authorized market participants commits to invest capital in a fund with the
purpose of replicating an index or other benchmark. ETF shares are created,
unlike traditional mutual funds, by authorized market participant's depositing
a certain block of securities with the ETF. Based on the manager's composition
of the ETF, the participant buys the block of the underlying securities on the
markets. For the deposit of the shares, the participant receives a xed number
of ETF shares with a NAV that is the value of the replicating index. The ETF
shares are known as creation units and usually constitutes in lots of between
10 000 to 100 000 shares. The ETF shares prices are based on the underlying
securities, when the shares are traded, the prices depends on the supply and
demand. If the prices dier from the NAV, market participants can step in
and take positions on the spreads, making arbitrage prots. In order to make
arbitrage prots, market participants seek ETFs that are undervalued compared
to their NAV, buying large blocks of ETF shares, then redeem them at the
custodian bank for the underlying securities. After receiving the underlying
securities, the investor can sell them on the market. The same strategy may be

                                  9
implemented in reverse, should the ETF be overvalued compared to its NAV.
However, when dierences occur between ETF prices and their underlying NAV,
the market makes them disappear very fast.

3.1.2 Replication
There are ETFs attempting to replicate sectors, indices, commodities, hedge
funds, currency baskets and private equity. The replication mechanism of an
ETF may be structured in three dierent ways. An ETF manager may replicate
an index by holding all of the securities in the same proportion as their part in
the underlying index. This strategy oers a quite natural replication. However,
when trying to track a very broad index with a lot of securities, this strategy
can be very dicult to implement, due to the dierences in liquidity which
can make some securities dicult to acquire in the appropriate volume. High
transaction costs is also a factor that makes this strategy expensive due to the
large number of securities in the trust. Instead of holding all the underlying
securities in the index, a manager can implement statistical sampling strategy,
where the manager instead of investing in all securities, only invests in the
most liquid securities in order to replicate the index. Compared to the physical
replication, this strategy does not cost as much and is widely used for tracking
large indices. When using a swap-based replication, the manager invests in a
basket of securities and outsources the tracking error management to a third
party. The basket of securities will most likely not track the index perfectly, so
the dierences in the ETFs performance to the underlying index are balanced
by swap payments made by the swap-counterparty. These ETFs does not have
the risk of large tracking errors and comes at relatively low costs. However,
there is risk for the swap-counterpart. Should the ETF dier a lot from the
underlying index, the swap-counterparty is obliged to make payments. [8] In
order to minimize the risk, there is usually a risk limit of 10% of the fund's
NAV. Should the fund reach this limit, the swap is rearranged.

3.1.3 Dividends
ETFs may handle dividends from the assets in the trust in two ways. First, they
can either pay out dividends in cash to the shareholders. Dividend payments
on the securities held in the fund remain in the fund in cash until they are
paid out at xed time intervals. The dividends from the underlying securities
may accumulate in the fund, and create a small deviation in performance from
the underlying index. ETFs can instead of paying out the dividends to the
shareholders, choose to reinvest them. ETFs that use this strategy are tracking
the total return of a specic underlying index (including reinvested dividends).
The cash ow payments that the shareholders have to handle if this strategy is
implemented, are only those occurring when the shareholder buys or sells ETF
shares.

                                  10
3.1.4 Diversication
The most popular kinds of ETFs are still the ones tracking specic equity in-
dices. These ETFs tracks the return of indices such as OMX30, NASDAQ
and S&P500. For an investor, these ETFs oer a much diversied alternative
for exposure towards the equity markets. By using ETFs, investors now have
a shortcut when they want to take positions in certain markets. There are
also equity ETFs replicating the return of certain industry sectors, investment
styles and recently ETF providers have created ETFs with exposure towards
the emerging markets, such as the BRIC countries. Beside ETFs replicating
equities, there are a wide range of other ETF alternatives for investors want-
ing to get exposure towards the returns of ination protected, corporate and
government bonds. The Fixed-income ETFs have expanded to alternative in-
vestments, which are more sophisticated and enables investors to invest in hedge
funds, private equity, currency baskets and real estate replicating ETFs. These
ETFs provides investors with more investment opportunities, and can better
help them customize the diversication of their portfolios.

3.1.5 Tax
Traditional mutual funds' realized capital gains are passed on to the funds share-
holders, these tax rules are disadvantaging for long-term investors. ETFs have
the same tax rules as mutual funds, however, they allow investors to redeem
ETF shares by swapping ETFs for the underlying stock, which does not include
any cash changing hands. For example, if an investor redeems SEK 1 000 000
from an OMX30 index fund. In order for the fund to pay out cash to the in-
vestor, it must sell SEK 1 000 000 worth of stock on the market. Should the
stocks be sold at an appreciated price, the fund will receive a capital gain, it
will be passed on to the investor before the end of the year. Hence, the in-
vestor will pay tax for the turnover within the fund. When an ETF shareholder
wishes to redeem SEK 1 000 000, the ETF manager does not have to unload any
stocks in the portfolio, the manager may instead oer the shareholder in-kind
redemptions in order to limit the capital gains.

3.1.6 Tracking Error
The dierence in return between the ETF and the underlying index or bench-
mark is called the fund's tracking error. Usually the tracking error for any given
ETF is small, perhaps a few basis points. However, sometimes the tracking er-
ror can increase to several hundred basis points due to a number of factors.
Regulations require that ETF and mutual fund managers cannot invest more
than a certain amount of its capital in one single security. When specialized
ETFs tries to replicate an industry or sector, these rules can create problems,
since replication of an industry index may require that the fund holds more than
the allowed amount of its capital in one specic security, which is not allowed.
Hence, the fund cannot replicate the index to its full extent and a tracking error
will most likely occur. Other substantial contributors to tracking errors are the

                                  11
fees. Even if an ETF tracks an index perfectly, the ETF will underperform the
index return by the amount of fees that are deducted from the ETF's return.
Returns will also be reduced by how much the fund trades securities in the mar-
ket, the more it trades, the more trading fees it will accumulate which will reduce
the returns. When investors take short positions in stocks, securities lending
occurs. Before an investor can short sell a stock, he must in most cases rst
borrow it from someone, (unless he is naked short). Stocks and other securities
are usually borrowed from large institutional fund managers, for example ETF
index fund managers. By charging interest on borrowed stock and securities, the
managers that takes part in securities lending, can generate additional returns
for their investors. The ownership and dividends claims still maintains with
the lending fund. The extra returns that the fees generate creates additional
return for the shareholders, beyond the index performance, hence a tracking
error occurs. To evaluate the tracking quality of an ETF, one can take many
approaches. To start o, one may simply analyze the dierence between the
returns on the ETF and the underlying index or benchmark that it is trying
to replicate. Another way of evaluating the tracking quality of an ETF is by
analyzing the correlation between the ETF and the underlying index. Tracking
errors may also be analyzed by comparing the mean returns of the ETF and the
index or benchmark.

3.2 The Leveraged ETF
In order to create leverage ETFs managers use a wide range of nancial products
such as futures contracts, asset swaps, options and other derivatives. In many
cases, especially in the U.S ETF managers simply borrow money to create a
leveraged exposure for investors.
   Leveraged ETFs are as multifacetted as unleveraged ETFs, but we have
chosen to focus our attention in this descriptive section on two of the main
distinguishing features for leveraged ETFs. The inherent tracking error will be
algebraically described and the leverage dynamic will be explained with a simple
example.

3.2.1 Inherent Tracking Error
The divergence of long-term return of leveraged and inverse ETFs can be ex-
plained by the quadratic variation over the holding period [5]. This can be
shown by algebraically by deriving the cumulative return expressions for lever-
aged and inverse ETFs. To present the quadratic varition eect we begin by
         L     I
dening rt and rt as the daily returns of a double leveraged ETF and an inverse
double ETF at date t. Assuming that the two ETFs perfectly deliver returns in
                                             L    B     I      B
line with what is promised the daily return should be rt = 2rt and rt = −2rt ,
 B
rt being the return of the underlying index.
         B
   Dene Rtnas the nth-day cumulative return of the benchmark index starting
                               L       I
at date t. Further we dene Rtn andRtn as the nth-day cumulative return of
the double leverage ETF and the double inverse ETF starting at date t. Then

                                  12
    B   ∏n−1    B
   Rtn =   i=0 (1 + rt+i) − 1 (1),
    L   ∏n−1    L
   Rtn =   i=0 (1 + rt+i) − 1 (2),
    I   ∏n−1     I
   Rtn =   i=0 (1 + rt+i) − 1 (3).
   To show the compounding eect we present the two-day case, since longer
periods demand increasingly tedious algebra. Given that n is two, then
    B       B     B        B   B    B B
   Rt2 = (1 + rt )(1 + rt+1) − 1 = rt + rt+1 + rt rt+1.The two day returns of
the ETFs are
    L         B      B         B    B     B B
   Rt2 = (1 + 2rt )(1 + 2rt+1) − 1 = 2rt + 2rt+1 + 4rt rt+1 for the double
leveraged.
    L        B      B          B    B     B B            B
   Rt2 = (1 − 2rt )(1 − 2rt+1) − 1 = −2rt − 2rt+1 + 4rt rt+1. In terms of Rt2,
the return of the double leveraged ETF two-day cumulative return expression
is
    L     B    B B
   Rt2 = 2Rt2 + 2rt rt+1, while the double inverse ETF two day cumulative
                       I       B    B B
return expression becomes Rt2 = −2Rt2 + 6rt rt+1.
   Neither the double leveraged ETF nor the inverse double ETF expressions
are equivalent to returning twice of the underlying benchmark. Also, the inverse
double ETF is farthest from the target return. Lastly, we can conclude that if
the signs of the two factors in the quadratic term are unequal, there will be a
negative deviation on long term leveraged returns.

3.2.2 Leverage Dynamics
Denition Portfolio Leverage

                             P ortf olio T otal Exposure
P ortf olio Leverage =     P ortf olio Debt (4)

This section aims to in detail describe the process of rebalancing a portfolio
to keep the portfolio leverage constant. The process is refered to as constant
leverage rebalancing and value lost through this process is called falling into the
constant leverage trap. [2][13]
   Assume a leverage portfolio with a total exposure of $200. For a leverage
factor of 2, debt must constitute 50%, $100. The remaining $100 is investor
equity. Total exposure is the $200 invested in the underlying market. If markets
increase by 1%, the total exposure will reach $202 dollars. Less debt of $100
investor return on equity is 2%. This is how leverage works. However, after
the 1% increase the portfolio now has a total exposure of $202, with an equity
                                          $202
stake of $102. Leverage is reduced to $102 = 1.98, a decrease when underlying
markets increase. To oset this 0.02 decrease in leverage the portfolio manager
borrows an additional $2 increasing debt to $102, and invests this $2 in the
                                                                             $204
markets increasing exposure to $204. Portfolio leverage is restored to $102 = 2.
The opposite applies to underlying markets decreasing. If underlying markets
decrease by 1%, the total exposure drops to $198. Less debt of $100 investor
return on equity is now -2%, dropping to $98. New portfolio leverage is now
$198
 $98 = 2.02, an increase when underlying markets decrease. To oset this
0.02 increase in leverage, the portfolio manager sells $2 worth of the portfolio
exposure, and amortizes debt by $2. New debt is $98 while new exposure is $196.

                                  13
                                    $196
Portfolio leverage is restored to $98 = 2. Leverage is inversely proportional to
market movement direction. Ultimately, if markets are moving in a strong
ranging manor, this rebalancing methodology will imply locking in losses and
cutting prots, in documented cases leading to value destruction. This is called
the constant leverage trap. [2][13]

4 Data

In order to construct and evaluate the portfolios and strategies we have extracted
daily data on the price of the S&P500 Index, the net asset value (NAV) of the
SPDR S&P500 (SPY) ETF and NAV of the ProShares Ultra S&P500 (SSO)
leveraged ETF. This data covers a period between 2006-06-22 and 2010-04-
29. We have a start date of 2006-06-22 because that was when the SSO rst
started trading. We chose to use ETFs tracking the S&P500 because it is a
good general market proxy and because of good liquidity in that market. [8]
The data is in time series format and all prices are in US dollars. All data on
prices are collected on trading days with the underlying index and ETFs trading
on the same days.
    In addition to prices we have also extracted data on overnight interest rates.
Implementing the strategies we have used the overnight USD LIBOR rate as a
proxy for overnight lending. This rate is published on a daily basis and thus we
have allocated the correct rate to the respective trading day of the ETFs and
S&P500 Index.
   Using this data we have computed variables and metrics needed to create
our portfolios and evaluate strategies. These computations have been extensive.
All variables and metrics will be dened in section 5.1.
   Data extracted from the Bloomberg Professional service.

5 Methodology

This section will rst describe how the portfolios are constructed and which re-
balancing rules are used. Then we will describe the intuition behind why we have
chosen the specic portfolio features and rebalancing rules. Then explain the
intuition behind the characteristics of the provide information on the intution
behind the strategies constructed and present the method used for construction.

5.1 Mathematical Denitions of Variables
Below we will provide the mathematical denitions of the variables computed
by our model.

Dention Daily Return of SPY

                     SP Y     SP Yt+1
Daily Return = rt,t+1 =  SP Yt − 1 , between day t+1 and t. (5)

Denition Return of SPY between rebalancing events

                                  14
                          SP Y    SP Y t+1
Rebalancing Return = rt,t+1 =  SP Yt − 1, where t is a rebalancing date (6)

Denition Daily Return of the Portfolio

Daily Return of the P ortf olio = Daily Return (7)

Dention Dollar Change of the Portfolio

             Daily Return of P ortf olio
$Delta = P ortf olio T otal Exposure (8)

Denition Percentage Equity Return

                                $Delta
%ROE = P ortf olio T otal Exposure−Debt−Interest Rate Cost (9)

Denition Dollar Debt Change

                   (P ortf olio T otal Exposure)(1+Daily Return)
$Debt Delta =                2 −Debt, for the debt dollar
change on rebalancing dates one substitutes the Daily Return with the Rebal-
ancing Return. (10)

Dention Adjusted Portfolio total exposure

Adj P ort T ot Exp = P ortf olio T otal Exposure(1+Daily Return)+$Debt Delta,
since $Debt_Delta is reinvested in the SPY. (11)

Denition Adjusted Portfolio Debt

Adj Debt = Debt + $Debt Delta (12)

Denition Cumulative Equity Return on the Portfolio
 P   ∏n−1
rtn =   i=0 (1 + %ROE) − 1, on the nth day; t on a daily basis (13)
 P   ∏n−1
rtn =   i=0 (1 + %ROE) − 1, on the nth rebalancing date; t on a rebalancing
      event basis (14)

5.2 The Portfolio
The portfolio constructed is initiated on 2006-06-22, the second trading day of
the SSO. On end of trading the previous day, on end of day prices 2006-06-21,
we have assumed we have bought one unit of SPY with available cash, while
having borrowed funds to buy another unit. Hence, on the start of trading
2006-06-22, we are holding two unleveraged ETFs tracking the S&P500 Index,
with a portfolio leverage of 2, which in terms of leverage exposure is equivalent
to holding a unit of the SSO.

                                  15
5.2.1 Daily Rebalancing
From 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29 we will monitor the portfolio value change and
include rebalancing events. Four dierent rebalancing rules have been applied
and compared for the portfolio dened above. The rst will rebalance the port-
folio on end of trading each trading day. This rebalancing dynamic follows that
which is described in section 3.2.2. When markets start trading on 2006-06-
22 to 2010-04-29 (975 trading days), our model re-calculates and updates the
following variables on a daily basis:

   1. Daily return on the SPY

   2. The dollar change of the portfolio

   3. The percentage equity return on the current cash position less the interest
      rate cost

   4. The debt change necessary to maintain a leverage factor of 2

   5. The leverage factor

   6. Updates the portfolio value adjusting for the daily return and debt change

   7. Updates debt level

   8. Calculates the cumulative daily return on the portfolio equity position

In addition to the above, the daily return as well as the cumulative daily return
of the SSO is computed. Important to note, is that the model is constructed in
such a way that it dynamically/automatically rebalances.

5.2.2 Rebalancing Rules
The rebalancing rules are conditioned on the cumulative daily return of the
underlying index of the SPY, namely the S&P500 Index. Rebalancing of our
portfolio is triggered by the cumulative daily return of the S&P500 Index reaches
levels outside of the following intervals:

  1. ] − 2% : +2%[

  2. ] − 5% : +5%[

  3. ] − 10% : +10%[

In which case our model re-calculates and updates the following variables:

   1. Daily return on the SPY

   2. Daily return on the portfolio

   3. Cumulative daily return of the portfolio up to the rebalancing date

   4. Return on SPY between rebalancing dates

                                  16
   5. The dollar change of the portfolio between rebalancing dates

   6. The percentage equity return on the current cash position less the interest
      rate cost between rebalancing dates

   7. The debt change necessary to maintain a leverage factor of 2

   8. The leverage factor

   9. Updates the portfolio value adjusting for the daily return and debt change

  10. Updates debt level

  11. Calculates the cumulative daily equity return on the portfolio between
      rebalancing dates

  12. Restarts the counter for the cumulative daily return on the S&P500 Index

The rst rebalancing date is the initiation date of the portfolio, namely 2006-
06-22. As with the daily rebalancing method, the daily return as well as the
cumulative daily return of the SSO is calculated. Important to note, is that
the model is constructed in such a way that it dynamically/automatically re-
balances.
   The intuition behind the rebalancing rules is grounded in the research of
Lu, Wang and Zhang, where an existence of a positive relation between the
benchmark moving within a range and the leveraged ETF tracking error is sug-
gested. By rebalancing less often, and only when the underlying index reaches
above/under a certain cumulative level, the goal is for our portfolio to decreases
the risk of being harmed by choppy and reversing market movements.

5.3 Interest Rate Costs
Specic to the SSO ETF, it promises to deliver a leverage factor of 2 on a daily
basis, following the described leverage dynamics in section 3.2.1. Our portfolios
will be rebalanced the same dynamic, but in addition to daily rebalancing we
apply other rules. Holding leverage using debt induces interest rate costs. As
mentioned in section 4 the lending rate used is the USD overnight LIBOR. Using
this rate assumes being a bank, and most probably retail investors will borrow
at a higher rate. We have chosen to use the USD overnight LIBOR interest rate
for the sake of generality. However, the model we have constructed to create the
portfolio is exible on interest rate input, so can be adjusted for retail investor
lending rates. Having described the method of obtaining leverage we move to
how our strategies eliminate the compounding eect, the main culprit of the
leverage ETF tracking error.

5.4 Minimizing Leveraged ETF Quadratic Variation
In the leverage portfolio that we have constructed, we have taken tracking er-
ror eects into account and eliminated them by using unleveraged ETFs. The

                                  17
unleveraged ETFs do not display the problematics of the compounding eect.
As mentioned in section 2, research and documentation has shown that tacking
error in unleveraged ETFs is small enough to be neglected [5]. In our portfolio,
using unlevereged ETFs, leverage is obtained on a portfolio level rather than
product level, eliminating tracking error while providing similar leveraged ex-
posure. We believe this could be the fundamental cause of overperformance in
our portfolio over the holding period.

5.5 Comparison to the S&P500 Benchmark
Even though our portfolio might show better over time performance than hold-
ing the leveraged ETF, investors who search for leveraged returns on the S&P500
Index might not be satised if our portfolio while providing better results that
the SSO, still largely under perform twice the S&P500 Index cumulative daily
return. Therefore our model will also compute a double cumulative daily return
S&P500 benchmark. This modied benchmark will provide returns equivalent
to twice the S&P500 Index cumulative return, thus providing a great benchmark
for a buy-and-hold strategy while incorporating the multiple return of leverage.
   By comparing our portfolio cumulative daily return and the SSO cumulative
daily return against the double cumulative daily S&P500 benchmark we will
be provided with an insight in how closely our strategy manages to track the
actual underlying asset. Essentially, a perfect tracking is what we hope to
provide investors with.

5.6 Model
Our model was constructed using Visual Basic programming language in Mi-
crosoft Excel 2007.

6 Results

During the holding period from 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29, we have observed our
portfolio value on a daily basis accounting for changes induced by rebalancing.
All in all the period constitutes 975 trading days. The aim with our tests have
been to evaluate the cumulative daily return and daily return of the portfolio
over this period and compare that to holding the ProShares UltarLong ETF,
SSO. Also, the cumulative return on a rebalancing day basis has been calcu-
lated. The rebalancing cumulative performance metric simulates the scenario
where an investor initiates the portfolio and does not observe it until it is time
to rebalance. Comparing it to the daily cumulative return of the portfolio, one
could get an idea of how passively the investor can manage the portfolio. We
believe that these metrics can give us a good indication of how the portfolio
fars over time compared to holding the ETF. Results will be sorted according
to the dierent rebalancing rules. Tables and graphs can be found in the ap-
pendix. All spreads are not to be interpreted as absolute values. If a spread

                                  18
is positive it indicates performing over the benchmark, while a negative spread
indicates the opposite. The benchmarks are, depending on which case, either
the SSO, S&P500 Index or a double return S&P500 Index. Lastly, all spreads
are presented in units of percentage points (pps).

6.1 Daily Rebalancing
Using a daily rebalancing rule our strategy is bound by the same frameworks as
the manager of the leveraged ETF. Evaluating a buy-and-hold of our portfolio
with daily rebalancing compared to holding the SSO gives a good indication of
value earned by using unleveraged ETFs instead. Overperformance will not be
attributed to rebalancing rules but to avoiding leveraged ETF tracking errors
over time.

6.1.1 Cumulative Returns
Refer to table 2 and 3 and gure 2 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio cumulative return during the holding period was
53.593%, 2007-10-09. The minimum cumulative portfolio return was -76.327%,
2009-03-09. On the corresponding dates the SSO had returned 40.014% and
-79.664%. The portfolio cumulative return on the nal valuation date was 2010-
04-29 is -29.198% while the SSO cumulative return on that day was -37.524%.
Over the holding period the average cumulative return is -7.521% while the
SSO average cumulative return is -16.091%. Hence, our portfolios show better
extreme returns and average returns than leveraged ETF. In addition, gure 2 in
the appendix proves that the portfolio cumulative return is above the leveraged
ETF every trading day. However, the SSO has a lower standard deviation,
8.683% compared to a standard deviation of 11.076% for our portfolio.
   The largest spread between the two is 18.593 pps, on 2007-12-20 and the
smallest is 0.166pps, 2006-06-25. The average spread is 8.571pps with a stan-
dard deviation of 4.449 %. So on average during this holding period the portfolio
earns 8.571pps higher returns. The graph of the spread shows increase up until
2008-02-22 up to 18.593pps, with two jumps on 2006-12-22 and 2007-12-22.
Between 2007-12-22 and 2008-08-22 the spread is within a range of 14.143pps
and 17.105pps, before showing a strong decreasing trend until 2009-02-22 to
3.472pps. The value on the nal day is 8.326pps.

6.1.2 Daily Returns
Refer to table 1 and table 5 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio daily return was 29.040%, 2008-10-13. The lowest
portfolio daily return was -19.690%, 2008-10-15. On the same days the SSO
daily return was 22.414% and -17.109%. The number of trading days the SSO
overperforms the portfolio during the period is 477 out of 975.
   The largest spread between the two is 6.626pps, indicating that the portfolio
daily return is 6.626pps above the SSO daily return. The smallest spread is -

                                  19
3.107pps, indicating that the portfolio daily return is 3.107pps below the SSO
daily return. The average spread over the entire holding period is 0.0175pps.
During 2006-06-22 to 2006-12-30 the average spread is 0.0422pps. Between
2007-01-02 and 2007-12-30 the average spread is 0.0318pps. Between 2009-01-
02 and 2009-12-30 the average spread is 0.00965%. Between 2010-01-02 and
2010-04-29 the average spread is 0.00075pps.

6.2 ±2% Rebalancing Rule
From previous research it is clear that the tracking error of a leveraged ETF
increases when the underlying index range trades. [5] Essentially, the quadratic
variation term is negative. By rebalancing less frequently and only then the
index return is ≥| 2% |, our model will not rebalance if the index return is trading
within a range of range <| 2% | . Therefore, the probability of rebalancing
during range trading is lessened, hence increasing portfolio performance.

6.2.1 Cumulative Return
Refer to table 2 and table 3 and ture 3 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum cumulative return during the holding period was 53.587%,
2007-10-09, while the minimum was -76.328%, 2009-03-09. For the cumulative
return of the SSO on the corresponding dates please refer to section 6.1.1. The
portfolio average cumulative return over the holding period is -7.524%, while the
SSO average return is -16.091%. The portfolio cumulative return standard devi-
ation is 11.076% while the SSO standard deviation is less, 8.683%. On the nal
valuation day, 2010-04-29, the portfolio has returned -29.201%. On the same
day the SSO has returned -37.524%. On the nal day the dierence between
our portfolio and the SSO is -8.323pps. As with the case of daily rebalancing,
our portfolio shows better edge returns, average returns at a higher standard
deviation. Figure 3 in the appendix proves how the portfolio cumulative return
is above the SSO cumulative return for every trading day.
   The largest spread is 18.588pps, 2007-07-20. The smallest spread is 0.166pps,
2006-06-25. The average spread for the holding period is 8.567pps with a stan-
dard deviation of 4.448%. On average during the holding period the portfolio
earns 8.567pps higher returns. The graph over the spread essentially display a
similar dynamic as in the case of the daily rebalancing portfolio, refer to section
6.1.1.

6.2.2 Daily Return
Refer to table 1 and table 5 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio daily return was 29.040%, 2008-10-13. The lowest
portfolio daily return was -19.690%, 2008-10-15. On the same days the SSO
daily return was 22.414% and -17.109%. The number of trading days the SSO
overperforms the portfolio during the period is 477 out of 975.

                                  20
   The largest spread between the two is 6.626pps, indicating that the portfolio
daily return is 6.626pps above the SSO daily return. The smallest spread is -
3.107pps, indicating that the portfolio daily return is 3.107pps below the SSO
daily return. The average spread over the entire holding period is 0.0175pps.
During 2006-06-22 to 2006-12-30 the average spread is 0.0422pps. Between
2007-01-02 and 2007-12-30 the average spread is 0.0318pps. Between 2009-01-
02 and 2009-12-30 the average spread is 0.00965%. Between 2010-01-02 and
2010-04-29 the average spread is 0.00075pps.
   Thus the descriptive metrics for the portfolio daily return are essentially
equal to the daily reblancing portfolio.

6.2.3 Rebalancing Cumulative Performance
Refer to table 4 and gure 10 in the appendix for this section.
   During the holding period the portfolio rebalances 201 times. The high-
est reblance day return is 52.416%, 2007-10-05 and the lowest is -75.580%,
2009-03-02. The average rebalancing date return is -26.565% and the standard
deviation is 38.254%.

6.3 ±5% Rebalancing Rule
From previous research it is clear that the tracking error of a leveraged ETF
increases when the underlying index range trades. [5] Essentially, the quadratic
variation term is negative. By rebalancing less frequently and only then the
index return is ≥| 5% |, our model will not rebalance if the index return is trading
within a range of range <| 5% | . Therefore, the probability of rebalancing
during range trading is lessened, hence increasing portfolio performance.

6.3.1 Cumulative Return
Refer to table 2 and table 3 and gure 4 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio cumulative return during the holding period was
53.580%, 2007-10-09. The minimum cumulative portfolio return was -76.329%,
2009-03-09. On the corresponding dates the SSO had returned 40.014% and
-79.664%. The portfolio cumulative return on the nal valuation date 2010-04-
29 was -29.204% while the SSO cumulative return on that day was -37.524%.
Over the holding period the average cumulative return is -7.521% while the
SSO average cumulative return is -16.091%. Hence, our portfolios show better
extreme returns and average returns than leveraged ETF. In addition, gure 4 in
the appendix proves that the portfolio cumulative return is above the leveraged
ETF every trading day. However, the SSO has a lower standard deviation,
8.683% compared to a standard deviation of 11.073% for our portfolio.
   The largest spread between the two is 18.5 82pps, on 2007-12-20 and the
smallest is 0.166pps, 2006-06-25. The average spread is 8.564pps with a stan-
dard deviation of 4.44 7%. So on average during this holding period the portfolio
earns 8.564pps higher returns. The graph over the spread essentially display a

                                  21
similar dynamic as in the case of the daily rebalancing portfolio, refer to section
6.1.1.

6.3.2 Daily Return
Refer to table 1 and table 5 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio daily return was 29.040%, 2008-10-13. The lowest
portfolio daily return was -19.690%, 2008-10-15. On the same days the SSO
daily return was 22.414% and -17.109%. The number of trading days the SSO
overperforms the portfolio during the period is 477 out of 975.
   The largest spread between the two is 6.626pps, indicating that the portfolio
daily return is 6.626pps above the SSO daily return. The smallest spread is -
3.107pps, indicating that the portfolio daily return is 3.107pps below the SSO
daily return. The average spread over the entire holding period is 0.0175pps.
During 2006-06-22 to 2006-12-30 the average spread is 0.0422pps. Between
2007-01-02 and 2007-12-30 the average spread is 0.0318pps. Between 2009-01-
02 and 2009-12-30 the average spread is 0.00965 pps. Between 2010-01-02 and
2010-04-29 the average spread is 0.00075pps.
   Thus the descriptive metrics for the portfolio daily return are essentially
equal to the daily reblancing portfolio.

6.3.3 Reblancing Cumulative Rule
Refer to table 4 and gure 11 in the appendix for this section.
   During the holding period the portfolio rebalances 67 times. The high-
est reblance day return is 46.527%, 2007-05-18 and the lowest is -74.592%,
2009-02-23. The average rebalancing date return is -32.677% and the standard
deviation is 35.473%.

6.4 ±10% Rebalancing Rule
From previous research it is clear that the tracking error of a leveraged ETF
increases when the underlying index range trades. [5] Essentially, the quadratic
variation term is negative. By rebalancing less frequently and only then the
index return is ≥| 10% |, our model will not rebalance if the index return is
trading within a range of range <| 10% | . Therefore, the probability of rebal-
ancing during range trading is lessened, hence increasing portfolio performance.

6.4.1 Cumulative Return
Refer to table 2 and table 3 and gure 5 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio cumulative return during the holding period was
53.580%, 2007-10-09. The minimum cumulative portfolio return was -76.329%,
2009-03-09. On the corresponding dates the SSO had returned 40.014% and
-79.664%. The portfolio cumulative return on the nal valuation date 2010-04-
29 was -29.204% while the SSO cumulative return on that day was -37.524%.
Over the holding period the average cumulative return is -7.521% while the

                                  22
SSO average cumulative return is -16.091%. Hence, our portfolios show better
extreme returns and average returns than leveraged ETF. In addition, gure 5 in
the appendix proves that the portfolio cumulative return is above the leveraged
ETF every trading day. However, the SSO has a lower standard deviation,
8.683% compared to a standard deviation of 11.073% for our portfolio.
   The largest spread between the two is 18.5 82pps, on 2007-12-20 and the
smallest is 0.166pps, 2006-06-25. The average spread is 8.564pps with a stan-
dard deviation of 4.44 7%. So on average during this holding period the portfolio
earns 8.564pps higher returns. The graph over the spread essentially display a
similar dynamic as in the case of the daily rebalancing portfolio, refer to section
6.1.1.

6.4.2 Daily Return
Refer to table 1 and table 5 in the appendix for this section.
   The maximum portfolio daily return was 29.040%, 2008-10-13. The lowest
portfolio daily return was -19.690%, 2008-10-15. On the same days the SSO
daily return was 22.414% and -17.109%. The number of trading days the SSO
overperforms the portfolio during the period is 477 out of 975.
   The largest spread between the two is 6.626pps, indicating that the portfolio
daily return is 6.626pps above the SSO daily return. The smallest spread is -
3.107pps, indicating that the portfolio daily return is 3.107pps below the SSO
daily return. The average spread over the entire holding period is 0.0174pps.
During 2006-06-22 to 2006-12-30 the average spread is 0.0421pps. Between
2007-01-02 and 2007-12-30 the average spread is 0.0318pps. Between 2009-01-
02 and 2009-12-30 the average spread is 0.00965 pps. Between 2010-01-02 and
2010-04-29 the average spread is 0.00075pps.
   Thus the descriptive metrics for the portfolio daily return are essentially
equal to the daily reblancing portfolio.

6.4.3 Rebalancing Cumulative Rule
Refer to table 4 and gure 12 in the appendix in this section.
   During the holding period the portfolio rebalances 21 times. The high-
est reblance day return is 46.355%, 2007-05-18 and the lowest is -73.728%,
2009-03-02. The average rebalancing date return is -36.456% and the standard
deviation is 32.150%. Refer to table 4 in the appendix.

6.5 Comparison to the Benchmark, S&P500 Index
Refer to table 6 and gure 1 in the appendix for this section.
   Figure 1 is the result of the model having computed data on cumulative
daily returns of the S&P500 Index, SSO and the daily rebalancing portfolio.
However, the cumulative return for the S&P500 Index we have doubled, this
way we have constructed an over time cumulative daily return benchmark. The
gure tells us that the our portfolio with daily rebalancing rather closely manage

                                  23
to track the double cumulative daily return S&P500 Index benchmark. This is
especially true in comparison to the SSO. Table 6 in the appendix tells us that
the maximum spread between the portfolio and the double return benchmark
is 0.00318pps. The minimum spread for the portfolio is -0.224pps. For the
SSO the corresponding numbers are 0.00153pps and -0.309pps. These numbers
are not to be interpreted as absolut values, but positive numbers indicate that
the portfolio or the SSO are returning above the double return S&P500 Index
benchmark. Therefore the numbers indicate that the daily rebalancing portfolio
has a larger maximum dierence of over performing the double return S&P500
Index benchmark than the SSO, while not under performing as much as the
SSO either.

6.6 Analysis
6.6.1 Cumulative Daily Return
The portfolio cumulative daily return is essential to our study. Primarily it is
the cumulative return metric that will decide whether or not our constructed
portfolio and the accompanying rebalance rules will prove to be a better lever-
aged buy-and-hold strategy than the leveraged ETF. The results on cumulative
returns presented in section 6.4 clearly indicate that our portfolio over performs
that of holding a leveraged ETF. Over the holding period, there is not a single
trading day where the leveraged ETF cumulative return is above our portfolio.
Also, with an average spread of of around 8.555pps over the total holding period,
we believe we have proved that investors seeking buy-and-hold investment with
leveraged returns should consider holding our portfolio rather than a leveraged
ETF.
   Having analyzed our results and while our portfolio independent of rebal-
ancing rule clearly is better, we expected the dierences in cumulative return
to be larger between the rebalancing rules. Therefore it is worth making a
comment on that aspect as well. In theory, when the underlying markets trade
in a range, the leveraged ETF manager must rebalance more often, and with
markets reverting often, he will ultimately cut prots and lock losses. Alge-
braically, in section 3.2.1, we prove that when the quadratic term is negative,
over time the leveraged ETF will not manage to deliver two times the bench-
mark return. . The only way for that term to be negative is if markets are
trading in a range with frequent reversion. The opposite is correct for strongly
trending markets, where the quadratic term takes on a positive value where the
leveraged ETF will deliver more than two times the benchmark return. Using
other rebalancing rules that daily, we were, ex ante, expecting the dierent rules
to yield signicantly dierent results, since naturally they capture returns dif-
ferently. Drawing conclusions from theory, in strongly trending markets a daily
rebalancing rule should provide most return, since it adjusts for the changing
leverage quicker. In strongly range bound market conditions less frequent hedg-
ing should provide better returns since these do not rebalance as much, since
essentially the leverage will range in a same manor, rendering it redundant to

                                  24
actively rebalance.
   In retrospect, we believe that the holding period is so long that it incor-
porates periods of both the index trading in a range and periods of trending.
Therefore, overall the eects of diferent rebalancing rules cancel out. There-
fore, the results, while being dierent, show no signicant dierence in returns,
where there according to conclusions drawn from theory should be one. In sec-
tion 8.1 we comment on what additional studys can be made to search for that
distinction.
   Derived from the above, it is therefore fair to claim that the over perfor-
mance on a cumulative basis of our portfolio is more attributed to the fact
of using unleveraged ETFs while gaining leverage on a portfolio basis, rather
than holding a leveraged ETf gaining leverage on a product level. Essentially,
the mechanism of the leverage ETF tracking error is eliminated. Rather than
passively holding a leveraged ETF over time investors can simply by holding a
portfolio of unleveraged ETFs and borrowing cash, implement a strategy that
is historically proven much more successful.
   On a humble note, it is important to mention that the results presented are
only valid for the holding period, and are historically corret. While providing
conceptual and quantitative indications, the results are not perfect forecast of
future conditions and returns. Also, the results might not be as valid for other
types of market conditions and holding periods.

6.6.2 Daily Return
The results we have obtained on the daily returns are mainly important for one
                       1
reason. From theory , we have understood that leveraged ETFs tend to under
perform their promised leverage over time. However, from an leveraged ETF
managers point of view, leveraged ETFs only promise the leverage return on a
daily basis. For the sake of completeness it is therefore important to measure
how well they fair on a daily basis compared to our portfolio. Our results
show that on a daily basis, there is no conclusive proof as with the cumulative
return case, that our portfolio is better than the leveraged ETF. The peak and
bottom values are better for the portfolio but all in all there were 477 our of
975 trading days where the leveraged ETF returned higher than the ETF. This
is essentially 49% of the trading days. While it is not the results that we had
                                  2
hoped, it is inline with theory . As with the case of cumulative returns, the
dierence between the dayly rebalancing strategies is small. This seems a bit
peculiar at rst glance, because one might expect the leverage factor between
these to be quite dierent. Not having explained this result fully, we nd it an
interesting result to analyze further in future research.

   1
    Lu, Wang and Zhang, 2009 for a more in detail description
   2
    Leveraged ETFs promise to deliver the leveraged return on a daily basis. Since our
portfolio is tested using some rules with less frequent rehedging it is expected that our level
of leverage will lagg somewhat compared to the leveraged ETF. Therefore, on a daily basis,
ex ante to our portfolio evaluation, there is no cause to expect the portfolio to over perform
the leveraged ETF.

                                  25
   Lastly, the small average spread between the daily return of the portfolio
and the leveraged ETF shows us that on a daily basis, over the holding period,
the dierence between the two is small anyways.

6.6.3 Rebalance Return
The rebalance returns vary widely for the dierent rebalancing rules. This is
expected because the rebalancing days dier for the dierent strategies. What
is observable is that the more rebalancing events that take place the higher
upp will the rebalancing returns reach. This is because when the underlying
index is moving the more frequent the rebalancing the more closely the portfolio
cumulative return follows. In appendix gure 10 and gure 12 we see that the
±2% rule rebalances all the way up to 52.416%, 2007-10-05 while the ±10%
rebalancing rule rebalances once in 2007-05-15 at 46.355% and then in 2008-
01-17 at 9.551%. It thus misses to rebalance on the increase up to around
2007-10-05, thus it should lose momentum from lower leverage.

6.6.4 Comparison to S&P500 Index
Figure 1 in the appendix is truly signicant in this comparison. Table 6 in the
appendix provides the descriptives of the spreads. The results of our comparison
of the daily rebalancing portfolio cumulative daily return, the SSO cumulative
daily return and 2x the S&P500 Index cumulative daily return, clearly shows,
that not only does our portfolio over perform the SSO, but it actually delivers 2x
the cumulative return of the benchmark apart from a period beginning 2008-10-
22. This is quite remarkable. Initiating our portfolio, has for quite a signicant
time period almost completely eliminated the tracking error accrued by holding
leveraged ETFs, and actually deliver twice the cumulative return of the S&P500
Index. We have provided a means for investors to truly gain leveraged exposure
in the markets, while applying a buy-and-hold strategy, not possible holding the
SSO. With dissapointed investors in the U.S having initiated an investigation on
leveraged ETFs through the SEC, our strategy using historical data, shows that
if investors would have initiated our suggested portfolio strategy, the issue might
not have arisen in the rst place. Figure 1 in appendix, also provides a measure
of the spread between the 2x S&P500 cumulative daily return and the portfolio
cumulative daily return. The spread between the 2x S&P500 cumulative daily
return and SSO cumulative return is also displayed. The two spreads can be
read on the right y-axis, while the cumulative returns can be read on the left
y-axis.
    Observing the lines for the spreads we can observe an even more enticing fact.
During the period 2006-06-22 to 2007-11-30, our portfolio actually delivers a
higher cumulative daily return than 2x the S&P500 Index. It does this again
during 2008-10-07 to 2009-04-03. This is while the SSO cumulative return is
below the 2x S&P500 Index cumulative daily return between 2006-06-22 to
2008-11-12, and again between 2009-03-24 and 2010-04-29.
    It is quite clear from these results that from a return perspective, all else

                                  26
equal, and investor should prefer our portfolio to holding the SSO. In addition,
graphs and data show that our portfolio seems to be much better at tracking
twice the return of the benchmark index over time, which ultimately is the
investor need.

7 Conclusions

There are four main conclusions that we have been able to draw from imple-
menting our alternative strategy with dierent rebalancing rules.

   1. Constructing a portfolio that uses unleveraged ETFs but obtains leverage
      on a portfolio basis by borrowing funds, proves to be a better leveraged
     buy-and-hold strategy than holding a leveraged ETF. Thus our initial
      notion was correct.

   2. Constructing a portfolio that uses unleveraged ETFs, obtaining leverage
      on a portfolio basis by borrowing funds, proves to be a rather suitable
     tracker for the double cumulative return of the underlying index. Thus,
      not only does this portfolio outperform the leveraged ETF, it also tracks
      the double cumulative return of the index very well.

   3. On daily return basis, there is no conclusive distinction between our port-
     folio and the leveraged ETF. 49% of the trading days the leveraged ETF
      provides better returns so the two dierent vehicles are close to equivalent.

   4. Over a longer period such as the one we have examined, the underlying
      markets display both ranging and trending patterns. Therefore, the dif-
      ferent rebalancing rules have not appeared to have a signicant eect on
     portfolio returns. However, we suspect that the eects on returns from
                                                                              3
      dierent rebalancing rules might be signcant during other periods . On a
     practical note, we understand that some assumptions made in our model
     might make it more dicult for some investors to apply our strategy or
     accrue more costs than we have described. These discrepancies include
     transaction costs and interest rate costs. Our models do not take into
      account transaction costs. Regarding interest rate costs, our models use
     USD overnight LIBOR, a rate at which banks may borrow at. For retail
      investors, this borrowing rate will be higher. However, we still think that
      our conclusions are valid on a conceptual level and are in line with what
      previous research might indicate.

8 Further Research

While being excited about our ndings, we feel like we have only peeled the
surface of ETFs, leveraged ETFs and dierent portfolio strategies. Writing this

   3
    Periods with either strong range bound or trading market conditions

                                  27
thesis has aroused even more questions and a strong interest in how we might
develop our ideas further. Furthermore, we will most likely continue to create
other strategies and expand the evaluation of the one presented in this thesis.
In addition, we hope that investors might be able use this study to widen their
basis for making investment decisions within ETFs. hopefully, our study have
implictions for ETF managers as well, displaying some dynamics that might
previously have been academically unexplored.
   Some of the inspiration for futher research has been extracted from our own
studies while other was extracted from sources we had came across that we felt
brought interesting ideas but were out of the span for this thesis.

8.1 Research
Having nished our study we have idented three main areas of interest for
further research in the subject. These are:
   1. Evaluation of our portfolio for other time periods, preferably with dis-
     tinguished market trading characteristics. We hope these results might
     indicate the eect on returns from dierent rebalancing rules and also
      provide insight in the dynamics between our portfolio returns and market
      conditions.
   2. Incorporate our model with transaction costs and a more realistic interest
     rate for retail investors. However, transaction costs and interest costs
     der between investors so this test might be dicult to perform with
      specic exactness. However, our models are exible for dierent interest
      rate inputs thus making such as study quite viable.
   3. Having observed that our portfolio over performing the leveraged ETF on a
      cumulative daily return basis, and benchmark tracking basis, we would like
      to evaluate a strategy were we take a market netutral position. A market
      neutral strategy would attempt to short sell [buy] the leveraged ETF while
      buying [short selling] the portfolio capitalizing on the dierence. Results
     from the points above might aid in deciding which asset to buy or sell
      short, during what market conditions. During market conditions where it
     has been showed that the leveraged ETF over performs the portfolio, we
      would like to investigate the return from buying the leveraged ETF while
      short selling the portfolio. In the opposite case we would like to evaluate
      the opposite trading congguration. In addition, one might apply dierent
      rebalancing rules as well, and evaluate those results. The benets of such
      a trading strategy is of course the market neutrality aspect. However, it is
      dicult to model such a trade, since many of the costs connected to short
      selling are signcant but hard to retrieve.
   4. Lastly, we think that from our back test, there might be incentives in
      attempting to construct a forward looking model, implementing our strat-
      egy using stochastic models. However, as of now, unfortunately, that lies
      beyond our mathematical skills.

                                  28
8.2 Implications
We believe that our paper and the results presented will have most implications
for retail investors. We have clearly shown that holding our portfolio versus
a leveraged ETF over a longer period provides higher cumulative returns and
a superior benchmark tracker. Also, we hope that investors will take a more
thorough look at leveraged ETFs and apply caution when investing in them.
Clearly their dynamics are more complicated than what might be perceived at
rst sight. Furthermore, as previous studies have shown leveraged and inverse
ETFs are not suitable for long term investing, with an increasing tracking er-
ror. Our greatest impact will have been providing alternative means to gaining
leveraged exposure while applying a buy-and-hold strategy. The great accuracy
in our portfolio tracking the double cumulative S&P500 benchmark indicates
the latter.
   On an academic level we hope that this paper might inuence others to
indulge in research related to leveraged ETFs. We are certain that ETFs and
leveraged ETFs will gain even more popularity amongst investors when the
present issues are solved. We believe that in order to drive that development
forward, academic research will play a huge role. In the professional investor
sphere the knowledge of ETFs is already vast, and thus academics is lagging.
This gap needs to be closed, because in order for ETFs to be fully demystied,
we believe that more academic rigour and legitimace needs to be applied in
the eld. Ultimately, this will be a gain for all stakeholders, retail investors,
professionals and academics alike.

References

 [1] Dave Nadig, 2010, Capturing Trendless Volatility With ETFs, Article
    available at http://seekingalpha.com/article/201354-capturing-trendless-
     volatility-with-etfs

 [2] Dr. Guido Giese, 2010, On the performance of leveraged and optimally
    leveraged investment funds, STOXX Ltd

 [3] Heath Hinegardner, 2009, How Managing Risk
    With ETFs Can Backre, Article available at
    http://online.wsj.com/article/SB123578237239398181.html

 [4] Jonathan Bernstein, 2007, Leverage ETF Review: How
    do they Stack Up One Year Later?, Article available at
    http://www.etfzone.com/?template=viewarticle&article_id=837

 [5] Lei Lu, Jun Wang, Ge Zhang, 2009, Long Term Performance of Leveraged
    ETFs, Working paper available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1344133

 [6] Marc Gerstein, 2009, Leveraged ETFs - Intraday Pricing Trends,
     Article available at http://seekingalpha.com/article/127238-leveraged-etfs-
     intraday-pricing-trends

                                  29
 [7] Minder Cheng and Ananth Madhavan, 2009, The Dynamics of Leveraged
    and Inverse Exchange-Traded Funds, Barclays Global Investors

 [8] Noël Amenc, Felix Goltz, Adina Grigoriu, David Schröder, 2009, The ED-
    HEC European ETF Survey 2009, Survey available at http://www.edhec-
    risk.com/indexes/etf_survey

 [9] Richard Co, Research and Product Development, 2009, Lever-
    aged ETFs vs. Futures : Where Is the Missing Performance?,
    Article available at http://www.cmegroup.com/trading/equity-
    index/les/Embedded_Volatility_in_Leveraged_ETF_021709.pdf

[10] Shiraz Lakhi, 2009, Trading Inter Market Spreads - A Fresh
    Look At The Simple Pairs Trading Strategy..., Article available at
    http://www.dowtrader.net/ShirazLakhi.htm

[11] Simon Maierhofer, 2009, Short and Leveraged ETFs
    - 3 Pitfalls You Shouldn't Ignore, Article available at
    http://www.etfguide.com/research/210/8/Short-and-Leveraged-ETFs3-
     Pitfalls-You-Shouldn't-Ignore-/

[12] Tom Lauricella, Susan Pulliam, Diya Gullapalli, 2008, Are
    ETFs Late-Day Turns? Leveraged Vehicles Seen Magnify-
    ing Other Bets; Last-Hour Volume Surge Article available at
     http://newsgroups.derkeiler.com/Archive/Misc/misc.invest.stocks/2008-
    12/msg01042.html

[13] Tristan Yates, 2007, Leveraged ETFs: A value Destruction Trap?, Article
     available at http://seekingalpha.com/article/31195-leveraged-etfs-a-value-
     destruction-trap

[14] Tristan Yates, 2009, Market Neutral: The
    Last Path To Diversication, Article available at
    http://www.tradingmarkets.com/.site/stocks/how_to/articles/Market-
    Neutral-The-Last-Path-To-Diversication-80548.cfm

[15] Tristan Yates, 2007, The Case Against Leveraged ETFs, Article available
     at http://seekingalpha.com/article/35789-the-case-against-leveraged-etfs

                                  30
9 Appendix

 Daily Returns
     2006-2010 Dly Reblc +/- 5% +/- 10% +/- 2% SSO
           Max 29,040% 29,040% 29,040% 29,040% 22,414%
            Min -19,690% -19,690% -19,690% -19,690% -17,293%
         Average -7,521% -7,524% -7,528% -7,533% -16,091%
         StdDev 3,385% 3,385% 3,385% 3,385% 3,240%

Table 1: Daily Return Descriptives, pe-
riod 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29
 Cumulative Returns
          2006-2010 Dly Reblc +/- 5% +/- 10% +/- 2% SSO
                 Max 53,593% 53,587% 53,580% 53,570% 40,084%
                  Min -76,327% -76,328% -76,329% -76,331% -79,664%
               Average -7,521% -7,524% -7,528% -7,533% -16,091%
               StdDev 11,076% 11,076% 11,073% 11,070% 8,683%

Table 2: Cumulative Return Descrip-
tives, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29
 CumRet Spread
       2006-2010 Dly Reblc +/- 2% +/- 5% +/- 10%
             Max 18,593pps 18,588pps 18,582pps 18,573pps
              Min 0,166pps 0,166pps 0,166pps 0,166pps
           Average 8,571pps 8,567pps 8,564pps 8,558pps
           StdDev 4,449% 4,448% 4,447% 4,445%

Table 3: Cumulative Return Spread
Descriptives, portfolio vs SSO, period
2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29
    ReblcDayPerf
        2006-2010 Dly Reblc +/- 2% +/- 5% +/- 10%
              Max 53,593% 52,416% 46,527% 46,355%
               Min -76,327% -75,580% -74,592% -73,728%
            Average -7,521% -26,565% -32,677% -36,456%
 Standard Deviation 11,076% 38,254% 35,473% 32,150%

Table 4: Rebalance Day Performance
Descriptives, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-
04-29

                                  31
 Average Dly Spread
                      Dly Rblc +/- 2% Rblc +/- 5% Rblc +/- 10% Rblc
                  2006 0.0422pps 0.042pps 0.0422pps 0.0421pps
                  2008 0.0318pps 0.0318pps 0.0318pps 0.0318pps
                  2009 0.0096pps 0.0096pps 0.0096pps 0.0097pps
                  2010 0.00074pps 0.00075pps 0.00075pps 0.00075pps
      Total Hold Period 0.0175pps 0.0175pps 0.0175pps 0.0175pps

Table 5: Daily Return Spread Averages,
Yearly and Entire Holding Period
   Spreads
 2xS&P500 Dly Rblc SSO
       Max 0.00318pps 0.00153pps
        Min -0.224pps -0.309pps
     Average -0.0318pps -0.117pps

Table 6: Cumulative Daily Return
Spread, SSO and Daily Rebalancing
Portfolio Cumulative Daily Return vs
2xS&P500 Index Cumulative Daily Re-
turn, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

                                  32
  စငငငငႁ
           ဒငငငႁ  တငငငႁ  ဈငငငႁ  ဆငငငႁ            ဆငငငႁ   ဈငငငႁ   တငငငႁ   ဒငငငႁ
                                               ငငငႁ

                                        ဆငငတငတဆဆ
                                      ဆငငတငထဆဆ                             
         $% ဆ&         $% ဆ&         ဆ
                                    ဆငငတငဒဆဆ
                        
                        !" #ဆငငတငဓဆဆ

                                        ဆငငတစငဆဆ
                                        ဆငငတစစဆဆ
                                        ဆငငတစဆဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထငစဆဆ
                                    ဆငငထငဆဆဆ
                     
                                        ဆငငထငဇဆဆ

                                        ဆငငထငဈဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထငဉဆဆ

                                        ဆငငထငတဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထငထဆဆ

                                        ဆငငထငဒဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထငဓဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထစငဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထစစဆဆ
                                        ဆငငထစဆဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒငစဆဆ

                                        ဆငငဒငဆဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒငဇဆဆ

                                        ဆငငဒငဈဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒငဉဆဆ

                                        ဆငငဒငတဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒငထဆဆ

                                        ဆငငဒငဒဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒငဓဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒစငဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒစစဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဒစဆဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငစဆဆ

                                        ဆငငဓငဆဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငဇဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငဈဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငဉဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငတဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငထဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငဒဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓငဓဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓစငဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓစစဆဆ
                                        ဆငငဓစဆဆဆ
                                        ဆငစငငစဆဆ

                                        ဆငစငငဆဆဆ
                                     ဆငစငငဇဆဆ                            

                                        ဆငစငငဈဆဆ
  ငဈ             ငဇ             ငဆ             ငစ             င               ငစ              ငဆ

                                  33

Figure 1: Cumulative Daily Return
comparison, 2xS&P500, Daily Rebal-
ance Portfolio, SSO and spreads, period
2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29
       ဒငႁ

       တငႁ
                                                                  
                                                               
       ဈငႁ

       ဆငႁ

        ငႁ
      
              ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
                 ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
              တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
        ဆငႁ   င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
              တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ  ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
               င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
               င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
               ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
        ဈငႁ

        တငႁ

        ဒငႁ

       စငငႁ

Figure 2: Comparison of Cumulative
Daily Return, SSO vs Daily Rebalanc-
ing Portfolio, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-
04-29

      ဒငႁ

     တငႁ                                                                                  ႅ ဆႁ     
                                                                                     !   

      ဈငႁ

      ဆငႁ

      ငႁ
   
            ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
               ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
            တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
               င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
            တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
     ဆငႁ   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
             င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
             ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

      ဈငႁ

      တငႁ

      ဒငႁ

     စငငႁ

Figure 3: Comparison of Cumulative
Daily Return, SSO vs ±2%Rebalancing
Portfolio Cumulative Daily Return, pe-
riod 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

                                  34
      ဒငႁ

     တငႁ                                                                                      ႅ ဉႁ     
                                                                                         !!"   

      ဈငႁ

      ဆငႁ

      ငႁ
   
            ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
               ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
            တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
               င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
            တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
     ဆငႁ   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
             င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
             ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

      ဈငႁ

      တငႁ

      ဒငႁ

     စငငႁ

Figure 4: Comparison of Cumulative
Daily Return, SSO vs ±5%Rebalancing
Portfolio Cumulative Daily Return, pe-
riod 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

      ဒငႁ

     တငႁ                                                                                  ႅ စငႁ      
                                                                                     !   

      ဈငႁ

      ဆငႁ

      ငႁ
   
            ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
               ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
            တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
               င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
            တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
     ဆငႁ   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
             င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
             ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

      ဈငႁ

      တငႁ

      ဒငႁ

     စငငႁ

Figure 5: Comparison of Cu-
mulative Daily Return, SSO vs
±10%Rebalancing Portfolio Cumula-
tive Daily return, period 2006-06-22 to
2010-04-29

                                  35
   ငဆင
           
           
              
           
  ငစဒ      
              
            
           
           
   ငစတ
           
                 

   ငစဈ

   ငစဆ

   ငစင

   ငငဒ

   ငငတ

   ငငဈ

   ငငဆ

   ငငင
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
           ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
         တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
           င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
         တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

Figure 6: Spread between Cumulative
Daily Return, SSO vs Daily Rebalanc-
ing Portfolio, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-
04-29

   ငဆင
           
           
              
           
  ငစဒ      
              
            
           
           
   ငစတ
           
                 

   ငစဈ

   ငစဆ

   ငစင

   ငငဒ

   ငငတ

   ငငဈ

   ငငဆ

   ငငင
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
           ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
         တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
           င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
         တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

Figure 7: Spread between Cumulative
Daily Return, SSO vs ±2%Rebalancing
Portfolio, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-
29

                                  36
   ငဆင
           
           
              
           
  ငစဒ      
              
            
           
           
   ငစတ
           
                 

   ငစဈ

   ငစဆ

   ငစင

   ငငဒ

   ငငတ

   ငငဈ

   ငငဆ

   ငငင
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
           ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
         တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
           င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
         တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

Figure 8: Spread between Cumulative
Daily Return, SSO vs ±5%Rebalancing
Portfolio, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-
29

   ငဆင
           
           
              
           
  ငစဒ      
              
            
           
           
   ငစတ
           
                 

   ငစဈ

   ငစဆ

   ငစင

   ငငဒ

   ငငတ

   ငငဈ

   ငငဆ

   ငငင
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
           ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
         တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
           င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
         တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
         င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
         ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

Figure 9: Spread between Cu-
mulative Daily Return, SSO vs
±10%Rebalancing Portfolio, period
2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

                                  37
       တငႁ

                                                                                 ႅ ဆႁ       

       ဈငႁ

       ဆငႁ

        ငႁ

     
      
      ဆငႁ
     
       
     
     

       ဈငႁ

       တငႁ

       ဒငႁ

      စငငႁ

Figure 10: ±2%Rebalancing Portfolio,
Rebalance Day Cumulative Return, pe-
riod 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

       တငႁ

                                                                                  ႅ ဉႁ       ! 
       ဈငႁ

       ဆငႁ

        ငႁ
               ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
                  ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
              တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
                 င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
              တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ  ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
              င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
       ဆငႁ   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
              ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
       
     
     

       ဈငႁ

       တငႁ

       ဒငႁ

       စငငႁ

Figure 11: ±5%Rebalancing Portfolio,
Rebalance Day Cumulative Return, pe-
riod 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

                                  38
      တငႁ

                                                                                  ႅ စငႁ       
      ဈငႁ

      ဆငႁ

       ငႁ
             ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
                ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
             တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
                င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
             တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ  ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
             င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
             င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
       ဆငႁ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ

       ဈငႁ

       တငႁ

       ဒငႁ

Figure 12: ±10%Rebalancing Portfolio,
Rebalance Day Cumulative Return, pe-
riod 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

       တငႁ

       ဈငႁ

       ဆငႁ

        ငႁ
               ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
                  ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ    ဆ   ဆ    ဆ
              တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ   ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ   ဉ   တ   ထ   ဒ   ဓ   င   စ   ဆ   စ   ဆ  ဇ   ဈ
                 င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င    င    င    င    င    င    စ    စ    စ    င    င   င    င
              တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   တ   ထ   ထ  ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ထ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဒ   ဓ   ဓ  ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   ဓ   င   င  င   င
              င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   စ   စ  စ   စ
       ဆငႁ   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င   င  င   င
              ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ   ဆ  ဆ   ဆ
       
     
     

        ဈငႁ

        တငႁ

        ဒငႁ

       စငငႁ

Figure 13: Cumulative Daily Return,
SSO, period 2006-06-22 to 2010-04-29

                                  39