    The Decoupling of the CDS and Bond Markets: An
Empirical Study of the CDS-Bond Basis of the Credit Crisis

                                            ∗                    †
                  Fredrik Sundelin      Tommy Torwald

                                June 2010

                                     Abstract

     We examine determinants of the credit default swap (CDS) prices, bond credit spreads and
     the CDS-bond basis of 62 U.S. firms during the period 2007 to 2009. We try to explain the
     basis by employing credit risk factors from structural models and by introducing a control for
     market liquidity as well as a funding liquidity factor. We find no evidence of credit risk factors
     affecting the basis; instead we find liquidity and funding liquidity to be the dominant factors.
     We also examine the basis within broader credit rating groups, and two findings emerge: First,
     the credit spread of firms with lower ratings is more sensitive to changes in credit risk factors
     and funding liquidity. Second, the basis of firms with lower ratings is more sensitive to funding
      liquidity.

     Keywords: Corporate Bonds, Credit Default Swaps, Credit Crisis, Basis

     Tutor: Magnus Dahlquist, Professor

     Date: May 28, 2010, 13.15–17.00

    Location: Room Ruben

     Discussants: Henrik Bark and David Boxi Hu

  ∗
   Email address: 21358@student.hhs.se
  †
   Email address: 21231@student.hhs.se

                                                                           i
Contents

1 Introduction 1

2 Theoretical Framework 4
   2.1 The CDS-bond basis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.2 Determinants of credit risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   2.3 The role of liquidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   2.4 Empirical findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

3 The model 11

4 Data and methodology 16
   4.1 Data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   4.2 Construction of the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   4.3 Determining the credit spread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

5 Results 20
   5.1 Basic setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   5.2 Cross-sectional variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

6 Concluding remarks 24

References 27

A Tables 28

                                                                            ii
1 Introduction

The Law of One Price asserts that identical goods should have the same price. Nevertheless, during
the credit crisis of 2007 to 2009, a persistent pricing error between the credit default swap (CDS)
market and the bond market was observed. This thesis investigates the so called decoupling of the
CDS and bond markets by studying structural model determinants of credit risk, market liquidity
and funding liquidity. Using data from the period April 2, 2007 to December 31, 2009, we show
that the decoupling was not caused by differing pricing of credit risk, and suggest that the basis
depended on limited funding at hand for investors, which in practice restricted the possibility to
the exploit the arbitrage. Our results are in line with recent suggestions by Gˆarleanu and Pedersen
(2009), who show that the price of an asset must depend on the funding costs, and that two
securities with identical cash flows will trade at a basis if they have different margin requirements.
We further produce results comparable to empirical studies such as Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001),
Blanco et al. (2005), Zhu (2004), De Wit (2006) and Alexopoulou et al. (2009), and find that
the credit crisis might have brought about a change in the CDS and bond markets’ sensitivity to
liquidity factors.
We thus extend the current literature in the following way:

   I. Pricing of credit risk. We show that credit risk is priced similarly in the CDS and bond
     markets, in our time period, and that the basis does not seem to be caused by differing
      pricing of credit risk between the CDS and bond markets.

  II. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. We find that bond-specific liquidity plays a major role
     in the development of the basis. More importantly, we are, to the best of our knowledge,
      among the first to empirically evaluate the role of funding constraints for investors in relation
      to the CDS-bond basis. Our findings show that funding constraints was a significant cause
      of the basis during the financial crisis.

A CDS is a contract in which the protection against the default of a reference entity is exchanged
for a series of payments called a CDS premium, or CDS spread. The seller of the CDS pledges
to buy the defaulted bond at par, and the buyer, in exchange for this protection, makes regular
payments expressed as a percentage of the insured notional amount. Since the innovation in the
early 1990’s, the CDS has developed into the most common form of credit protection, and is now
a building block of most credit derivative products (Batterman et al., 2008). CDS contracts are
of great use for many market participants, because it allows them to hedge specific cash market
exposures, or incorporate other strategies such as taking long or short positions to speculate on
changing credit quality of firms.
The pattern with which the bond and CDS markets co-move used to be predictable (Leland, 2008),
but that relationship weakened during the crisis, causing significant losses for many investment
banks and hedge funds. The difference between the price of a CDS contract and the bond credit
spread is known as the CDS-bond basis. To avoid arbitrage, the basis should be close to zero.
Figure 1.1 below illustrates how the basis developed during the financial crisis for the investment
bank Goldman Sachs.
A large basis is supposedly easy to exploit, and the process of doing so is called basis trade.
Exploiting a negative basis (when CDS spreads are lower than bond spreads) involves a long
position in the bond, and a long position in protection on the same bond. At maturity, the basis
must be zero, and so a basis trade yields a positive carry return over the holding period. A positive
basis is somewhat more complicated to exploit, primarily because of the limited supply of bonds
in the repo market and the limited number of market participants that can sell CDS contracts
(Leland, 2008). Nevertheless, active basis trading has traditionally kept basis levels very low.

                                          1
                                     Figure 1.1
This figure illustrates how the basis, defined as the CDS premium less the bond credit spread, de-
veloped during the financial crisis 2007 to 2009 for the investment bank Goldman Sachs. The sus-
tained negative basis observed after July-August 2008 illustrates the main motivation of this paper.
      -400-400-300-300-200-200-100-10000100100Basis (basis points)Basis (basis points)Jul1 2007Jul1 2007Jan1 2008Jan1 2008Jul1 2008Jul1 2008Jan1 2009Jan1 2009Jul1 2009Jul1 2009DateDate

          100

          0

           -100

           -200

            Basis (basis points)

           -300

           -400

                Jul1 2007    Jan1 2008    Jul1 2008    Jan1 2009    Jul1 2009
                                            Date

The persistent negative basis illustrated in Figure 1.1 is therefore puzzling; what changes brought
about such a fundamental decoupling of the credit markets? Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)
and Gˆarleanu and Pedersen (2009) propose that the basis depends on the availability of funds to
investors.
The number of empirical studies in this area is, however, limited; especially in relation to the
credit crisis. The focus of this paper is therefore to investigate the causes of the persistent negative
basis observed during the credit crisis. Given that liquidity severely worsened and capital be-
came increasingly scarce during the credit crisis (Brunnermeier, 2009, Kim et al., 2009), our main
hypothesis is that the basis was largely driven by liquidity differences between the markets and
limited availability of funds. Furthermore, because credit risk and liquidity risk might be positively
correlated (B¨uhler and Trapp, 2008), we also expect credit risk factors to play a significant role in
the explanation of the basis. Specifically, the aim is to study whether:

   1. the decoupling can be explained by differing pricing of credit risk in the CDS and bond
     markets, or whether

   2. the decoupling can be explained by liquidity changes in the bond market, or whether

   3. the decoupling can be explained by investors’ funding constraints.

We limit the scope to a largely non-dynamic approach, and do not evaluate the supposed lead-lag
relationship or price-discovery between the markets.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In section 2, we describe the theoretical
framework underlying our methodology, beginning with an explanation of the details about the
CDS-bond basis, followed by a review of relevant literature. In section 3, we present the details of

                                          2
our model and the proxies we employ and in section 4 we explain our methodology and describe
our data. In section 5, we present our results, and section 6 contains some concluding remarks and
suggestions for further research.

                                          3
2 Theoretical Framework

2.1 The CDS-bond basis

The notion of a zero basis between the CDS and bond market rests on the idea that both markets
should price approximately the same risks. For example, a holder of a fixed-rate bond receives
steady cash flows until the maturity of the bond, provided the bond issuer does not default. If the
issuer defaults, the value of the bond drops to the recovery value. Similarly, a CDS seller receives
premium payments until maturity, unless a credit event occurs. If the reference entity defaults, the
loss to the CDS seller is the par value minus the recovery value of the delivered bond. Therefore,
the bond holder and CDS seller are exposed to the same risks. If the bond is benchmarked against
a risk-free reference rate, then the difference between this benchmark and the bond’s yield to
maturity – the credit spread – should approximately equal the CDS spread. The word ”spread”
for the CDS price emanates from the fact that the periodic payments are expressed as a fraction
of the insured nominal value. A CDS spread of 20 basis points on a nominal of 10 million dollars
is hence equivalent to a yearly insurance premium of 20 000 dollars.
We define the basis as the difference between the CDS spread and the bond spread:

                        Basis = CDS spread − Bond spread (2.1)

Specifically, Duffie (1999) and Francis et al. (2003) show that the cash flow profile of a CDS is more
                                                                      1
readily comparable to a par floating rate bond funded at Libor , or with an asset swapped fixed-
rate bond funded in the repo market. Francis et al. (2003) and De Wit (2006) demonstrate that
the relationship should be such that there exists an approximate arbitrage relationship between
the asset swap spread (ASW) and the CDS spread.
An asset swap is a package consisting of two trades: a purchase of a bond and a fixed-for-floating
interest rate swap agreement. The fixed leg payer of the swap pays cash flows that are identical in
size and timing to the coupons of the bond, and the floating rate payer in return pays the Libor
rate plus an additional rate called the ASW. The ASW is usually the rate such that the present
value of the swap is zero when entering into the agreement, and the ASW is hence a function of
the credit risk of the bond over the interbank credit risk (Libor). The value of the asset swap is
zero when the present value of the fixed leg payments equals the value of the floating leg payments
which, at initiation, are the present value of the Libor and ASW payments of the relevant time
period. As such, the ASW is a measure of the credit spread of the bond.
The arbitrage relationship demonstrated by Francis et al. (2003) and De Wit (2006) can be il-
lustrated as follows: For an investor who funds himself at Libor, a combined position of buying
protection in a CDS and entering into an asset swap where the fixed coupon payments are swapped
for a stream of floating rates is fully hedged in any state of the world. Before maturity, there are
two possible states of the world: no default of the reference entity or default of the reference entity.
The combined position is always risk-free, assuming unwinding of the interest rate swap in the
                2
case of default . Any deviation from the equality of the CDS spread and ASW would constitute
an arbitrage opportunity.
While the ASW provides a useful insight into the arbitrage relationship between the CDS and
bond markets, the argument has some problematic weaknesses. It is significantly more difficult

   1
    The Libor is a reference interest rate corresponding to interbank borrowing costs. It is the rate at which financial
institutions believe that they can borrow funds from other institutions for a certain time-period.
   2
    In a practical setting, it is not always possible to unwind a position in an interest rate swap, because the
payments of the fixed leg is not linked to the actual coupons and the cost of unwinding is paid by the swap buyer
(O’Kane and Sen, 2004).

                                          4
to exploit a situation where the CDS spread is higher than the ASW, for example, and the setup
implicitly assumes that it is possible to borrow against the full value of the bond in the repo
market. Furthermore, the ASW tends to underestimate risk as bond prices fall, and overestimate
risk as prices rise (Francis et al., 2003). When prices move far below par, such as during a financial
crisis, it implies that the compensation from the ASW will be much lower than the cost of the
CDS, yielding this type of trading less beneficial. In fact, the term structure of asset swap spreads
deviate significantly from that of the CDS spreads even for discounts or premiums as low as 400
basis points, as illustrated by Duffie (1999).
So far, we have explained how the CDS and bond markets are expected to co-move. Due to some
elements that are specific to the nature of the CDS market, it is sometimes difficult to determine
the expected size and direction of the basis. CDS spreads are affected by some additional risks that
are not present in the bond market. For example, not all credit events are defaults, and a CDS
is often required to pay out even if the bond issuer does not experience a full default. Another
well-known risk is the delivery option inherent in CDS contracts. This option allows CDS buyers
to, in the event of default, deliver any bond out of a range of bonds, because the specific reference
asset is often not specified. Other factors, that aggregate to usually make the CDS-bond basis
positive, include funding cost differences, counter-party risk and demand for CDS contracts. We
summarize and discuss the most important factors in Appendix, Table A.8. Because most of these
factors expose the CDS seller to a larger risk than a bond holder, it is unlikely that any of these
factors is the cause of the large negative basis observed during the credit crisis.

2.2 Determinants of credit risk

While there is an active debate regarding theory and assumptions behind models aiming to explain
credit risk, it lies beyond the scope of this paper to evaluate the validity of existing models. This
                                                               3
section, instead, aims to briefly outline the different approaches  to valuing credit instruments,
because they form the ground on which we chose the variables included in the empirical model.
There are two primary categories of credit risk models: structural models and reduced-form models.
The former draw on the work of Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1974). Structural models
assume that a firm defaults when the value of the firm’s assets drops below a certain threshold.
The default threshold is in turn a function of the amount of outstanding debt. Collin-Dufresne
et al. (2001) explain that, in structural models, holding a risky debt claim is analogous to holding
a risk-free debt claim and having sold a put option at the value of the risk-free claim to the firm’s
equity holders. By put-call parity, holding a debt claim is also equivalent to holding the total firm
and having sold to the equity holders a call option on the firm with strike price equal to the value of
the outstanding risk-free debt claim. The value of the debt, then, is calculated as the risk-neutral
present value of expected future cash flows. Structural models hence assert that the default risk is
associated with the size of the debt claim (i.e. the amount of leverage), the cash flows to the debt
holders and the risk-free rate. In addition, most models include a set of state variables, capturing
for example the term-structure of interest rates (Merton (1974) assumes that they are constant),
non-deterministic (stochastic) volatility of assets, bankruptcy costs or time-varying recovery rates.
One of the central messages of Merton’s model is that two investors who have quite different utility
functions and different expectations for a firm’s future but who agree on the volatility of the firm’s
value will, for a given risk-free interest rate and current firm value, agree on the value of a security
of the firm. This simple intuition means that the parameters are quite easily testable, because
both interest rates and volatility (or relevant proxies and estimations for them) are observable in
the market.

   3
    Because this section aims to outline the general thought of structural models rather than in detail review all
relevant studies, we cannot cover all relevant literature. Some notable contributions to the field that are not covered
here are for example Leland (1994) and Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001).

                                          5
Despite the appealing intuition of Merton’s structural model, it suffers from some weaknesses. For
example, interest rates are assumed to be constant, and defaults are assumed to occur only when
assets are completely exhausted. In reality, interest rates are neither constant nor deterministic
– especially not for corporate bonds – and firms default long before assets are exhausted. The
promising outlook of the structural models are further questioned by Jones et al. (1983), who
show that structural models predict credit spreads that are much lower than those observed in the
market (sometimes several percentage points). These results are confirmed by Ogden (1987), who
further notes that firm size seem to be an important factor and that constant interest rates is an
important misspecification.
In an extended framework, Black and Cox (1976) relax the assumption of complete exhaustion
of assets by introducing a default barrier, or a lower threshold. Longstaff and Schwartz (1995)
develop the Black-Cox framework, and incorporates both default-risk and interest-rate risk.
Lyden and Saraniti (2000) find that both the Merton and the Longstaff-Schwartz models un-
derpredict spreads. Using a more practical approach, KMV (now Moody’s KMV) develops the
Vasicek-Kealhofer model, which builds on the Merton and Black-Cox framework. The Vasicek-
Kealhofer model incorporates a measure of default probability called Expected Default Frequency.
It is essentially similar to the Merton model, but it translates the model-implied probability of de-
fault a EDF measure using historical default rates of firm’s with similar characteristics and default
              4
probabilities .

                                                                                          5
The other approach of modeling research focuses on so called reduced-form models . In a reduced-
form approach, default is an exogenously driven process which is often represented by a random
”stopping time” which has an arrival intensity (or hazard rate) that is either deterministic or
stochastic. The risk associated with default is assumed to be affected by the expected recovery
rate, which in turn is usually assumed to be constant. Litterman and Iben (1991) were first to
model credit risk in a reduced-form model. The model is simpler than many successors, in that it
assumes constant 0 % recovery rates (an assumption which is easily relaxed, however, as shown by
Acharya and Schaefer, 2009).
The reduced-form modeling approach is attractive for example because of the comparable math-
ematical tractability. However, the underlying intuition is somewhat less appealing than that of
the structural models, because reduced-form models lack a clear definition of the default process.
Thus, it is difficult to identify the exogenous process that drives the default probability, and it
is difficult to incorporate this approach in an empirical setting. Furthermore, Arora et al. (2005)
note that reduced-form models make rather poor out-of-sample predictions.
Nevertheless, there is some empirical support of reduced-form models. For example, Houweling
and Vorst (2005) find that a reduced-form model explains CDS spreads better than credit spreads
of corporate bonds. Most empirical work, however, focus on estimating the parameters of the
models rather than testing their empirical performance.

2.3 The role of liquidity

The fact that Merton-style structural models tend to underpredict credit spreads of corporate
bonds is often referred to as the credit spread puzzle, although it is arguably not very puzzling
anymore. One of the more popular explanations for the puzzle is the fact that structural models
lack a liquidity factor. Much new research focus on the ability of liquidity to explain the cross-
sectional as well as time-series variation of bond spreads and returns. For example, Driessen

   4
    For a detailed discussion on this framework, refer to for example Crosbie and Bohn (2003) or Kealhofer (2003).
   5
    It is beyond the scope of this paper to review the field of reduced-form modeling in any great detail. To the best
of our knowledge, prominent contributions are for example made by Jarrow and Turnbull (1995) and subsequently
Jarrow et al. (1997), Duffie and Singleton (1999), Hull and White (2000) and Hull and White (2001).

                                          6
(2005) decomposes corporate bond returns into default, liquidity and tax factors using the Duffie
and Singleton (1999) reduced-form approach, and Liu et al. (2006) study how default and liquidity
risks are incorporated in interest rate swaps and find that the credit premium for all but for very
short maturities compensate for liquidity risk.
Traditionally, the notion of liquidity refers to the ability to perform transactions in large quantities
quickly with limited impact on the price of the security (Covitz and Downing, 2007). More recent
studies, however, further distinguish between market liquidity and funding liquidity. Market liq-
uidity is what is typically associated with the term liquidity in that it refers to the ease of finding
somebody who takes the other side of a trade (Brunnermeier, 2009). Kyle (1985) outlines three
forms of market liquidity. Firstly, the bid-ask spread, which captures how much a trader loses on
selling an asset and immediately repurchasing it. Secondly, the market depth, which measures how
many units can be traded at the current bid or ask price without affecting the price. Lastly, the
market resiliency captures how fast prices bounce back after temporarily having fallen.
Funding liquidity refers to the ease with which investors and traders can obtain funding from
financiers. When it is high, raising funds is easy. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) provide a
useful case study on the funding requirements of hedge funds, banks and market makers, and they
explain that levered traders typically use purchased assets as short-term collateral and borrow
against them. However, it is normally not possible to borrow against the full value of the asset,
because the financier is exposed to counter-party risk and thus has to make sure the collateral
can be sold to cover the position if the borrower defaults. This gives rise to a haircut, which is
the difference between the value of the collateral and the cash obtained from borrowing against it.
In essence, therefore, the capital needed in a transaction where the purchased asset is borrowed
against is represented by the margin, or haircut (Francis et al., 2003). This illustrates the first
form of funding liquidity risk, as outlined by Brunnermeier (2009).
The second form is linked to the short-term financing requirements more directly. As Brunnermeier
(2009) explains, banks have become increasingly dependent on very short-term maturity financing
                                              6
during the period leading up to the crisis . Assets, at the same time, often have long maturities.
This leaves banks exposed to severe maturity-mismatching, and creates a dependency on being
able to roll over short-term debt. If rolling over the debt is not possible, it is equivalent to margins
increasing to 100%, because it renders the assets impossible to borrow against. Hence, this increases
the capital requirements and thus the funding liquidity risk. Brunnermeier (2009) refers to this
form of funding liquidity risk as rollover risk. Withdrawal of capital from an investment fund,
similarly, has the same effect as a margin increase, and Brunnermeier (2009) calls this last form of
funding liquidity risk redemption risk.
During the financial crisis, funding liquidity risk proved particularly important. Brunnermeier and
Pedersen (2009) show, informally and in a general framework, how losses, funding problems and
subsequently firesales and dropping prices lead to higher margins and more losses, which in turn
lead to new funding problems and more firesales, etc. They extend the idea of margin risk into
a complete framework where investors’ scarcity (or ”shadow”) cost of capital is linked directly
to funding liquidity. The model further provides an explanation for the commonality of liquidity
across assets, because funding constraints affect all securities (Garcia, 2009).
Gˆarleanu and Pedersen (2009) further extend the Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) framework
and derive a model for margin-based asset-pricing. They explain that liquidity crises give rise
to deviations from the Law of One Price and show that the model can be used to explain the
CDS-bond basis of the credit crisis of 2007 to 2009. In particular, this is because a bond requires
a larger margin than a CDS. A bond is a funded instrument which means that an investor needs
cash to finance the position in the bond. A position in a CDS, on the other hand, is unfunded

   6
    One reason for this, as noted by Brunnermeier (2009), is that long-term financing is more difficult and expensive
to obtain when banks suffer from the debt-overhang problem discussed by Myers (1977). This, in turn, implies that
it is usually not possible to to raise long-term debt to cover increasing margins, because collateralized lending enjoys
seniority. Hence, to cover margins, traders must often unwind positions and sell part of the assets.

                                          7
and does not require any initial cash outlay. Since an investor uses the bond as collateral and
borrows against it in the repo market to finance the investment, a position in a bond uses more
of a financier’s capital than a position in a CDS, and this is reflected in the margin requirements.
The margin requirement of a CDS is mostly a function of counter-party risk and does not include
a premium for borrowed cash.

2.4 Empirical findings

The empirical research field on fixed-income securities is vast, so in this section we focus on em-
pirical findings that are relevant to our purpose of investigating the causes of the CDS-bond basis.
We first present various factors that have been shown to affect credit spreads or CDS spreads, and
subsequently summarize research closely related to this study in Table 2.1.
Leverage is a central component of structural models, and has hence been used in a wide range
of studies. For example, Nashikkar et al. (2008) use leverage measured as book value of debt
divided by the sum of the book value of debt and the average market value of equity during a
quarter, and find that it significantly affects the CDS-bond basis. Alexopoulou et al. (2009) use
stock returns as a proxy for firms’ financial health and leverage, and find that it explains CDS
and bond spreads. Similarly, since structural models use a ”contingent claims” approach to value
debt instruments, the probability of asset values dropping below the default barrier increases with
volatility. Therefore, we typically expect credit spreads to be closely related to the volatility of the
firm’s assets. This is confirmed by Aussenegg and Goetz (2009), who find that CDS spreads are
highly sensitive to equity market volatility, especially in periods of financial crises.
Besides credit risk, other important determinants of credit spreads are interest rates. Longstaff and
Schwartz (1995) show that higher spot rates increase the risk-neutral drift of the firm value, which
reduces the probability of default and thus reduces CDS and credit spreads. Duffee (1999) further
finds that a default-free process adequately prices corporate bonds, and so we expect interest
rates to be negatively correlated with credit spreads. Furthermore, since interest rate risk likely
constitute a larger portion of the total credit spread for higher rated bonds, it is likely that lower
rated bonds are relatively less sensitive to these factors.
Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001) and Alexopoulou et al. (2009) note that low long-term interest rates
may suggest a weakening economy and thus, perhaps, lowering recovery rates, in which case we
would expect spreads to widen. Indeed, Fama and French (1989) show that there is an important
relationship between business cycles and returns of stocks and bonds and Collin-Dufresne et al.
(2001), Blanco et al. (2005) and Alexopoulou et al. (2009) use market implied volatility and market
equity returns to capture the business climate (though with different results). Acharya et al.
(2007), Gagliardini and Gouri´eoux (2003) and Duffie and Singleton (1999) show that both default
probabilities and recovery rates may vary with the general business climate and Acharya et al.
(2007) show that recovery rates are lower when firms are in distress. Altman and Kishore (1996)
show that recovery rates are time-varying.
Elton et al. (2001) find that corporate bond returns are affected by risk factors common with the
stock market. Specifically, they show that market excess return and the factors introduced by Fama
and French (1993) explain the return on corporate bonds. As a possible explanation, they propose
that the factors may proxy for default expectations. Surprisingly, they assert that the none of the
alternative measures of credit risk they use contain any additional information about systematic
risk beyond the information already captured by the Fama-French factors. Collin-Dufresne et al.
(2001) find similar support, and confirm that the Fama-French factors are statistically significant
across several rating-groups.
A wide range of studies show that market liquidity, as identified by for example bid-ask spread and
trading volumes, affect corporate as well as sovereign bonds. Covitz and Downing (2007) (looking

                                          8
at very short-term maturities) find that, although credit risk plays an important role, liquidity is
also a determinant of corporate bond spreads. Longstaff et al. (2005), assuming that CDS spreads
capture the default component of bond yields, find evidence of a significant non-default component
of bond yields. They measure bond liquidity as the bid-ask spread, outstanding debt amount and
coupon rate, and show that these factors affect the non-default component of yields. de Jong
and Driessen (2006) confirm a negative relationship between liquidity shocks and realized return
and Acharya et al. (2009) find regime-switching effects of liquidity factors (very high sensitivity in
periods of macroeconomic stress).
Fontaine and Garcia (2009) measure the value of funding liquidity, and find that funding liquidity
explains the cross-section of bond returns.
To the best of our knowledge, the studies that in nature are similar to ours are summarized in
table 2.1.

                                          9
     mar-                                                             co-

   deter-  study.

                                                                        Find
   thebondour                                                                            Further find

                                                               Principal com-
        to
     and                                   Otherwise, basis is
                                                                  changes.

   address

    CDS
       related                                                       spread
  that

    the
                                                                bond

     thefindings                                                      and
   studies
     of
                                                         CDS

                                      Further confirms leading price-discovery in the

                                                                                   lead
        empirical
   empirical                                                                                Interest rates are important determinants of spread


                                                                                  returns

   recentco-integration)recent
                                                                stock
        of
     (the
   some                                                            that


                    ConclusionSystematic factors play an important role in explaining CDS spreads. Creditspreads are more sensitive to firm-specific factors and liquidity factors. Con-firms co-integration of markets (CDS leads bond market), but weaker rela-tionship during the credit crisis.Confirms co-movement in the long run, but finds short-run deviations due tovarious short-run dynamics.CDS market, and that liquidity matters for price discovery.Finds co-integration for 88 of 144 firms. Detects fourteen basis drivers. Ob-serves positive basis in 2004–2005.Find that in some cases, basis is caused by imperfections in contract spec-ifications and measurement errors in the credit spread.caused by faster price discovery in the CDS market than in the bond market.Macroeconomic variables have a larger impact on credit spreads than on CDSspreads. Find stable long-run co-integration.Theoretical determinants have limited explanatory power.ponents analysis shows that spreads are mostly driven by a single commonfactor; neither macroeconomic nor financial variables is able to explain thesystematic component. Suggest that credit spread changes are driven by localsupply and demand shocks that are independent of both credit risk factorsand standard proxies for liquidity.Findintegration for 36 of 58 firms and that the CDS market is more sensitiveto the stock market than the bond market and that the magnitude of thissensitivity increases when credit quality worsens.Credit spreads exhibit varying dynamics depending on macroeconomic marketconditions. In periods of distress, credit spreads are more sensitive to equitymarket volatility, while in tranquil periods stock returns provide better ex-planations of spreads.levels. Find evidence of autocorrelation of asset swap spread changes.Find that bonds with high ”latent liquidity” (turnover of funds holding thebond) are more expensive relative to their CDS counterpart.that leverage and other firm-specific measures affect the CDS-bond basis.Confirms co-integration relationship for 82 of 116 firms. Shows that the mag-nitude of the basis is related to measures of idiosyncratic credit risk andliquidity, and to market conditions.
                Description of study

     relationship
  summarizes  representation

Table 2.1
   table good       2004–2008 1999–2002 2004–20052001–2002   1988–1997     2000–2002 2006–2009   2002–20062001–2007
     lead-lag
       a       Data time period
     the
  This
                                                           of
     or form                                and
              CDS             CDS CDS                             swap

                                       of       linkages               between
                  of                       of
         they                                                                          asset
     basis                                spreads
                                                                         by
   studies.                                            determinants
                                           dynamic
                                                credit
                                                            the            relationship
                                        co-integrationthe
                    determinants             determinantsand                                measured
                                                                 the
     CDS-Bondknowledge,

  empirical
   theour
                   Central purpose of studyStudyspreads and credit spreads and ex-amine their long-run relationship.Compares the pricing of credit riskin the CDS and bond markets andexamines the dynamic linkages be-tweem them.Examinesspreads and asset swap spreads.Studyspreadsexaminebetweem them.Investigatecredit spreads.StudyCDS, bond and stock markets byexamining lead-lag relationships ina VAR model.Investigate determinants of creditspreadsspreads. Investigate the role of liquidity inthe CDS and bond markets.Studies trading opportunities thatarise from the CDS-bond basis.

        of
  recent

   spreads,
   of   best


       the
     credit


     of To

  comparison
                 AuthorsAlexopoulou et al. (2009)Zhu (2004) De Wit (2006)Blanco et al. (2005)Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001)Norden and Weber (2004)Aussenegg and Goetz (2009)Nashikkar et al. (2008)Trapp (2009)
  A minantskets.

                                        10
3 The model

To formalize our aim to investigate the cause of the suspended negative basis observed during the
credit crisis, we formulate a model that incorporates our expectations. We want to study if credit
risk pricing differed in the CDS and bond markets, and if liquidity and funding constraints can
help explain the large deviation from the historical pattern. Taking into account the theoretical
framework on which our analysis is built, we are interested in the na¨ıve model:

basisi,t = β0,i + β1Credit riski,t + β2Interest rate riski,t + β3Liquidity riski,t + β4Funding riski,t + ui,t
                                                                                                   (3.1)

We now proceed to specify the components of the model more carefully.

   1. Credit spreads and basis. We define the basis as the difference between the CDS spread and
      the credit spread for a CDS and a bond of the same maturity.

   2. Leverage. Following Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001), Blanco et al. (2005), Zhu (2004) and
      Alexopoulou et al. (2009), we consider stock returns as a proxy for leverage and firms’ financial
     health. Using leverage derived from book values is problematic, because it is infrequently
      sampled, and is often affected by accounting principles. Instead, we apply the reasoning that,
      all else equal, negative stock returns reduce the market value of equity and thus increase
     leverage. Increasing leverage induces uncertainty of repayment capacity, which should be
     reflected in bond and CDS spreads. Furthermore, we argue that this proxy is especially
      relevant in crisis periods, when the premonition of default becomes more real. Equity holders
      in heavily leveraged firms will expect to recover less from default than those of less leveraged
     firms, and this should be reflected in the stock price as the firm approaches distress. We
       denote this factor by reti,t.

   3. Volatility. In structural models, increased asset volatility increases the risk of the firm value
      falling below the default barrier. Higher volatility signals a deterioration of repayment capac-
      ity, which increases the probability of default. We capture this effect by a rolling ten-period
      realized volatility of firm-specific stock returns. While this represents neither the instan-
      taneous volatility in the models nor the volatility of the firms total assets, we deem that
     it is sufficient to capture at least some degree of the asset volatility. Most studies use the
      Black and Scholes (1973) option-implied volatility (see for example the studies referenced
      above), because of its forward-looking nature (Cremers et al., 2008). However, this data is
      not available to us for more than a sub-sample of the period. As a reference, we perform some
      comparative regressions on a sub-sample of our dataset, and we find that the rolling realized
                                                                 7
      volatility measure produces materially similar results . We denote the volatility factor by
        voli,t.

   4. Interest rates and yield curve slope. As pointed out by Longstaff and Schwartz (1995), higher
      spot rates increase the risk-neutral drift of the firm value, which reduces the probability of
      default and thus spreads. As a proxy for long-term spot rates, we use ten-year swap rates.
      Many studies, such as Alexopoulou et al. (2009) and Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001), focus on
     Treasury rates with longer maturities to capture benchmark spot rate changes, and some
     studies, for example De Wit (2006), use both Treasury and swap rates to compare their
      effects. To control for differences in interest rate sensitivity and convexity between the bonds,
      we use the difference between the ten and two-year swap rate as well as the square of the

   7
    The coefficients are more significant and of larger magnitude when we use implied volatility for the shorter time
period where data is available, and Cao et al. (2009) find that option-implied volatility explains CDS spreads better
than realized volatility in a time series. However, our main results remain the same regardless of volatility measure.

                                          11
      ten-year swap rate. This approach is similar to that used by Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001),
      who interpret their slope factor as an indication of expectations of future short rates as well
      as an indication of economic health. In our case, we also intend these variables to capture
                                                                                           10
      interest rate sensitivity. As a notation for the ten-year swap rate, we use rt . The slope,
                 10    2                                                                10
      given by rt − rt is denoted slopet. Since we will use the first difference of rt , the convexity
                                                                                       (   10)2
     control becomes the square of the first differenced ten-year swap rate, denoted  ∆r   t .

   5. Market liquidity. To capture the supposed market liquidity effect on bond prices, we include
      a proxy intended to capture bond-specific market liquidity. While there is a range of possible
     proxies for market liquidity, we consider a measure used by Han and Zhou (2006) and Wang
       (2009), which is proposed by Downing and Xing (2005). We refer to the measure as liqi,t,
      and it is defined as the daily price volatility divided by the average price as a proportion of
      daily dollar trading volume. Specifically, it is specified as:

                                               max   min
                                             P i,t −P i,t
                                         P¯     × 100
                                                            i,t
                               liqi,t =    ∑N   j                           (3.2)
                                                j=1 Qi,t

            max      min
     where P i,t and P i,t are the maximum and minimum price of bond i a particular trading
      day t, P¯i,t is the average price of bond i in day t, and the denominator is the sum of the
     dollar value of all trades j = 1, ... , N the same day.
      The intuition, as explained by Wang (2009), is that trading of less liquid bonds move prices
      more for a given volume. By definition, this measure is only available for days when there
      are at least two trades.
      For the sake of robustness, we also consider other proxies for market liquidity, namely the
     logarithm of the age of the bond (Wang, 2009) and the logarithm of cumulative trading
     volume (Elton and Green, 1998).

   6. Funding liquidity. As a proxy for investors’ funding constraints, we use the spread between
     the three-month Libor and the three-month overnight indexed swap (the Libor-OIS spread).
      While it would have been desirable to use a direct measure of funding costs for investors,
     such data is not available to us. Gorton and Metrick (2009a) illustrate that haircuts on
      corporate bonds in the repo market rose sharply during the credit crisis, across all rating
      groups. Likewise, Brunnermeier (2009) exemplifies how haircuts on S&P 500 futures rose in
      a similar manner. Data on margins and haircuts for corporate bonds is, however, proprietary,
      and we have not been able to gain access to such data. Instead, we argue that the Libor-OIS
      spread proxy for changing counter-party risk in the interbank market.
      An OIS is a fixed-for-floating interest rate swap in which the floating leg is equal to the
     geometric average of an overnight reference interest rate of the payment period. In the
     United States, the reference rate is the Federal Funds rate. The Federal Funds rate is an
      unsecured interbank overnight rate. It is the rate paid by banks that borrow and lend reserves
      to each other through the Federal Reserve.
      The Federal Funds rate is thus materially similar to the Libor, and, actually, the spread
                                                                 8
      between the two should theoretically be close to zero . The discrepancy is that in an OIS,
      there is no exchange of principal. The OIS rate is set at the initiation of the contract and
      reflects the market’s expectation of the overnight Federal Funds rate over the term of the
      contract (Thornton, 2003). At the end of the contract, the net obligation is settled. As an
      effect, the counter-party risk in an OIS contract is minimal (Griffoli and Ranaldo, 2009).

   8
    Since an interbank lending position can be hedged by financing the loan in the overnight Federal Funds market
and entering into an OIS for the same term as the first loan, the spread between the Libor and the OIS should be
zero by no arbitrage. When there are transaction costs or counter-party risk, this does not hold. For a detailed
discussion, see Gorton and Metrick (2009b), who also point out the no-arbitrage condition has kept the Libor-OIS
spread below 10 basis points historically.

                                          12
      The spread between the Libor and OIS, then, reflects the difference between interbank lending
     with counter-party risk (Libor) and interbank lending which is virtually free from counter-
      party risk, and it proxies for counter-party risk in the interbank market (Gorton and Metrick,
      2009a). Hui et al. (2009) and Gorton and Metrick (2009a) also use the Libor-OIS spread as
      a proxy for funding liquidity. Figure 3.1 below illustrates graphically how the basis evolved
      relative to the Libor-OIS spread for the investment bank Goldman Sachs. Summary statistics
      over the correlation between the basis and the Libor-OIS spread are available in Appendix,
      figure A.7.
     Other proxies we consider are the TED spread, which is the difference between Libor and
      equal-maturity Treasury bills, and the spread between Libor and the repo general collateral
      rate. The former captures funding liquidity since interbank financing costs (Libor) increase
      in uncertain times when counter-party risk is perceived as high. This increases the demand
      for high-rate collateral, making Treasury bonds more attractive to hold, pushing down the
     Treasury rates and thus increasing the TED spread (Brunnermeier, 2009). Similarly, as
      explained by Gˆarleanu and Pedersen (2009), the Libor-repo general collateral spread captures
      the differing costs between uncollateralized borrowing such as the Libor and collateralized
      borrowing such as a repo.
      In the model, we refer to the Libor-OIS spread as liboroisi,t

                                     Figure 3.1
This figure illustrates how the CDS-bond basis evolved relative to the Libor-OIS spread during
the financial crisis for the investment bank Goldman Sachs. The basis and the Libor-OIS seem
to co-move, indicating that the Libor-OIS spread captures some change that caused the basis.
      -400-400-200-20000200200400400Bbasis pointsBbasis pointsJul1 2007Jul1 2007Jan1 2008Jan1 2008Jul1 2008Jul1 2008Jan1 2009Jan1 2009Jul1 2009Jul1 2009DateDateBasisBasisLibor-OISLibor-OIS

          400

          200

          0

           Bbasis points

           -200

           -400

                Jul1 2007    Jan1 2008    Jul1 2008    Jan1 2009    Jul1 2009
                                            Date

                                            Basis             Libor-OIS

Using these specifications, our initial model in equation (3.1) translates into:
                                            10                 ( 2)2
  basisi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2voli,t + β3rt + β4slopet + β5 r  t + β6liqi,t + β7liboroist + ui,t
                                                                                                   (3.3)

Next, because most firms are heavily affected by the general business climate, and because recovery

                                          13
rates tend to be lower in recessions (Blanco et al., 2005), we also consider factors reflecting the
business climate.

   7. The business climate. In line with Collin-Dufresne et al. (2001) and Alexopoulou et al. (2009),
     we use market equity returns as captured by the returns of the S&P 500, denoted S&Pt in the
      model. Similar to our argument about individual stock returns, we assume that market equity
      returns captures the market’s expectations about economic activity. Furthermore, we use the
                  9
     VIX index , denoted V IXt, which – besides reflecting market volatility and capturing some
      sort of market unease – provides a support to the firm-specific realized volatility measure.

Lastly, we consider three separate models to more readily compare the effect of the factors on CDS
and credit spreads (”CS”). We use the first difference of the variables CDS, CS, basisi,t, voli,t,
 10                                                                                               10
rt , slopet, liboroisi,t and V IXt because we find that they are non-stationary processes  . This
leads to the final specification of:

                                                       10                   (   10)2
      ∆CDSi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t + β6liqi,t
                  + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t (3.4)

                                                       10                   (   10)2
       ∆CSi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t + β6liqi,t
                  + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t (3.5)

                                                       10                   (   10)2
      ∆basisi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t + β6liqi,t
                  + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t (3.6)

where CDSi,t, CSi,t and basisi,t are the CDS spread, credit spread and basis respectively for firm
i in day t.
Table 3.1 below summarizes our hypothesized signs. The signs on the basis variable derives from
the following reasoning: If liquidity risk and default risk are correlated in such way that poor
liquidity can be associated with increased sensitivity to credit risk, then the credit risk component
of a spread will also reflect part of the liquidity risk. Consequently, the credit risk component in
the bond market is possibly larger than that of the CDS market. Therefore, we should observe a
significant effect of credit risk factors on the basis.

   9
    The VIX, or CBOE Volatility Index, is constructed using the implied volatility of a range of S&P 500 index
options.
  10
   We perform an Augmented Dickey-Fuller unit root test for each time series in the panel dataset. When the
majority of the time series for a particular variable are found to be unit roots, we conclude that it is non-stationary.
The basis does not have unit roots, in most cases, but we use the first difference to simplify the comparison of the
regression results.

                                          14
                                     Table 3.1
Explanatory variables of the regression model. This table outlines our predicted
signs on the explanatory variables in the regression model ∆CDSi,t (∆CSi,t) (∆basisi,t) =
                                      10                     (   10)2
β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t + β6liqi,t + β7∆liboroist +
β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t. We use two different measures of credit spread, Asset Swap
Spread and Z-spread, but the predictions are the same regardless of measure. A plus
or minus sign means we expect a positive or negative coefficient respectively, and ”In-
sig.” means that we do not expect the coefficient to be significantly different from zero.

                                                                                  Predicted sign
 Variable Description ∆CDSi,t ∆CSi,t ∆basisi,t
 reti,t Stock return − − +
 ∆voli,t Firm-specific volatility + + −
     10
 ∆rt Change in long interest rate − − Insig.
 ∆slopet Change in slope of yield curve − − Insig.
  (     )2
      10
  ∆r  t Change in convexity + + Insig.
 liqi,t Liquidity measure + + −
 ∆liboroist Libor-OIS spread + + −
 S&Pt Return on the S&P 500 − − +
 ∆V IXt Market implied volatility volatility + + −

                                          15
4 Data and methodology

4.1 Data description

The data we use for the study consist primarily of CDS data, bond data, reference interest rates
                                                                        11
and equity market data. CDS data is obtained from Datastream  . The spreads are composites
aggregated from spreads reported by major market makers, and we do not know whether a certain
spread is an indicative quote or a spread reported from an actual transaction. Furthermore, no
firm has CDS quotes time series without gaps, and we do not have information on whether quotes
are left out because the data is unavailable or because no trading occurred. We download data
on 624 firms that have traded CDS contracts during our time period, which we use to compose a
dataset of CDS contracts matched with corresponding bonds. We limit the CDS data to five-year
maturities, because this is the most traded maturity (Blanco et al., 2005). We do not include an
explicit control for liquidity in the CDS market, but we believe that choosing a liquid maturity is
sufficient, seeing for example that B¨uhler and Trapp (2008) state that only about 4% of the CDS
spread is attributable to liquidity, compared to about 35% for corporate bonds (B¨uhler and Trapp,
2008).
Price, volume and the yield to maturity data for a large amount of transactions carried out in
                                                                                              12
the U.S. corporate bond market during our time period are obtained from TRACE  , accessed
                 13
through WRDS  . The total sample contains 23 165 691 transactions and 31 245 corporate bonds.
The transaction frequency varies between bonds, and for most bonds there are quite large gaps
in the time series. Issue dates, maturity dates and coupon rates are obtained from the CUSIP
                14
Service Bureau  , accessed through WRDS, and credit rating for bonds are obtained from Fidelity
Investments Fixed Income Center.
A quite large proportion of the bonds we use in the final dataset are callable, which means that
the issuer can redeem the bond before maturity. This makes the bonds extra sensitive to interest
rate changes, since the value of the embedded call option increases as it becomes closer to ”in the
money”, i.e. as interest rates drop. We acknowledge that this will likely affect our measure of
the basis to some degree, but controlling for fixed effects and interest rate changes as well as yield
curve slope and convexity will most likely capture the main part of the callability effect.
We consistently use swap rates as reference rates in our calculations and regressions. Daily data
on swap rates for maturities between one and thirty years are obtained from the Federal Reserve
Board. Other reference rates are obtained from Datastream, including Libor rates for all maturities
from overnight to twelve months, three-month Treasury rates, OIS rates and repo overnight general
collateral rates. Lastly, we use Eudodollar futures supplied by Datastream to determine the future
Libor quotes for any given day during our sample period.
The swap rates are not bootstrapped to zero rates. This means that there is an embedded ”coupon
effect” in the swap rates we use, because they represent the rate paid in the fixed leg in an fixed-
for-floating interest rates swap. Our swap rates are thus either higher or lower than the actual
zero rates, depending on the slope of the yield curve. Compared to using Treasury rates, which

  11
    Datastream is a large financial statistics database provided by Thomson Reuters.
  12
    Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) is the corporate bond market price service of the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority, a self-regulatory organization. TRACE was introduced in 2002, and consolidates
transaction data of almost the complete U.S. corporate bond market.
  13
    Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) of Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania provides access
to a variety of databases.
  14
    The CUSIP Service Bureau, operated by Standard & Poor’s for the American Bankers Association, provides
attributes for over 5 million corporate, municipal and government securities in North America.

                                          16
                          15
are often artificially low  , we deem that the effect will not be crucial for our results.

                                                                            16
Daily stock prices and levels of the S&P 500 index and are obtained from CRSP  accessed through
WRDS. For the main model, we calculate the volatility from the realized stock returns, but for a
robustness test performed on only the latter half of our time period, we use one month implied
volatility data from Datastream. Daily data on the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) are obtained
from the Chicago Board Options Exchange, accessed through WRDS.
Lastly, for robustness tests we use data on the Fama and French (1993) factors, which is provided
by Kenneth French and accessed through WRDS.

4.2 Construction of the dataset

To enable an apples-to-apples comparison between the CDS spread and the credit spread, we
construct a five-year credit spread that matches the maturity of the five-year CDS spread. We
follow the methodology of Blanco et al. (2005) and Houweling and Vorst (2005), and search for a
pair of bonds for each firm. The first bond should have three to five years left to maturity at the
beginning of our time period. The second bond should have at least five years left to maturity at
the end of our period. With such a pair of bonds, it is always possible to combine the two bonds
to form a five-year credit spreads.
We proceed in the following manner: First, from our bond data we remove trades with prices
reported inclusive of commission, with prices reported as a weighted average price for multiple
trades, or otherwise non-regular trades. Then, we keep only the last price of the day as a closing
price. Doing so, we create somewhat of an intra-day timing mismatch between the bond and CDS
quotes. However, the impact of such a mismatch is likely to be trivial, because bond prices tend
not to fluctuate much intra-day.
Next, we consider how it is possible to find an ”optimal” set of firms given the look of our dataset.
To interpolate a five-year credit spread for a certain day, we need the price for both bonds in the
pair. Furthermore, to calculate the basis we also need the spread for the CDS that day. Since
there are gaps in both the CDS and bond time series, observations do not necessarily match on
all days in the sample, so the number of final observations we can achieve depends on which two
bonds we combine together. Consequently, we examine every combination possible of the 31 245
bonds and 624 CDS contracts. We then select those bond combinations where we can find at least
300 days with prices for both bonds and CDS spreads. We deem 300 observations to be acceptable
since there are approximately 690 trading days in our time period.
Lastly, we manually inspect each chosen firms. We remove firms that experienced credit events
during our time period and firms that were acquired by another firm. We also replace bond pairs
where the credit rating of each bond differs by more than two rating steps and bonds rated lower
than Highly Speculative (corresponding to a S&P rating of B+ to B-). We then assign a credit
rating to each bond pair. In general, we take into account the rating from both Moody’s and
Standard & Poor’s for each bond and weigh them together into a reasonable composite rating for

  15
    Treasury bills and bonds must be purchased by financial institutions to fulfill regulatory requirements (Hull,
2009), which increases the demand, driving the yields down. In addition, the capital reserve a bank is required
to carry as collateral for a Treasury instrument investment is substantially smaller than for virtually all other
investments, including instruments with very low risk. This further increases demand, and pushes the yields down.
Lastly, in the United States, Treasury instruments are given a favorable tax treatment compared to other fixed-
income investments, because they are not taxed at the state level (Elton et al., 2001). Hence, because of tax and
regulatory issues, Treasury rates are often artificially low. Other problems with Treasury rates include the existence
of ”humps” in on-the-run Treasury bond prices, following the on-the-run premium of about 15-25 basis points. For
a detailed discussion on special repo rates and this effect, see for example Fisher (2002) or Duffie (1996).
  16
    The Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) at Booth School of Business of the University of Chicago
collects data from NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stock markets.

                                          17
the pair. We also divide the ratings into broader rating groups. The assumptions underlying these
conversions are detailed in Table A.1.
In total we obtain a dataset comprising of 62 firms. Table A.6 summarizes the main characteristics
of each firm with regard to credit spread, CDS spread, basis and credit rating.

4.3 Determining the credit spread

The credit spread is the difference between the bond’s yield to maturity and the risk-free rate, and
thus reflects the credit risk of the bond. However, there are other components inherent in the bond
yield, such as liquidity risk, interest rate risk and funding risk. Measuring the credit spread is not
always straightforward; especially not if it is supposed to be comparable to the CDS spread.
A conventional measure of credit spread is the interpolated spread or I-spread. It is simply cal-
culated as the yield to maturity of the bond less the yield of a risk-free benchmark of the same
maturity (Francis et al., 2003). While methodologically tractable, it does not take into account the
term structure of interest rates. For example, when the yield curve is hump-shaped, the I-spread
would overstate the credit spread.
A more refined measure is the zero volatility spread, or the Z-spread. The Z-spread is defined
as the spread that must be added to the yield curve at every point in time so that the sum of
the discounted cash flows of the bond equals its price. For each bond and day, we calculate the
Z-spread in the following way:

                (                 )
           ∑T
                                Ct            F V
                  P =                 t +       T   , t = 1, 2, ..., T (4.1)
                      t=1  (1 + rt + Z)    (1 + rt + Z)

                          17
Where P is the dirty price   of the bond, Ct is the coupon payment at time t, rt is the risk-free
benchmark with maturity T , F V is the face value of the bond, and Z is the Z-spread which is
found iteratively.
As mentioned, we use the swap rate as a risk-free benchmark. However, the swap rate is only
available for certain maturities. To construct a complete yield curve, we use the Nelson and Siegel
(1987) interpolation method. The approach is common (see for example Elton et al., 2001), and
the efficiency of the rather simple model is confirmed by for example Dahlquist and Svensson
(1996). Essentially, we fit a polynomial function with least squares minimization to the swap rate
data, and use the model parameters to obtain interpolated swap rates for any date. For detailed
discussion on the Nelson-Siegel method, refer to Nelson and Siegel (1987).
While the Z-spread offers an intuitive interpretation, it is not a tradable spread. A measure that
is in fact tradable is the previously discussed Asset Swap Spread (ASW), which, for this reason,
is often the focus of empirical studies (for example De Wit, 2006). For each bond and day, we
calculate the ASW in the following way:

              ∑T      ∑T
                               Ct        (Lt + ASW ) × αt
              0 = 100 − P +           t −               t , t = 1, 2, ..., T (4.2)
                                t=1 (1 + rt)    t=1      (1 + rt)
where P is the dirty price of the bond at initiation, Ct is the coupon payment at time t, rt is the
risk-free benchmark with maturity t, Lt is the forward three-month Libor rate at time t, αi is the
accrual factor, and ASW is the Asset Swap Spread.

  17
    Bond quotes are usually referred to as ”clean” prices, because they do not include accrued interest. The clean
price of the bond plus the interest accrued since the last coupon payment equals the bond’s dirty price.

                                          18
As a risk-free benchmark, we use the same interpolated swap rates as in the calculation of the
Z-spread. We estimate Libor forward rates using Eurodollar futures contracts, which in essence
give us Libor futures rates. A Eurodollar future allows an investor to lock in a Libor rate for a
period of time in the future, and thus represents the market’s prediction of what the Libor rate
will be at that time. We linearly interpolate between Eurodollar futures to obtain a rate for each
payment date.
Lastly, for each firm and day, we linearly interpolate between the two selected bonds to obtain a
five-year Z-spread and a five-year ASW. See Table A.6 for summary statistics.

                                          19
5 Results

5.1 Basic setup

                                                                          18
Table 5.1 reports the results from regressions (3.4), (3.5) and (3.6)  . The results show that, out
of the credit risk factors derived from the Merton (1974) framework, only leverage significantly
explains spread changes in the bond market and the CDS market. Credit risk factors do not seem
to affect the basis. The main factors affecting the basis are instead related to market liquidity and
funding liquidity.
As explained in section 3, we use the first difference of several variables. It is necessary for statis-
tical reasons, but introduces some problems with respect to the interpretation of the coefficients.
Therefore, we also include a regression performed with a non-differenced basis (CDS spread minus
Z-spread) as the dependent variable. Throughout the analysis, we will refer to this regression when
commenting significance levels, but the signs on the coefficients may not be as expected.
Looking at the summary statistics in Table A.6, we first note that the ASW is consistently below
the Z-spread. Throughout our time period, most bonds trade at prices well below par, so the ASW
will underestimate the credit spread, as discussed in section 2.1. For the rest of the this section,
will use the Z-spread as a measure of the credit spread.
Stock returns affect both credit spreads and CDS spreads in the expected direction, and the
coefficient is highly significant. In line with our predictions, higher stock returns reduce spreads, but
the sensitivity to stock returns seems to be similar for both CDS and credit spreads. Consequently,
stock returns does not seem to be a significant determinant of the basis.
The market return is a significant determinant of credit spreads, but is incorrectly signed according
to our predictions. Since we consider the market return to proxy for overall changes in recovery
rates, this is surprising. Positive market return should be associated with lower credit spreads.
Firm volatility is correctly signed but insignificant for all variables. Judging from the size of the
coefficients, the bond market seems to be more sensitive to volatility than the CDS market, but
no coefficients are significant. The market volatility is correctly signed for credit spreads, but is
not significant in any regression. Though insignificant, we note that the firm-specific volatility
measure plays a more important role than market implied volatility, because the coefficients on
firm-specific volatility are consistently larger (firm-specific volatility and market implied volatility
are measured in the same unit).
The liquidity measure seems to accurately capture what we intended it to do. As expected,
worsening liquidity (higher values of the liquidity measure) translates into higher credit spreads
and a significant basis. For the CDS spread, the coefficient is insignificant, which we take to mean
that the measure succeeds in capturing the bond-specific liquidity. Even though the coefficient
in the CDS spread regression is small and insignificant, we note that the sign is positive. It is
possible that this is an example of the correlation between liquidity risk and credit risk that we
discussed earlier, so that some of the liquidity risk in the bond market spills over to the CDS
market. For example, the delivery option risk in CDS contracts should be positively correlated
with bond liquidity, since there is a possibility that an illiquid bond will be delivered – especially
if the probability of delivery is high. Consequently, lower liquidity in the bond market can lead to
higher CDS premiums, explaining the positive sign.
Funding liquidity is a highly significant determinant for both CDS and credit spreads, and all signs
are in line with our expectations. Higher Libor-OIS spreads are associated with scarcer availability

  18
    The regressions are estimated using OLS with Huber-White heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.

                                          20
of funds, which should affect credit spreads more than CDS spreads since bonds require larger
margins, as discussed in section 2.3 (Gˆarleanu and Pedersen, 2009). As seen, this leads to negative
changes in the basis. Looking at the non-differenced basis variable, we see that the coefficient
is very large in magnitude and highly significant, indicating that there is a strong relationship
between the funding constraints to investors and the CDS-bond basis. The reason for the positive
coefficient is related to the first differencing discussed above. Clearly, we would expect a negative
relationship, and Table A.7 shows that the correlation between the basis and the Libor-OIS spread
is indeed highly negative for almost all firms in the sample. The only exceptions are Medtronic,
which is negatively correlated in the second half of the sample, and American Express, which has
an average basis close to zero.
The long-term interest rate and the yield curve slope are highly significant for both CDS and credit
spreads most of the time. The coefficient for the long-term interest rate is negative for both CDS
and credit spreads. This is in line with our predictions, since we expect an increase in risk-free
rates to increase the drift of the firm and to decrease CDS and credit spreads. However, we expect
the effect to be similar for both CDS and credit spreads so that it does not give rise to a basis.
On the contrary, the effect of the ten-year swap rate is notably larger for credit spreads than for
CDS spreads. Even though we control for the yield curve slope and convexity, this seem to be an
important determinant of the basis, driving the basis negative when interest rates rise.
As explained in section 4.1, we are forced to include many callable bonds in the dataset, and
the bonds therefore likely have high convexity, which would explain the strong sensitivity to the
ten-year swap rate and the convexity control. The convexity in a CDS arises primarily because the
expected profit or loss for either party does not change linearly with spread changes; an increase
in the spread level follows from an increase in the probability of default. As the probability of
default increases, so does the probability of an early termination of the contract, and hence it
                         19
arises a convexity issue  . As evident, neither the duration nor the convexity are the same in CDS
contracts and bonds, and this effect becomes especially prominent for callable bonds. Therefore,
the different sensitivities to convexity might be a reason for the effect on the basis.
For robustness, we try our model with a variety of different specifications. We use the TED
spread and the Libor-repo general collateral spread instead of the Libor-OIS spread, both of which
prove to be a less significant determinants of the basis. We also use age and trading volume as
alternatives to the liquidity measure, and this does not change our conclusions. Our findings also
remain unchanged after considering the Fama and French (1993) risk factors, which do not seem
to capture the changes in the CDS-bond basis.
In relation to other studies, we believe some specifications are less suitable for stressed time periods
like the credit crisis, because the focus is often heavily leaned towards capturing market liquidity
and not funding liquidity. Instead, most authors control for a so called mean-reverting nature
of the basis by including a lagged basis term. We argue that such studies may incorporate only
the effect of a pricing error rather than controlling for its cause. The notion of a mean-reverting
basis rests on the assumption that the markets price risk equally in the long run, but because of
market frictions there might be a short-run basis. For this reason, we believe, it is common that
the focus of empirical work is on the co-integration of the markets, and not on the pricing errors
themselves. If funding constraints provide a natural explanation for the CDS-bond basis, then a
lagged basis term should cancel out the effect of the Libor-OIS spread. We find that this is indeed
true. We run regressions analogous to those of Zhu (2004), Blanco et al. (2005) and Alexopoulou
et al. (2009). We first run our standard specification with a lagged first differenced basis term,
and find that the coefficient on the lagged basis term is significant and signed as expected (price
correction is faster in CDS market). Next, we run the same regression but without taking the first
difference on the dependent variable, in the same manner as Zhu (2004). Our results show that
about 9% of the errors are corrected to the next period, compared to 7-9% as found by Zhu (2004).

  19
    Because future survival is conditional on previous survival, the cumulative survival probability is more affected
than that of the current period. For a detailed discussion on duration and convexity of credit derivatives, refer to
Beinstein and Scott (2006).

                                          21
Lastly, we apply the same Granger two-step approach as Alexopoulou et al. (2009), and estimate
an error correction term from the regression CDSi,t = CSi,t + i,t, and substitute ˆi,t in place of
the lagged basis term. Doing so, we find significant results with the same signs as with our lagged
basis terms, with coefficients of the same magnitude. Overall, the results are very similar to those
of Alexopoulou et al. (2009). Seeing that the effect of the Libor-OIS factor seems to diminish
with the inclusion of error correction terms, we interpret this as funding requirements playing an
important role in determining the CDS-bond basis.

                                     Table 5.1
Regression results, main specification. This table shows the outcome of running the regres-
                                                                                        10
sions ∆CDSi,t (∆CSi,t) (∆basisi,t) (basisi,t) = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet +
   (   10)2
β5 ∆r   t + β6liqi,t + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t. We use stock returns, reti,t,
as a proxy for leverage and financial health of the firms, and ∆voli,t is the changes in firm-
specific ten-period realized volatility. We use three factors to control for interest rate changes:
                                          10
changes in the ten-year swap rate, rt , changes in the slope of the yield curve, slopet, which
is calculated as the difference between the ten-year and the two-year swap rates, and finally
                                                        (   10)2
we use changes in the ten-year swap rate squared,  ∆r   , to control for convexity issues.
Bond-specific market liquidity is captured by a measure of price volatility to trading volume,
liqi,t, and changes in the Libor-OIS spread, liboroist, proxy for funding liquidity by captur-
ing interbank counter-party risk. Lastly, we include returns of the S&P500 index and changes
in the VIX volatility index to capture changes in the business climate and varying general
recovery rates. The regression is performed on the complete dataset consisting of 62 firms.

                      ∆CDSi,t ∆CSi,t ∆basisi,t basisi,t
                            ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
  reti,t -2.107                -2.655                0.0579 -0.433
                        (0.000) (0.000) (0.890) (0.455)
 ∆voli,t 0.769 1.570 -1.281 0.728
                        (0.256) (0.204) (0.339) (0.744)
    10                         ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗
 ∆rt -0.0904             -0.675              0.583               0.263
                        (0.004) (0.000) (0.000) (0.037)
                             ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗      ∗∗
 ∆slopet -20.89              15.10 -32.48              -54.13
                        (0.001) (0.168) (0.003) (0.011)
  (     )2
      10                                                                                            ∗∗∗
  ∆r   t -12.07 44.67 -51.42 -650.0
                        (0.586) (0.167) (0.105) (0.000)
                                                ∗∗∗      ∗∗      ∗∗∗
  liqi,t 1.047 10.39                 -9.184                -37.30
                        (0.339) (0.007) (0.015) (0.000)
                            ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
 ∆liboroist 0.307               0.530               -0.178 1.116
                        (0.000) (0.000) (0.184) (0.000)
                                               ∗∗∗
 S&Pt 0.511 2.273              -1.079 1.407
                        (0.387) (0.006) (0.119) (0.290)
 ∆V IXt -0.0754 0.425 -0.384 1.328
                        (0.706) (0.341) (0.402) (0.156)
                                                   ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 Constant 0.0000166 -0.000220           0.000246            -0.00636
                        (0.589) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 N 17489 19550 17489 18258
       2
 adj. R                0.084 0.050 0.009 0.025
 p-values in parentheses
 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
   p < 0.1,    p < 0.05,     p < 0.01

5.2 Cross-sectional variations

So far we have assumed homogeneity among firms; an assumption implicit in the panel regression
approach. Assuming that each firm is equally sensitive to the credit risk factors is clearly inappro-

                                          22
priate. For example, we expect firms with high leverage to be more sensitive to increased volatility
than firms with low leverage. Consequently, the coefficients in our first regressions are unable to
fully capture the effects of changes in credit risk and liquidity factors.
To shed some light on the cross-sectional variations, we perform the same regressions as earlier
(equations (3.4), (3.5) and (3.6)) on subsamples divided according to credit rating groups. The
credit rating groups are outlined in Table A.1.
Tables A.2, A.3, A.4 and A.5 report the results of the regressions within rating groups. The results
reveal two main findings. First, the credit spreads for firms with lower ratings are more sensitive
to changes in credit risk factors and changes in funding liquidity. Second, the basis for firms with
lower ratings is more sensitive to funding liquidity.
The coefficient for stock return is correctly signed for both CDS and credit spreads, and its sig-
nificance and size increases as the credit rating decreases. For high grade bonds, stock return is
insignificant, while it is highly significant for the other rating groups. This is in line with our pre-
dictions, since we expect CDS and credit spreads for firms with lower rating to be more sensitive to
changes in leverage. Comparing the sensitivities for each rating group, we see that the sensitivity
of the CDS and the credit spread are of similar magnitude. This translates into an insignificant
coefficient for the basis, as was the case using the full sample.
Liquidity is a somewhat significant determinant of the credit spread. Looking at the significance
of the non-differenced basis in the regression, we see that liquidity is significantly associated with
basis for all but the highest rating.
The slope of the yield curve proves significant for determining the credit spread for higher rating
groups, and the size of the coefficient decreases with higher rating. This result is related to the
definition of the Z-spread. Firms with higher ratings have lower Z-spreads, and thus a large part
of their yields consists of a risk-free rate. Consequently, the credit spread of a firm with a high
rating becomes relatively more sensitive to changes in the slope of the yield curve. Because the
effect is not similar for the CDS, the yield curve slope becomes significant for the basis for all
rating groups except the lowest. The ten-year swap rate is highly significant and correctly signed
for the credit spread and for all ratings. The size of the coefficient is generally larger for lower
ratings, which is in line with the findings for the full sample. Bonds with lower credit quality have
a higher probability of default, and the marginal effect of an increase in the risk-free rate is hence
larger for low-rated firms than high-rated firms. Similar to our findings above, the swap rate also
seems to be a determinant of the basis.
The Libor-OIS is not significant for the credit spread except for the upper medium rating. For the
CDS spread, the Libor-OIS is highly significant for all ratings. In line with our hypothesis, the
coefficients are much smaller for the unfunded CDS position than for the credit spread. Therefore,
the Libor-OIS should affect the basis. Indeed, the Libor-OIS spread significantly affects the basis
across all rating groups, and the size of the coefficient is largest for the lowest rating, indicating
that lower rating groups are more sensitive to funding liquidity than higher rating groups.
Evidently, there is a cross-sectional variation among firms in their sensitivity to the factors deter-
mining the basis. This section has illustrated that bonds of different credit quality have different
sensitivity to credit risk, liquidity risk and funding risk.

                                          23
6 Concluding remarks

In this thesis we examine the CDS and credit spreads and the resulting CDS-bond basis of 62
U.S. firms during the period 2007 to 2009. We try to explain CDS and credit spreads and the
CDS-bond basis by employing credit risk factors, a market liquidity factor and by introducing a
funding liquidity factor. The credit risk factors leverage, firm volatility and recovery rates are
derived from the structural models of credit risk, and we proxy for them by using stock returns,
realized volatility and controls for the business climate (market returns and the VIX volatility
index) respectively. In addition, we add variables that proxy for market liquidity and funding
liquidity. We use a measure of price volatility to trading volume to control for market liquidity,
and based on recent research, we use the Libor-OIS spread as a proxy for funding liquidity. To the
best of our knowledge, this one of the first studies that use a funding liquidity factor to study the
determinants of the CDS-bond basis.
We find scarce evidence of credit risk factors affecting the basis. Stock return and firm volatility are
rarely significant determinants of the basis, and market return is more often than not incorrectly
signed. Liquidity, on the other hand, is highly significant for the basis, so that increased liquidity
in the bond market lowers the basis. The funding liquidity factor is highly significant for both
CDS and bond spreads as well as for the basis.
We also have reason to believe that there may be large differences between firms with regards to
their sensitivity to the determinants of the CDS and bond spreads and the basis. For example,
we expect firms with high leverage to be more sensitive to increased volatility than firms with
low leverage. Consequently, the coefficients in our first regressions are unable to fully capture the
effects of changes in credit risk and liquidity factors. To examine this notion, we divide the dataset
into subsamples according to the credit rating of the firms. We create four broad credit rating
groups, and run the same regressions within the groups. We conclude that there are indeed large
differences in sensitivity to factors explaining both CDS and bond spreads and the basis, and two
findings emerge: First, the credit spread of firms with lower ratings is more sensitive to changes
in credit risk factors and funding liquidity. Second, the basis of firms with lower ratings is more
sensitive to funding liquidity.
We draw a simple yet intuitively appealing conclusion: The large discrepancies that were observed
2007 to 2009 between the CDS and bond markets were not mainly caused by any fundamental
change in the pricing of credit risk in the markets. Instead, the pricing discrepancies may not have
been traded away for the reason that the funding needed for the trades was unavailable.
For future research, we would like to point to the time variability of the sensitivities to basis
determinants. We have found indications for that the sensitivities to credit risk, market liquidity
and funding liquidity vary over time, and we suspect that there is a possibility that a permanent
shift in the sensitivity to certain factors occurred some time during the financial crisis. This could
for example mean that certain rating groups experienced a permanent increase in the sensitivity to
some of the factors. To be able to make more accurate interpretations of the information content
of the credit markets, future research needs to assess the possible occurrences of shifts in the
sensitivity to credit risk and liquidity risk for certain rating groups or firms with other special
characteristics.

                                          24
References

Acharya, Viral V., Yakov Amihud, and Sreedhar T. Bharath. Liquidity Risk of Corporate Bond Returns, 2009.
   Working paper, New York University Stern School of Business.

Acharya, Viral V., Sreedhar T. Bharath, and Anand Srinivasan. Does industry-wide distress affect defaulted firms?
  Evidence from creditor recoveries. Journal of Financial Economics, 85:787–821, 2007.

Acharya, Viral V. and Stephen Schaefer. Litterman and Iben Model of Estimating Credit Risk. Lecture London
   Business School, March 2, 2009.

Alexopoulou, Andersson, and Georgescu. An Empirical Stidy On the Decoupling Movements Between Corporate
  Bond And CDS Spreads. Technical Report 1085, European Central Bank, 2009.

Altman, Edward I. and Vellore M. Kishore. Almost Everything You Wanted to Know about Recoveries on Defaulted
  Bonds. Financial Analysts Journal, 52(6):57–64, 1996.

Arora, Navneet, Jeffrey R. Bohn, and Fanlin Zhu. Reduced Form vs. Structural Models of Credit Risk: A Case
  Study of Three Models, 2005. Working Paper, Moody’s KMV.

Aussenegg, Wolfgang and Lukas Goetz. Regime Switching in Credit Spreads: An empirical analysis of determinants
   of European Asset Swap Spreads during the credit crisis, 2009. Working paper, Vienna University of Technology.

Batterman, James, Ian Rasmussen, and David Yan. Credit Policy Special Report, A Brief Review of ”The Basis”.
   Technical report, Fitch Ratings, 2008.

Beinstein, Eric and Andrew Scott. Credit Derivatives Handbook. Technical report, J.P. Morgan, 2006.

Black, Fischer and John C. Cox. Valuing Corporate Securities: Some Effects of Bond Indenture Provisions. The
   Journal of Finance, 31(2):351–367, 1976.

Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes. The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities. The Journal of Political
  Economy, 81(3):637–654, 1973.

Blanco, Roberto, Simon Brennan, and Ian W. Marsh. An Empirical Analysis of the Dynamic Relation between
  Investment-Grade Bonds and Credit Default Swaps. The Journal of Finance, 50(5):2255–2281, 2005.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007–2008. Journal of Economic Perspec-
   tives, 23(1):77–100, 2009.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Lasse Heje Pedersen. Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity. The Review of
   Financial Studies, 22(6):2201–2238, 2009.

B¨uhler, Wolfgang and Monika Trapp. Time-Varying Credit Risk and Liquidity Premia in Bond and CDS Markets,
   2008. Presentation, FDIC 18th Annual Derivatives Securities and Risk Management Conference.

Cao, Charles, Fan Yu, and Zhaodong Zhong. The Information Content of Option-Implied Volatility for Credit
   Default Swap Valuation, 2009. Working Paper, Pennsylvania State University.

Choudhry, Moorad. The credit default swap basis: Analysing the relationship between cash and synthetic credit
  markets. Journal of Derivatives & Hedge Funds (Formerly: Derivatives Use, Trading & Regulation), 10(1):8–26,
   2004.

Choudhry, Moorad. The credit default swap basis. Bloomberg Press, New York, 2006.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre and Robert S. Goldstein. Do Credit Spreads Reflect Stationary Leverage Ratios? The
   Journal of Finance, 56(5):1929–1957, 2001.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin. The Determinants of Credit Spread Changes.
   The Journal of Finance, 56(6):2177–2207, 2001.

Covitz, Dan and Chris Downing. Liquidity or Credit Risk? The Determinants of Very Short-Term Corporate Yield
  Spreads. The Journal of Finance, 62(5):2303–2328, 2007.

Cremers, Martijn, Joost Driessen, Pascal Maenhout, and David Weinbaum. Individual Stock-Option Prices and
  Credit Spreads. Journal of Banking and Finance, 32(12):2706–2715, 2008.

Crosbie, Peter and Jeff Bohn. Modeling Default Risk. Technical report, Moody’s KMV, 2003.

                                          25
Dahlquist, Magnus and Lars E. O. Svensson. Estimating the Term Structure of Interest Rates for Monetary Policy
  Analysis. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 98(2):163–183, 1996.

de Jong, Frank and Joost Driessen. Liquidity Risk Premia in Corporate Bond Markets, 2006. Working paper,
  University of Amsterdam.

De Wit, Jan. Exploring the CDS-Bond Basis. Technical Report 104, National Bank of Belgium, 2006.

Downing, Chris and YuHang Xing. Is Liquidity Risk Priced in the Corporate Bond Market?, 2005. Working paper,
   Rice University.

Driessen, Joost. Is Default Event Risk Priced in Corporate Bonds? The Review of Financial Studies, 18(1):165–195,
   2005.

Duffee, Gregory R. Estimating the Price of Default Risk. The Review of Financial Studies, 12(1):197–226, 1999.

Duffie, Darrell. Special Repo Rates. The Journal of Finance, 51(2):493–526, 1996.

Duffie, Darrell. Credit Swap Valuation. Financial Analysts Journal, 55(1):73–78, 1999.

Duffie, Darrell and Kenneth J. Singleton. Modeling Term Structures of Defaultable Bonds. The Review of Financial
   Studies, 12(4):687–720, 1999.

Elton, Edwin J. and T. Clifton Green. Tax and Liquidity Effects in Pricing Government Bonds. The Journal of
   Finance, 53(5):1533–1562, 1998.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Deepak Agrawal, and Christopher Mann. Explaining the Rate Spread on
  Corporate Bonds. The Journal of Finance, 56(1):247–277, 2001.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks and Bonds. Journal
   of Financial Economics, 25(1):23–49, 1989.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal of
   Financial Economics, 33(1):3–56, 1993.

Fisher, Mark. Special Repo Rates: An Introduction. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 2002.

Fontaine, Jean-S´ebastien and Ren´e Garcia. Bond Liquidity Premia, 2009. Working Paper, Universit´e de Montr´eal.

Francis, Chris, Atish Kakodkar, and Barnaby Martin. Credit Derivatives Handbook 2003. Technical report, Merrill
   Lynch, 2003.

Gagliardini, P. and C. Gouri´eoux. Spread Term Structure and Default Correlation, 2003. Working paper Universit`a
   della Svizzera Italiana.

Garcia, Ren´e. Liquidity Risk: What is it? How to Measure it?, 2009. Presentation, EDHEC Business School,
   Cirano, Montr´eal.

Gˆarleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Heje Pedersen. Margin-Based Asset Pricing and Deviations from the Law of One Price,
   2009. Working paper, Haas Business School, University of California, Berkeley.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick. Haircuts, 2009a. Yale International Center for Finance Working Paper No.
   09-15.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick. Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo, 2009b. Yale International Center
   for Finance Working Paper No. 09-14.

Griffoli, Tommaso Mancini and Angelo Ranaldo. Limits to arbitrage during the crisis: funding liquidity constraints
   and covered interest parity, 2009. Working Paper, Swiss National Bank.

Han, Song and Hao Zhou. Nondefault Bond Spread and Market Trading Liquidity, 2006. Division of Research &
   Statistics, Federal Reserve Board.

Houweling, Patrick and Ton Vorst. Pricing Default Swaps: Empirical Evidence. Journal of International Money
   and Finance, 24(8):1200–1225, 2005.

Hui, Cho-Hoi, Hans Genberg, and Tsz-Kin Chung. Funding Liquidity Risk and Deviations From Interest-Rate
   Parity During the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009, 2009. Working Paper, Hon Kong Monetary Authority.

Hull, John and Alan White. Valuing Credit Default Swaps I: No Counterparty Default Risk. Journal of Derivatives,
   8(1):29–40, 2000.

                                          26
Hull, John and Alan White. Valuing Credit Default Swaps II: Modeling Default Correlations. Journal of Derivatives,
   8(3):12–22, 2001.

Hull, John C. Options, Futures and Other Derivatives. Pearson Education, Inc, 7 edition, 2009.

Jankowitsch, Rainer, Rainer Pullirsch, and Tanja Veˇza. The Delivery Option in Credit Default Swaps, 2007. Vienna
   University of Economics and Business Administration (Unpublished, available through SSRN eLibrary).

Jarrow, Robert A., David Lando, and Stuart M. Turnbull. A Markov Model for the Term Structure of Credit Risk
  Spreads. The Review of Financial Studies, 10(2):481–523, 1997.

Jarrow, Robert A. and Stuart M. Turnbull. Pricing Derivatives on Financial Securities Subject to Credit Risk. The
   Journal of Finance, 50(1):53–85, 1995.

Jones, E. Philip, Scott P. Mason, and Eric Rosenfeld. Contingent Claims Analysis of Corporate Capital Structures:
  An Empirical Investigation. The Journal of Finance, 39(3):611–625, 1983.

Kealhofer, Stephen. Quantifying Credit Risk I: Default Prediction. Financial Analysts Journal, 59(1):30–44, 2003.

Kim, Gi Hyun, Haitao Li, and Weina Zhang. The CDS/Bond Basis and the Cross Section of Corporate Bond
   Returns, 2009. Stephen M. Ross School of Business, University of Michigan.

Kyle, Albert S. Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading. Econometrica, 53(6):1315–1335, 1985.

Leland, Hayne. Structural Models and the Credit Crisis. 2008.

Leland, Hayne E. Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital Structure. The Journal of Finance,
   49(4):1231–1252, 1994.

Litterman, Robert B. and Thomas Iben. Corporate bond valuation and the term structure of credit spreads. The
   Journal of Portfolio Management, 17(3):52–64, 1991.

Liu, Jun, Francis A. Longstaff, and Ravit E. Mandell. The Market Price of Risk in Interest Rate Swaps: The Roles
  of Default and Liquidity Risks. Journal of Business, 79(5):2337–2359, 2006.

Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis. Corporate Yield Spreads: Default Risk or Liquidity? New
  Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market. The Journal of Finance, 60(5):2213–2253, 2005.

Longstaff, Francis A. and Eduardo S. Schwartz. A Simple Approach to Valuing Risky Fixed and Floating Rate
  Debt. The Journal of Finance, 50(3):789–819, 1995.

Lyden, Scott and David Saraniti. An Empirical Examination of the Classical Theory of Corporate Security Valuation,
   2000. Working Paper, Barclays Global Investors.

Merton, Robert C. On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates. The Journal of
   Finance, 29(2):449–470, 1974.

Myers, Stewart C. Determinants of Corporate Borrowing. Journal of Financial Economics, 5(2):147–175, 1977.

Nashikkar, Amrut, Marti Subrahmanyam, and Sriketan Mahanti. Limited arbitrage and liquidity in the market for
   credit risk, 2008. New York University - Department of Finance, working paper.

Nelson, Charles R. and Andrew F. Siegel. Parsimonious Modeling of Yield Curves. The Journal of Business,
   60(4):473–489, 1987.

Norden, Lars and Martin Weber. The comovement of credit default swap, bond and stock markets: an empirical
   analysis. Technical Report 20, Center for Financial Studies, 2004.

Ogden, Joseph P. Determinants of the ratings changes and yields on corporate bonds: Tests Determinants of the
  ratings changes and yields on corporate bonds: Tests of the contingent claims model. The Journal of Financial
   Research, 10(4):329–339, 1987.

O’Kane, Dominic and Saurav Sen. Credit Spreads Explained. Fixed income quantitative credit research, Lehman
   Brothers, 2004.

Thornton, Daniel L. What the Libor-OIS Spread Says. Economic Synopses, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
   (24), 2003.

Trapp, Monika. Trading the Bond-CDS Basis – The Role of Credit Risk and Liquidity, 2009. Working Paper,
   University of Cologne Centre for Financial Research.

Wang, Yuan. Liquidity Effects in Corporate Bond Spreads, 2009. Working Paper, The Penn State University.

Zhu, Haibin. An empirical comparison of credit spreads between the bond market and the credit default swap
   market. BIS Working Papes 160, Bank for International Settlements, 2004.

                                          27
A Tables

                                   Table A.1
Assumptions of credit rating conversion and rating band assignment. This table outlines
our assumption of credit rating conversion between Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s long-term
credit rating. It also show how we assume that the particular ratings are divided into larger groups.

                                                                       Credit rating by institute
 Rating group Moody’s Standard & Poor
                                   Aaa AAA
                                  Aa1 AA+
 High grade
                                   Aa2 AA
                                     Aa3 AA-
                                  A1 A+
 Upper Medium grade                    A2 A
                                      A3 A-
                                    Baa1 BBB+
 Lower Medium grade                     Baa2 BBB
                                      Baa3 BBB-
                                   Ba1 BB+
 Low grade                             Ba2 BB
                                      Ba3 BB-
                                  B1 B+

                                          28
                                   Table A.2
Regression results, divided by credit rating (CDS spread). This table shows the outcome
                                                                    10                    (   10)2
of the regression ∆CDSi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t +
β6liqi,t + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t, when the total sample is split into four
rating groups. We use stock returns, reti,t, as a proxy for leverage and financial health of the
firms, and ∆voli,t is the change in firm-specific ten-period realized volatility. We use three fac-
                                                                                           10
tors to control for interest rate changes: changes in the ten-year swap rate, rt , changes in
the slope of the yield curve, slopet, which is calculated as the difference between the ten-year
and the two-year swap rates, and finally we use changes in the ten-year swap rate squared,
(   10)2
 ∆r   , to control for convexity issues. Bond-specific market liquidity is captured by a mea-
sure of price volatility to trading volume, liqi,t, and changes in the Libor-OIS spread, liboroist,
proxy for funding liquidity by capturing interbank counter-party risk. Lastly, we include returns
of the S&P500 index and changes in the VIX volatility index to capture changes in the busi-
ness climate and varying general recovery rates. In total, there are 62 firms in the dataset.

                           High grade Upper Medium grade Lower Medium grade Low grade
 Variable ∆CDS ∆CDS ∆CDS ∆CDS
                                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
  reti,t -0.0136 -1.225                   -2.676             -2.549
                              (0.857) (0.000) (0.006) (0.000)
                                                                                                        ∗
 ∆voli,t 0.0905 0.915 -0.153 4.169
                              (0.788) (0.164) (0.885) (0.083)
    10                             ∗∗∗       ∗∗
 ∆rt -0.0449              -0.0834                 -0.0908 -0.109
                              (0.000) (0.021) (0.141) (0.315)
                                  ∗∗      ∗∗      ∗      ∗∗
 ∆slopet 3.965               -12.53                  -20.40           -57.06
                              (0.033) (0.030) (0.077) (0.031)
  (     )2
     10                             ∗∗                            ∗∗
  ∆r   t -9.397                -10.49 -66.59           97.51
                              (0.020) (0.436) (0.048) (0.249)
 liqi,t -0.428 0.804 2.197 -2.946
                              (0.292) (0.230) (0.287) (0.123)
                                  ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗
 ∆liboroist 0.0456               0.213                  0.375            0.485
                              (0.006) (0.000) (0.001) (0.003)
 S&Pt -0.138 0.220 0.441 -0.0871
                              (0.104) (0.607) (0.705) (0.946)
                                                                            ∗
 ∆V IXt 0.112 0.318 -0.659          0.176
                              (0.104) (0.184) (0.057) (0.852)
 Constant 0.0000115 0.00000375 0.0000758 -0.0000278
                              (0.172) (0.912) (0.196) (0.782)
 N 1334 7589 6676 1890
       2
 adj. R                       0.099 0.048 0.102 0.179
 p-values in parentheses
 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
   p < 0.1,    p < 0.05,     p < 0.01

                                          29
                                   Table A.3
Regression results, divided by credit rating (credit spread). This table shows the out-
                                                                     10                   (   10)2
come of the regression ∆CSi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t +
β6liqi,t + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t, when the total sample is split into four rat-
ing groups. We use stock returns, reti,t, as a proxy for leverage and financial health of the
firms, and ∆voli,t is the change in firm-specific ten-period realized volatility. We use three fac-
                                                                                           10
tors to control for interest rate changes: changes in the ten-year swap rate, rt , changes in
the slope of the yield curve, slopet, which is calculated as the difference between the ten-year
and the two-year swap rates, and finally we use changes in the ten-year swap rate squared,
(   10)2
 ∆r   , to control for convexity issues. Bond-specific market liquidity is captured by a mea-
sure of price volatility to trading volume, liqi,t, and changes in the Libor-OIS spread, liboroist,
proxy for funding liquidity by capturing interbank counter-party risk. Lastly, we include returns
of the S&P500 index and changes in the VIX volatility index to capture changes in the busi-
ness climate and varying general recovery rates. In total, there are 62 firms in the dataset.

                           High grade Upper Medium grade Lower Medium grade Low grade
 Variable ∆CS ∆CS ∆CS ∆CS
                                                       ∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
  reti,t -0.520 -2.558                   -2.658             -3.322
                              (0.447) (0.014) (0.001) (0.008)
 ∆voli,t 1.343 -0.0388 1.150 11.28
                              (0.775) (0.967) (0.550) (0.137)
    10                             ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
 ∆rt -0.573               -0.527                  -0.738            -0.974
                              (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
                                 ∗∗∗     ∗
 ∆slopet 46.12                22.12                  16.06 -23.86
                              (0.007) (0.081) (0.370) (0.652)
  (     )2
     10                                                  ∗
  ∆r   t 15.88 56.04                  31.25 58.86
                              (0.769) (0.094) (0.535) (0.649)
                                  ∗∗     ∗∗∗
  liqi,t 13.67                 16.93                      5.429 13.14
                              (0.013) (0.000) (0.316) (0.192)
                                                     ∗∗∗
 ∆liboroist 0.134 0.555                   0.528 0.671
                              (0.239) (0.000) (0.105) (0.153)
                                                     ∗∗∗
 S&Pt 0.310 3.877                  -0.158 4.326
                              (0.742) (0.009) (0.898) (0.128)
                                                     ∗∗
 ∆V IXt 0.275 1.056                  -0.682 1.753
                              (0.694) (0.027) (0.406) (0.441)
                                    ∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗
 Constant -0.000175           -0.000244                -0.000236          -0.000177
                              (0.065) (0.000) (0.029) (0.452)
 N 1642 8643 7253 2012
       2
 adj. R                       0.026 0.062 0.053 0.051
 p-values in parentheses
 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
   p < 0.1,    p < 0.05,     p < 0.01

                                          30
                                   Table A.4
Regression results, divided by credit rating (first differenced basis). This table shows
                                                                                        10
the outcome of the regression ∆basisi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet +
   (   10)2
β5 ∆r   t + β6liqi,t + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t, when the total sample is split
into four rating groups. We use stock returns, reti,t, as a proxy for leverage and financial health
of the firms, and ∆voli,t is the change in firm-specific ten-period realized volatility. We use three
                                                                                           10
factors to control for interest rate changes: changes in the ten-year swap rate, rt , changes in
the slope of the yield curve, slopet, which is calculated as the difference between the ten-year
and the two-year swap rates, and finally we use changes in the ten-year swap rate squared,
(   10)2
 ∆r   , to control for convexity issues. Bond-specific market liquidity is captured by a mea-
sure of price volatility to trading volume, liqi,t, and changes in the Libor-OIS spread, liboroist,
proxy for funding liquidity by capturing interbank counter-party risk. Lastly, we include returns
of the S&P500 index and changes in the VIX volatility index to capture changes in the busi-
ness climate and varying general recovery rates. In total, there are 62 firms in the dataset.

                           High grade Upper Medium grade Lower Medium grade Low grade
 Variable ∆basis ∆basis ∆basis ∆basis
 reti,t 0.809 -0.121 0.0360 0.834
                              (0.270) (0.743) (0.963) (0.341)
 ∆voli,t -1.323 0.725 -1.592 -6.978
                              (0.808) (0.523) (0.426) (0.290)
    10                             ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
 ∆rt 0.517                0.411                  0.696            0.829
                              (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.001)
                                  ∗∗      ∗∗      ∗∗
 ∆slopet -41.41               -32.46                  -36.58           -22.79
                              (0.033) (0.013) (0.047) (0.625)
  (     )2
     10                                                                          ∗
  ∆r   t -36.21 -51.84 -89.69          39.16
                              (0.561) (0.133) (0.065) (0.747)
                                  ∗∗      ∗∗∗
  liqi,t -11.25                -16.40                     -2.596 -17.89
                              (0.022) (0.000) (0.598) (0.108)
 ∆liboroist -0.0948 -0.208 -0.156 -0.165
                              (0.486) (0.118) (0.572) (0.707)
                                                     ∗∗
 S&Pt -0.224 -1.763                  0.539 -4.462
                              (0.822) (0.029) (0.654) (0.120)
 ∆V IXt -0.152 -0.688 0.345 -1.798
                              (0.844) (0.172) (0.661) (0.428)
                                   ∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 Constant 0.000222            0.000241               0.000313           0.000207
                              (0.041) (0.001) (0.004) (0.397)
 N 1334 7589 6676 1890
       2
 adj. R                       0.021 0.013 0.010 0.013
 p-values in parentheses
 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
   p < 0.1,    p < 0.05,     p < 0.01

                                          31
                                   Table A.5
Regression results, divided by credit rating (basis). This table shows the outcome
                                                                    10                    (   10)2
of the regression basisi,t = β0,i + β1reti,t + β2∆voli,t + β3∆rt + β4∆slopet + β5 ∆r   t +
β6liqi,t + β7∆liboroist + β8S&Pt + β9∆V IXt + ui,t, when the total sample is split into four
rating groups. We use stock returns, reti,t, as a proxy for leverage and financial health of the
firms, and ∆voli,t is the change in firm-specific ten-period realized volatility. We use three fac-
                                                                                           10
tors to control for interest rate changes: changes in the ten-year swap rate, rt , changes in
the slope of the yield curve, slopet, which is calculated as the difference between the ten-year
and the two-year swap rates, and finally we use changes in the ten-year swap rate squared,
(   10)2
 ∆r   , to control for convexity issues. Bond-specific market liquidity is captured by a mea-
sure of price volatility to trading volume, liqi,t, and changes in the Libor-OIS spread, liboroist,
proxy for funding liquidity by capturing interbank counter-party risk. Lastly, we include returns
of the S&P500 index and changes in the VIX volatility index to capture changes in the busi-
ness climate and varying general recovery rates. In total, there are 62 firms in the dataset.

                           High grade Upper Medium grade Lower Medium grade Low grade
 Variable basis basis basis basis
                                                      ∗
 reti,t 2.754 -1.624                   0.504 -0.839
                              (0.128) (0.084) (0.546) (0.617)
                                  ∗
 ∆voli,t -14.03               1.661 -0.534 5.721
                              (0.087) (0.669) (0.846) (0.519)
    10                                                                          ∗∗
 ∆rt 0.252 0.0733 0.431           0.566
                              (0.252) (0.657) (0.030) (0.316)
                                                     ∗∗
 ∆slopet -64.30 -71.34                  -33.69 -55.26
                              (0.102) (0.016) (0.286) (0.555)
  (     )2
     10                            ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
  ∆r   t -432.6               -449.6                  -760.5            -921.1
                              (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
                                                       ∗∗∗                      ∗∗∗
  liqi,t -8.336 -43.83                     -13.50 -113.1
                              (0.727) (0.000) (0.186) (0.000)
                                  ∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗
 ∆liboroist 0.838               0.821                  1.131            2.982
                              (0.011) (0.000) (0.001) (0.000)
 S&Pt -1.629 2.836 1.386 -0.956
                              (0.416) (0.144) (0.490) (0.871)
 ∆V IXt 0.559 0.893 1.687 1.735
                              (0.716) (0.473) (0.256) (0.679)
                                                       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 Constant 0.000204 -0.00317                -0.00927           -0.0140
                              (0.427) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
 N 1468 7948 6899 1943
       2
 adj. R                       0.035 0.015 0.031 0.077
 p-values in parentheses
 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
   p < 0.1,    p < 0.05,     p < 0.01

                                          32
   rat-thepar-

     as of annual-

                      N    268485252440196242411307246247526252427291498455527179375248217507270330(continues)
   credit
         the

  Thedefinedis
       amount
                       Std.Dev.143.036.0123.165.4184.0101.170.497.768.4144.1229.5166.683.2137.5278.456.7208.854.584.569.883.138.275.4104.6

       theCDS


   study.Spread,as
                  Basis (Z-spread, basis points)Mean -231.0-32.5-117.7-42.928.9-157.95.1 -140.5-40.4-188.3-169.3-200.1-114.5-26.3-259.8-8.0-166.7-58.7-104.7-62.0-121.8-29.6-86.2-102.5
   the     price.
    Swap
   in   defined
                   N    268485252440196242411307246247526252427291498455527179375248217507270330
  usedAssetbond’s

     thespread,the
                     Std.Dev.23.7429.4838.41278.15102.9018.83164.9687.3541.9742.3279.5969.0829.82156.28111.5094.99157.19111.6072.5937.33119.5228.2254.6227.03
   firmsis


          equal
   the             CDS (basis points)

   of ASWto         Mean 44.8248.9173.11308.43316.3760.84219.25126.5961.3786.59121.03165.1765.11533.51193.67108.72199.82245.31120.1569.49248.0052.0885.8352.42


       Zero-volatility
          flows
                     N    311549273459203252427321276257552257439325514486557184480272218561289347
   statisticsthe
         cash
     maturity.is

                         Std.Dev.1.640.551.522.871.481.151.721.701.051.762.941.821.102.143.260.983.441.431.390.961.600.611.171.27
  summarybond’s Z-Spread (%)
    five-year
       Z-spread
      a    the        Mean 2.800.781.833.412.922.162.072.610.982.712.793.651.795.504.451.113.533.042.101.293.690.811.661.54
Table A.6
     to Theof
  provides

                      N    311549273459203252427321276257552257439325514486557184480272218561289347
           value

   table swap.The basis is defined as the difference between the CDS premium and the Z-spread.


   Thisinterpolated     Std.Dev1.510.521.292.651.261.051.521.550.921.612.651.581.041.952.970.893.061.231.280.851.530.571.121.16
       assetpresent ASW (%)


       an the
      bonds             Mean 2.280.321.392.722.311.621.471.980.502.092.152.911.244.563.660.612.842.591.560.802.960.361.251.16
   firm.  of
          for
     two
  by  leg

     of

        needed   CreditratingBBB-AABB+A- BBB-BBBBBB+BBBA- BBB-BBB+A A BBB-BBB+BBBA+BBBBB+BBA- A A A

        floating
  datasetrating
        curve

  of   the

       in
         swap
     average

     an   the
       Libor
  statistics
     to   of

        over
          shift
     refers

                       Firm A T & T IncAbbott LaboratoriesAetna Inc NewAlcoa IncAllied Waste Industries IncAmerican Electric Power Co IncAmerican Express CoAnadarko Petroleum CorpAnheuser Busch Inbev Sa NvAutozone IncBank Of America CorpBoston Scientific CorpC V S Caremark CorpCablevision Systems CorpCapital One Financial CorpCaterpillar IncCitigroup IncCitizens Communications CoComcast Corp NewConsolidated Edison IncConstellation Energy Group IncCostco Wholesale Corp NewDeere & CoDevon Energy Corp New
  Summaryingspreadallelized premium for a five-year Credit Default Swap.

                                        33
           N    493248439504415413310537464343525345277437533243483371308307345436244310407354192373429(continues)



            Std.Dev.57.191.772.746.0136.9111.044.079.796.6134.780.475.545.171.987.173.567.642.655.1171.2140.0206.598.4202.1155.8119.8638.4115.5160.8
       Basis (basis points)


             Mean -49.3-128.0-73.1-28.3-148.6-116.5-27.5-59.5-50.0-69.5-91.7-23.6-27.4-43.7-75.7-90.7-75.7-37.6-57.7118.6118.2-211.2-115.8-157.3-75.8-145.9-534.1-127.5-204.6



         N    493248439504415413310537464343525345277437533243483371308307345436244310407354192373429




            Std.Dev.25.5026.59173.9243.5743.6162.0627.18103.04347.54300.4975.3931.9227.68242.3146.2423.0430.7221.0115.7645.10243.70160.7416.93454.25494.6218.79392.46225.21310.44



         CDS (basis points)
            Mean 49.8663.29178.1862.0795.07152.4246.86155.78550.36411.05132.2453.6752.76245.6192.5249.2070.4036.6735.2168.32340.73235.1248.39654.58715.5653.29554.15286.45472.53



           N    516262450538446431339552472350555378296466567278510415321353358452265314412369194379435


            Std.Dev.0.771.112.060.721.631.590.651.743.843.871.470.900.662.421.250.880.890.610.672.161.393.351.126.205.451.299.563.144.17

       Z-Spread (%)

Table A.6(continued)Mean 0.981.932.500.902.332.620.722.125.974.762.170.760.802.781.631.371.460.710.93-0.602.224.401.598.077.851.9710.804.126.79



           N    516262450538446431339552472350555378296466567278510415321353358452265314412369194379435


            Std.Dev0.731.001.880.671.491.440.631.603.423.441.360.800.632.251.130.850.820.580.621.961.242.921.045.374.651.207.762.843.60
       ASW (%)


            Mean 0.521.332.020.461.862.000.281.575.053.861.610.630.472.141.111.011.080.250.45-0.961.733.701.076.756.591.548.873.355.62





        CreditratingBBB-BBB+A- BBB+BBB-A BBB+B+BBB+BBBA A+BBBA BBB+BBB-AAA AA-A- BB+BBB+BB-BB-BB-BBBBBB-A- A-


















           Firm Disney Walt CoDominion Resources Inc Va NewDow Chemical CoDu Pont E I De Nemours & CoFirstenergy CorpFortune Brands IncGeneral Dynamics CorpGoldman Sachs Group IncGoodyear Tire & Rubr CoHartford Financial Svcs Group IHome Depot IncHoneywell International IncInternational Business Machs CoJohnson Controls IncJpmorgan Chase & CoKellogg CoKraft Foods IncLilly Eli & CoMcdonalds CorpMedtronic IncMetlife IncMotorola IncProgress Energy IncRoyal Caribbean Cruises LtdS L M CorpSara Lee CorpSears Holdings CorpSimon Property Group Inc NewSprint Nextel Corp

                                        34
          N   51146049650632254644423936023418



            Std.Dev.45.340.972.834.359.366.9193.3167.8122.7165.3
       Basis (basis points)


            Mean -37.5-10.0-80.0-4.6-69.6-43.5-170.0-198.6-137.4-85.0



         N   51146049650632254644423936023418




            Std.Dev.59.4234.1098.4530.6794.7064.1070.7782.69156.22270.69



         CDS (basis points)
            Mean 90.5656.53149.6550.98163.21103.02167.73154.39222.95180.71




          N   53949152856334256545625037024841


            Std.Dev.0.950.631.550.451.321.112.412.362.633.16

       Z-Spread (%)

Table A.6(continued)Mean 1.240.662.260.532.311.443.353.493.542.58



          N   53949152856334256545625037024841


            Std.Dev0.890.601.410.461.201.052.182.112.382.78
       ASW (%)

            Mean 0.770.251.680.301.700.952.742.872.821.98




         CreditratingA+A- A A+A- BB+AABBB-BBB-











           Firm Target CorpUnited Technologies CorpUnitedhealth Group IncWal Mart Stores IncWellpoint IncWells Fargo & Co NewWeyerhaeuser CoWilliams CosXerox CorpTotal

                                        35
                      Corr.Libor-OIS-0,15-0,71-0,32-0,51-0,63-0,18-0,62-0,73-0,73-0,50-0,76-0,490,12-0,52-0,77-0,45-0,67-0,25-0,70-0,50-0,61-0,66-0,70-0,72-0,73-0,48-0,63-0,59-0,29-0,47-0,51

                   Std.Dev
                           79,6896,55 80,3775,5245,0671,8787,0673,5267,5642,6155,12       98,42                45,3340,9472,7834,2959,2766,90
                                134,73                       171,22139,97206,52202,06155,75119,76638,37115,51160,77              193,30167,84122,72
              Basis statistics

                   Mean                                                                  -4,60
                            -59,48-50,01-69,51-91,72-23,62-27,39-43,65-75,74-90,72-75,71-37,60-57,69118,58118,23      -75,76         -37,53-10,04-80,03-69,56-43,49
                                                                     -211,18-115,81-157,28-145,92-534,05-127,53-204,63              -169,96-198,58-137,42





               CreditratingB+BBB+BBBA A+BBBA BBB+BBB-AAA AA-A- BB+BBB+BB-BB-BB-BBBBBB-A- A- A+A- A A+A- BB+AABBB-BBB-


















   This table shows the correlation between the CDS-bond basis and the
                    CompanyGoldman Sachs Group IncGoodyear Tire & Rubr CoHartford Financial Svcs Group InHome Depot IncHoneywell International IncInternational Business Machs CorJohnson Controls IncJpmorgan Chase & CoKellogg CoKraft Foods IncLilly Eli & CoMcdonalds CorpMedtronic IncMetlife IncMotorola IncProgress Energy IncRoyal Caribbean Cruises LtdS L M CorpSara Lee CorpSears Holdings CorpSimon Property Group Inc NewSprint Nextel CorpTarget CorpUnited Technologies CorpUnitedhealth Group IncWal Mart Stores IncWellpoint IncWells Fargo & Co NewWeyerhaeuser CoWilliams CosXerox Corp

Table A.7



                      Corr.Libor-OIS-0,55-0,30-0,80-0,68-0,76-0,59-0,780,10-0,64-0,39-0,52-0,80-0,47-0,63-0,26-0,83-0,61-0,71-0,22-0,78-0,62-0,65-0,65-0,72-0,72-0,43-0,67-0,42-0,67-0,58-0,57-0,04

                   Std.Dev
                                36,00 65,37    70,4197,7068,38       83,20    56,70 54,5384,5069,7783,0838,2475,41 57,1491,7572,7445,98    43,96
                             142,97123,08184,05101,12      144,06229,48166,63137,50278,38208,84              104,61        136,87111,05
                       112,66
                    Basis statistics

                                                  5,07                        -7,98
                     Mean      -32,50-42,8728,85       -40,43         -26,25      -58,65-62,04-29,55-86,19-49,27-73,14-28,34   -27,49
                           -93,36-230,96-117,71  -157,87-140,45-188,33-169,34-200,08-114,51-259,80-166,71-104,72-121,77  -102,51-128,02  -148,59-116,51





              CreditratingBBB-AABB+A- BBB-BBBBBB+BBBA- BBB-BBB+A A BBB-BBB+BBBA+BBBBB+BBA- A A A BBB-BBB+A- BBB+BBB-A BBB+




















                   Firm MeanA T & T IncAbbott LaboratoriesAetna Inc NewAlcoa IncAllied Waste Industries IncAmerican Electric Power Co IncAmerican Express CoAnadarko Petroleum CorpAnheuser Busch Inbev Sa NvAutozone IncBank Of America CorpBoston Scientific CorpC V S Caremark CorpCablevision Systems CorpCapital One Financial CorpCaterpillar IncCitigroup IncCitizens Communications CoComcast Corp NewConsolidated Edison IncConstellation Energy Group IncCostco Wholesale Corp NewDeere & CoDevon Energy Corp NewDisney Walt CoDominion Resources Inc Va NewDow Chemical CoDu Pont E I De Nemours & CoFirstenergy CorpFortune Brands IncGeneral Dynamics Corp
   Correlation between the CDS-bond basis and the Libor-OIS spread.Libor-OIS spread. The CDS-bond basis is defined as the CDS spread less the Z-spread of a bond with the same maturity. The Libor-OIS spread is usedas a proxy for counter-party risk in the interbank market, and is calculated as the three-month Libor less the three-month Overnight Indexed Swaprate. Only American Express Co and Medtronic Inc exhibit a weak positive correlation. The average values are shown as the first entry of the table.

                                        36
   ba-     de-
       versa.
     means  (2006).
  the    the


      signvicein
               Basis+       +       +                  + or -        (continues)
  make
      and
          Choudhry                               A
     minus                                . If
  that

     or   discussed                      asset
           and

        spreads,
   factorsplus
                              A CDS is often
           (2004)
   A
       bond
                                                                            For an investor to be

          circumstances
       than
   importantzero.
        theChoudhry

  somefrom on
        higher

   of          (2003),
      are

      deviate al.                                                                Conversely, repo rates below Libor will lead to

           dependinget

  summaryspreads
    bond,
  a
                                                                        .
      CDS Francis
                                                                         20
         negatively
           by
   providescorporatethator

Table A.8a
       so
            detail
   tableof
            in
          positively
  This
     spreadparibus),
         basis

            discussed
     credit
   zero.   the
       (ceteris  are

      the            DescriptionHighly rated bonds may trade below Libor in the asset swap market, which reflects the market view ofcredit risk associated with these names being lower than the credit risk associated with banks. Insurancesellers (who finance themselves with Libor) on such bonds do, however, still expect a premium – a spreadover Libor – for selling protection on the bond.CDS contracts have a higher risk of pay-out than the actual default risk of bonds.required to pay out on credit events that are not necessarily full defaults that would affect a bondholder. CDS sellers will demand a premium for this additional risk, which means that CDS spreads willbe greater than credit spreads.CDS contracts that are settled physically often name a reference entity rather than a referencea credit event occurs, the buyer sometimes has an array of assets to choose from to deliver. The looserthe definition of deliverable asset in the contract, the larger the potential basket to choose from. Hence,a CDS seller may potentially receive any bond from a basket of deliverable instruments, including abond with a lower coupon, a convertible bond, a less liquid bond, an asset backed security or a long-dated bond, any of which might be cheaper to deliver than the actual bond held originally. In contrast,a long position in the cash bond market always means that the payments of a specific bond stand tobe lost. The higher the probability of default, the higher is the value of the delivery option to the cashbond holder. The higher the value of the delivery option, the larger is the risk taken by the CDS seller,and the more positive the basis will beFunding costs higher than or lower than Libor will drive the basis lower and higher respectively.bond’s ”cost of carry” or funding cost is usually assumed to be its repo rate.indifferent between investing in a bond or selling a CDS, the alternatives must yield the same payoff.Since a CDS position is unfunded with an assumed funding cost of Libor, this demands a higher creditspread for bonds with repo rates higher than Libor.lower credit spreads and a positive basis.

   frombasisaffects
    less    factors

          factor
     spreadpositive  These
  deviate
         the
       to

    CDS
  basis    that
       leads  factor.
     the

     as      the
         means
  makingfactor  of
        -”
       the
     defined  or
                                                                                         For a detailed discussion on the delivery option in CDS contracts and expected recovery rates, see Jankowitsch et al. (2007)
                      FactorCDS spreads always larger than zeroNot all credit events are defaultsDelivery option of CDS contractsFunding costs and arbitrage       20
   Factorssis,that”+scription

                                        37
         Basis+ or -        + or -

                                  These risks do not exist in the


                                        has been one driver of the demand for CDS

                                           21

Table A.8(continued)



          DescriptionCDS buyers and sellers are exposed to counter-party risk. In the event of default, the buyer is dependenton the CDS seller being able to fulfill its obligation, making the CDS spread lower. On the other hand,the seller is exposed to counter-party risk of the buyer. Because the contract will terminate if the buyerdefaults, there will be a mark-to-market gain or loss if the CDS spread has narrowed or widened sinceorigination.Strong demand from CDS buyers (need for protection) will drive the basis wider. Strong demand fromCDS sellers (over supply) will drive the basis tighter. For example, taking a short position in the cashbond market is often difficult, since the position in the repo has to be covered and there is a risk thatthe bond will go special (especially for high-quality credit names).CDS market, and, other things being equal, increases the demand for protection and drives the basiswider. There are a wide range of determinants of the demand for protection, and the rapid growth ofthe market for synthetic collateralized debt obligationscontracts..





                                                                                                              A synthetic collateralized debt obligation, or a synthetic CDO, is like a portfolio of CDS contracts which is tranched and sold to investors with varying degrees of risk
         FactorCounter-party riskMarket demand                                                             21
                                                                                                                   appetite.

                                        38