          The Distress  Risk Puzzle in Turbulent  Times
              -   Default  risk during the financial crises

                  SANNA BATZ*    ANDERS NORDSTRÖM**

                                    Bachelor Thesis
                  Department of Finance,  Stockholm School of Economics
                          Tutor: Jungsuk Han, Assistant Professor
                                      June 1, 2011

                        ABSTRACT

Studies on whether risk of default is systematic or not have led to the discovery of the distress risk
puzzle. It is a rather new anomaly and its implications are that empirical evidence seems to indicate
that higher default risk results in lower returns.  The purpose of this thesis is to clarify whether default
risk is systematic, using Altman’s Z-score as a proxy  for default risk.  We also  investigate some of the
possible explanations of the distress risk puzzle by applying empirical tests on the times surrounding
the financial crisis. We first confirm the existence of the puzzle during a longer period; however our
findings suggest that this relationship is spurious due to a leverage effect. We then find that both the
puzzle  and  the  spuriousness  seem  to  disappear  during  the  financial  crisis.  We  dedicate  this
disappearance to a shift in the bargaining power from equity holders to debt holders or to the
hypothesis that investors became more aware of the default risk during the financial turmoil.

   Keywords:  Distress risk puzzle, bankruptcy risk, systematic risk, asset pricing, Altman Z-score

                               Introduction

A.  Background

The definition of default, according to the Cambridge  Advanced Learner’s  Dictionary, is “to
fail to do something, such as pay a debt, that you legally have to do”.  One of the most
prominent risks for an individual  firm  is the risk of not being able to repay  its debts and
therefore declaring  bankruptcy.  According to the American Bankruptcy Institute (Annual
Business Filings by Year (1980-2009)), bankruptcy filings  for American businesses reached
its highest level 2009 since 1993. Meaning that the risk of default has increased during the

* 21672@student.hhs.se
** 21668@student.hhs.se
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

last couple of turbulent years.  The default of an individual  firm  does not solely affect the  firm
and  its employees, but it also leads to a situation where the shareholders of the  firm  often lose
their entire investment, or at least a  majority of the money invested.  As an investor, the
situation of default is the worst-case scenario since it often implies significant losses.  Hence,
when making investment decisions, the risk of default should be carefully considered.
         There are two types of risks;  diversifiable and systematic. Diversifiable risk is firm
specific and in some cases industry specific.  This risk is called diversifiable since the investor
can eliminate this kind of risk by holding a diversified portfolio,  consisting  of  stocks from
various firms  and industries. Since it is diversifiable  the  investor should not get rewarded for
taking on this kind of risk. Systematic risk is  news or  events that affects the entire economy,
for instance interest rate  increases. The investor  cannot protect himself from systematic risks
and require higher expected return  for investing in  firms  with high exposure to systematic
risk.  Hence if default risk is diversifiable,  the level of default probability should not affect the
expected returns. But if the risk of default is systematic,  firms  with a high probability of
default should generate higher returns to its investors.
         Consequently, it becomes  quite crucial for the investor whether the risk of default is
systematic or not.  Several studies have been executed on the topic, with different ways of
measuring the probability of default. The results and conclusions vary.  Basically, the studies
can be  divided into two groups; those who claim  that default risk is systematic and those who
claim the opposite.  We will start by giving an account for these two groups and then, work
through those who find a negative relation between default risk and expected returns.
         Shumway (1996) finds that firms  listed  on NYSE and AMEX with a high probability
of exchange delisting generate above average returns and thus implies that the risk of
bankruptcy is systematic. Vassalou and Xing (2004) is the first study that uses  Merton’s
(1974) option pricing model to compute a default measure. They agree that risk of bankruptcy
is systematic and show how  their measure of default,  from their sample of  firms  varies  with
the business cycle. This is in accordance with findings of Denis and Denis (1995) who argue
that default risk correlates with macroeconomic factors and that it varies within the business
cycle.
         Others, like Opler and Titman (1994),  as well as Asquith, Gertner and Sharfstein
(1994), find that bankruptcy is mostly related to idiosyncratic factors and mean that there is
no correlation to systematic risk.  Then there are those who find that not only does a higher
probability of bankruptcy not generate higher returns, it even results in lower returns. One of
the first to  discover this phenomenon was  Dichev (1998). His study aimed to investigate

                                                                           2
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

whether the risk of default was systematic or not. However he found this negative relation and
that investors holding a risky portfolio were rewarded with returns below average. Several
others, including  Griffin and Lemmon (2002), Charitou, Lambertides and Trigeorgis (2004)
and Campbell, Hilscher and Sziglayi (2008)  come to the same conclusion using different
measures for risk of default. Griffin and Lemmon (2002) use, like Dichev (1998),  an
accounting based measure called Ohlson’s O  presented  by Ohlson (1980). Campbell et al
(2008) also use accounting as well as market variables to compute their bankruptcy risk
measure.  Charitou et al (2004) on the other hand use option theory to construct the probability
of default.  In  contradiction to this,  Chava and Purnanandam (2010) find a positive cross-
sectional relationship between probability of default and expected stock returns. But unlike
prior studies, which mostly use ex post realized returns to estimate expected returns, they use
ex ante estimates based on the implied cost of capital.  However, the most common finding is
the negative relationship,  which we will try to further investigate.
         The phenomenon that bankruptcy is negatively related to returns  is called the distress
risk puzzle. There are  several  attempts  trying  to explain this. Griffin and Lemmon (2002) say
that the puzzle  is due to mispricing, the market  underestimates the impact of default on high
O-score firms.  Garlappi et al (2008) points to the factor of shareholder bargaining power.
They assert  that the payoff to the shareholders in case of default rarely is zero and hence that
the  risk  is  overestimated.  A  strong  shareholder  bargaining  power  prevents  inefficient
liquidations when negotiating in case of default and transfers wealth from bondholders to
shareholders.  Thus, the risk for shareholders is smaller than anticipated, even in the  worst-
case  scenario, default, the investor still get a return on his investments. Hence the risk is
overrated  and should not be rewarded with higher returns.  George and Hwang (2007) say  that
the puzzle, and the fact that returns are negatively correlated to default risk, is  spurious and
assert that it disappears after controlling for leverage.  Bankruptcy only relates to leverage,
which in turn affects returns. The intuition behind this is  that as long as  managers have an
optimistic view of future earnings prospects the level of leverage  is  likely to be high and
hence the equity of the high leverage firm might be overpriced and returns abnormally low,
and downwards correction will occur at earnings announcements.  If this sort of mispricing is
the reason for the negative relation, then more negative earnings announcements should be the
case for high leverage firms compared to firms with a low level of leverage.  One additional
explanation of the puzzle can  be derived from Fama and French’s (1995)  claim  that the Fama
and French (1992, 1993) factor book-to-market is a proxy for financial distress. If  this is true,
the distress risk puzzle is not really a puzzle since book-to-market  is positively correlated to

                                                                           3
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

returns.  Dichev (1998) never calls it a distress risk puzzle but finds an explanation to his
findings in time lags.  Using accounting data to predict bankruptcy, at the time of the
investment the investor is unable to make his decision  based  on  updated  data, which could
cause  a time friction.
         Focusing on the mispricing and overconfidence theory  as explanation for the distress
risk puzzle, the overall financial environment becomes quite crucial. If the market, in general,
performs well, bankruptcies will be less anticipated and investors less anxious. If defaults are
infrequent it is easy to underestimate its consequences.  High risk of default does not generate
higher returns since investors underestimates the risk, and hence do not price it.  Given this
reasoning, overconfidence should decline in times when the threat of  firm  defaults become
much more substantial and thus the risk will be priced.  If this is a valid explanation for the
distress risk puzzle, the puzzle should disappear when investors become more cautious. To
test this theory, we choose two time periods for our regression analysis. The overall “normal”
times, 1998-2010, and the turbulent years  2008-2010  in  particular in  a subsample.  If
overconfidence is the explanation,  and that it disappears during the turbulent times, the return
patterns should be more intuitive with a positive relation between return and default risk
during the shorter period.
         Besides Ohlson’s O  there is another widely used, accounting based,  bankruptcy
probability  measure constructed by Altman (1968), called the Z-score.  The most famous and
quoted previous study using  Altman’s Z as proxy for financial distress is conducted by
Dichev (1998). As mentioned above, he finds that higher risk of default does not imply higher
expected returns and  he discovers signs of the distress risk puzzle.  The study was based on a
sample of data from the years 1981-1995 for industrial  firms  with COMPUSTAT Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) codes from 1-3999 and 5000-5999.  Each month the  firms  were
divided into decile portfolios based on their Z-score. Realized stock returns were regressed
monthly on the Z-score and Fama-French factors  market value and book-to-market,  using all
individual firm observations for that month.  Twice a year, the ten portfolios were  redesigned
and based on an updated Z-score. These portfolios were used to evaluate returns.  As
previously mentioned, Dichev (1998) found signs of the distress risk puzzle. However, the
event window consists of a quite stable time in the manufacturing industry.  For this study, we
will use a similar method but with another time frame and evaluate how the results differ.

                                                                           4
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

B.  Motivation

              The aim of this thesis is to examine whether the risk of default is systematic and
to see if the distress risk puzzle holds during financially turbulent times. The key intuition
behind this purpose lies in the hypothesis that the turmoil caused by the financial crisis shed a
light on the possibility of a firm going bankrupt and thus made the default risk more evident
to the investors. We will use an accounting based bankruptcy probability measure. Previous
studies show that the distress risk puzzle seems to be more prominent when accounting based
probabilities are used. For the purpose to check whether the puzzle holds in turbulent times,
an accounting based measure should facilitate the study. As mentioned, the two most famous
accounting based measures are Altman’s Z and Ohlson’s O. The Z-score is purely accounting
based while Ohlson’s O contains a factor such as GNP price-level index. Hamer (1983)
analysis the predicting power of four default probability measures applied on industrial
companies, two  of them was Altman’s Z and Ohlson’s O. The conclusion was, disregarding
analytical model, that the four measures where roughly equally successful in predicting
corporate failure. Hence suggesting that the analyst should choose a measure that minimizes
cost  of data collection. Considering this, Altman’s Z is far more simple to calculate compared
to Ohlson’s O and it will hence be used for this study.
         To be able to investigate what happens with the relationship between default risk and
returns during turbulent times, we will compare the results of two sample periods, one being
the ordinary years 1998-2010 and the other being the subsample consisting of the turbulent
years 2008-2010. This will give two sample periods with two overall distinctively  different
macroeconomic and financial environments. We will show how the puzzle disappears in the
turbulent years and discuss possible explanations for this. The two prime reasons discussed
will be derived from two previous explanations of the distress risk puzzle provided by
Garlappi et al (2008) and Griffin and Lemmon (2002). Further we will show that the
spuriousness of the relationship between default risk and returns (suggested by George and
Hwang as a possible explanation of the distress risk puzzle)  disappears during the turbulent
years 2008-2010.

                                                                           5
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

                Sample selection, data and method

A. Data and method

The fundamental data needed for calculating the Altman Z-score was taken from  firm  annual
filings found  in the COMPUSTAT database. Stock prices, indices and similar was taken from
the  Centre  for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database. Since the Altman Z-score is
derived for industrial  firms  only, all  firms  but industrials have been excluded from this study.
This is done by only including  firms  with COMPUSTAT  SIC  codes 1 to 3999 and 5000 to
5999, the same selection frames as used by Dichev (1998) to make comparison simpler.
Further,  only  firms  listed  on AMEX, NYSE and Nasdaq are used. The Z-scores for the 1998-
2010 regression are calculated every second year based on numbers from the annual filings
for fiscal years 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008. The reason why the Z-score is only
calculated every other year is the fact that Altman’s Z measures the default risk during a two
year period. The leverage factor is calculated as book value of liabilities divided by the book
value of assets and is based on numbers  from quarterly filings. The stock returns in the 1998-
2010 regression are based on monthly stock prices. The Fama-French factor size based  on
fiscal-quarter end stock prices times the number of shares outstanding and is defined as the
logarithm of this  product. Altman’s Z in the 2008-2010 regression is calculated using
numbers from the annual report from fiscal year 2008. Stock returns are based on daily stock

prices.   The leverage factor is defined as book value  of liabilities divided by book  value of
assets. The reason why the leverage factor is based on book values is that this captures the ex-
ante decisions of the managers, plus that a market value based leverage factor might cause
multicollinearity problems together with the book-to-market factor (see Welch (2004) and
Penman, Richardson and Tuna (2005) for a more thorough discussion).  Size and book-to-
market are calculated using fiscal-quarter end numbers.  Fama and French (1992) use  a
logarithm of this ratio but  we chose to do  otherwise  since it is rather common for near-
bankruptcy  firms  to have a negative book-to-market ratio and the logarithm of a negative
number is not defined.
        One of the main reasons why the time window for the long-term regression was set
to include year 1998 through 2010 is that COMPUSTAT records seem to be larger post-1998
than pre-1998. Another reason is the fact that Dichev’s (1998) study is based on a time
window that  ends  in year 1995, why it with a comparison purpose would be interesting to  use
a different time period, a more recent one.  The  time window for the 2008-2010 subsample  is

                                                                           6
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

based on and motivated by the recent financial crisis. As mentioned above corporate
bankruptcies spiked during 2009, which presents an excellent opportunity to study the default
risk and its possible systemic nature during a time where the risk of bankruptcy should be
apparent. It can also be interesting to compare the results from  the long-term regression with
this shorter period regression.
         An issue that could be possibly devastating for this  is the survivorship bias.  If firms
that  end up bankrupt,  and thus  whose  stock price eventually becomes zero, are not accounted
for, the results would be biased. The stock returns would in such a case be higher than what
they truly are, since you do not account for the default returns of zero percent. To solve this
problem,  the CRSP database offers  one item called delisting code and one item called
delisting price. The delisting code offers an explanation to a situation where a certain stock
was delisted. Delisting codes 400-490 and 574 indicates a delisting due to a bankruptcy or
liquidation. The item delisting price is the used to calculate the delisting return.
         The method used to examine the level of  systematicity  in default risk is statistical
tests provided by Fama and  MacBeth (1973) regressions. In the 1998-2010 regression the
cross-section of stock returns are regressed monthly on Altman’s (1968) Z, firm size, book-to-
market and leverage based on book-values of liabilities and assets. The regression coefficient
reported in the results table is the average of the monthly cross-section coefficients. In the
2008-2010 regression the cross-section of stock returns are regressed daily on the same
regressors and the reported coefficient is the average of the daily cross-section coefficients.
The t-statistic reported in parenthesis in the results  tables is equal to the coefficient divided by
the time-series standard error.  Presented in the results tables are both results from univariate
regressions, where returns are regressed on all regressors alone, and multivariate regression
results, where all regressors are included together. This provides an opportunity to compare
the two specifications in order to demonstrate the interdependencies among the factors
bankruptcy risk, size and book-to market in explaining stock returns. It also provides an
opportunity to examine whether or not the book-to-market effect of higher stock returns is due
to book-to-market being a proxy for bankruptcy. If this is the case, any significance of
Altman’s Z in the univariate regression should be consumed by the book-to-market factor in
the multivariate regression.

                                                                           7
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

                                          Figure 1
                         Relationship between pay-off and default

                     Pay-off

                                                 1.8-3.0           Altman’s Z

        We will also investigate if the explanatory power of default risk is higher when
looking  at  firms that are on the limit of either prevailing  or going into bankruptcy. The
intuition about this can be explained by looking at the default risk and the future business of a
firm as a call option in the pay-off diagram in Figure 1.  Altman (1968) considers firms with a
Z-score below 1.8 as risky and firms with a  Z-score above 3.0 as safe. Let us hypothetically
say that almost all firms in the safe group will prevail and almost all firms in the risky group
will declare bankruptcy. Let us also assume that the pay-off for equity holders in case of
default will be zero. In this hypothesis the Z-score of a firm will be considerably important for
the future business of the firm and also for the pay-off of the investor. However the Z-score
will not be nearly as important for a firm with a Z-score close to the thresholds  as to a firm
with either a very large or very small Z-score. We will test this hypothesis by running
additional regressions which only includes firms with a Z-score in the range  -5 < Z < 5 and
compare these results with the results of the main regressions.

                                                                           8
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

B. Altman’s Z-score

Altman (1968) presented a measure that could forecast the probability of bankruptcy within
two years. The formula was derived using multiple discriminant analysis (MDA) on a sample
of 66 manufacturing corporations. The firms were divided into two groups;

        Group 1  –  The bankrupt group: 33 firms that filed for bankruptcy petition under
        Chapter X of the National bankruptcy Act from 1946 to 1965.
        Group 2  –  Non-bankrupt group: A random sample of 33 manufacturing firms that
          were still in existence at the time of the analysis.

From a first selection of 22 variables, which were likely to explain probability of default, five
was chosen on basis of doing the best job in overall predicting corporate bankruptcy together.
Generating the following formula

              !  =  0.012!! + 0.014!! + 0.033!! + 0.006!! + 0.999!!

             Where
                 X1=working capital/total assets
                 X2=retained earnings/total assets
                 X3=earnings before interest and taxes/total assets
                  X4=market value equity/book value of total liabilities
                 X5=sales/total assets

The original 22 variables belonged to five different groups from which one measure was
chosen to the formula.

     X1  is a liquidity measure, a firm that suffers from constant operating losses will soon
      have liquidity problems and  further on problems paying their current liabilities and
      keeping the business going.

     X2  belongs to the group of leverage ratios but is also an age indicator. If retained
      earnings are high compared to total assets,  the firm is financed with previous profits

                                                                           9
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

      rather than debts,  which can be seen as more stable financing. This measure benefits
      older  firms  that have built their retained earnings during a long time period. One can
      argue that those firms are more stable and this agrees to the real world. According to
     Dun & Bradstreet (1994), approximately 50% of all firms that failed in 1993 were
      younger than five years. This justifies the fact that older firms are  favored  by the second
      variable.

     X3  measures profitability or the earning power of the firm’s assets. When it comes to
      prediction corporate defaults it is essential to look at profitability, which is the key for a
      firm to live further.

     X4  is a ratio of solvency. One can argue that it is an indicator of a firm’s perseverance,
     how much the assets can decline in value before the firm becomes insolvent. It also
     adds an otherwise rarely, when it comes to these types of measures, seen market
      dimension since it is the market value of equity that is used.

     X5  is the measure with the highest weight to in the formula. It is a productivity measure
      and a standard financial turnover ratio. The activity, or the ability to use the assets to
      generate sales, is one of the most crucial factors for a firm to live on.

High values in each of the five variables are  good  for  a firm and hence a high Z-score means a
lower probability of bankruptcy and vice verse.  Altman (1968) sets the cut-off points  to 1.8
and 3.0 Firms with z-scores higher than 3.0 are believed to have a low probability of going
bankrupt and the opposite for  firms below 1.8. All in between are hard to evaluate and that
interval is considered to be a grey area.
         Later studies have investigated the ability of the Z-score to predict bankruptcy.
Altman (1993) himself comes to the conclusion that his model correctly predicted 24 out of
25 bankrupt firms and 52 out of 66 being the corresponding numbers for the  non-bankrupt
firms. Begley, Ming and Watts (1997) confirm this using COMPUSTAT data for firms during
the 1980’s. They also made an attempt to improve the predicting power of the model by a
reestimation. The reestimation was done using more recent data than Altman (1968) did,
however their attempts were unsuccessful which strengthens the credibility of the original Z-
score model.  Our sample shows a significant difference  between the high and low Z groups.
Of 1268 firms with a Z lower than 1.8, implying that the risk of default is high, 221 (17.43%)

                                                                          10
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

actually went bankrupt. The corresponding numbers for the low risk group, Z above 3.0, was
56 out of 1053 (5.31%).

                      Empirical Results and Discussion

                                          Table 1
    Descriptive Statistics and Correlation Matrix for the Test Variables in 1998-2010
                                   Regression
Panel A shows descriptive statistics that illustrate the empirical distributions of the test variables from
the  1998-2010  regression  and  Panel  B  shows  the  corresponding  statistics  for  the  2008-2010
regression.. Returns are monthly returns for the entire sample of firms in Panel A and daily returns in
Panel B. Z is from Altman (1968) and measures default risk. A higher Z  means a lower risk for
default.  The Z-score is based on fiscal years 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008 in Panel A  and on
fiscal year 2008 in Panel B. Panel C shows Pearson correlation coefficients between the variables from
the 1998-2010 regression and Panel B shows the corresponding coefficients for the 2008-2010
regression.  Size is the logarithm  of fiscal-quarter-end  stock  price times  the number of shares
outstanding. BtM is common equity divided by fiscal-quarter-end stock price times  the  number of
shares outstanding. Leverage is book value of total liabilities to book value of total assets and is
calculated quarterly.
             Panel A: Descriptive Statistics for the Test Variables in 1998-2010 Regression
Variables Mean      StdD         P25                P50       P75
Returns   1.01       13.78         -9.88                 2.11      11.98
Z        4.77        8.23         -1.55                 5.20       9.14
Size     4.80        1.97         2.91                 5.09       7.22
BtM     0.91        4.91         0.33                 0.97      1.99
Leverage 0.78        1.45         0.34                 0.80       1.33
             Panel B: Descriptive Statistics for the Test Variables in 2008-2010 Regression
Variables Mean      StdD         P25                P50       P75
Returns   -0.4         2.54         -0.02                  0.21       0.77
Z       1.61        6.83         0.21                 2.20      4.14
Size     5.58        2.37         3.91                 5.64       7.72
BtM     2.21        7.91         0.33                 0.57      0.94
Leverage 0.65        1.19         0.27                 0.57       1.12
       Panel C: Pearson Correlation Coefficients for the Test Variables in 1998-2010 Regression
                  Returns          Z            Size         BtM         Leverage
Returns             1.0000
Z                0.0012         1.0000
Size               -0.0215          0.0042         1.0000
BtM               0.0022         -0.0012        -0.0666          1.0000
Leverage           -0.0043         -0.0023         0.0045           -0.0091       1.0000
       Panel D: Pearson Correlation Coefficients for the Test Variables in 2008-2010 Regression
                  Returns             Z          Size         BtM         Leverage
Returns             1.0000
Z                0.0024         1.0000
Size               -0.0126          0.0001         1.0000
BtM               0.0029          0.0027        -0.0718          1.0000
Leverage           -0.0006         -0.0031         0.0098           -0.0004       1.0000

                                                                          11
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

Table  1  includes descriptive statistics and correlation matrices for both the 1998-2010
regression and the 2008-2010 regression. Comparing the descriptive statistics for the two
different regression one can find that Altman’s Z seems to be higher in the  long-term
regression than in the  short-term  regression. Both the mean and median value of the Z-score is
larger in the first regression. This indicates that firms on average had a lower default risk in
the period 1998-2010 than in the period 2008-2010. This is certainly  not an unexpected
observation and can most probably be explained by the financial crisis of 2008. Another
observation is that the Z-scores are more widely dispersed in the  long-term  regression; the
standard deviation is larger in this regression. This is  also quite comprehensible, since this
regression includes more observed Z-scores and ranges over a longer time-period. Further
interesting remarks can be done by looking at the correlation matrices; the matrices give the
first evidence of how the different  factors are related and can thus give a hint of how the
regression  results  will  look  like.  In  the  1998-2010  regression  the  correlation  between
Altman’s Z and returns is positive. This means that firms with a lower risk of default (higher
Z-score) seem to  have higher realized return. The 2008-2010 regression shows the opposite,
i.e. the correlation between the Z-score and return is negative and thus a higher risk (lower Z-
score) seem to indicate a higher return. The correlation between size and returns is negative
and the correlation between book-to-market and return is positive, which means that smaller
firms and firms with higher book-to-market ratios seem to earn higher returns than their
counterparties. This goes for both the 1998-2010 and the 2008-2010  regression. Both of these
findings are consistent with the logic behind the Fama-French three factor model. Looking at
the correlation between Z-score and the book-to-market ratio,  the results are different between
the two regressions. In the long-term regression the correlation is negative, which indicates
that firms with a high default risk (low Z-score) seem to have a high book-to-market ratio. In
the short-term regression the correlation is instead negative, which indicates that firms with a
high default risk seem to have a low book-to-market ratio. The negative correlation in the
long-term regression is consistent with the idea that the book-to-market ratio can be seen as a
proxy for bankruptcy risk. The correlation between Altman’s Z and size is positive in the
long-term regression and insignificant in the  short-term  regression. This indicates that the
default risk seems to be higher among larger firms. The correlation between size and book-to-
market is negative in both regressions. This result means that larger firms seem to have a
lower book-to-market ratio, which is consistent with previous studies  (Fama and French,
1995). Leverage seems to be negatively correlated with returns. This would indicate that firms
with higher leverage  will  have a lower realized return. This is consistent with previous

                                                                          12
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

literature  (George and Hwang 2007)  and gives another perspective on the distress risk puzzle.
Intuitively a firm with higher leverage should have a higher default risk and thus a higher
return. The first part  of the intuition holds since the correlation between leverage and Z is
negative, but as mentioned recently the  positive  correlation between return and Z is puzzling.

                                          Table 2
Regression Results for the Relation between Altman’s Z, Market Value, Book-to-
Market, Market Return and Subsequent Realized Returns during the period 1998-2010
Z is calculated according to Altman (1968), where a higher Z signify a lower probability of default and
vice versa.  Z-scores are calculated on values from fiscal years 1998,  2000, 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008
for the 1998-2010 regression. Returns are  monthly stock returns in percent, starting one month after
fiscal-year-end. Size is the logarithm of fiscal-quarter-end stock price times  the  number of shares
outstanding. BtM is common equity divided by fiscal-quarter-end stock price times  the  number of
shares outstanding. Leverage is book value of liabilities to book value of assets and is calculated
quarterly. The sample contains 84 523 observations of monthly returns for stocks traded on NYSE,
AMEX and NASDAQ. T-statistics in parenthesis.
                                          Regression results
                Returns  =    β0   +        β1*Z   +      β2*Size  +    β3 * BtM   +   β4* Lev
Pred. sign of coeff.:                        (-)             (-)             (+)            (+)

                                   ***
                           0.91         0.02**
                              (.75)          (1.65)
                                     ***                            ***
                              0.56                         -0.04
                              (12.70)                      (-5.78)
                                     ***                                         ***
                           0.67                                     0.09
                            (6.78)                                  (7.89)
                                     ***                                                        ***
                              0.45                                                       -0.01
                               (8.01)                                                   (-4.78)
                                     ***                              ***            ***
                            0.68          0.02**        -0.05         0.08
                             (5.88)         (2.12)         (-6.12)        (6.45)
                                    ***                              ***            ***              ***
                             0.54          0.001         -0.05         0.08          -0.01
                              (4.66)         (0.99)         (-6.03)        (6.66)         (-7.87)
*p<0.1 **p<0.05  ***p<0.001

Presented in Table 2  is the result of the 1998-2010 regressions of realized return on Altman’s
Z, size, book-to-market and leverage. The results from the univariate regressions indicate that
Altman’s Z is significant in explaining raw returns.  The coefficient on Z is however positive,
which means that a lower default risk (higher Z-score) gives higher returns. This result is
consistent with previous evidence of the distress  risk  puzzle. The coefficient on size is
significantly negative, which is consistent with the idea that the returns of smaller firms
outperform the returns of larger firms. Book-to-market is significant in explaining raw returns
and the coefficient is positive, i.e. firms with a higher book-to-market ratio earn greater

                                                                          13
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

returns  on their stock. The results further indicate that leverage is significant in explaining
raw returns and that the coefficient on leverage is negative. This means that higher leverage
gives lower returns. This result confirms the evidence of previous studies. The multivariate
regression gives an opportunity to examine a couple of things. Firstly it sheds light on
whether the book-to-market effect can be explained as it being a proxy for default risk and
whether this is an explanation to the distress risk puzzle. Secondly the multivariate regression
will test the findings of George and Hwang (2007) that the distress risk puzzle can be
explained by a spurious relationship between default risk and returns caused by leverage. The
first multivariate regression, in  which return is regressed on Altman’s Z, size and book-to-
market, disproves the idea of book-to-market being a proxy for default risk. If the idea were to
be true, the significance of Altman’s Z would be disappearing when controlled for book-to-
market but  the result of the regression indicates that the significance of Altman’s Z in fact
increases after including book-to-market. The second multivariate regression, which adds
leverage as an explaining variable, confirms the idea that the relationship between  default risk
as measured by Altman’s Z and return is spurious, since the significance of Altman’s Z
disappears in this regression when controlling for leverage.

                                                                          14
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

                                          Table 3
Regression Results for the Relation between Altman’s Z, Market Value, Book-to-Market
               and Subsequent Realized Returns during 2009 and 2010
Z is calculated according to Altman (1968), where a higher Z  signifies  a lower probability of default
and vice versa.  Z-scores are calculated for fiscal year 2008 for the 2008-2010 regression Returns  are
daily stock returns in percent, starting one day after fiscal-year-end. Size is the logarithm of fiscal-
quarter-end stock price times number of shares outstanding. BtM is common equity divided by fiscal-
quarter-end stock price times  the  number of shares outstanding. Leverage is book value of liabilities to
book value of assets and is calculated quarterly. Panel A contains regression results for the entire
sample of 1  417  971 observation of daily returns for stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ.
Panel  B contains regression results for  firms  with Z-values closer to the thresholds of 1.8 and
3.0.Number of observations is 765  234 T-statistics in parenthesis.
                              Panel A: Regression results for all  firms
           Returns   =        β0  +         β1*Z   +      β2*Size   +    β3 * BtM+     β4* Lev
Pred. sign of coeff.:                        (-)             (-)             (+)            (+)

                                     ***                **
                             2.29          -0.004
                                (-115.07)      (-2.04)
                                      ***                            ***
                               -1.99                          -0.06
                                (-39.70)                      (-6.32)
                                     ***                                            ***
                           2.29                                    0.0006
                              (-117.78)                                 (11.26)
                                      ***                                                       ***
                               -2.29                                                         -0.09
                                (-117.94)                                                 (6.11)
                                      ***             *             ***               ***            ***
                              -0.036         -0.003         -0.05          0.0004        -0.09
                              (-63.68)       (-1.69)        (-6.05)        (8.66)         (6.41)
                    Panel B: Regression results for  firms  with Z-values:  -5 < Z < 5
           Returns  =        β0  +         β1*Z   +      β2*Size  +    β3 * BtM   +   β4* Lev
Pred. sign of coeff.:                        (-)             (-)             (+)            (+)

                                      ***              ***
                               -0.45          -0.01
                                (-17.07)        (-3.5)
                                      ***                            ***
                               -0.87                          -0.08
                                (-11.11)                      (-4.88)
                                      ***                                           ***
                             -0.76                                       0.0006
                              (-21.09)                                   (13.43)
                                      ***                                                       ***
                               -1.32                                                         -0.12
                               (-18.90)                                                 (6.88)
                                      ***             **             ***               ***            ***
                              -0.036         -0.009         -0.07          0.0004        -0.10
                              (-63.68)       (-2.91)        (-5.54)        (7.98)         (5.98)
*p<0.1 **p<0.05 ***p<0.001

The  results of the 2008-2010 regression are  found in Table  3. Panel A includes observations
for all sample firms, whereas panel B only includes observations for  firms  with a Z in the
range  -5 <  Z < 5. The implications of size, book-to-market and leverage in the univariate
regressions are the same in these couple of  two-year  period regression as in the previous
regression. That is, size and leverage have a significant negative effect on realized returns and

                                                                          15
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

book-to-market has a significant positive effect on realized return. On the contrary, when
looking at Altman’s Z,  and its effect on realized returns during these two years,  the findings
are the opposite of the findings in the previous regression. Altman’s Z is significant in both
the univariate and the multivariate regressions and further has a negative sign in both cases.
This implies that during the period 2008-2010, a higher default risk did lead to higher realized
returns. These findings contradict both the findings of the previous long period regression and
the “distressed risk puzzle”. Also contrary to the 1998-2010 regression,  the significance of
Altman’s Z does not disappear when controlling for leverage in this short-term regression.
The  implication of these findings is primarily that the distress risk puzzle seems to disappear
during the period 2008-2010. The same goes for the spurious relationship between default risk
and realized returns. Of course this time period is special due to the  financial crisis starting in
2008 and we will begin with exploring a couple of explanations to the results which are
related to the financial crisis, but first we will connect the regression results to the initial
discussion of systematic versus idiosyncratic risk
        Concluding from the regression results you can say that default risk was not a
systematic risk during the period 1998-2010. This conclusion is quite obvious since there is a
negative relationship between default risk and raw returns and that this relationship disappears
when controlling for leverage, i.e. it is spurious. However during the period 2008-2010 we
conclude that default risk has to be somewhat systematic, since the correlation with returns is
significantly  positive and that this correlation does not seem to be spurious.
        The risk of default  should  probably have  increased  during  the years following the
financial crisis outburst. Evidence of this is found in the fact that the Z-score during the
period 2008-2010 was on average lower than the Z-score during the period 1998-2010. This
could be a possible explanation to the disappearance of the distress risk puzzle. This would
mean that when the bankruptcy rick becomes more prominent, the investors start getting
rewarded  for  investing  in  high  default  risk  stocks.  An  analogy  can  be  made  to  the
disappearance of the size effect during the  1980s, which is found and debated, by Fama and
French (1992) and Roll  (1995). In the 1980s the returns of large stocks outperformed the
returns of small stocks.  However if the explanation of the distress risk puzzle lies in different
levels of prominence of the default risk, previous studies which also includes times of
recessions should not have  obtained  results which are justifying the puzzle, which is the case
in many studies. This means that this explanation of the distress risk puzzle probably does not
hold.

                                                                          16
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

        One possible explanation to  the disappearance is based on the overconfidence
mispricing theory of the distress risk puzzle, which says that investors are  overconfident in
their valuation of high default risk stocks. The explanation is based on the hypothesis that the
2008 financial crisis caused investors to be more cautious in their expectations of the
performance of distressed firms which makes the overpricing disappear.  This explanation
makes sense  since the financial markets saw some major bankruptcies caused by the financial
crisis. These bankruptcies might have acted as an eye-opener for investors,  which caused the
overconfident  behavior  to cease. This hypothesis could explain the negative coefficient on
Altman’s Z in the 2008-2010 regression, and would then also imply the correctness of the
overconfidence mispricing theory of Griffin and Lemmon (2002).
        Another  explanation to the disappearance of the  distress risk puzzle is that the
bargaining power of the debt holders might have increased during the years of the latest
financial crisis.  This explanation leads to a discussion about shareholder bargaining power
initiated by Garlappi et al (2008).  The reason for this possible increase in bargaining power
might have to do with an increasing selectiveness among financial institutions and other
lenders. Due to the unstable climate of the financial markets, it is probable that the debt
holders was more careful in their selection of which firm’s debt they were willing to hold and
thus they obtained a bargaining power over the equity holders. It is also probable that the
increasing number of bankruptcies during the financial crisis forced the debt holders to fight
harder for their claims in every single bankruptcy. This eventually led to a higher risk for the
equity holders and thus the distress premium appeared. This hypothesis can definitely explain
the results of this thesis.
         The finding that the spuriousness  of default risk also seems to disappear during the
financial crisis is another interesting  discovery  of the regression results. Similarly to George
and Hwang (2007) the results of our 1998-2010 regression indicate that the relationship
between default risk and realized return is spurious and the actual effect on returns is caused
by leverage, but during the period 2008-2010 both default risk and leverage are significant in
explaining returns. Perhaps this finding might shed some light on the distress risk  puzzle.
George and Hwang (2007)  assign  the leverage effect to a mispricing due to overconfidence
from both investors and managers of high leverage firms. Both managers and investors are
excessive  in  their  expectations  of  future  earnings  prospect,  which  causes  investors  to
overprice the stock and managers to take on too much  risk;  this  behavior  eventually causes
returns to fall. It might be the case that during the financial crisis the leverage effect and
default risk got separated due to the macroeconomic shock, which caused the spuriousness to

                                                                          17
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

cease. Perhaps investors became more informed about the risk of bankruptcy, but did not
connect this risk with leverage. The negative effect of leverage is however still a puzzle.
        Comparing Panel A and Panel B in Table 3 one can observe that meanwhile Z is
fairly significant in both cases; the significance is higher in Panel B. Thus the significance of
Altman’s Z is higher when the sample is consisted of  firms  with a Z that lies  close to the
thresholds 1.8 and 3.0. This observation was not made in the long-term regression. The
intuition behind can, as mentioned previously, be explained by observing the firm and its
prevalence or default as  a  call option in a pay-off diagram  (See Figure 1)  with Z-score on the
x-axis and the pay-off to equity holders on the y-axis. We also assumed that the pay-off to
equity would be zero in the event of a default and that almost all firms with a Z-score below
1.8 would be declared bankrupt; meanwhile almost all firms with a Z-score above  3.0 would
prevail. In this hypothetical world the Z-score of a firm would be crucial for the firm’s future
business. However it would be considerably more important for a firm with a Z-score closer
to the thresholds of 1.8 and 3.0, since a small shift of  the Z-score could mean a significant
change of the survival probability of the particular firm.  The fact that the significance of
Altman’s Z increases when only including firms with a Z-score closely to the thresholds could
indicate that there is some truth behind the mentioned hypothetical world. One implication of
this is that the explanatory power of Altman’s Z in predicting bankruptcies seems to be high.
Another implication is that the pay-off to equity in case of default seems to be small. The
latter  implication suggests that the explanation of the distress risk puzzle found in Garlappi et
al (2008), which suggests that the high level of shareholder bargaining power in case of a
default eliminates the default risk, since the risk of investors losing money is small even in
case of a default. Since the significance of Altman’s Z does not show any signs of
strengthening when observing  firms  closely to the thresholds, one could assume a situation
where it does not matter whether a firm has a Z-score which is above 3.0 or below 1.8, i.e. it
does not matter if the firm is considered risky or safe, since investors know that they will be
able to extract a majority of their investment from the bankrupt estate. However during the
years of the financial crisis the  significance of Altman’s Z increases among firms around the
thresholds, which could indicate that investors are more observant of the default risk, since
they risk losing money in the event of a default due to a shift of the bargaining power in a
default from equity holders towards debt holders.

                                                                          18
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

                                          Table 4
     Performance of Z Measure of Default Risk in Predicting Bankruptcy Delistings
This table demonstrates the accuracy of Z in predicting bankruptcies. The sample is divided into two
parts according to Altman  (1968). Firms with a Z lower than 1.8 should have a potentially high risk of
default, whereas the default risk for  firms  with a Z higher than 3.0 should have a low risk. The table
indicates the number of delistings due to bankruptcy in each group of  firms. The cause for delisting is
found in the CRSP database.
Group:                    Number of Bankruptcy delistings 1998-2010
Low Risk                            56
(Z > 3.0)

High Risk                            221
(Z < 1.8)
Group:                   Number of Bankruptcy delistings
Low Risk                           7
(Z > 3.0)

High Risk
(Z < 1.8)                              45

Presented in  Table  4  is a performance measure of Altman’s Z as a proxy for default risk
during the period 1998-2010. The table shows the number of delistings due to default in two
groups. The first group includes firms with a Z lower than 1.8 and the second  group includes
firms with a Z higher than 3.0. The reason behind this dividing is the fact that Altman (1968)
regards a  firm  as safe if the  firm  Z is higher than 3.0, and risky if Z is lower than 1.8. The
reason for delisting is taken from the COMPUSTAT “Delisting code” item. A delisting code
of 400-490 and 574 indicates a delisting due to bankruptcy or insolvency. The number of
bankruptcy related delistings in the low-risk group was 56 and the corresponding number in
the high-risk group was 221. During the  period 2008-2010 the number of bankruptcy
delistings in the low-risk group was 7 and in the high risk group the number was 45. This
result coincides with a number of previous studies which all suggests that Altman’s Z is
highly significant in explaining bankruptcy. It is however difficult to claim causation since the
delisting rarely happen at the same time as the bankruptcy event, but it still gives some
justification to the use of Altman’s Z as the default risk proxy in this thesis.
         Even though the survivorship bias is accounted for, it can still pose a threat to the
validity of our results. This is due to a potential problem with the delisting codes and delisting
returns from CRSP. In some of the later bankruptcy delistings it is still not certain what  stake
the shareholders will get in the bankrupt estate, since the matter is yet to be resolved. It has
also been shown that there exists a bias in the delisting returns from CRSP, due to omitted

                                                                          19
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

delisting returns (Shumway, 1997). This bias could certainly  have led to bias also in the
results of this thesis.
         It certainly would have been motivated to have made the time-span for the long-term
regression even longer. The main reason behind the decision to only include year 1998-2010
is the fact that a number of previous studies already have examined years previous to 1998
and almost all of these studies have unanimous results. Since the result from the regression in
this study also consists with the previous results, the decision to include only the later years
could be seen as justified.
         In order to validate the results a discussion about Altman’s Z also has to be made.
There are a number of different ways to measure the default risk, e.g. CDS spreads,  Merton’s
option pricing model,  implied volatility, credit ratings.  The authors of previous studies have
different opinions of which of these measures that has the best ability to capture the default
risk and each argue for their point of view.  The fact that the distress risk puzzle is most
evident in studies which make use of an accounting based default risk measure such as
Altman’s  Z, of course the explanation for  the default risk puzzle could be as simple as  the fact
that  accounting based risk measures does not capture default risk in an adequate way. If this  is
the case the results of this thesis is probably biased due to using only Altman’s Z as a default
risk measure. On the other hand many accounting based measures, especially Altman’s Z,
have been proven highly significant in predicting bankruptcies. This  means that Altman’s Z
has to capture at least some risk. One must also consider that this thesis,  along with a number
of  previous  studies,  get  rather  highly  significant  results  using  Altman’s  Z  and  other
accounting based measures, which could certainly be  due to some endogeneity problem. It is
however unlikely that this endogeneity would be apparent in all studies, since the studies use
different types of accounting based measures. To resolve this issue we encourage future
research of the distress risk puzzle during the recent financial  crisis that  uses other types of
risk measures.
        One must also consider that this study only includes industrial firms and thus
excludes many companies, such as start-up IT-firms, which in many cases have high default
risks.  If one were to apply the default risk as an investment strategy one would probably want
to include high-risk  firms and thus a different default risk measure has to be used. A highly
interesting measure is CDS-spreads. The main reason why this thesis does not apply CDS-
spreads as a default risk measure is the unavailability of data.

                                                                          20
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

                              Conclusion

This thesis confirms the existence of the default risk puzzle in the long term. It also confirms
the previous findings of the relationship between default risk and returns as being spurious,
where the effect instead is attributed to leverage. However the most remarking result of this
thesis is the fact that both the distress risk puzzle and the spuriousness disappear during the
turbulent times following the financial  crisis. During the period 2008-2010 the relationship
between default risk and returns is significantly positive, also after controlling for size, book-
to-market and leverage. Possible explanations of this disappearance are that investors became
more informed of and  aware of  the risk of bankruptcy,  which erased the investor’s previous
overconfidence in high-risk and high-leverage stocks. It can also be  assigned  to a shift in the
bargaining power in the event of a bankruptcy, from the shareholders to the debt  holders. This
might have caused shareholders to receive less from the bankrupt estate, which enhanced the
default risk since investors now risked losing a larger sum of their investment in the event of a
bankruptcy. However we must mention that previous studies have argued that the use of an
accounting based default risk measure, such as the one we use, is inaccurate and that this
might possibly cause bias to our results. It can therefore be interesting to conduct future
studies of the distress risk puzzle  during the financial crisis using a different kind of default
risk measure.

                                                                          21
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

                               References

Altman, Edward I., 1968, Financial ratios, discriminant analysis, and the prediction of
corporate bankruptcy,  Journal of Finance  23, 589-609

Altman, Edward I., 1993. Corporate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy (Wiley, New York)

Asquith, Paul, Robert Gertner and David Sharfstein, 1994, Anatomy of financial distress: An
examination of junk-bond  issuers,  Quarterly Journal of Economics  109, 625-658

Begley, Joy, Jing Ming and Susan Watts, 1997, Bankruptcy classification errors in the 1980s:
An empirical analysis of Altman and Ohlson’s models,  Review of Accounting Studies  vol 1 no
4

Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In Search of Distress Risk,  Journal
of Finance  63, 2899-2939

Charitou, Andreas, Neophitos Lambertides and Lenos Trigeorgis, 2004, Is the Impact of
Default Risk on Stock Returns Systematic? An Option-Pricing Explanation, University of
Cyprus working  paper

Chava, Sudheer and Amiyatosh Purnanandam, 2010, Is Default Risk Negatively Related to
Stock Returns?,  The Review of Financial Studies  v 23 n 6, 2523-2559

Denis, David J., and  Diane Denis, 1995, Causes of financial distress following leveraged
recapitalizations,  Journal of Financial Economics  27, 411-418

Dichev, Ilia D., 1998, Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk?  Journal of Finance  53,
1131-1147

Dun & Bradstreet, "The Failure Record," 1994, and annually

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
Journal of Finance  47, 427-465

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds,  Journal of Financial Economics  33, 3-56

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings
and returns,  Journal of Finance  50, 131-155

Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
Journal of Political Economy  81, 607-636.

Garlappi, Lorenzo, Tao Shu and Hong Yan, 2008, Default Risk, Shareholder Advantage, and
Stock Returns,  The Review of Financial Studies  v 21 n 6, 2743-2778

George,  Thomas J.,  and Chuan-Yang Hwang, 2007,  Leverage, Financial Distress and the
Cross Section of Stock Returns,  working paper

                                                                          22
                                                                   The Distress Risk Puzzle in Turbulent Times

Griffin, John M., and Michael L. Lemmon, 2002, Book-to-market equity, distress risk, and
stock returns,  Journal of Finance  57, 2317-2336

Hamer, Michelle M., 1983, Failure Prediction: Sensitivity of Classification Accuracy to
Alternative Statistical Methods and Variable Sets,  Journal of Accounting and Public Policy
vol 2 issue 4, 289-307

Merton, Robert C., 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates,
Journal of Finance  29, 449-470

Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy,
Journal of Accounting Research  18, 109-131

Opler, Tim and Sheridan Titman, 1994, Financial distress and corporate performance,  Journal
of Finance  49, 1015-1040

Penman, Stephen H., Scott A. Richardson, and Irem A. Tuna, 2005,  The Book-to-Price Effect
in Stock Returns: Accounting for Leverage,  Columbia University working paper.

Roll, Richard W., 1995, Style Return Differentials: Illusions, Risk Premiums, or Investment
Opportunities?,  The Handbook of Equity Style Management, Coggin, T.,  and F. Fabozzi,
(eds.), Frank J. Fabozzi Associates, 1995

Shumway, Tyler, 1996,  The Premium for Default Risk in Stock Returns,  Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Chicago

Shumway, Tyler, 1997, The delisting bias in CRSP data,  Journal of Finance  52, 327-340

Vassalou, Maria, and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Default Risk in Equity Returns,  Journal of Finance
59, 831-868

Welch, Ivo, 2004,  Capital Structure and Stock Returns,  Journal of Political Economy,
112, 106-131.

                                                                          23