 Does a Local Advantage Exist in Private Equity?

                Christoffer Norman*                           Richard Riboe**

                 Stockholm School of Economics Stockholm School of Economics

                                          Bachelor Thesis
                                Stockholm School of Economics
                                     Department of Finance
                                       Tutor: Jungsuk Han
                                             June 1, 2011

Abstract
We hypothesize that informational advantages, network advantages and reputational incentives allow local
private equity investors to outperform non-local private equity investors in improving the operating
performance of their holdings. To test the validity of this hypothesis, we apply both an event study and a
difference-in-differences method to analyze data from the annual accounts of 91 Scandinavian target
companies acquired by private equity investors between 1998 and 2009. Using EBITDA growth as a
proxy for value generation, we find indications, in contrast to our initial hypothesis, that non-local
investors increase the value of their investments more than local investors. Our findings suggest that this
result is attributable to a superior ability of non-local investors to increase the revenue of their holdings.
However, in line with our expectations, we find statistically significant evidence that local investors
outperform non-local investors in improving the EBITDA margin of their holdings.

Keywords: Home bias, Leveraged buyouts, Local advantage, Informational advantage, Private equity

First and foremost, we would like to thank Per Strömberg, Director at the Stockholm Institute of Financial Research and the SSE
Centennial Chair in Finance and Private Equity at the Stockholm School of Economics for generous support and kind assistance.
Furthermore, we especially thank our tutor Jungsuk Han, Assistant Professor at the Department of Finance at the Stockholm
School of Economics, for invaluable comments and support throughout the writing of this thesis. We also wish to sincerely
thank Caspar Callerström at EQT and Anders Borg at Ratos for sharing their extensive knowledge and insightful thoughts with
us. Moreover, we thank Erik Lindqvist and Johannes Breckenfelder at the Stockholm School of Economics for valuable
comments. Finally, we thank Niklas Lyttkens, Louise Stenfors Virenfeldt and Alexandra Tham for helpful remarks at the final
stage. All errors are our own.

* 21758@student.hhs.se
** 21629@student.hhs.se
CONTENTS

I Introduction ................................................................................................................................................... 1
II Prior Research................................................................................................................................................ 2
           The Value Generation Process in Private Equity ................................................................................. 2
          The Importance of Human Capital Factors in Private Equity ........................................................... 3
            Local and International Advantages in Equity Investing..................................................................... 4
III Theory and Hypotheses ............................................................................................................................... 4
            Motivation for a Local Advantage in Private Equity............................................................................ 4
            Measuring Value Generation .................................................................................................................... 6
          Hypotheses .................................................................................................................................................. 7
IV Analytical Framework................................................................................................................................... 7
            Empirical Strategy ...................................................................................................................................... 7
            The Event Study Model Specification .................................................................................................... 8
               Calculating Abnormal Operating Performance ............................................................................... 9
           The Difference-in-Differences Model Specification .......................................................................... 10
              The Assumption of the Difference-in-Differences Method ....................................................... 10
V Data ............................................................................................................................................................... 11
            Data for Target Companies .................................................................................................................... 11
            Data for Peer Companies........................................................................................................................ 12
            Description of the Data .......................................................................................................................... 13
VI Empirical Results......................................................................................................................................... 15
           Compound Annual Growth Rate of the EBITDA ............................................................................ 16
           Compound Annual Growth Rate of Sales ........................................................................................... 17
           Change in EBITDA Margin ................................................................................................................... 18
VII Conclusion.................................................................................................................................................... 19
References ................................................................................................................................................................... 21
Appendices.................................................................................................................................................................. 24
         Appendix A. Detailed Results of the Event Study ................................................................................ 24
         Appendix B. Detailed Results of the Difference-in-Differences Regressions .................................. 27
         Appendix C. The Assumption of the Difference-in-Difference Model............................................. 30
         Appendix D. List of the Transactions Included in our Sample........................................................... 32
I INTRODUCTION
Does a local advantage exist in private equity? This question is of importance since the creation of global
financial markets has allowed private equity investors to adopt an increasingly international investment
scope.1 European cross-border private equity deal volumes have grown by a compound annual growth
rate of 36.3 percent between 1995 and 2005 (Schertler and Tykvová 2006). Furthermore, Aizenman and
Kendall (2008) document a significant increase in the share of cross-border deals by private equity and
venture capital firms, from 15 percent of the total number of deals in the early 1990s to 40 percent in
2007. In sharp contrast to this development, a multitude of private equity investors refer to their local
presence and local market knowledge as key competitive advantages vis-à-vis rival sponsors.2 This thesis
seeks to investigate whether the commonly cited advantage of local presence has empirical support.
Evidence in this matter would have implications for the strategic investment decisions of both private
equity firms and their clients.

We identify three plausible reasons why local private equity investors should be able to manage their
holdings more successfully than non-local investors. Firstly, local investors may enjoy informational
advantages when investing in local companies (Heel and Kehoe 2005). This informational advantage may
arise from better access to information about upcoming deal flows and more efficient screening processes
of potential investment opportunities. Secondly, we hypothesize that local investors may enjoy a network
advantage. For example, this would imply that local investors are likely to have more extensive local
contact networks, which allow them to more efficiently find suitable candidates for management
positions in their holdings. Moreover, a better understanding of the local language facilitates interaction
with management teams and an extensive local professional network improves the investor’s ability to
participate in auction processes (Siming 2010). Thirdly, we hypothesize that local investors are subject to a
reputational incentive to produce superior performance in their holdings. Non-local investors are not as
geographically constrained as local investors. Thus, if an investment fails, it is easier for non-local
investors than for local investors to walk away. Non-local investors do not need to be as concerned with
their reputation in the local market because if reputational damage is incurred, they can permanently exit
the geographical market. Local investors, on the other hand, are not as flexible and are therefore
incentivized to dedicate resources to improve the performance of faltering portfolio companies, even if a
swift exit would be more lucrative for the fund in a short term perspective. However, this incentive is
likely to have a positive relative impact on the performance of distressed holdings at the portfolio
company level.

We also identify a number of arguments in support of the opposing view that international investors
should have an advantage over local investors. For example, non-local investors may be more
sophisticated and have access to better resources and expertise than local investors (Grinblatt and
Keloharju 2000). However, due to the limited amount of publicly available information that characterizes
the private equity market, we believe the advantage of having local market knowledge and a strong local
network should outweigh any potential international advantage.

To develop evidence on the validity of the arguments above, we analyze the annual accounts of 91 target
companies between 1998 and 2009. We consider Scandinavia as one homogenous region. We distinguish
between target companies acquired by: (1) Scandinavian investors, (2) foreign investors with a local office
in Scandinavia and (3) foreign investors without local presence in Scandinavia. If a local advantage does
exist, we should find that Scandinavian investors outperform foreign investors, ceteris paribus.

1 The terms private equity investor, private equity firm and buyout sponsor are used interchangeably throughout this thesis.

2 Examples include, but are not limited to: 3i, AAC Capital Partners, Actis, Advent International, Akina, Angola Capital Partners, Apax Partners,
AXA Private Equity, Bridgepoint, Capvent, CVC Capital Partners, Doughty Hanson & Co, EQT, Gilde Buy Out Partners, Natixis Private
Equity, Pantheon Ventures and The Carlyle Group.

                                                                                      1
Furthermore, foreign investors with a local office in Scandinavia should reasonably outperform those
without local presence. We apply two complementing methodologies to examine the validity of this
reasoning. Both methodologies examine the impact of local presence of the investor on the growth in the
firm value of the target company. As firm value is conventionally approximated as the product of the
EBITDA and a valuation multiplier, we use EBITDA growth as a proxy for firm value growth.3 To
determine whether growth in firm value is achieved by sales expansion or cost cutting, the impact of local
presence is also tested on sales growth and change in the EBITDA margin. Firstly, we apply an event
study in which we measure actual performance in relation to expected performance. The second method
makes use of a difference-in-differences model where the control group is defined as companies acquired
by non-local investors and the treatment group as companies acquired by local investors. We include both
methods in order to improve the robustness of our results and because they allow for complementing
interpretations.

We present three main findings in this thesis. First of all, in contrast to our hypothesis, we find
indications that non-local investors increase the firm value of their holdings more than local investors.
Secondly, our findings suggest that non-local investors are more adept at improving top line growth than
local investors. Thirdly, in accordance with our hypothesis, we find economically and statistically
significant evidence that local investors more effectively improve the EBITDA margin than non-local
investors.

Section II discusses previous research and Section III presents the theory and our hypotheses. Section IV
presents the construction of our analytical framework and our empirical strategy. Section V describes the
data sample and section VI presents our findings. Section VII provides conclusions and suggestions for
future research.

II PRIOR RESEARCH
A considerable amount of literature documents the positive effect of buyout transactions on the
operating performance of target companies (see for example Acharya, Hahn and Kehoe 2009; Bergström,
Grubb and Jonsson 2007; Jensen 1989; Kaplan 1989; Smart and Waldfogel 1994). Due to the exhaustive
evidence that private equity owners do in fact generate value in their investments, we consider this issue
resolved. Instead, we seek to add to the literature on why certain private equity investors are more
successful than others.

THE VALUE GENERATION PROCESS IN PRIVATE EQUITY
In order to understand why a local advantage could exist in private equity, it is essential to comprehend
how sponsors generate value in their holdings. Berg and Gottschalg (2005) have constructed a conceptual
framework to categorize the value generation levers of private equity ownership. First and foremost, their
framework defines value generation as the sum of the value capturing and value creating activities of
private equity investors.

Value capturing refers to “financial arbitrage” or the ability of buyout firms to profit from developments
in the market and in the portfolio companies that would have occurred even without the interventions of
private equity investors.4 For example, buyout sponsors may use their contact networks to build up
industry expertise, allowing them to more precisely forecast future developments and to identify
promising acquisition targets. Value capturing is largely internal to the portfolio company as it does not

3 EBITDA denotes earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization.

4 According to Berg and Gottschalg’s framework, value capturing also refers to the ability to profit from changes in the market valuation of the
company. However, we do not include such effects in this review because our analysis does not take market valuations into consideration.

                                                                                      2
require any transfer of skills or knowledge from the buyout sponsor to the portfolio company in order to
take place.

In contrast to value capturing, value creation improves the operating performance of the target company
through intervention by the investor. Value creation is principally external to the portfolio company as it
reflects changes imposed upon it by the investor. According to the framework of Berg and Gottschalg
(2005), value creating activities can be divided into primary and secondary levers. Primary levers are
directly linked to the financial development whereas secondary levers affect performance indirectly.

An important primary lever is the enhancement of operational performance. Private equity investors seek
to increase revenues aggressively, either by implementing ambitious plans for organic growth or by
making add-on acquisitions to the existing business (Easterwood, Seth and Singer 1989; Liebeskind and
Wiersema 1992; Seth and Easterwood 1993). Private equity firms also invest heavily in product
development and take other innovation-increasing measures to increase sales (Malone 1989; Thompson et
al 1992; Wright and Coyne 1985; Zahra and Fescina 1991). Secondly, the sponsors cut costs and expand
margins (Anders 1992). A large source of cost cuts stem from the minimization of overhead costs and
reduction of bureaucracy (Loos 2005). In Berg and Gottschalg’s framework, a second primary lever is to
focus the business strategy of the target company. Buyout sponsors utilize their industry expertise and
market knowledge to fine-tune strategic variables such as market presence, pricing, product quality and
customer service.

The primary levers are measures implemented by private equity investors to generate value. However,
they do not explain why these processes are facilitated by the private equity ownership and why they were
not employed before the transaction. This question is clarified by the secondary levers, which function as
catalysts for the primary levers. Acharya et al. (2009) and Beroutsos, Freeman and Kehoe (2007) provide
evidence that a large share of the value generated by private equity investors pertains to the
implementation of an efficient corporate governance model. A beneficial effect of this model is that
investors can monitor the performance of management members more closely (Singh 1990). Importantly,
buyouts are typically followed by the replacement of inefficient management and board teams (Anders
1992). The sponsors are responsible for finding new candidates for these positions and leverage their
extensive networks to find the most suitable candidates. Another important secondary lever is the
mentoring of management teams of the portfolio companies by the private equity investors. Investment
professionals in the buyout firms act as sounding boards for managers in the portfolio companies. The
communication is often informal and unbureaucratic (Kester and Luehrman 1995). Importantly, the
portfolio companies attain access to the buyout firms’ extensive contact networks, which for example
help them to find new business partners and new key employees (Bruining and Wright 2002).

THE IMPORTANCE OF HUMAN CAPITAL FACTORS IN PRIVATE EQUITY
According to the strategic management view of leveraged buyouts, as discussed by Loos (2005), buyout
sponsors generate value through sharing resources with the target company. A distinguishing feature
between buyout sponsors and strategic buyers is that strategic buyers typically acquire companies in the
search for horizontal synergies whereas buyout sponsors generally lack the capability to share resources
amongst its portfolio companies. Instead, the buyout sponsor seeks to exchange resources vertically and
to improve the profitability of each individual portfolio company. The main resource of the buyout
sponsor is the knowledge and expertise of its employees (Loos 2005).

Despite the importance of the exchanges between the buyout sponsor and the target company,
remarkably little evidence has been provided in the existing literature on the composition of human
capital factors that affect the financial performance of the target company. However, Acharya et. al (2010)
provide anecdotal evidence showing that differences in human capital factors partly explain why large

                                                                                      3
mature buyout funds are able to consistently outperform others. In addition, Loos (2005) investigates a
number of human capital factors related to the characteristics of private equity firms and its employees to
see if a relationship exists between these factors and fund returns. According to his findings, professional
experience is the most important amongst the factors. All in all, Loos’ results establish that characteristics
related to the firm and its investment professionals are statistically significant performance drivers in the
value creation process and that they explain up to one quarter of the cross-sectional returns of private
equity funds. Siming (2010) provides support to Loos’ findings regarding the importance of professional
background and finds evidence of the benefit of a network advantage in private equity. Siming shows that
private equity firms have a 19 percentage points higher probability of being included in an auction
bidding process and a 13.5 percentage points higher probability of winning the auction if the process is
led by an advisory firm within a previous employment network. Moreover, the mere inclusion in an
auction process is valuable for the private equity investor because bidders obtain access to confidential
information memorandums and data rooms that would not have been accessible otherwise.

LOCAL AND INTERNATIONAL ADVANTAGES IN EQUITY INVESTING
The possible existence of a local advantage in private equity has not been previously examined. However,
it has been extensively investigated in connection to exchange traded stocks. In an influential study,
Shukla and van Inwegen (1995) argue that local investors have access to better information about local
securities for a number of reasons. For example, local investors can make personal visits to target
companies at a lower cost, giving them an edge over foreign investors. Furthermore, differences in
accounting procedures make local financial statements more intelligible for local investors. Several other
papers have reached similar conclusions. Hau (2001) studies trading data for professional traders and
finds that local investors outperform foreign traders. Malloy (2005) argues that analysts located closer to a
company provide more accurate analyses. Orpurt (2004) studies local and non-local analysts’ earnings
estimates in seven European countries and finds statistically significant evidence of a local advantage
derivable from a better understanding of local languages, financial statements, customs and cultures.

On the other hand, there is also ample evidence in support of the contrasting view that a local advantage
does not exist. The principal argument is that foreign investors are more sophisticated and have access to
better resources and expertise. This view is emphasized by for example Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000),
Seasholes (2000), Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (2001) and Froot and Ramadorai (2001). Other papers
have found that any differences between the returns of local and foreign investors are attributable to the
type of securities that are held. For example, Dahlquist and Robertsson (2001) show that foreign
investors buy larger stocks compared to local investors. Otten and Bams (2007) conduct a similar study to
Shukla and van Inwegen (1995) using a more elaborate multi-factor asset pricing model, a more recent
sample period and a larger sample but find no evidence of a local advantage. If anything, they find that
foreign investors perform slightly better than local investors. Thus, the evidence is mixed. Some literature
suggests that local investors enjoy an informational advantage whereas other papers stress the superior
sophistication of non-local investors. However, no clear consensus has emerged as to which factor is
more conducive to superior investor performance.

III THEORY AND HYPOTHESES

MOTIVATION FOR A LOCAL ADVANTAGE IN PRIVATE EQUITY
From the literature review and interviews with investment professionals, we identify three key reasons as
to why a local advantage may exist in the private equity market.5 Firstly, we expect the informational

5 We have conducted interviews with investment professional in the private equity industry to improve our understanding of how private equity
firms analyze investment opportunities, which financial performance metrics are studied, how investors generate value and what differentiates
local investors from foreign investors.

                                                                                      4
advantage of local investors and analysts in exchange traded equities to persist also within private equity.
As in exchange traded equities, local private equity investors can visit target companies more often and
gain a better understanding of their operations. In addition, geographic proximity facilitates the process of
following up on the practical implementation of strategic decisions and fine-tuning their execution.
Furthermore, the informational advantage may arise through better access to information about
upcoming deal flows and more efficient screening processes of investment opportunities due to a better
understanding of local languages, customs and cultures and financial statements.

Secondly, the local investor may enjoy a network advantage. Siming (2010) shows that an extensive
previous employment network is valuable because it allows the private equity investor to gain access both
to a greater deal flow and to privileged information about target companies. It is reasonable to assume
that local investors have more extensive previous employment networks in the local market. Moreover,
key to implementing a successful corporate governance model is the ability to find and attract experienced
industry professionals who can assume management positions and seats on boards of directors. It is likely
that local investors have a larger local industrial network and a better ability to find suitable candidates. In
addition, our interviews indicate that language barriers between members of boards of directors or
members of management teams significantly reduce the efficiency of internal decision making processes.

Thirdly, the local investor is subject to a reputational incentive to engender superior performance in each
target company. Private equity investors are incentivized to complete restructurings, as they would
otherwise suffer reputational damage (Ross Sorkin 2007). In the multiplayer repeat private equity market,
counterparties, for example banks, management teams, potential board members and acquirees, would be
less willing to transact with a non-reputable investor (Davidoff 2009). From interviews conducted with
industry professionals, we deduce that local investors are exposed to a much stronger incentive to
complete restructurings than non-local investors. Non-local investors are not as geographically
constrained as local investors and can exit a geographical market if substantial reputational damage is
accrued. Local investors do not have the same flexibility. They are incentivized to complete restructurings
and to commit substantial resources to improve target performance even if a quick exit would have been
more cost effective in a short-term perspective. Whilst this may not be an advantage for the local investor
per se, we expect the reputational incentive to have a positive relative impact on the operating
performance of distressed target companies.

Like in the case of exchange traded equities, compelling arguments exist in favor of the view that non-
local investors should have an advantage over local investors. For example, adopting the conclusions of
Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), it would be possible to argue that non-local investors are more
sophisticated and have access to better resources and expertise. Moreover, non-local investors could
potentially also enjoy an informational advantage. Specifically, an investor with an international
investment scope could have a narrow industry scope and thus invest exclusively in certain industries but
in a multitude of countries.6 In such cases, industry knowledge may be more advantageous than local
market knowledge. Our network advantage argument can also be inversed. Assuming that non-local
investors have a broader geographical investment scope than local investors, non-local investors may
enjoy an advantage if they can use a more extensive international network to find attractive business
partners in other countries. Concretely, this could facilitate making add-on acquisitions and growing the
business abroad. Furthermore, non-local investors could potentially enjoy a greater possibility to recruit
qualified candidates from around the world and not just from the local market. In addition, international
investors may also choose their investments from a larger pool of targets, suggesting that they only
acquire companies in which they see substantial upside potential. Finally, our reputational incentive

6 For example, GMT Communication Partners are focused exclusively on the telecommunications industry and have made investments in 17
different countries, despite having only one single office.

                                                                                      5
argument can also be turned over. If local investors are more concerned with their reputation in the local
press than non-local investors, it could be easier for non-local investors to implement unpopular but
efficiency improving measures in their portfolio companies. For example, it could be argued that it would
be easier for a non-local investor to lay off employees than for a local investor.

In sum, it is not evident whether we should expect local investors to outperform non-local investors, or
vice versa. However, we believe that it is especially important in private equity to have good knowledge
about the local market and a strong local network due to the limited amount of publicly available
information about each investment opportunity. We expect that local investors should be able to gain
access to a better deal flow and thus be able to acquire better companies and be in a better position to
monitor them. We also believe that a local contact network is more advantageous than an international
network because it is important to be able to recruit qualified senior staff members that speak the local
language and have a good understanding of local market conditions. Thirdly, we believe that the
reputational argument should work in favor of local investors. We do not expect that it is practical or
desirable to implement unpopular measures in portfolio companies because it could obstruct efficient
governance of the company. Our initial perception is therefore that any potential local advantage should
outweigh any potential international advantage and that we should see that local investors generate more
value in their portfolio companies than international investors do.

MEASURING VALUE GENERATION
As pointed out by Berg and Gottschalg (2005), value generation in buyouts is often seen from the
perspective of equity holders and can be measured in terms of change in equity capital. The authors
decompose the equity value into

                    Equity value = Valuation Multiple * Revenues * Margin – Net Debt.                  (1)

To examine whether a local advantage exists, we rearrange Equation 1 to

                                 Firm value = Valuation multiple * Revenues * Margin.7
                                                                                                                  (2)

We study the impact on firm value rather than equity value because the firm value takes into account the
value generation attributable to all stakeholders, not only to equity holders. This is important in our setup
for two reasons. Firstly, the reputational incentive compels local investors to also acknowledge the
interests of credit holders and not only seek to maximize the equity value at the expense of credit holders.
Secondly, net debt figures cannot be accurately calculated, as the databases we use do not distinguish
between interest bearing and non-interest bearing liabilities.8

In order to investigate whether local investors generate more value in their holdings than non-local
investors, we introduce EBITDA growth as a proxy for growth in firm value. Since the firm value is the
product of the EBITDA and the EBITDA multiplier, a percentage change in the EBITDA can be seen as
a percentage change in firm value, holding the valuation multiple constant. The valuation multiple is
predominantly determined by market conditions beyond the control of the private equity firm. Our
analysis thus excludes the effects of market sentiment on valuation and thereby the ability of investors to
profit from changes in market sentiment. This is appropriate since such an ability is unlikely to be
contingent on whether the investor is local or non-local. Furthermore, the EBITDA is an appropriate
profitability measure for four reasons: (1) it is preferable to study a measure of operating income rather

7 Firm value is the sum of equity value and net debt.

8 The performance of private equity firms is analyzed using measures on the target company level. The alternative, to analyze the internal rate of
return (IRR) on the fund level is not feasible. Most importantly, IRR data is not typically public information and is only disclosed sporadically by
the investors. Furthermore, very few funds are solely dedicated to one geographical area, which makes it problematic to create a relevant
distinction between local and non-local investors.

                                                                                      6
than net income because it measures the productivity of operating assets more appropriately; (2) it is
problematic to compare net income across countries due to differences in tax regulation; (3) operating
income is independent of financing decisions which is important as the capital structure is often
significantly altered subsequent to a buyout; and (4) it is preferable to EBIT because it excludes
depreciation and amortization costs and is thus independent of financing decisions (Barber and Lyon
1996).9

HYPOTHESES
Considering our reasoning as to why a local advantage might exist and using our proxy for value
generation, we hypothesize that the EBITDA increases more for holdings owned by local investors than
for holdings owned by non-local investors. Thus, we hypothesize that the advantages of local investors
outweigh those of non-local investors. There are two ways to increase the EBITDA, either by increasing
sales and/or by expanding the EBITDA margin, i.e. decreasing operating costs without decreasing sales.
To investigate whether a potential local advantage stems from a superior ability to increase sales and/or
to increase the EBITDA margin, we subsequently examine if a difference exists in the abilities of local
and non-local investors to increase these measures. We hypothesize that local presence will facilitate both
sales expansion and margin improvement.

IV ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
To investigate our hypotheses, we study transactions in Scandinavia and consider it as one homogenous
region. The Scandinavian setting is advantageous for three reasons: (1) Denmark, Norway and Sweden’s
geographic, social, political, linguistic, regulatory, economic and cultural proximity; (2) accounting
information for private companies is publicly available; and (3) the region has experienced a vast amount
of private equity activity during the last decade.

A potential local advantage would stem from the accumulated local knowledge and network of the firm’s
employees. It is a human capital factor that cannot be directly observed or measured. Due to the difficulty
of measuring local expertise at the individual level, we use origins and office locations as proxies. We
differentiate between: (1) Scandinavian private equity investors, (2) foreign private equity investors with a
local office in Scandinavia, and (3) foreign private equity investors without local presence in Scandinavia.
If a local advantage exists, we ought to find that Scandinavian investors outperform foreign investors.
Moreover, foreign investors with a local office in Scandinavia should outperform those without local
presence. These three subgroups are combined into the five classifications presented in Table 1. For each
classification, local investors are defined as investors belonging to group (i) and non-local investors are
defined as investors belonging to group (ii). This implies that foreign investors with local presence are
considered as non-local investors in Classification (1) to (3) and as local investors in Classification (4) and
(5). It is important to note that only Classification (1) and (5) include all observations and that
Classification (2) to (4) merely compares subgroups of the total sample. We alter the definitions in order
to examine whether any differences in performance pertain to the origin of the buyout sponsor or to the
existence of a local office.

9 We refrain from studying taxes and loan terms. As transaction prices are based on multiples of EBITDA, private equity investors are not
substantially rewarded for dollars saved below the EBITDA line in the income statement. In the words of one of our interviewees: “A dollar
saved below the EBITDA is worth a dollar. A dollar saved above that line is worth ten”. Secondly, negotiating loan terms and setting up tax
structures are skills that have become more generic than they were in the early days of private equity. Investors typically hire tax advisors who
implement off-the-shelf solutions and banks have commoditized their offerings by lending at more uniform terms.

                                                                                      7
Table 1. Classification of investors as local and non-local
                                          (i) (ii)
 Classification Local investors Non-local investors
        1 Acquired by Scandinavian PE investor Acquired by foreign PE investor

        2 Acquired by Scandinavian PE investor Acquired by foreign PE investor with no
                                                                presence in Scandinavia
        3 Acquired by Scandinavian PE investor Acquired by foreign PE investor with a local
                                                                    office in Scandinavia
        4 Acquired by foreign PE investor with a local   Acquired by foreign PE investor with no
                   office in Scandinavia                           presence in Scandinavia
        5 Acquired by PE investor with presence in      Acquired by foreign PE investor with no
                  Scandinavia (Scandinavian or foreign)         presence in Scandinavia

The table presents the classifications used in the regression models. In the models, a dummy variable takes on the value 1 when the investor
belongs to (i) and 0 when it belongs to (ii).

We run our regression models on each of the five classifications. However, designing the regression
specification is fairly problematic as it is difficult to determine an appropriate benchmark against which
post-transaction performance should be measured. More specifically, it is difficult to find a control
measure that convincingly estimates the performance development that would have materialized in the
absence of a buyout. Smart and Waldfogel (1994) discuss this issue extensively and establish that the two
most robust methodologies for this type of analysis is the difference-in-differences estimation and the
event study. Due to the difficulty of benchmarking post-transaction performance, we seek to improve the
robustness of our results by applying both methods. As the two methods use different setups, the
variables of interest are not calculated identically and the magnitudes of the coefficients derived from the
two methods are not directly comparable. However, the methods offer complementing interpretations.
The event study model measures, to the best extent possible, the value creation effect whereas the
difference-in-differences model captures both the value creation effect and the value capturing effect.

THE EVENT STUDY MODEL SPECIFICATION
The event study method has been widely used in previous literature (see for example Alemany and Martí
2005; Andersson and Gilstring 2009; Bergström et al. 2007; Cressy, Munari and Malipiero 2007; Vinten
2008). The method is useful for explaining the operating improvements in buyouts that are in excess of
the expected improvement. As discussed by Bergström et al. (2007), the expected improvements can be
attributed to macro factors or other factors that affect similar companies. Such improvements are likely to
materialize through a buy-and-hold strategy and therefore do not rely on the identification and
implementation of operating performance improvement measures. In accordance with the framework of
Berg and Gottschalg (2005), these factors can be referred to as value capturing factors. By comparing the
development of the portfolio company with the development for similar companies, we exclude, to the
best extent possible, the value capturing effect.

We run five independent regressions for each performance measure using the classifications of Table 1.
The regression specification is

                                                                                                ,                                                (3)

where AOPi is the abnormal operating performance of firm i at the time of the exit. Typei is a dummy
variable that is assigned the value 1 if firm i belongs to category (i) and 0 if firm i belongs to category (ii),
as specified in Table 1. τ denotes additional control variables and includes the log of total assets of the
target company and the log of the investor’s assets under management. δ is a coefficient vector.
Controlling for target size is important, as it is feasible that discrepancies in performance measures could

                                                                                      8
be explained by differences in the target size. For example, small firms typically grow more quickly than
large firms. It is also necessary to control for the size of the investor as larger investors potentially have
more resources, a larger knowledge base and a superior financial backing, which for example could
facilitate sales expansion through add-on acquisitions. Moreover, it is important to control for the
duration of the holding period of the portfolio company. This is indirectly achieved through calculating
EBITDA growth and sales growth as compound annual growth rates. However, we consistently apply
holding period dummy variables to the EBITDA margin regressions since the change in EBITDA margin
is not annualized. When using the event study method, we account for the so-called J-curve effect by
studying the entire performance change between the year before entry and the exit year (see Bergström et
al. 2007, Cao and Lerner 2006 and Muscarella and Vetsuypens 1990). According to Burgel (2000), the J-
curve effect arises as portfolio companies tend to underperform up to assumedly the fourth year of
sponsor ownership due to substantial restructurings and start to outperform from the fourth year and
onward.

CALCULATING ABNORMAL OPERATING PERFORMANCE
We define abnormal operating performance as

                                                                                        .                                                   (4)

Hence, abnormal operating performance is calculated by subtracting the expected operating performance of
firm i at the time of exit from the actual operating performance of firm i at the time of exit. The expected
operating performance should be interpreted as operating performance at the time of exit, had an
acquisition not taken place. The expected operating performance is by nature unobservable and must be
estimated. To approximate the expected operating performance, we produce individual estimates of
expected performance for each firm by assigning peer companies to each target company. Matching the
target company with a benchmark peer group has been the most common method of deriving expected
performance in previous research. Barber and Lyon (1996) seek to establish the most powerful matching
methodology and compare matching firms on the grounds of: (1) two-digit SIC code, (2) four-digit SIC
code, (3) two-digit SIC code and similar size and (4) two-digit SIC code and similar pre-event
performance.10 The authors conclude that matching target and peers on industry and pre-event
performance yields the most powerful and well-specified results in almost all cases. We therefore apply
this matching technique in our study. Through this construction, time and industry fixed effects are
inherently controlled for in our event study model.

We distinguish between calculating abnormal operating performance for growth measures and margins.
In accordance with Alemany and Martí (2005), we specify the calculation of abnormal performance for
annual growth measures as

                                         ( ) ( ) ,11                              (5)

where is the chosen performance measure at exit for target firm i, is the chosen
performance measure at the year of the exit for the peer group of target firm i, is the level of the
performance measure in the year before entry for target firm i, is the level of the performance
measure in the year before entry for the peer group assigned to target firm i and n is the holding period.

10 The Standard Industrial Classification (abbreviated SIC) is a United States government system for classifying industries by a four-digit code.

11 When calculating growth rates, we recognize some inherent problems in applying equation (4) to profit measures. Growth cannot be calculated
if the sign of the variable changes from positive to negative, or vice versa. Therefore, we adjust these measures. Firstly, if a company goes from
making a profit in period t to a loss in period t+1, we record the percentage change as -100 percent. Secondly, if a company goes from making a
loss in period t to a profit in t+1, we record the change as +100 percent.

                                                                                      9
Following the methodology of Barber and Lyon (1996), we define the calculation for changes in operating
margins as

                                               ( ).                            (6)

In addition to the definitions above, denotes the average change in performance of the
peer group assigned to target firm i between the year before entry and the exit year.
                      thereby denotes the expected performance at the time of exit for target company i.

The event study excludes, to the greatest possible extent, the effect of value capturing. If a perfect
measure for expected performance could be found, the model would solely measure differences in the
investors’ value creation abilities. However, since we merely can approximate expected performance, it is
likely that the approximated value is not identical to the true value of expected performance. This
discrepancy will introduce some unavoidable noise in the estimation of investors’ value creation abilities.
A drawback of the method is that it does not take information prior to t-1 into account. Furthermore, the
accuracy of this method is highly dependent on the chosen peer group, which in turn is dependent on the
performance of the target at time t-1. We are convinced that our matching methodology is sound, but to
ascertain that our results are not driven by extreme observations in the peer groups we also adopt the
difference-in-differences model, as suggested by Smart and Waldfogel (1994).

THE DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES MODEL SPECIFICATION
The difference-in-differences regression model tests how a certain treatment affects a treatment group in
comparison to a control group that does not receive the treatment. This approach has been used in a
number of similar papers (see Desbrières and Schatt 2002; Guo, Hotschkiss and Song 2011; Kaplan 1989;
Smith 1990). The setup in this study is that the treatment group is assumed to be a sample of firms
acquired by local private equity investors and the control group consists of firms acquired by non-local
private equity investors, i.e., group (i) and (ii) in Table 1, respectively. Hence both treatment and control
groups receive a treatment, with the key distinguishing factor being that one group receives a “local
treatment” whereas the other one receives a “non-local treatment”. For each performance measure, we
run five independent regressions in order to compare the subgroups presented in Table 1. The model
specification is

                                                                                                                    ,                            (7)

where the dependent variable is a measure of operating performance of the target company for firm i
at time t. Typei is a dummy variable that denotes the characteristic of firm i and which is assigned the value
1 if firm i belongs to group (i) and 0 if it belongs to group (ii) in Table 1. Postit is a time-varying dummy
variable which is assigned the value 1 for every post-entry observation of firm i and 0 for every pre-entry
observation of firm i. γ is a set of control variables and include year fixed effects, the log of the total
assets of the target firm, the log of the investor’s assets under management and dummy variables for the
duration of private equity ownership. δ is a coefficient vector. Since the dependent variable is not peer-
adjusted, we use year fixed effects to control for the impact of changes in the business cycle on the
dependent variable. We also use length-of-ownership dummies in order to control for the J-curve effect.

THE ASSUMPTION OF THE DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES METHOD
The method tests the change in performance of “treatment companies” against the change in
performance of “control companies”

                               [ ] [ ],                            (8)

                                                                                     10
where is the change in performance during the period of private equity ownership. Recall
that value generation is the sum of value capturing and value creation. Let denote the
difference between the expected performance level at exit and the actual performance level at entry. In
order to distinguish between value capturing and value creation, it is essential to assume

                         [ ] ( ) ,                      (9)

i.e., that the expected changes in performance of the treatment and control companies are equal.12 To
understand the implication of the assumption, consider target company i, a potential target of a
“treatment investor”, and target company j, a potential target of a “control investor”. The assumption
implies that in the absence of transactions, no change in the relative performance of the two firms should
take place. If the assumption holds, there should be no difference in the two types of investors’ value
capturing ability since the expected performance changes should be equal in magnitude. Hence, the entire
difference in post-transaction performance would be attributable to either firm’s superior value creation
ability. If the assumption is flawed, the difference-in-differences estimator will be affected by differences
in both value creating and value capturing ability.13

To evaluate the validity of the assumption, consider company j, which belongs to a population of
Scandinavian companies that will be acquired by private equity investors. As discussed by Smart and
Waldfogel (1994), the population is a non-random draw from the entire population of firms as only firms
with certain characteristics are acquired by buyout sponsors. However, the process that determines
whether company j will be acquired by an investor belonging to the treatment or to the control group is
possibly stochastic. The outcome of the process is typically the result of a competitive bidding process,
and the type of buyer that eventually offers the highest bid could well be random. In that case, the
composition of the treatment and control firms should also be random with the same expected post-
transaction performance and hence the assumption would be valid. Whilst this argument is theoretically
compelling, it is probably too strong in reality. For instance, a significant part of all transactions are
subject to proprietary processes where the outcomes depend on the buyout firm’s deal-making and
screening capabilities rather than coincidence. Therefore, the most truthful interpretation of the
difference-in-differences estimate is that it measures value generation as a whole and thus includes both
value creation and value capturing effects.

V DATA

DATA FOR TARGET COMPANIES
Our sample contains private equity sponsored transactions that have taken place in Denmark, Norway
and Sweden between 1999 and 2008 and with a deal value larger than €5 million. We restrict our sample
to deals in which the buyout sponsor has acquired a majority of the share capital. Finally, deals in which a
foreign investor has co-invested with a Scandinavian buyout sponsor are excluded. In a number of cases,
accounting data for eligible transactions has been unavailable, mostly because consolidated accounts have
been registered outside of Scandinavia. These restrictions yield a sample of 91 target companies.14 The
dataset contains information on the name of the target company, the name of the buyout firm, whether
the buyout firm is Scandinavian or foreign, if the foreign buyout firm has an office in Scandinavia, entry
and exit dates of the investment, and the industry classification of the target. Moreover, we have retrieved
selected accounting information from three years before the entry up until the year of the exit, or if the
holding has not yet been realized, until the date of the latest available annual accounts. As remarked by

12 This is also known as the common trends assumption.

13 For a graphical illustration and detailed explanation of the assumption, please refer to Appendix C.

14 A complete list of the transactions included in our study can be found in Appendix D.

                                                                                     11
Bergström et al. (2007), it would be ideal to study only realized buyout deals as the exit implies that the
restructuring of the target is complete. However, due to the limited sample size, it has been necessary to
include non-realized deals. In total, 49 of the deals have been realized and 42 are still under private equity
ownership. The average holding period of the realized transactions is 4.7 years and of the non-realized
transactions 3.0 years. This potentially introduces a bias in our data since our analysis may fail to capture
potential performance improvements in the non-realized companies that may materialize between the
date of the latest reported figures and the imminent exit. However, the non-realized transactions are
equally distributed across the three investor groups, which implies that a bias should not be present.15

The transactions have been identified through searches on the databases Mergermarket and Zephyr, as
well as through systematic reviews of the current and historical holdings of a large number of
international and Scandinavian private equity firms. There is a possibility that not all transactions are
covered by the databases. However, nothing indicates any systematic exclusion. If a target has been
acquired several times within the time period, it is observed as multiple observations. Four companies
have been acquired multiple times: three of them occur two times in the dataset and one occurs three
times. The time period has been chosen to include as many deals as possible to facilitate statistical
inference. The period includes the most recent transactions where post-transaction accounting
information can be retrieved and deals from as far back as Mergermarket and Zephyr contain
information. Entry dates were typically disclosed in Mergermarket or Zephyr and exit dates were
identified by going through the websites of the buyout sponsors, and through searches on Factiva, the
database for press clippings.

Pre- and post-transaction accounting information for the target companies was accessed through the
databases Affärsdata, Retriever and Orbis for Swedish companies, Greens for Danish companies and
Ravninfo for Norwegian companies.16 These databases publish information on all public and private
companies in their respective countries. In some instances, data for certain years and companies were
missing in the databases. In such cases, we ordered supplementary annual reports from the Companies
Registration Office in the corresponding country to complement the data from the databases. In total, we
have used accounting information from approximately 680 annual accounts. The industry classifications
of the target companies were retrieved by looking up their NACE-codes in the database Orbis.17 The
NACE industry classifications have thereafter been translated into Industry Classification Benchmark
(ICB) codes to allow for matching with peer companies.

The characteristics of the private equity firms, such as assets under management and office locations,
have been determined by systematic study of their websites. We have also identified historical office
locations by going through press clippings and through searches on Factiva. In cases where office
locations have varied over time we use a time-varying variable that classifies the observation as either a
foreign investor with local presence or a foreign investor without local presence, for each time t.

DATA FOR PEER COMPANIES
The peer companies have been chosen from the universe of all listed companies on Scandinavian
exchanges between 1997 and 2010. For each company and year, we use Datastream to download sales,
EBITDA and total assets as well as the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB) on the 2-digit level.
Each target company is matched with the ten companies with the most similar EBITDA margin in the
year before the entry and within the same 2-digit level ICB code as the target company.

15 45 percent of the holdings owned by Scandinavian sponsors are current. The corresponding figures for foreign investors with and without local
presence are 46 and 50 percent, respectively.

16 See www.affarsdata.se, www.retriever.se, orbis.bvdep.com, www.greens.dk and www.ravninfo.no.

17 Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community.

                                                                                     12
Delisted peers have not been replaced with new peers because new peers cannot be appropriately
selected. Each target company’s peer group must be selected at time t-1 to appropriately reflect the
market conditions at the time of the entry. New peers cannot be added at time t+k because they will be
similar to the target company at time t+k not at time t-1. Their subsequent performance development will
not adequately reflect the performance development of similar companies to the target company
subsequent to the entry. However, having delisted peers potentially creates a bias in the data. If a
company has been delisted, it is uncertain whether the company has been privately placed, gone bankrupt
or if there is an error in the database. The survivorship bias may result in overstated performance
measures for the peer groups since bankruptcy cases are not captured. Over the entire time period, only
four peers have been delisted: Profilgruppen AB, D. Carnegie & Co., Kapitalpleje A/S and
Affärsstrategerna i Sverige. Of these, only D. Carnegie & Co. could possibly create a bias, since the other
three peers were either privately placed, merged with another company or erroneously handled by
Datastream. D. Carnegie & Co. is used as a peer for three companies (one owned by a Scandinavian
investor and two owned by foreign investors without local presence). However, considering that only one
peer could create a bias and that each peer company is assigned ten peers, such a bias is unlikely to have
any impact on our overall results.

DESCRIPTION OF THE DATA
The vast majority of the transactions included in this study took place in the period 2004 to 2007. The
concentration of deal activity to these years is anticipated due to the high liquidity in financial markets and
the ease of borrowing prior to the financial turmoil that emanated in 2007. Table 2 shows a number of
descriptive statistics for our data sample. 51 of our 91 observations are Swedish target companies, 18 are
Danish and 22 are Norwegian. The average holding period across the sample is 4 years, which is
consistent with the average duration of a private equity holding (Bergström et al. 2007) and also fairly
consistent across the three subgroups. The average target company has total assets worth SEKm 1,708;
however, there are some extreme observations with both very high and low values. The standard
deviation of the total assets of targets owned by Scandinavian investors is almost double the standard
deviation for the firms owned by foreign investors with local presence. Hence, Scandinavian investors
acquire companies in a broader size range than foreign investors do. However, due to differences in the
means and medians, it is not clearly discernable whether any subgroup of investors systematically acquires
smaller or larger targets than the others. The average private equity investor has assets worth USDm
5,701 (SEKm 35,895) under management.18 The foreign sponsors are, on average, 2 to 3 times larger than
the Scandinavian sponsors but the standard deviation of their size is also 2 to 3 times larger. Moreover,
the foreign investors are substantially more international than the Scandinavian investors, in the sense that
they invest and have office locations in more countries. On average, the Scandinavian investor has
invested in 5 different countries, whereas foreign investors with and without Scandinavian presence have
invested in 12 and 10 countries respectively. The medians are distributed similarly to the means. In
addition, it is also observable that the Scandinavian investor has offices in three countries on average,
whereas the two other investor categories have offices in 9 and 5 countries, respectively. Again, the
medians follow the same distribution. However, the majority of Scandinavian investors only have offices
in Scandinavia whereas the foreign investors have offices around the world.

18 Exchange rate as of 27 May 2011. USD/SEK: 6.30.

                                                                                     13
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of the sample properties
                                   Total sample Scandinavian Foreign with   Foreign with no
                                                                       local presence   local presence
No. of            Total sample 92 47 25 20
observations     Swedish target 51 20 19 12
                  Danish target 19 9 6 4
                  Norwegian target 22 18 0 4
Holding period    Mean 4 4 5 4
(years)           Min 1 1 2 2
                 Max 9 7 9 6
Total assets of    Mean 1,708 1,796 1,257 2,085
target (SEKm)    Median 579 579 583 469
                   Std. Dev. 3,428 4,033 2,009 3,369
                 Min 15 100 70 15
                  Max 20,000 20,000 9,664 14,000
The investor's     Mean 5,701 3,549 9,655 8,151
assets under      Median 3,930 1,916 6,050 5,400
management
                   Std. Dev. 6,639 3,471 8,717 9,013
(USDm)
                 Min 82 82 563 90
                  Max 32,500 10,280 31,100 32,500
No. of countries   Mean 8 5 12 10
in which the      Median 7 3 15 9
investor has
                  Std. Dev. 6 5 4 6
invested
                 Min 1 1 6 3
                 Max 24 16 19 24
No. of countries   Mean 5 3 9 5
in which the      Median 4 2 10 4
investor has
                  Std. Dev. 4 3 5 4
offices
                 Min 1 1 3 1
                 Max 16 9 14 16

The table presents descriptive statistics for the sample in total and for each of the investor types (Scandinavian, foreign with local presence and
foreign with no local presence). No. of observations presents the total number of acquisitions made by each investor type, as well as the number of
acquisition made by each investor type in each Scandinavian country. Holding period is the number of years of private equity ownership. Total assets
of target is measured by book values. The investor’s assets under management is the amount invested in each private equity firm’s active funds, and
excludes divested funds where the assets have been redistributed to investors. No. of countries in which the investor has invested takes into account both
current and realized holdings of each private equity investor. No. of countries in which the investor has offices takes only current office locations into
account.

Table 3 shows descriptive statistics of the compound annual growth in EBITDA and revenue, as well as
the change in the EBITDA margin between the entry date and the exit date of each transaction. Raw data
denotes the actual performance measure, without reference to peer performance. Abnormal figures are
the peer-adjusted figures used in the event study method. On examination of the operating statistics, it is
evident that the sample contains some extreme observations. We note substantial maximum values for
the compound annual growth rates in EBITDA and sales. Such large values would have been unfeasible
with organic growth. However, since we do not adjust for add-on acquisitions, the sales and EBITDA
growth figures are most likely driven by add-on acquisitions.19 The extreme values in EBITDA and sales
growth cause discrepancies between some means and medians. However, it is important to note that the
means and median are distributed similarly across the three subgroups for all six measures.

19 We do not make any adjustments since add-on acquisitions are, in fact, one of many value drivers used by private equity investors, as discussed
by Loos (2005). Secondly, as Bergström et al. (2007) point out, add-on acquisitions can be viewed as a substitute for organic growth.

                                                                                     14
Table 3. Descriptive statistics of the EBITDA CAGR, Sales CAGR and change in EBITDA margin
between entry and exit: raw data and peer adjusted data

                                   Total sample Scandinavian Foreign with   Foreign with no
                                                                       local presence   local presence

EBITDA CAGR    Mean 0.187 0.122 0.143 0.366
(Raw)            Median 0.093 0.044 0.094 0.149
                   Std. Dev. 0.426 0.296 0.262 0.691
                  Min -0.424 -0.424 -0.380 -0.327
                  Max 2.037 0.997 0.592 2.037

EBITDA CAGR    Mean 0.161 0.087 0.134 0.342
(Abnormal)       Median 0.092 0.048 0.084 0.189
                   Std. Dev. 0.386 0.288 0.292 0.572
                  Min -0.505 -0.505 -0.356 -0.335
                  Max 1.883 0.898 0.719 1.883

Sales CAGR      Mean 0.101 0.084 0.048 0.208
(Raw)            Median 0.067 0.068 0.022 0.116
                   Std. Dev. 0.211 0.183 0.140 0.304
                  Min -0.307 -0.153 -0.307 -0.141
                  Max 1.183 0.985 0.335 1.183

Sales CAGR      Mean 0.067 0.060 0.007 0.155
(Abnormal)       Median 0.028 0.024 0.011 0.064
                   Std. Dev. 0.214 0.242 0.137 0.202
                  Min -0.400 -0.400 -0.240 -0.088
                  Max 1.220 1.220 0.326 0.613

ΔEBITDA         Mean 0.017 0.064 -0.021 -0.046
margin (Raw)     Median -0.005 0.001 -0.018 -0.023
                   Std. Dev. 0.200 0.255 0.084 0.118
                  Min -0.332 -0.247 -0.222 -0.332
                  Max 1.310 1.310 0.103 0.190

ΔEBITDA         Mean 0.043 0.057 0.063 -0.013
margin           Median 0.021 0.018 0.061 0.000
(Abnormal)       Std. Dev. 0.176 0.214 0.106 0.135
                  Min -0.549 -0.549 -0.147 -0.364
                  Max 0.899 0.899 0.263 0.291

The table presents performance measures for the sample in total as well as for each type of investor. EBITDA CAGR (Raw) measures the
absolute compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of the EBITDA between entry and exit (for deals not yet exited: from entry to the latest
reported figures). EBITDA CAGR (Abnormal) measures the EBITDA CAGR between entry and exit in relation to the performance of the peer
group. Identical methods are used to calculate both Sales CAGR (Raw) and Sales CAGR (Abnormal). ΔEBITDA margin (Raw) is the absolute
change in EBITDA margin between entry and exit. ΔEBITDA margin (Abnormal) is the change in EBITDA margin between entry and exit in
relation to peer groups.

VI EMPIRICAL RESULTS
In contradiction to our hypothesis, our findings suggest that foreign private equity investors are better at
improving the EBITDA of their portfolio companies than Scandinavian investors. Furthermore, we find
indications that foreign investors are better at increasing revenue than their Scandinavian counterparts.
We also provide evidence that Scandinavian investors tend to be better at enhancing the operational
effectiveness of their investments by improving the EBITDA margin. Finally, our findings indicate that it
is the existence of a local office, rather than the origin of the buyout sponsor that drive any differences in
performance between local and non-local investors.

We compare and contrast the results of the two methods for each performance measure. The results of
the event study are presented in Appendix A. The results of the difference-in-differences regression are

                                                                                     15
presented in Appendix B. We present the results for all five classifications. Looking at the result tables, (i)
denotes the Typei variable and refers to the local investor group of each classification (1) to (5). For each
method, we present one table for each dependent variable. In each table, we present four panels. Firstly,
in Panel A, we present the initial regressions, in which we only control for year fixed effects and the
duration of the private equity ownership. Secondly, in Panel B, we control for the target size by
introducing the log of the total assets of the target company as a control variable. Thirdly, in Panel C, we
add the log of the private equity investor’s assets under management as a control variable. Unfortunately,
assets under management are not disclosed by all investors. We presume that non-disclosure is a
reflection of a secretive brand image rather than a characteristic systematically exhibited by exceptionally
strong or weak private equity firms. Hence the addition of the variable is not anticipated to introduce a
bias. However, it reduces the number of observations to critical levels and may therefore reduce the
significance of our results. In Panel D, we replicate the initial regression from Panel A but control for
extreme observations using winsorized data at the 95 percent level. This is a robustness test to check
whether our results are driven by extreme observations. Hence, tail observations below the 2.5th and

above 97.5th percentiles are assigned the values of the 2.5th percentile and 97.5th percentile, respectively.
Hence, by using winsorized data, we do not drop any observations, which is desirable given our relatively
small sample.

Overall, treating foreign investors with local presence as local (Classification (5)) yields the most well-
specified results and most appropriately captures the differences between the subgroups in Classification
(2) to (4). In general, we find few statistically significant differences between Scandinavian-owned
companies and companies owned by local foreign investors (Classification (3)). However, we do find
statistically significant differences when comparing companies owned by Scandinavian investors and
those owned by non-local investors (Classification (2)). We also find statistically significant differences
upon comparing companies owned by local foreign investors and non-local foreign investors
(Classification (4)). This suggests that a potential local advantage stems from local presence rather than
local origin. Hence, we will focus our discussion on Classification (5).

COMPOUND ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF THE EBITDA
Table A1 presents the results of the event study and Table B1 presents the results of the difference-in-
differences regressions. In Panel A of Table A1, we find statistically significant evidence at the 10 percent
level that non-local investors in Classification (2) and (5) outperform local investors. Classification (2)
provides evidence that foreign non-local investors annually increase revenues by 25.5 percentage points
more than Scandinavian investors do. When considering both foreign investors with local presence and
Scandinavian investors as local investors (Classification (5)), we find that non-local investors outperform
local investors by 24.1 percentage points per year. However, the results of the difference-in-differences
regression, found in Panel A of Table B1, are inconclusive. The coefficients are not statistically significant
at any conventional level.

We present the results of the event study, controlling for the target size, in Panel B of Table A1. The
results of the initial event study are not altered. The (i)-coefficients of Classification (2) and (5) are still
significant and of the same sign and magnitude. The coefficients of the target size variable carry their
expected signs, indicating that larger target companies experience smaller increases in the EBITDA
compound annual growth rate than larger target companies. Moreover, the coefficients are statistically
significant at the 10 percent level for Classification (1), (2) and (4) and at the 5 percent level for
Classification (5). The corresponding results of the difference-in-differences regression can be found in
Panel B of Table B1. As with the event study, the target size control does not have a substantial impact
on either the signs, magnitudes or t-values of the results in Panel A. The (i)*Post-coefficients in the
difference-in-differences regression remain statistically insignificant.

                                                                                     16
In addition to control for the target size, we also control for the size of the private equity investor. The
results of the augmented event study are presented in Panel C of Table A1. The inclusion of this control
does not substantially alter our results. The t-values of the previously significant coefficients increase and
the (i)-coefficient in Classification (1) also becomes statistically significant at the 10 percent level. It is also
observable that the addition of the control increases the explanatory power of the regression through a
substantially increased R-squared value. The results of the difference-in-differences regressions are
presented in Panel C of Table B1. Upon the addition of the control, the signs of the (i)*Post-variable
remain negative, but are insignificant in all five classifications and in both methods. Hence, we cannot
find evidence that the investor size affects the improvement in EBITDA growth.

The results of the event study regressions with winsorized data can be found in Panel D in Table A1.
Controlling for extreme observations, we find practically the same results as in the Panel A regression.
The coefficients of interest in Classification (2) and (5) carry the same sign as in Panel A. This is
reassuring and suggests that the event study results are not substantially driven by outliers. However,
when applying the same technique to the difference-in-differences regression (see Panel D of Table B1),
the magnitudes of the (i)*Post-coefficients are immediately reduced. For example, the relevant coefficient
in Classification (5) is reduced from -0.924 to -0.084, although it remains statistically insignificant. Even if
the results are not altered, the substantial change in the coefficient suggests that the difference-in-
differences regression is more sensitive than the event study to extreme observations in the sample.

Overall, the event study finds evidence in favor of the view that non-local investors improve the
EBITDA growth rate more than local investors do. The results of the difference-in-differences regression
show the same tendency since the relevant coefficients carry the same signs. However, the results are
never statistically significant at any conventional level. The discrepancy in the results can partly be
attributed to differences in the construction of the dependent variables. Another explanation is that the
event study, to the best extent possible, only tests the value creation ability of the investor whereas the
difference-in-differences method tests both the value creation and the value capturing abilities. This could
cause the regression results to be different if the value capturing ability is of substantial importance. If we
assume that this explanation is correct, it would imply that whilst non-local investors have a superior value
creation ability (as inferred from the event study), this effect is counteracted by the effect of local investors
acquiring better targets to begin with. Hence, we detect no difference in the overall value generation ability
of the investors. However, we refrain from making any definite conclusions regarding the actual existence
of a value capturing effect since it cannot be directly tested.

COMPOUND ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF SALES
Table A2 presents the results of the event study and Table B2 presents the results of the difference-in-
differences regressions. Panel A shows the results of the initial regression. The (i)-coefficients of
Classification (4) and (5) are significantly negative at the 5 percent level. The results of Classification (5)
show that non-local investors increase the compound annual growth rate of sales by 11 percentage points
more than local investors. As indicated by Classification (4), this result is attributed to a superior ability of
non-local foreign investors to increase revenue in comparison local foreign investors. Due to the
magnitudes of the coefficients, we infer that the results are economically meaningful. The results of the
difference-in-differences regressions are however not concurrent. The relevant coefficient is statistically
insignificant for all five classifications.

Controlling for the size of the target company does not alter the results of either the event study or the
difference-in-differences regression. See Panel B in Table A2 and B2 respectively. Looking first at the
event study, the control contributes substantially to the R-squared value of the regressions but does not
alter the magnitudes of the statistically significant (i)-coefficients in Classification (4) and (5). The control
variable is negative and significant at the 5 percent level, which implies that larger companies experience a

                                                                                     17
smaller increase in the sales growth. Moreover, the control variable does not have an impact on the
magnitudes, signs or t-values of the relevant coefficients in the difference-in-differences regression.

When including the investor size control in the event study (Panel C of Table A2), our results strengthen
considerably. In general, the R-squared value increases considerably. Looking specifically at Classification
(5), the (i)-coefficient also becomes both stronger in magnitude and statistically significant at the one
percent level. However, the investor size coefficient is both economically and statistically insignificant.
On examination of the difference-in-differences regression in Panel C of Table B2, we find that the
relevant coefficient in Classification (5) more than doubles in magnitude but remains statistically
insignificant. However, the (i) * Post variable is statistically significant at the 10 percent level in
Classification (1) and (3). Since the same variable is not statistically significant in Classification (4), the
results suggest that the international reach of foreign investors with local presence gives them an
advantage vis-à-vis Scandinavian investors in increasing the revenues of their holdings. However, in
congruence with the results of the event study, the investor size variable is both economically and
statistically insignificant. Hence, we do not find any indication that the sheer size of the investor affects
the ability of the investor to increase the revenues of its holdings.

The results of the event study with winsorized data are presented in Panel D of Table A2. Reassuringly,
the relevant coefficients in Classification (4) and (5) are not affected by this robustness check. The signs,
magnitudes and t-values are consistent, which indicates that extreme observations do not substantially
drive our results. Likewise, the difference-in-differences results, presented in Panel D of Table B2, are not
markedly altered.

Overall, the event study finds evidence in support of the view that non-local investors improve the sales
growth rate more than local investors do. Again, the results of the difference-in-differences regressions
are congruent but not statistically significant. Moreover, the inconsistency of the results can again be
attributed to the different constructions of the dependent variables and the different setups of the two
methods. A potential explanation of the divergence is, as with the EBITDA growth, that non-local
investors increase the revenues more in their holdings than local investors do. However, local investors
acquire better companies which subsequently, and independently of the investors’ improvement efforts,
grow more quickly than the holdings of non-local investors. In aggregate, these effects largely subdue
each other, and we do not detect any convincing evidence that one outperforms the other in the
difference-in-differences regression. However, the same explanation would also suggest (from the results
in Panel C for Classification (3)) that local foreign investors acquire intrinsically better companies than
Scandinavian investors. Since we cannot test the actual impact of the value capturing effect, we cannot
accurately determine the validity of the above explanation.

CHANGE IN EBITDA MARGIN
Table A3 presents the results of the event study and Table B3 presents the results of the difference-in-
differences regressions. The results of the initial event study regressions are displayed in Panel A of Table
A3. We find economically and statistically significant evidence in Classification (2) and (5) that local
investors increase the EBITDA margin more than non-local investors. In contrast, the relevant
coefficients in Classification (3) and (4) are not statistically significant, although they carry their expected
signs. Given the t-values of 1.77 and 1.62 for Classification (2) and (4) respectively and 0.07 of
Classification (3), the results suggests that the outperformance of local investors is driven by local
presence rather than the origin of the buyout sponsor. The difference-in-differences results, presented in
Panel A of Table B3, lend economically and statistically significant support to the results of the event
study. To be sure, the magnitudes of the relevant coefficients are of the same magnitude and the relevant
coefficients in the difference-in-differences regression are significant at the 10 percent level.

                                                                                     18
Our results are not considerably altered when controlling for the size of the target company (see Panel B
of Table A3 and B3). The coefficient of interest in Classification (5) remains of the same magnitude, of
the same sign and statistically significant at the 10 percent level for both methods. Once again, the
coefficient of the target size variable is statistically insignificant for both methods.

Upon addition of the investor size control in Panel C, the t-values of the coefficients of interest are
reduced. Looking first at the event study, the (i)-coefficient is statistically insignificant for all five
classifications. However, the coefficient in Classification (5) is of the same sign and reasonably similar in
magnitude compared to the result in Panel B. However, it is reassuring that the investor size variable is
statistically insignificant for all five classifications. Moreover, the coefficient in Classification (5) can be
dismissed as economically insignificant. The difference-in-differences regression, presented in Panel C of
Table B3, shows the same tendency. The (i)*Post variable becomes statistically insignificant for all five
classifications. Likewise, the investor size variable is statistically insignificant for all five classifications.
Since the investor size variable is not statistically significant in either of the two methods, we cannot
deduce that it explains the variation in the dependent variable. The deterioration of statistical significance
of the coefficients of interest is thus expected to be attributable to the loss of observations associated
with the introduction of the investor size variable rather than an endogenous relationship between the
Typei variable and the investor size variable.

We present the winsorized results in Panel D of Table A3 and Table B3. Reassuringly, the results of the
event study are not markedly altered from the Panel A regression. To be sure, the signs, magnitudes and
t-values of the coefficients of interest are fairly similar. This is reassuring. However, when implementing
the outlier control measure in the difference-in-differences regression, the t-value of the relevant
coefficient in Classification (5) falls from 1.69 to 1.31. Whilst this robustness check identifies the effect of
extreme observations on our results, it also alters the original data, which could be of critical importance
when studying a limited sample size.

In sum, the event study and difference-in-differences regressions both find evidence in support of our
hypothesis that the EBITDA margin increases more under local than non-local private equity ownership.
The significance of the results deteriorate when adding the investor size variable, but we suspect that this
result is due to the loss of observations. Since the two methods both show that local investors
outperform non-local investors, it is difficult to discuss the relative effects of value creation and value
capturing. Moreover, it may seem puzzling that local investors improve the EBITDA margin more than
non-local investors, but that non-local investors seem to improve the EBITDA more than local investors.
The probable explanation for this finding is that non-local investors improve the revenue growth more
than local investors and that this effect trickles down through the income statement and subdues the
counteracting effect of local investors’ relatively superior EBITDA margin improvements.

VII CONCLUSION
In contrast to our initial hypothesis, we find indications that non-local investors are able to increase the
EBITDA, and thus the firm value, of their holdings more than local investors. Our results suggest that
non-local investors increase the EBITDA more effectively than local investors. Our findings also suggest
that the key driver of this result is the superior ability of non-local investors to increase the revenue of
their holdings. These findings lend support to the view that the advantages of being international
outweigh any advantages that stem from being local in generating value. There are several reasons as to
why this is plausible. For example, non-local investors may have a larger international presence and more
extensive networks abroad, which they can leverage to increase revenues swiftly and substantially.
Specifically, this could materialize through an advantage in the process of finding add-on acquisitions
abroad and it is conceivable that non-local investors have extensive expertise in implementing

                                                                                     19
internationalization strategies. Moreover, some investors prioritize a sophisticated industry knowledge
over local market knowledge. Such an investment strategy could allow the investor to leverage its
industrial expertise in any geographical market and gain an informational advantage.

In line with our initial hypothesis, we find statistically and economically significant evidence that local
investors improve the EBITDA margin of their holdings more than non-local investors do. This result
holds using both the event study and the difference-in-differences regression. Local expertise thus seems
to play a more central role in cutting costs and streamlining operations than in increasing revenue. A
possible explanation for this finding is that local presence facilitates monitoring and mentoring of
management teams, following up on the practical implementations of strategic decisions and fine-tuning
their execution. Nevertheless, since non-local investors increase the EBITDA more than do local
investors, our findings indicate that the local investors’ superior ability to expand margins is not sufficient
to counteract the non-local investors’ superior ability to increase revenues.

This paper has sought to fill the gap in the previous literature on the human capital factors that influence
the success of private equity investments. In doing so, we show that whilst a local advantage facilitates
margin improvement efforts, global reach is equally, if not more, important in order to generate value. A
potential caveat with this study is the limited sample size. The limited sample size reduces the statistical
significance of our results and is probably a contributing reason to the slightly divergent results of our
two methods. In addition, the fact that Scandinavian private equity investors are considered highly
successful in an international perspective may reduce the generalizability of our results. We therefore
recommend future research to apply the methodology of this thesis to other regions and larger datasets to
determine whether our results persist. Moreover, to further investigate the connection between local
presence and value generation, we recommend future research to qualitatively and rigorously explore the
mechanisms through which non-local investors generate revenue and through which local investors
improve operating efficiency in their portfolio holdings.

                                                                                     20
REFERENCES

Acharya, V.V., Hahn, M., Kehoe, C. (2009), “Corporate Governance and Value Creation: Evidence from
Private Equity”, CEPR Discussion Papers 7242, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Aizenman, J., Kendall, J. (2008), “The Internationalization of Venture Capital and Private Equity”, NBER
Working Papers 14344, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Alemany. L., Martí, J. (2005), “Unbiased Estimation of Economic Impact of Venture Capital Backed
Firms”. Working paper. Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Small Business (EISB) Conference, Barcelona,
Spain.

Anders, G. (1992), “The Barbarians in the Boardroom”, Harvard Business Review, 70(4), 79-87.

Andersson, G., Gilstring, H. (2009), “Operational Effectiveness in Buyouts”. Master’s thesis. Stockholm
School of Economics.

Barber, B.M., Lyon, J.D. (1996), “Detecting Abnormal Operating Performance: The Empirical Power and
Specification of Test Statistics”, Journal of Financial Economics, 41(3), 359-399.

Berg, A., Gottschalg, O. (2005), “Understanding Value Generation in Buyouts”. Journal of Restructuring
Finance, 2(1), 9-37.

Bergström, C., Grubb, M., Jonsson, S. (2007), “The Operating Impact of Buyouts in Sweden: A Study of
Value Creation”, The Journal of Private Equity, 11(1), 22-39.

Beroutsos, A., Freeman, F., Kehoe, C. (2007), “What Public Companies Can Learn from Private Equity”
McKinsey on Finance, Winter 2007, 1–6.

Bruining, H., Wright, M. (2002), “Entrepreneurial Orientation In Management Buy-Outs And The
Contribution Of Venture Capital”, Venture Capital, 4(2), 147-168.

Burgel, O. (2000), “UK Venture Capital and Private Equity as an Asset Class for Institutional Investors”.
Research report. London Business School.

Cao, J., Lerner, J. (2006), “The Performance of Reverse Leveraged Buyouts”, NBER Working Paper 12626,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Cressy, R., Munari, F., Malipiero, A. (2011), “Creative Destruction? Evidence that Buyouts Shed Jobs to
Raise Returns”, Venture Capital, 13(1), 1-22.

Dahlquist, M. and Robertsson, G. (2001), “Direct foreign ownership, institutional investors and firm
characteristics”, Journal of Financial Economics, 59(1), 413-440.

Davidoff, S.M. (2009), “The Failure of Private Equity”, Southern California Law Review, 82(3), 481-546.

Desbrières, P., Schatt, A. (2002), “The Impacts of LBOs on the Performance of Acquired Firms: The
French Case”, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 29(5-6), 695-729.

Easterwood, J.C., Seth, A., Singer, R.F. (1989), “The Impact of Leveraged Buyouts on Strategic Direction,
California Management Review, 32(1), 30-43.

Froot, K.A., O’Connell, P.G.J., Seasholes, M. (2001), "The Portfolio Flows of International Investors",
Journal of Financial Economics, 59(2), 151-193.

                                                                                     21
Froot, K. A., Ramadorai, T. (2001), “The Information Content of International Portfolio Flows”, NBER
Working Paper 9000, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M. (2000), “The Investment Behavior and Performance of Various Investor
Types: A Study of Finland's Unique Data Set”, Journal of Financial Economics, 55(1), 43–67.

Guo, S., Hotchkiss, E.S., Song, W. ( 2011), “Do Buyouts (Still) Create Value?”, The Journal of Finance,
66(2), 479-517.

Harris, R.I.D., Siegel, D.S., Wright, M. (2005), "Assessing the Impact of Management Buyouts on
Economic Efficiency: Plant-Level Evidence from the United Kingdom", The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 87(1), 148-153.

Hau, H. (2001), “Location Matters: An Examination of Trading Profits”, The Journal of Finance, 56(5),
1959-1983.

Heel, J., Kehoe, C. (2005) “Why Do Some Private Equity Firms Do Better Than Others”, The McKinsey
Quarterly, 2005(1), 24-26.

Jensen, M.C. (1989) “Eclipse of the Public Corporation.” Harvard Business Review, 67(5), 61-74.

Kaplan, S. (1989) “The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and Value”, Journal of
Financial Economics, 24(2), 217-254.

Kester, C.W., Luehrman, T.A. (1995), “Rehabilitating the Leveraged Buyout”, Harvard Business Review,
73(3), 119-130.

Liebeskind, J., Wiersema, M. (1992) “LBOs, Corporate Restructuring, and the Incentive-Intensity
Hypothesis”, Financial Management, 21(1), 73-88.

Loos, N. (2005) “Value Creation in Leveraged Buyouts”. Doctoral dissertation, Graduate School of
Business Administration, Economics, Law and Social Sciences, Universität St.Gallen.

Malloy, C.J. (2005) "The Geography of Equity Analysis", Journal of Finance, 60(2), 719-755.

Malone, S. (1989) “Characteristics of Smaller Company Leveraged Buyouts”, Journal of Business Venturing,
4(5), 345-359.

Muscarella, C.J., Vetsuypens, M.R. (1990), “Efficiency and Organizational Structure: A Study of Reverse
LBOs” Journal of Finance, 45(5), 1389-1413.

Orpurt, S. (2004), “Local Analyst Earnings Forecast Advantages in Europe”. Working paper. University
of Chicago.

Otten, R., Bams, D. (2007), “The Performance of Local versus Foreign Mutual Fund Managers” European
Financial Management, 13(4), 702–720.

Ross Sorkin, A. (2007), “Can Private Equity Firms Get Out of Buyouts?”, The New York Times, August 21.

Seasholes, M. (2000), "Smart Foreign Traders in Emerging Markets". Working paper. Harvard Business
School.

Schertler, A., Tykvová, T. (2006), "Rivals or Partners? Evidence from Europe's International Private
Equity Deals" ZEW Discussion Papers 06-91. Center for European Economic Research.

                                                                                     22
Seth, A., Easterwood, J. (1993), “Strategic Redirection in Large Management Buyouts: The Evidence
from Post-Buyout Restructuring Activity”, Strategic Management Journal, 14(4), 251–273.

Shukla, R., van Inwegen, G. (1995), "Do Locals Perform Better than Foreigners?: An Analysis of UK and
US Mutual Fund Managers", Journal of Economics and Business, 47(3), 241–254.

Siming, L. (2010) “Your Former Employees Matter: Private Equity Firms and Their Financial Advisors”,
Working Paper. Bocconi University.

Singh, H. (1990), “Management Buyout: Distinguishing Characteristics and Operating Changes Prior to
Public Offering”, Strategic Management Journal, 11(Special issue), 111-129.

Smart, S.B., Waldfogel, J. (1994), “Measuring the Effect of Restructuring on Corporate Performance: the
Case of Management Buyouts”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(3), 503–511.

Smith, A.J. (1990), “Corporate Ownership Structure and Performance: The Case of Management
Buyouts”, Journal of Financial Economics, 27(1), 143-164.

Thompson, R. S., Wright, M. and Robbie, K. (1992), “Buy-outs, Divestment and Leverage: Restructuring
Transactions and Corporate Governance”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 8(3), 58-69.

Vinten, F. (2008), “The Performance of Private Equity Buyout Fund Owned Firms”. Working Paper.
Copenhagen Business School.

Wright, M., and Coyne, J. (1985). “Management Buy-outs”. Beckenham: Croom Helm.

Wright, M., Hoskisson R.E., Busenitz, L.W., Dial, J. (2000), “Entrepreneurial Growth Through
Privatization: The Upside of Management Buyouts”, Academy of Management, 25(3), 591-601.

Wright, M., Hoskisson, R.E., Busenitz, L.W. , Dial, J. (2001a), “Buyouts as Facilitators of Strategic
Growth and Entrepreneurship”, Academy of Management Executive, 15(1), 111-125.

Wright, M., Hoskisson R.E., Busenitz, L.W., Dial, J. (2001b), “Finance and Management Buyouts: Agency
versus Entrepreneurship Perspectives”, Venture Capital, 3(3), 239-261.

Zahra, S., Fescina, M. (1991), “Will Leveraged Buyouts Kill U.S. Corporate Research and Development?”,
Academy of Management Executive, 5(4), 7-21.

                                                                                     23
APPENDICES

APPENDIX A. DETAILED RESULTS OF THE EVENT STUDY

Table A1. Dependent Variable: Compound Annual Growth Rate of the EBITDA

Classification (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                                              (i) Scand. vs.  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)   (i) Foreign with     (i) All firms with
CAGR of                                (ii) all foreign  foreign with no    foreign with     local pres. vs. (ii)    local pres. vs. (ii)
EBITDA                                              local presence    local presence    foreign with no     foreign with no
                                                                                                       local pres.           local pres.

Panel A (i) -0.145 -0.255* -0.041 -0.214 -0.241*
                   t-statistic -1.58 -1.75 -0.48 -1.38 -1.69
                Constant 0.232*** 0.342** 0.128* 0.342** 0.342**
                   t-statistic 2.99 2.49 1.83 2.46 2.50

               Obs. 69 51 52 35 69
                R-squared 0.035 0.085 0.005 0.056 0.073

Panel B (i) -0.139 -0.264* -0.0332 -0.245 -0.255*
                   t-statistic -1.54 -1.79 -0.40 -1.52 -1.76
                 Log(total assets) -0.063* -0.065* -0.036 -0.101* -0.067**
                   t-statistic -1.97 -1.73 -1.47 -1.89 -2.08
                Constant 1.079** 1.228** 0.607* 1.708** 1.252**
                   t-statistic 2.24 2.02 1.71 2.09 2.35

               Obs. 68 50 52 34 68
                R-squared 0.094 0.146 0.033 0.180 0.139

Panel C (i) -0.184* -0.280* -0.0974 -0.242 -0.261*
                   t-statistic -1.91 -1.87 -1.03 -1.39 -1.79
                 Log(total assets) -0.048 -0.060 -0.019 -0.106 -0.066
                   t-statistic -1.36 -1.12 -0.80 -1.63 -1.66
                Log(AUM) -0.046* -0.017 -0.041* -0.029 -0.017
                   t-statistic -1.92 -0.60 -1.92 -0.47 -0.79
                Constant 1.248** 1.274* 0.745* 2.011** 1.374**
                   t-statistic 2.19 1.77 1.83 2.11 2.20

               Obs. 58 41 45 30 58
                R-squared 0.135 0.184 0.055 0.271 0.174

Panel D (i) -0.132 -0.232* -0.0372 -0.195 -0.219*
                   t-statistic -1.52 -1.73 -0.44 -1.35 -1.67
                Constant 0.223*** 0.324** 0.129* 0.324** 0.324**
                   t-statistic 3.09 2.58 1.86 2.55 2.59

               Obs. 69 51 52 35 69
                R-squared 0.033 0.081 0.004 0.054 0.068

Table A1 presents the results from the event study using EBITDA CAGR as dependent variable. All estimations are estimated by OLS using
robust standard errors. * indicates that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level. ** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 5
percent level. *** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 1 percent level. Classification (1) to (5) corresponds to the classifications
presented in Table 1. (i) is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the investor is identified as local in each classification. In Panel A, the only
controls used are year fixed effects. In Panel B, the log of total assets of the target firm is added. Panel C also includes the log of assets under
management of the private equity investor as a control. In Panel D, we run the regression from Panel A on winsorized data at the 95 percent level
to control for outliers.

                                                                                     24
Table A2. Dependent Variable: Compound Annual Growth Rate of Sales

Classification (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                                              (i) Scand. vs.  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)   (i) Foreign with     (i) All firms with
                                            (ii) all foreign   foreign with no     foreign with     local pres. vs. (ii)    local pres. vs. (ii)
CAGR of Sales                                         local presence    local presence    foreign with no     foreign with no
                                                                                                       local pres.           local pres.

Panel A (i) -0.019 -0.095 0.046 -0.140** -0.110**
                   t-statistic -0.40 -1.56 0.97 -2.53 -2.04
                Constant 0.079*** 0.155*** 0.0142 0.155*** 0.155***
                   t-statistic 2.75 3.28 0.50 3.25 3.30

               Obs. 80 59 62 39 80
                R-squared 0.002 0.035 0.011 0.156 0.047

Panel B (i) -0.020 -0.102* 0.047 -0.151*** -0.118**
                   t-statistic -0.42 -1.75 1.01 -2.80 -2.28
                Log(total assets) -0.037** -0.039** -0.031 -0.044** -0.038**
                   t-statistic -2.17 -2.10 -1.44 -2.64 -2.42
                Constant 0.568** 0.679** 0.424 0.746*** 0.662***
                   t-statistic 2.43 2.58 1.48 3.06 2.96

               Obs. 79 58 62 38 79
                R-squared 0.063 0.101 0.046 0.302 0.113

Panel C (i) -0.068 -0.182*** 0.0209 -0.218*** -0.192***
                   t-statistic -1.40 -3.12 0.45 -3.92 -3.75
                Log(total assets) -0.031** -0.037** -0.020 -0.058*** -0.037***
                   t-statistic -2.03 -2.06 -1.28 -3.23 -2.70
                Log(AUM) -0.003 0.004 0.002 0.013 0.001
                   t-statistic -0.18 0.23 0.18 0.79 0.13
                Constant 0.525** 0.668*** 0.246 0.877*** 0.684***
                   t-statistic 2.21 3.01 1.06 3.60 3.52

               Obs. 66 46 52 34 66
                R-squared 0.100 0.261 0.028 0.475 0.263

Panel D (i) -0.028 -0.096* 0.030 -0.126** -0.106**
                   t-statistic -0.79 -1.96 0.84 -2.49 -2.30
                Constant 0.077*** 0.145*** 0.019 0.145*** 0.145***
                   t-statistic 2.95 3.42 0.72 3.39 3.43

               Obs. 80 59 62 39 80
                R-squared 0.008 0.071 0.010 0.151 0.079

Table A2 presents the results from the event study using Sales CAGR as dependent variable. All estimations are estimated by OLS using robust
standard errors. * indicates that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level. ** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 5 percent level.
*** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 1 percent level. Classification (1) to (5) corresponds to the classifications presented in Table 1.
(i) is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the investor is identified as local in each classification. In Panel A, the only controls used are year
fixed effects. In Panel B, the log of total assets of the target firm is added. Panel C also includes the log of assets under management of the
private equity investor as a control. In Panel D, we run the regression from Panel A on winsorized data at the 95 percent level to control for
outliers.

                                                                                     25
Table A3. Dependent Variable: Change in EBITDA margin

Classification (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                                                (i) Scand. vs.  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)   (i) Foreign with     (i) All firms with
ΔEBITDA                                 (ii) all foreign  foreign with no    foreign with    local pres. vs. (ii)    local pres. vs. (ii)
margin                                                 local presence    local presence    foreign with no     foreign with no
                                                                                                         local pres.           local pres.

Panel A (i) 0.045 0.088* 0.003 0.071 0.083*
                   t-statistic 1.06 1.77 0.07 1.62 1.87

              Holding period dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.063 -0.087 0.063*** -0.008 -0.020
                   t-statistic . -1.25 n.m. -0.19 -0.45

               Obs. 79 59 61 38 79
                R-squared 0.082 0.088 0.092 0.213 0.103

Panel B (i) 0.042 0.086 -0.003 0.074 0.083*
                   t-statistic 0.98 1.66 -0.06 1.63 1.80
                Log(total assets) -0.019 -0.022 -0.031 -0.005 -0.019
                   t-statistic -0.88 -0.92 -0.96 -0.33 -0.90

              Holding period dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.173 0.296 0.500 0.066 0.092
                   t-statistic 0.68 0.93 1.10 0.27 0.35

               Obs. 78 58 61 37 78
                R-squared 0.101 0.113 0.128 0.224 0.124

Panel C (i) 0.046 0.082 0.029 0.038 0.066
                   t-statistic 1.04 1.34 0.65 0.90 1.38
                Log(total assets) 0.003 0.008 0.008 -0.002 0.006
                   t-statistic 0.27 0.56 0.64 -0.08 0.46
                Log(AUM) 0.011 0.011 0.018 -0.011 0.008
                   t-statistic 0.76 0.57 1.23 -0.54 0.62

              Holding period dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant -0.197 -0.159 -0.205 0.144 -0.256
                   t-statistic -1.16 -0.67 -0.85 0.52 -1.28

               Obs. 65 46 51 33 65
                R-squared 0.153 0.171 0.229 0.277 0.169

Panel D (i) 0.025 0.058* -0.006 0.056 0.056*
                   t-statistic 0.91 1.72 -0.20 1.50 1.77

              Holding period dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.063*** -0.040 0.063*** 0.007 0.006
                   t-statistic n.m. -0.91 n.m. 0.19 0.20

               Obs. 79 59 61 38 79
                R-squared 0.139 0.127 0.202 0.220 0.168

Table A3 presents the results from the event study using change in EBITDA margin as dependent variable. All estimations are estimated by OLS
using robust standard errors. * indicates that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level. ** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 5
percent level. *** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 1 percent level. Classification (1) to (5) corresponds to the classifications
presented in Table 1. (i) is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the investor is identified as local in each classification. In Panel A, the only
controls used are year fixed effects. In Panel B, the log of total assets of the target firm is added. Panel C also includes the log of assets under
management of the private equity investor as a control. In Panel D, we run the regression from Panel A on winsorized data at the 95 percent level
to control for outliers.

                                                                                     26
APPENDIX B. DETAILED RESULTS OF THE DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCES REGRESSIONS

Table B1. Dependent Variable: Compounded Annual Growth Rate of the EBITDA

Classification (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                                                (i) Scand. vs.  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)   (i) Foreign with     (i) All firms with
CAGR of                                  (ii) all foreign  foreign with no    foreign with     local pres. vs. (ii)    local pres. vs. (ii)
EBITDA                                               local presence    local presence    foreign with no     foreign with no
                                                                                                         local pres.           local pres.
Panel A (i) 0.472 0.445 0.434 -0.446 0.266
                   t-statistic 0.97 0.66 0.95 -0.95 0.59
                Post 0.843 0 -0.023 3.598 1.583
                   t-statistic 0.67 . -0.02 1.10 0.59
                (i) * Post 0.016 -0.929 0.471 -1.133 -0.924
                   t-statistic 0.02 -0.46 0.67 -0.62 -0.50

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.463 -2.895** 2.071 -0.595*** 0.429
                   t-statistic 0.38 -2.46 1.53 n.m. 0.35

               Obs. 630 441 491 328 630
                R-squared 0.088 0.136 0.086 0.124 0.088

Panel B (i) 0.466 0.450 0.453 -0.439 0.285
                   t-statistic 0.94 0.66 0.95 -0.91 0.63
                Post 1.519 0 1.595*** 6.828 2.288
                   t-statistic 0.60 . 3.52 1.33 0.75
                (i) * Post 0.023 -0.918 0.456 -1.120 -0.923
                   t-statistic 0.02 -0.46 0.64 -0.62 -0.50

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Log(total assets) -0.136 -0.236 0.061 -0.066 -0.135
                   t-statistic -0.95 -1.14 0.80 -0.48 -0.97

                Constant 1.906 -0.332 -0.510 4.005* 1.856
                   t-statistic 1.16 -0.12 -0.23 1.93 1.13

               Obs. 628 441 489 326 628
                R-squared 0.089 0.138 0.087 0.124 0.089

Panel C (i) 0.283 0.361 0.570 -0.446 0.237
                   t-statistic 0.44 0.40 0.93 -0.88 0.42
                Post 1.171 -0.590 -0.111 5.602 0
                   t-statistic 0.78 -0.31 -0.16 1.32 .
                (i) * Post -0.655 -2.534 0.368 -1.940 -2.299
                   t-statistic -0.66 -1.36 0.43 -1.15 -1.40

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Log(total assets) 0.046 -0.010 0.036 0.104 0.040
                   t-statistic 0.47 -0.06 0.34 0.78 0.39
                Log(AUM) -0.426 -0.459 0.019 -0.468 -0.410
                   t-statistic -1.18 -1.20 0.08 -1.24 -1.51

                Constant 2.112 4.162 -0.428 4.452*** 5.437
                   t-statistic 0.80 1.31 -0.14 4.00 1.08

               Obs. 537 359 418 297 537
                R-squared 0.126 0.226 0.091 0.178 0.138

Panel D (i) 0.145 0.0894 0.197 -0.203 -0.0106
                   t-statistic 0.92 0.43 1.19 -1.07 -0.06
                Post 0.918*** 0 1.098*** 0.641* 0.962**
                   t-statistic 3.59 . 3.66 1.68 3.02
                (i) * Post -0.037 -0.139 0.014 0.026 -0.084
                   t-statistic -0.20 -0.58 0.07 0.11 -0.39

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant -0.555** -1.798*** 0.639 -0.595*** -0.570**
                   t-statistic -2.10 -6.86 1.04 n.m. -2.15

               Obs. 630 441 491 328 630
                R-squared 0.067 0.102 0.070 0.147 0.065
Table B1 presents the results from the difference-in-differences estimation using EBITDA CAGR as dependent variable. All estimations are
estimated by OLS using robust standard errors. * indicates that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level. ** indicates that the estimate is
significant at the 5 percent level. *** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 1 percent level. Classification (1) to (5) corresponds to the
classifications presented in Table 1. (i) is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the investor is identified as local in each classification. Post(i) is
a dummy variable that takes on value 1 when the target is under private equity ownership. (i) * Post is our variable of interest and denotes a target
under ownership of a local private equity investor. In Panel A, the only controls used are year fixed effects and dummies for holding period. In
Panel B, the log of total assets of the target firm is added. Panel C also includes the log of assets under management of the private equity investor
as a control. In Panel D, we run the regression from Panel A on winsorized data at the 95 percent level to control for outliers.

                                                                                     27
Table B2. Dependent Variable: Compounded Annual Growth Rate of Sales

Classification (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                                                (i) Scand. vs.  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)   (i) Foreign with     (i) All firms with
                                              (ii) all foreign   foreign with no     foreign with     local pres. vs. (ii)    local pres. vs. (ii)
CAGR of Sales
                                                          local presence    local presence    foreign with no     foreign with no
                                                                                                         local pres.           local pres.
Panel A (i) 0.118 -0.018 0.244 -0.449** -0.196
                   t-statistic 0.64 -0.06 1.53 -2.47 -0.90
                Post 0.331** 0 0.023 -0.899*** 0
                    t-statistic 2.38 . 0.05 -3.42 .
                (i) * Post -0.190 -0.133 -0.257 0.299 0.054
                   t-statistic -1.01 -0.46 -1.60 1.45 0.23

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.001*** 0.020 0.546 0.001 0.271
                   t-statistic n.m. 0.09 0.99 . 1.15

               Obs. 655 450 512 348 655
                R-squared 0.054 0.069 0.076 0.144 0.057

Panel B (i) 0.103 -0.022 0.233 -0.426** -0.189
                   t-statistic 0.55 -0.08 1.44 -2.41 -0.87
                Post -1.229*** 0 -1.147*** 0.167 -1.255***
                   t-statistic -4.06 . -2.91 0.66 -3.71
                (i) * Post -0.173 -0.122 -0.245 0.289 0.054
                   t-statistic -0.91 -0.42 -1.49 1.41 0.23

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Log(total assets) -0.046* -0.054 -0.026 -0.046 -0.046*
                   t-statistic -1.83 -1.60 -0.91 -1.58 -1.87

                Constant 1.790** 0.543 1.992** 0.786** 1.998**
                   t-statistic 2.34 1.57 1.97 2.19 2.46

               Obs. 652 450 509 345 652
                R-squared 0.060 0.076 0.077 0.153 0.063

Panel C (i) 0.236 0.167 0.287 -0.407** -0.071
                   t-statistic 1.14 0.56 1.45 -2.14 -0.32
                Post -1.232*** -0.756 -1.151** 0.190 -1.178***
                   t-statistic -3.45 -1.49 -2.29 0.82 -3.27
                (i) * Post -0.359* -0.371 -0.367* 0.207 -0.124
                   t-statistic -1.73 -1.18 -1.96 1.01 -0.51

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Log(total assets) -0.030 -0.054 -0.008 -0.046 -0.035
                   t-statistic -1.06 -1.09 -0.30 -1.27 -1.23
                Log(AUM) 0.006 0.044 -0.024 0.048 0.008
                   t-statistic 0.18 0.86 -0.63 0.88 0.25

                Constant 1.575** 0.975* 0.892 0.342 1.817**
                   t-statistic 2.15 1.73 1.19 1.01 2.28

               Obs. 561 368 438 316 561
                R-squared 0.077 0.107 0.101 0.161 0.075

Panel D (i) 0.013 -0.075 0.087 -0.235** -0.141*
                   t-statistic 0.22 -0.84 1.57 -2.73 -1.72
                Post 0.313*** 0 0.320** -0.353** 0
                    t-statistic 4.51 . 3.21 -2.79 .
                (i) * Post -0.084 -0.052 -0.114* 0.120 0.022
                   t-statistic -1.25 -0.51 -1.74 1.18 0.23

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.001*** -0.032 0.413 0.001 0.322**
                   t-statistic n.m. -0.37 1.31 . 3.03

               Obs. 655 450 512 348 655
                R-squared 0.119 0.154 0.139 0.186 0.131

Table B1 presents the results from the difference-in-differences estimation using EBITDA CAGR as dependent variable. All estimations are
estimated by OLS using robust standard errors. * indicates that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level. ** indicates that the estimate is
significant at the 5 percent level. *** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 1 percent level. Classification (1) to (5) corresponds to the
classifications presented in Table 1. (i) is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the investor is identified as local in each classification. Post(i) is
a dummy variable that takes on value 1 when the target is under private equity ownership. (i) * Post is our variable of interest and denotes a target
under ownership of a local private equity investor. In Panel A, the only controls used are year fixed effects and dummies for holding period. In
Panel B, the log of total assets of the target firm is added. Panel C also includes the log of assets under management of the private equity investor
as a control. In Panel D, we run the regression from Panel A on winsorized data at the 95 percent level to control for outliers.

                                                                                     28
Table B3. Dependent Variable: Change in the EBITDA margin

Classification (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                                                (i) Scand. vs.  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)  (i) Scand. vs. (ii)   (i) Foreign with     (i) All firms with
ΔEBITDA                                 (ii) all foreign  foreign with no    foreign with    local pres. vs. (ii)    local pres. vs. (ii)
margin                                                 local presence    local presence    foreign with no     foreign with no
                                                                                                         local pres.           local pres.
Panel A (i) -0.031 -0.086* 0.006 -0.076 -0.078
                   t-statistic -1.25 -1.66 0.42 -1.46 -1.56
                Post -0.205*** -0.268*** -0.001 -0.193** 0
                   t-statistic -6.19 -3.59 -0.04 -3.26 .
                (i) * Post 0.052* 0.105* 0.015 0.076 0.091*
                   t-statistic 1.81 1.86 0.74 1.34 1.69

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.056 -0.163*** -0.026 -0.209*** -0.161**
                   t-statistic 0.89 -3.54 -0.56 -3.76 -2.64

               Obs. 622 434 484 326 622
                R-squared 0.048 0.067 0.065 0.121 0.058

Panel B (i) -0.033 -0.086* 0.005 -0.070 -0.077
                   t-statistic -1.29 -1.68 0.33 -1.43 -1.57
                Post -0.227*** -0.271*** -0.187*** -0.083 -0.274***
                   t-statistic -4.85 -3.59 -6.16 -1.33 -4.65
                (i) * Post 0.054* 0.107* 0.016 0.073 0.091*
                   t-statistic 1.85 1.88 0.79 1.33 1.70

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Log(total assets) -0.008 -0.010 -0.002 -0.011 -0.007
                   t-statistic -1.40 -1.49 -0.40 -1.38 -1.40

                Constant -0.082 -0.060 -0.003 -0.096 -0.095**
                   t-statistic -1.47 -1.01 -0.04 -1.57 -2.03

               Obs. 620 434 482 324 620
                R-squared 0.054 0.075 0.066 0.132 0.063

Panel C (i) 0.000 -0.039 0.023 -0.063 -0.046
                   t-statistic -0.01 -1.12 1.46 -1.41 -1.25
                Post -0.223*** -0.171*** -0.182*** -0.049 -0.252***
                   t-statistic -5.85 -5.49 -6.65 -0.91 -4.63
                (i) * Post 0.017 0.052 -0.004 0.048 0.048
                   t-statistic 0.80 1.21 -0.21 1.02 1.14

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Log(total assets) -0.005 -0.009 -0.001 -0.010 -0.005
                   t-statistic -1.14 -1.06 -0.32 -1.44 -1.05
                Log(AUM) 0.009 0.015 0.005 0.015 0.008
                   t-statistic 1.53 1.42 1.18 1.34 1.25

                Constant -0.163*** -0.179*** 0.172 -0.195*** -0.158***
                   t-statistic -4.26 -5.48 1.00 -3.74 -4.23

               Obs. 529 352 411 295 529
                R-squared 0.077 0.105 0.105 0.154 0.082

Panel D (i) -0.003 -0.019 0.008 -0.020 -0.018
                   t-statistic -0.25 -1.24 0.63 -1.23 -1.25
                Post -0.184*** -0.189*** 0.001 -0.156*** 0
                   t-statistic -8.77 -7.32 0.02 -5.06 .
                (i) * Post 0.011 0.026 0.001 0.020 0.023
                   t-statistic 0.79 1.38 0.05 0.97 1.31

              Year dummies Y Y Y Y Y
              PE ownership dummies Y Y Y Y Y

                Constant 0.035 -0.142*** -0.028 -0.182*** -0.152**
                   t-statistic 0.62 -6.42 -0.64 -7.45 -2.81

               Obs. 622 434 484 326 622
                R-squared 0.071 0.088 0.080 0.152 0.073
Table B3 presents the results from the difference-in-differences estimation using EBITDA CAGR as dependent variable. All estimations are
estimated by OLS using robust standard errors. * indicates that the estimate is significant at the 10 percent level. ** indicates that the estimate is
significant at the 5 percent level. *** indicates that the estimate is significant at the 1 percent level. Classification (1) to (5) corresponds to the
classifications presented in Table 1. (i) is a dummy variable that takes on value 1 if the investor is identified as local in each classification. Post(i) is
a dummy variable that takes on value 1 when the target is under private equity ownership. (i) * Post is our variable of interest and denotes a target
under ownership of a local private equity investor. In Panel A, the only controls used are year fixed effects and dummies for holding period. In
Panel B, the log of total assets of the target firm is added. Panel C also includes the log of assets under management of the private equity investor
as a control. In Panel D, we run the regression from Panel A on winsorized data at the 95 percent level to control for outliers.

                                                                                     29
APPENDIX C. THE ASSUMPTION OF THE DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE MODEL
Graph C1 illustrates the case when the assumption of equal change in expected performance is true.

         Graph C1. The assumption holds.

                                                                                       x
             Performance
                                              a
                                                                                                y
                                           b

                                                                         Time
                       Non-local (ex ante) Local (ex ante) Non-local (estimate)

                       Local (estimate) Non-local (ex post) Local (ex post)

              The graph illustrates the difference-in-differences estimation when the assumption holds. The dashed lines illustrate
             the performance of the targets prior to acquisition. The dotted lines illustrate the expected performance after
             acquisition. When the assumption holds, the distances between the dashed lines and the dotted lines are equal. The
              continuous lines represent the actual performance after acquisition. The difference-in-differences estimate captures the
           difference between a and b. The relative change in performance attributable to the interventions of the private equity
          investors is estimated by the difference between x and y. When the assumption holds, the two estimates are equal and
              the difference-in-differences measures only the change attributable to the interventions of the private equity firms.

The difference-in-differences method measures the difference between the improvement of targets
owned by local firms, a, and the improvement of targets owned by non-local firms, b.

It might be the case that only parts of the improvements of the targets’ performances ex-post are a result
of the private equity firms’ interventions. This is illustrated by dotted lines in the graph, which represent
the expected performance of the target firms, i.e., the expected performance of the targets, had the
transactions not taken place. In the case illustrated in the graph, we can see that there would be an
increase in the performance of the targets even without the intervention of the private equity firms.
Therefore, it is only the change x that is attributable to the intervention of the local investor, and y for the
non-local investor. x and y are improvements that arise as a result of the investors’ value creation abilities.

When the assumption holds, then

                                           a – b = x – y,

and the difference-in-differences method will accurately capture the relative improvements in the
performance of the target companies caused by the intervention of the investors, i.e. their relative value
creation abilities.

Now assume that the assumption does not hold. This case is illustrated in Graph C2.

                                                                                     30
         Graph C2. The assumption does not hold.

                                                                                       x
             Performance
                                               a
                                                                                                y
                                           b

                                                                         Time
                       Non-local (ex ante) Local (ex ante) Non-local (estimate)

                       Local (estimate) Non-local (ex post) Local (ex post)

             The graph illustrates the difference-in-differences estimation when the assumption does not hold. The dashed lines
              illustrate the performance of the targets prior to acquisition. The dotted lines illustrate the expected performance after
             acquisition. When the assumption does not hold, the distances between the dashed lines and the dotted lines are not
              equal. The continuous lines represent the actual performance after acquisition. The difference-in-differences estimate
           captures the difference between a and b. The relative change in performance attributable to the interventions of the
          private equity investors is estimated by the difference between x and y. When the assumption does not hold, the
             difference-in-differences estimate will capture the relative performance change attributable to both the ability to
            foresee future changes in performance ex ante and the ability to improve operational performance ex post.

In the example described in Graph C2, the non-local investor do not have as good an ability as the local
investor to foresee future improvements (i.e., not as good value capturing ability). As a result, the
difference between the targets’ expected performance ex post is greater than the difference between the
actual performance ex ante and the assumption is violated.

When the assumption does not hold, then

                                             a – b ≠ x – y,

i.e., the estimate captured by the difference-in-differences method is not equal to the relative performance
change attributable to the intervention of the investors. Instead, the difference-in-differences method
now measures the combined effect of the investors’ relative value capturing and value creation abilities.

                                                                                     31
APPENDIX D. LIST OF THE TRANSACTIONS INCLUDED IN OUR SAMPLE

Table D1. List of transactions included in the sample: Scandinavian investors

Investor type Buyer Target Country Entry tear Exit year

Scandinavian        Accent Equity Acando Consulting Sweden 2000 2002
investors           〃 BakeMark Sverige Sweden 2004 2005
                  〃 Elmo Leather Sweden 1999 2004
                   〃 Tribon Solutions Sweden 2002 2003
                   Altor Aalborg Denmark 2005 2010
                  〃 SPT Group Norway 2006 Current holding
                  〃 Wrist Group Denmark 2007 Current holding
                  〃 AGR Group Norway 2008 Current holding
                   Axcel Industriinvestor Junckers Industrier Denmark 2004 Current holding
                  〃 Svenska Fönster Produktion Sweden 2000 2003
                   Borea Ocea Norway 2008 Current holding
                   〃 Software Innovation Norway 2008 Current holding
                   Canica Jernia Norway 2005 Current holding
                  EQT Bewator Sweden 2002 2005
                  〃 Bodilsen Denmark 2006 2009
                  〃 BTX Group Denmark 2005 Current holding
                  〃 Com Hem Sweden 2002 2005
                  〃 Eldon Sweden 2000 2005
                  FSN Via Travel Norway 2005 Current holding
                   Herkules Aibel Norway 2007 Current holding
                  〃 EFG Norway 2007 Current holding
                  〃 Handicare Norway 2005 2010
                   〃 Hatteland Display Norway 2007 Current holding
                   〃 Micro Matic Norge Norway 2007 Current holding
                   〃 Nille Norway 2006 Current holding
                  〃 Pronova Biopharma Norway 2004 Current holding
                   IK Alfa Laval Sweden 2000 2004
                  〃 MSI Holding Sweden 2000 2004
                  〃 Perstorp Sweden 1999 2003
                  〃 NVS Installation Sweden 2001 2005
                   Kistefos SecuriNet Norway 2004 2005
                   LD Equity Bramming Plast-Industri Denmark 2007 Current holding
                  〃 Gram Commercial Denmark 2005 2008
                   Nordic Capital Ahlsell Sweden 1999 2005
                  〃 C More Entertainment Sweden 2003 2004
                  〃 Unomedical Denmark 2002 2008
                   Norvestor BecoTek Norway 2006 Current holding
                  〃 Panorama Norway 2005 Current holding
                   Polaris Private Equity Skamol Denmark 2007 Current holding
                   Ratos Fastighets AB Tornet Sweden 2003 2005
                  〃 Hilding Anders Sweden 2000 2003
                   Reiten Brubakken Truckservice Norway 2008 Current holding
                  〃 Notabene Norway 2006 Current holding
                  Segulah CCS Sweden 2002 2004
                   Triton Partners Elitfönster Sweden 1999 2004
                  〃 Frigoscandia Sweden 2001 2005
                  〃 Semper Sweden 2003 2005

                                                                                     32
Table D2. List of transactions included in the sample: foreign investors, with and without local presence in
Scandinavia

Investor type Buyer Target Country Entry tear Exit year

Foreign investors    3i Alimak Hek Sweden 2001 2006
with a local office in   〃 Balco Sweden 2003 2010
Scandinavia
                  〃 Coor Service Management Sweden 2004 2007
                  〃 Damcos Denmark 2004 2006
                  〃 DIAB International Sweden 2001 2009
                  〃 Dotcom Solutions Sweden 2000 2004
                   〃 IVT Industrier Sweden 1998 2002
                   〃 Lekolar Sweden 2007 Current holding
                  〃 Q-Matic Sweden 2004 2007
                  〃 Teknikmagasinet Sweden 2004 Current holding
                   AAC Capital Partners Flexlink Sweden 2005 Current holding
                  〃 Glud & Marsstrand Denmark 2005 Current holding
                  〃 IVT Sweden 2002 2004
                  〃 Kreatel Communications Sweden 2000 2006
                   〃 Tylö Sweden 2008 Current holding
                   Apax Partners Mölnlycke Healthcare Sweden 2005 2007
                   Argan GCE Holding Sweden 2005 Current holding
                   Bridgepoint Attendo Care Sweden 2005 2007
                  Doughty Hanson & Co LM Wind Power Denmark 2001 Current holding
                  KKR VSM Group Sweden 2006 Current holding
                   Macquaire Group A-Train Sweden 2004 Current holding
                   Montagu Private Equity Unifeeder Denmark 2007 Current holding
                  PAI Partners Chr. Hansen Denmark 2005 2010
                   Riverside Vokes-Air Group Sweden 2008 Current holding

Foreign investors    AlpInvest Partners N.V. Eurogran AS Denmark 1999 2004
without a local      Arcapita Roxar ASA Norway 2006 2007
office in
                   BC Partners Dometic Sweden 2005 2009
Scandinavia
                   Candover Hilding Anders (Candover) Sweden 2006 2010
                   Carlyle B2 Bredband Sweden 2002 2004
                   Carlyle & Providence Com Hem (Carlyle) Sweden 2005 Current holding
                  Change Capital Partners Buksesnedkeren ApS Denmark 2004 2009
                   Cinven Coor Service (Cinven) Sweden 2007 Current holding
                  〃 Phadia Sweden 2007 Current holding
                   Englefield Capital Bluestep Sweden 2008 Current holding
                   Fabrel Lotos Schades A/S Denmark 2004 Current holding
                   Gilde Arovit Petfood A/S Denmark 2006 Current holding
                   〃 Plastal Sweden 2001 2004
                   GMT Communication Partners Multicom Security (GMT) Sweden 2005 Current holding
                   GS Capital Partners & Quadrangle  Get AS (GSCP) Norway 2007 Current holding
                         Capital Partners
                  HgCapital Visma Norway 2006 2010
                   Investcorp Hilding Anders (Investcorp) Sweden 2003 2006
                   Next Wave Partners Crendo Sweden 2007 Current holding
                   Palamon Capital Partners Espresso House Sweden Sweden 2006 Current holding
                   Warburg Pincus ElectroMagnetic GeoServices Norway 2004 2007

                                                                                     33