  Stock market cointegration in Europe

                            Fredrik Hallgren (21273)
                          Rasmus Rehn (21490)

                               May 30, 2011

                                   Abstract

         In this paper we try to uncover long-run dependency structures by testing for

      cointegration among six major European stock indices during the first eleven years and

                             st
      four months of the 21  century. We find strong support for one cointegrating vector,

      indicating that the national stock markets follow the same long-run growth path, and

       that no market is likely to have substantially greater or worse relative performance over

      time. This can be attributed to the wide-spread economic and financial integration

      of the markets, e.g. through the EU or EMU. Further, the cointegration relationship

      means that traditional risk diversification techniques based on covariance lose their

      effectiveness in the long run. We find the that U.K. is weakly exogeneous and will

      be the first market to be hit by events that do not affect all countries simultaneously,

      but that later spread to the others. In addition, we investigate short-run causal

      relationships, to determine which markets have a significant short-term effect on the

      others, and determine how the effects of different events will spread in the region.

1 Introduction

The analysis of dependency structures between stock markets is of central importance

in international finance research. Having a knowledge of this, might contribute to the

                                      1
understanding of stock price movements and the prediction of these. Statistical theory

offers a number of econometric techniques to evaluate linkages between economic time

series such as stock price indices. The most commonly used statistical measure of stock

market dependence is covariance. It provides a measure of short-term, or even instan-

taneous, co-movements between random variables. A large portion of existing finance

theory, such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), is based on covariance between

asset returns. Covariance is, however, subject to several limitations when evaluating stock

markets linkages.

Firstly, covariance is a time varying quantity, and, as such, it is of limited use when deter-

mining long-term dependency structures. It is a well known fact that covariances tend to

increase in times of stock market distress, as stocks generally co-move to a larger extent

in such times. Secondly, covariance only explains co-movements that are affected by sys-

tematic risk factors in the economy. Over time, the actual outcome of relative movements

between economic time series might be completely different from what is implied by the

covariance, due to idiosyncratic risk factors. Finally, covariance only enables evaluation

of co-movements between two variables at a time. It does not provide a single, coherent

measure of dependence between a larger set of time series.

In recent decades, cointegration has emerged as an alternative statistical method for eval-

uating dependencies between time series. A set of time series is said to be cointegrated if

each series is integrated of order d, commonly denoted I(d), where d > 0, but there exists

a linear combination of the series which is integrated of order c, i.e. I(c), where c < d. It

is commonly acknowledged that stock prices tend to follow non-stationary I(1) processes,

whereas their relative returns tend to follow stationary I(0) processes. Stationarity in this

context refers to a time series that stochastically fluctuates around a constant mean with

                                   1
constant autocovariance function.  Such a series returns to its mean an infinite number of

times as time goes to infinity, whereas a non-stationary time series, in contrast, will grow

infinitely large as time goes to infinity. The existence of a cointegrating linear combination

                                                                                            2
of stock prices, hence implies that this combination will stay bounded over time.

   1
    For a complete definition of stationarity we refer to Brockwell and Davis (1991)
   2
    For a further intuitive and non-mathematical description of cointegration, we refer to Murray (1994)

                                      2
In contrast to covariance, cointegration typically captures long-term relationships between

stock prices, due to the stationarity of the linear combination. Since this will remain

bounded over time, cointegrated stocks tend to stay together in the long run, implying

that they share a common, possibly stochastic, trend. Any temporary deviation from this

trend is expected to reverse in the long run, which is equivalent to cointegrated stocks ex-

hibiting error-correcting mechanisms. These act to reduce deviations from the equilibrium

cointegrating relationship, and ensure that the linear combination consistently returns to

its mean. Given these long-run stationary properties, cointegration has particular appeal

as a statistical tool for evaluating market dependencies. Furthermore, there are no limita-

tions to the number of variables that can enter into a cointegrating relationship, suggesting

a clear advantage over the covariance framework.

The purpose of this paper is to evaluate dependencies between six European stock mar-

                                      st
kets in the first 11 years of the 21  century in a cointegration framework. In addition to

evaluating long-run dependencies implied by cointegration, we also investigate short-run

causal relationships between the markets. Emprically, we use daily closing stock index

values for the major exchanges in Sweden, the U.K., France, Spain, Austria and Nether-

lands. While a majority of earlier research focuses either on determining the number of

cointegrating linear combinations (Kasa, 1992; Corhay et al., 1993), or investigate how

globalization has affected market linkages (Blackman et al., 1994), we aim to extend the

analysis by investigating both short-run and long run causal relationships between the six

stock markets. This approach is similar to Masih and Masih (2002), which is the most

recent study analyzing both cointegration dependencies and short run linkages between

national indices. However, Masih and Masih (2002) focus on the effects of globalization

on stock markets in four different contintents, whereas the purpose of our study is to

analyze interdependencies within the European region in recent years and evaluate what

conclusions can be drawn from the uncovered relationships.

It is well known that the economies in Europe have faced extensive economic integration

over the past decades, as the flows of labor, goods and capital across national boundaries

have increased dramatically. Indeed, this development has been further accelerated by

the increasing number of member states of the European Union (EU) and the European

                                      3
Monetary Union (EMU). As a consequence, stock markets across Europe have become

increasingly interdependent. In contrast to earlier research, in which the impact of global-

ization on market dependencies is evaluated, this paper rather assumes that the European

stock markets are closely linked, and aims to investigate causal relationships within the

region. We believe that much can be learnt from investigating cointegration using recent

data and evaluating the findings in light of recent events.

We find strong evidence of at least one cointegrating linear combination among these

markets. This implies that the European stock markets are mutually interdependent

in the long run and tend to move together, none deviating significantly from the rest.

Among other things, this reduces the benefits of traditional methods of diversification

based on covariance. In addition, the data suggests that the U.K. stock market is weakly

exogenous among the six indices, implying that the U.K. is the first market to respond

to exogeneous shocks, which later spread to the other markets. This could be explained

by the U.K. being the Europe’s leading financial centre, thus more easily adaptable to

changing market conditions.

The paper is structured in the following manner. Section 2 provides a review of previous

literature and research related to cointegration techniques and cointegration of stock mar-

kets. Thereafter, a thorough description of the data used in the study, along with summary

statistics, is given in section 3. In section 4 we present the various econometric techniques

used to analyze the data and to test for cointegration. Results from these tests, and our

comments on these, are presented in section 5. Further interpretations and implications

of our results are provided in section 6, whereas a summary of our conclusions is given in

section 7.

2 Previous literature

Cointegration has been widely discussed throughout econometric and economic literature.

The concept was first introduced by Granger (1981) and Granger and Weiss (1983) as a

statistical property of long-term interdependent time series. Engle and Granger (1987)

                                      4
is, however, the generally cited work in research related to cointegration. In this paper,

an extension of the framework was provided, as well as a two-step procedure for testing

for cointegration between time series. In addition, critical values for these tests were

determined, based on a Monte-Carlo simulation. Additional methods were introduced by

Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990), enabling testing for cointegration in

a vector autoregressive (VAR) framework, based on maximum-likelihood estimation.

Following this development, a wealth of papers examining cointegration of various eco-

nomic variables have been produced. Kasa (1992) examined cointegration between stock

markets in Japan, the U.S., the U.K., Germany and Canada during the years 1974 to

1990 and found a common stochastic trend driving these stock markets, by adopting the

Johansen (1988) method. A similar, yet less significant, result for European equity indices

over the period 1975-1991 was provided by Corhay et al. (1993), based on the Engle and

Granger (1987) as well as the Johansen (1988) procedures. Moreover, Choudhry (1997)

investigated long-run relationships between six Latin American indices and the U.S. stock

market, and detected significant long term linkages based on data from 1989 through 1993,

by using the Johansen (1988) framework. In addition, Blackman et al. (1994) implemented

a combination of the Engle and Granger (1987) and Johansen (1988) approaches, and were

able to present some evidence of long-term dependencies between 17 major stock exchanges

across the world in the period after, but not before, the development of global financial

markets. In contrast, Masih and Masih (2002) provided results supporting the hypothesis

of interdependencies between six important world stock markets in the pre-globalization

era as well as the post-globalization era, based on the Johansen (1988) method.

These findings are, however, not uncontradicted. Richards (1995) argued that previous

results in favour of cointegration between equity indices are based on inaccurate statistical

methods. In particular, the results presented by Kasa (1992) were questioned and further

examined by Richards, who claimed that Kasa incorrectly failed to take the small number

of degrees of freedom into account when determining critical values. By adjusting critical

test statistics to allow for finite sample bias, Richards found that the hypothesis of no

cointegration could no longer be rejected.

                                      5
In the same paper, Richards further argues that cointegration between stock markets is

unlikely to be observed, since this would enable significant predictability of stock returns,

as any deviation from the cointegration relationship would be expected to reverse in the

long run. This would imply a violation of the weak form of the efficient market hypothesis,

which states that stock prices cannot be predicted by analyzing historical price data (Fama,

1970). Richards however points out that no conclusions regarding market efficiency can

be drawn without considering risk-adjusted returns. This is also claimed by Masih and

Masih (2002).

The idea that cointegration precludes efficient markets was first discussed by Granger

(1986), who stated that ”If xt and yt are a pair of prices from a jointly efficient, speculative

market, they cannot be cointegrated.” Similar comments have been provided by Baillie

and Bollerslev (1989), Hakkio and Rush (1989), Booth and Mustafa (1991), and others.

A dissenting view was provided by Dwyer and Wallace (1992) who defined an efficient

market as “...one in which there are no risk-free returns above opportunity cost available

to agents given transaction costs and agents’ information.” Based on this definition, Dwyer

and Wallace showed mathematically, from a time series point of view, that equal expected

rates of returns of two assets (i.e. market efficiency) is not inconsistent with cointegration.

A similar conclusion was provided by Lence and Falk (2005), who demonstrated that

asset prices are determined by preferences and endowment processes, regardless of whether

markets are efficient or not. Given this result, Lence and Falk argued that asset prices are

cointegrated if, and only if, their endowment processes are cointegrated and preferences

satisfy certain conditions. As a consequence, cointegration was concluded not to be at

odds with market efficiency.

Yet another contribution to the debate was added by Davies (2005) who examined regime-

switching cointegration relationships between stock indices in the U.S., the U.K., Japan,

Germany, Switzerland, Australia and Canada, i.e. similar to the data analyzed by Kasa

(1992) and Richards (1995). By introducing a two-regime Markov model of the long-run

relationships, Davies provided significant evidence of cointegration, suggesting that coin-

tegration relationships are subject to structural breaks. This would imply an explanation

                                      6
of the failure to detect cointegration by Richards (1995), who conformed to a single-regime

treatment of data.

3 Data

We use daily closing stock price index data for equity markets in Sweden, the U.K, France,

Austria, Netherlands and Spain in our study. This data set has particular appeal, given

that all of the included countries are members of the European Union (EU), and hence

can be expected to be highly economically and financially integrated. In addition, four

of the indices – France, Spain, Austria and Netherlands – are members of the European

Monetary Union (EMU), implying an even stronger degree of financial integration between

these countries.

The index data are obtained from the Datastream database, and correspond to official

stock exchange indices in each country, i.e. OMX (Sweden), FTSE (U.K.), CAC (France),

IBEX (Spain), ATX (Austria) and AEX (Netherlands). Each index is equivalent to the

weighted average price development of all publicly traded stocks in each market, however

corrected for dilutions, splits and dividends. Thus, the data corresponds to actual value

evolutions throughout the period examined. This is of particular importance, as cointe-

gration between indices has limited economic significance if dividends are not accounted

for. (See e.g. Richards (1995) for a further discussion of this) For the same reason, all

index values are Euro adjusted, and thus reflect stock prices as perceived by an investor

with a Euro-denominated portfolio.

The time period of the analysis extends from January, 2000, throughout April, 2011, which

corresponds to 11 years and 4 months of data, or 2955 observations. During this time,

at least two periods of substantial stock market distress can be observed – the burst of

the IT bubble during the first years of the 2000’s and the global financial crisis of 2007-

2009, following the collapse of the U.S. housing market. In addition, the booming years

in between these two crises are captured, enabling cointegration analysis on both types of

market climates.

                                      7
Figure 1: Plot of 6 log-transformed European stock exchange indices for the period 1/1/2000 - 29/4/2011.

                     10

                      9

                      8

                      7

                      6

                      5

                      4

                      3

                                                                                                                                              Sweden
                        2                                                                                                                                           U.K.
                                                                                                                                                                     France
                                                                                                                                                                       Spain
                         1                                                                                                                                                 Austria
                                                                                                                                                                               Netherlands

                      0
                               2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

In line with earlier studies, (e.g. Kasa 1992; Richards 1995; Davies 2005), all index values

are log-transformed, enabling examination of relative changes in index values, as opposed

to absolute changes. The log-transformed equity index values are plotted in Figure 1.

Although cointegration tests mainly concern log-prices (see section 4), it is nevertheless

informative to get an idea of the characteristics of the log-returns associated with the data

set. Summary statistics for log-returns are reported in table 1, which indicate that all

six markets seem to display rather similar levels of return volatility. The average return

throughout the period is close to zero for all markets. Moreover, it seems that none of the

log-returns are normally distributed, as the kurtosis tests indicate fat tails, suggesting too

many extreme daily returns for the data to demonstrate normality.

Nearly all six markets demonstrate the largest daily drops in the last months of 2008,

i.e. coincident with the global financial crisis prevailing at the time. The Swedish stock

market, however, demonstrates the largest daily drop in September 2001, but nevertheless

show extreme negative returns in 2008 as well. The largest daily spikes occured in late

2008 and early 2009, in all six markets.

The similarity between stock market returns is further confirmed by their correlation coef-

ficients, which are summarized in table 2 and demonstrate strictly positive co-movements

                                      8
                         Mean Std. dev. Max Min Kurtosis

             France -0.00008 0.014 0.10 -0.093 8.47

             Spain -0.00005 0.014 0.11 -0.089 8.60

             Austria 0.0003 0.015 0.12 -0.10 11.9

             U.K. -0.0001 0.013 0.084 -0.080 7.85

             Netherlands -0.0002 0.016 0.10 -0.096 9.12

             Sweden 0.00003 0.017 0.11 -0.085 6.39

   Table 1: Summary statistics for daily stock index returns between January, 2000 and April, 2011.

between markets. Note, however, that Sweden, the U.K., France, Spain and Netherlands

seem to be generally more correlated, whereas the Austrian market consistently demon-

strates relatively low correlation with the other markets.

                      France Spain Austria U.K. Netherlands Sweden

          France 1 - - - - -

         Spain 0.89 1 - - - -

         Austria 0.65 0.64 1 - - -

         U.K. 0.85 0.77 0.60 1 - -

         Netherlands 0.93 0.84 0.60 0.83 1 -

         Sweden 0.83 0.77 0.61 0.75 0.79 1

        Table 2: Contemporaneous correlations between log-returns of stock market indices.

Nothing is, however, said about the significance level for the statistics in table 1 and 2.

They merely provide a rough indication of the characterisitics of the log-returns in each

market.

4 Methodology

This section provides a review of the mathematical properties of cointegrated time series

and the various estimators we use in our study. As noted in section 2, the two generally

adopted procedures for testing for cointegration are those suggested by Engle and Granger

                                      9
(1987) and Johansen (1988). The former is better suited for bivariate cointegration analy-

sis, whereas the latter is the one generally used in studies involving multivariate analysis of

time series. As our analysis involves more than two stock indices, we adopt the Johansen

maximum likelihood framework, in line with a majority of earlier studies.
                                                                     (            )′
                                                                                                       (1)        (p)
The Johansen procedure starts out from a p-dimensional VAR process Xt =  Xt , ..., Xt    ,
                                      (          )′
                                                         (1)       (p)
with stationary Gaussian iid errors εt =  εt , ..., εt    . Such a process can be expressed

as

                      Xt = μ + Π1Xt−1 + · · · + ΠkXt−k + εt, (1)

where μ is a p × 1 vector of unrestricted intercepts and Πi, i = 1, . . . , k denotes p × p

matrices of coefficients. Eq. (1) can be rewritten on error-correction form as

                                ′
             ∆Xt = μ + Γ1∆Xt−1 + · · · + Γk−1∆Xt−k + ΠXt−k+1 + εt, (2)

where ∆ = 1 − L, with L as the lag operator, Γi = − (I − Π1 − · · · − Πi) , i = 1, . . . , k − 1

and Π = I − Π1 − · · · − Πk. Here, I denotes the identity matrix. It is assumed that Xt is

I(1), from which follows that ∆Xt is I(0). When written in the form of Eq. (2), it is easily

observed that the VAR process is governed by both short-run dynamics captured by the

Γi matrices and a long-run component, governed by the Π matrix. The latter, commonly

denoted the impact matrix, is central to the cointegration relationship. It is the rank of

this matrix that determines the dimension of the cointegration space through the number

of linearly independent cointegrating vectors in the system. In general, the rank r can

take any value 0 ≤ r ≤ p, depending on the characteristics of the matrix.

If r = p, the impact matrix is said to be of full rank, in which case the original Xt process

can be shown to be stationary which precludes cointegration and violates our assumption

of Xt ∼ I(1). Furthermore, if r = 0, Π is a null matrix, in which case Eq. (2) only contains

short-run components, which, again, contradicts cointegration. If, however, 0 < r < p, Π

can be factored as

                                                               ′
                                  Π = αβ                                (3)

where α and β are two p × r matrices. Since both ∆Xt and εt are stationary, we can

                                                       ′
conclude that the term αβ Xt is also stationary. It can be shown that the space spanned

by the column vectors of β correspond to the linear combinations of Xt that are stationary,

                                      10
commonly denoted cointegrating vectors. Moreover, the row vectors of α provide an

indication of the relative weights of the cointegrating vectors on each stock index time

series in Xt.

The key problem in the Johansen procedure is to determine the number of linearly inde-

pendent cointegrating vectors, i.e. the rank of Π. This is done by maximum-likelihood

estimation of the space spanned by β, which is the space spanned by the r canonical vari-

ates corresponding to the r largest squared canonical correlations between the residuals

R0t and Rkt from the regression of ∆Xt and Xt−k respectively on the lagged differences.

According to Johansen (1988), the first r canonical variables can be calculated as the first
                   −1                                 1 ∑T      ′
r eigenvectors of Sk0S00 S0k with respect to Skk, where Sij = T   t=1 RitRjt, i, j = 0, k

are the product moment matrices of the residual vectors R0t and Rkt.

In order to find the eigenvectors, one must first determine the corresponding eigenvalues

λ1, ..., λp (in decreasing order of magnitude), which is done by solving the equation |λSkk −

    −1
Sk0S00 S0k| = 0. The eigenvectors are then found through the expression SkkED =

    −1
Sk0S00 S0kE, where E is the matrix with the eigenvectors as columns, and D is the

diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues as diagonal entries. In essence, λi , i = 1, . . . , p,

provides an indication of how well linear combinations of Xt given by the eigenvectors,

correlate with the stationary part of the process. If the linear combination given by

an eigenvector is non-stationary, this correlation is small, whereas it will be substantial

whenever an eigenvector yields a cointegrating linear combination.

Testing for the presence of cointegration, is consistent with testing the null hypothesis

that there are at most q cointegrating vectors, or equivalently

                                   H0 : r ≤ q.

To evaluate this hypothesis, Johansen derives the maximized likelihood function

                            ∏r (    )
                              −2/T                ˆ
                            Lmax = |S00|     1 − λi  ,
                                                    i=1
from which likelihood ratio tests for the value of r can be derived. Johansen suggests two

such tests: the trace test and the maximum eigenvalue test, where we denote the test

                                      11
statistics by Atrace and Amax respectively. These are calculated as

                                                   p
             ∑
                          Atrace = −T     ln(1 − λˆi),

                                            i=q+1

                           Amax = −T · ln(1 − λˆq+1).

Both tests evaluate the null hypothesis that r ≤ q , q < p. Their alternative hypotheses,

however, differ. The trace test has the alternative hypothesis that there exists at most p

cointegrating vectors, whereas the maximum eigenvalue test has the alternative hypothesis

that there exists q + 1 cointegrating vectors. The implication of this difference is that

Atrace will tend to be a more efficient than Amax in cases when the eigenvalues are evenly

distributed, since it considers all of the n − q smallest eigenvalues. In contrast, Amax is

more suitable when eigenvalues are relatively large or relatively small.

In practice, the testing procedure for both tests is rather a sequence of tests, where the

null hypothesis that r = 0 is first tested, and if rejected, a second null hypothesis that

                                                                ∗
r ≤ 1 is tested, and so on, until the null hypothesis that r ≤ q  cannot be rejected. Since

                                                ∗                     ∗
this is implies that we can dismiss that r ≤ q − 1, but not r ≤ q , such a result suggests

                ∗
that there are q  cointegrating vectors in the system.

In addition to determining the long-term characteristics implied by the impact matrix Π,

we evaluate short run dynamics as suggested by the Γi matrices in Eq. (2). Whenever

the coefficients in these matrices are significantly non-zero, there is evidence of short-run

correlations between variables in ∆Xt and ∆Xt−i , i = 1, ..., k. This provides an indication

of how well one time series is useful in forecasting another.

Prior to conducting cointegration analysis, we use two unit-root tests, in order to test

for presence of unit roots in the data. Recall that the Johansen procedure requires the

original time series Xt to be I(1). This assumption is by no means guaranteed to hold,

and hence, it must be validated before cointegration analysis is conducted.

The first unit-root test we adopt is the augmented version of the Dickey and Fuller (1979)

test. This is based on an autoregressive model, and has the form of

             ∆xt = α + βt + γxt−1 + δ1∆xt−1 + · · · + δn−1∆xt−n+1 + εt, (4)

                                      12
where xt represents an individual stock index time series, the intercept α represents a

drift in xt and β corresponds to a possible time trend in ∆xt. Furthermore, δi∆xt−i , i =

1, . . . , n − 1 corresponds to the additional contribution of the augmented model compared

to the simple Dickey-Fuller test and allows capturing of possible serial correlation in ∆xt.

The γ coefficient is, however, the parameter of central interest. It provides an indication

of whether there is a unit root or not in the data. To evaluate this, the Augmented

Dickey-Fuller procedure simply tests the hypothesis

                                   H0 : γ = 0

against the alternative that γ < 0. If γ = 0, xt can be concluded to be non-stationary,

as it needs to be differenced to become stationary. In contrast, if γ < 0, xt is already

stationary, and it does not require differencing in order to demonstrate stationarity.

In the second unit root test, we adopt the Philips and Perron (1988) procedure. This is

based on a non-parametric test, and therefore enables a robustness check of the results ob-

tained from the regression in Eq. (4). The Philips-Perron test is similar to the Augmented

Dickey-Fuller test, but has the somewhat simpler form

                                                            ′       ′        ′
                           xt = α + β t + γ xt−1 + εt, (5)

                ′                                         ′                                                     ′
where the α  represents an intercept and β  a possible time trend in xt. Again, γ  is

the coefficient of central interest, as it determines whether xt has a unit root or not. In

contrast to the Dickey-Fuller test, the Philips-Perron procedure however assumes that the

lagged level variable is endogenous, and therefore adopts test statistics that are robust to

serial correlation in the error term. In essence, we test the null hypotheis

                                                           ′
                                    H0 : γ = 1,

                                      ′
against the alternative that γ < 1. If H0 is rejected, xt can be concluded to be stationary.

Consequently, failure to reject H0 implies non-stationarity.

5 Results

In this section, we present the quantitative results obtained from unit root tests and the

Johansen procedure, as well as tests of short-run dynamics, as outlined in section 4.

                                      13
As noted, it is important to determine whether the original time series are non-stationary,

as cointegration analysis only can be performed on data that is at least I(1). Results from

the Augmented Dickey-Fuller and Philips-Perron unit root tests for the levels index data

for each stock market are reported in table 3. Note that each test is conducted on two

different models – one in which fluctuations around a constant mean is considered, and

the other with stationary fluctuations around a time trend, corresponding to the βt and

   ′
β t terms in Eq. (4) and Eq. (5). Optimal lag-choice for the Augmened Dickey-Fuller test

was determined by minimizing the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).

                    Augmented Dickey-Fuller Philips-Perron

                 Constant Constant and trend Constant Constant and trend

   France -0.869 -1.093 -5.570 -5.579

   Spain -1.280 -0.820 -3.940 -4.637

   Austria -0.249 0.575 -1.561 -1.102

   U.K. -0.977 -1.331 -5.013 -5.333

   Netherlands -1.083 -2.147 -4.678 -6.262

   Sweden -1.123 -0.942 -4.300 -4.925

Table 3: Test statistics for Augmented Dickey-Fuller and Philips-Perron unit-root test of national stock
index data. 1%, 5% and 10% critical values for the Augmented Dickey-Fuller are -3.430, -2.860 and -2.570
respectively for the constant model, and -3.960, -3.410 and -3.120 for the trend model. Corresponding
critical values for the Philips-Perron tests are -20.700, -14.100 and -11.300 for the constant model, and
-29.500, -21.800 and -18.300 for the trend model.

Table 3 shows that none of the test statistics fall below the critical values, and hence the

null hypothesis of unit roots is not rejected in any of the tests. Thus, we cannot preclude

that the index series are non-stationary. This result is in line with previous studies, which

typically show that stock prices follow I(1) processes. However, in order to confirm the

order of integration, we also conduct unit root tests on the differenced index series. The

results are reported in table 4.

As can be seen, the null hypothesis of a unit root in the differenced data is rejected at

the 1% level in all tests. We thereby conclude that the differenced stock index series is

a stationary process. By definition, a time series is I(1) if it is non-stationary and its

                                      14
corresponding differenced time series is stationary. Hence, we find that the level time

series all follow I(1) processes, allowing us to perform cointegration tests.

                  Augmented Dickey-Fuller Philips-Perron

               Constant Constant and trend Constant Constant and trend

 France -40.472*** -40.451*** -1744.273*** -1744.177***

 Spain -39.689*** -39.678*** -1703.987*** -1703.987***

 Austria -38.401*** 38.401*** -1640.977*** -1640.496***

 U.K. -41.015*** -41.001*** -1773.379*** -1773.227***

 Netherlands -40.518*** -40.502*** -1767.298*** -1767.164***

 Sweden -42.171*** -42.177*** -1757.544*** -1757.496***

Table 4: Test statistics for Augmented Dickey-Fuller and Philips-Perron unit-root tests of differenced
national stock index data. 1%, 5% and 10% critical values for the Augmented Dickey-Fuller are -3.430,
-2.860 and -2.570 respectively for the constant model, and -3.960, -3.410 and -3.120 for the trend model.
Corresponding critical values for the Philips-Perron tests are -20.700, -14.100 and -11.300 for the constant
model, and -29.500, -21.800 and -18.300 for the trend model. 1 %, 5% and 10% significance levels are
indicated by ***, ** and *.

In the next step of the analysis, we perform the Johansen procedure on the index levels

data throughout the full time period, by evaluating both maximum eigenvalue statistics

and trace statistics. Two different lag-lenghts are evaluated: k = 11 and k = 1. The former

is determined by minimizing the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), and the latter by

minimizing the Schwartz Bayesian Information Criterion (SBIC). The results are reported

in table 5.

In the case of k = 11, the trace test as well as the maximum eigenvalue test yield that

the null hypothesis that r = 0 can be rejected at the 5% level, but not at the 1% level.

The lowest rank at which failure to reject H0 at a 5% level occurs is r ≤ 1, suggesting

rather strong evidence of one cointegrating vector in the k = 11 lag model. Even stronger

significance is, however, provided by the k = 1 model, as this provides rejection of r = 0

already at the 1% level for both test statistics. The first failure to reject H0 at the 1 %

level occurs at r ≤ 1, implying strong support of one cointegrating vector in the k = 1

case.

Following this result, we estimate the α and β coefficients of the impact matrix. The β

                                      15
                          Test statistics Critical values

              k = 11 k = 1 1% 5%

   H0 Trace Max. Trace Max. Trace Max. Trace Max.

                   1         1
  r = 0 101.5290   40.9136    103.5051 46.7349 103.18 45.10 94.15 39.37

                    5          5          1,5          1,5
  r ≤ 1 60.6155    23.6038   56.7703    27.8934     76.07 38.77 68.52 33.46

  r ≤ 2 37.0117 16.7470 28.8768 12.3116 54.46 32.24 47.21 27.07

  r ≤ 3 20.2647 12.1105 16.5652 9.2156 35.65 25.52 29.68 20.97

  r ≤ 4 8.1542 4.8475 7.3496 5.1833 20.04 18.63 15.41 14.07

  r ≤ 5 3.3067 3.3067 2.1664 2.1664 6.65 6.65 3.76 3.76

Table 5: Johansen trace and maximum eigenvalue tests for the number of cointegrating vectors. H0 is
rejected when test statistics exceeds critical values. k refers to the number of lags, where k = 11 minimizes
                                1     5
AIC and k = 1 minimizes SBIC.   and   indicates the lowest rank at which failure to reject H0 occurs,
when comparing with 1% and 5% critical values respectively, implying that the number of cointegrating
vectors correspond to this rank.

coefficients correspond to the cointegrating linear combination normalized on the Swedish

index, whereas the α coefficients provide an indication of how well each index responds to

fluctuations in the common stochastic trend in the long run.

Results are summarized in table 6, and consistently demonstrate significant β coefficients

for both lag lengths. Graphs of the mean-errors of the cointegrating linear combination

of the indices implied by the estimated β coefficients in the k = 1 and k = 11 models are

plotted in figure 2. Note that mere inspection supports that the series are stationary, as

they do not show any evidence of exploding at any point. Instead, they repeatedly return

to their means, as stationary series are expected to do.

As for the α coefficients, all countries demonstrate significance in the k = 11 case, implying

that all markets respond after 11 days to deviations in the cointegration relationship.

According to the sizes of the respective α coefficients, Sweden, Netherlands and France

seem to be responding relatively forcefully to such deviations, whereas Spain, Austria and

U.K. respond somewhat weaker.

Similar results are reported in the k = 1 case, with the exception of U.K, which fails to

demonstrate a significantly non-zero α coefficient. This result suggests that, whenever

                                      16
                              Beta Alpha

                      k = 11 k = 1 k = 11 k = 1

       France -12.61053*** -22.30528*** 0.0020373*** 0.0008382***

       Spain 10.17726*** 19.38743*** 0.0012632*** 0.000533**

       Austria -3.564853*** -7.253815*** 0.0014524*** 0.0006073***

       U.K. 14.06196*** 31.37779*** 0.0010222** 0.0001942

       Netherlands -7.295103*** -17.38582*** 0.0023424*** 0.0009639***

       Sweden 1.0000 1.0000 0.0024933*** 0.0009921***

                                                                                                                                                                                 ′
Table 6: Johansen estimated α and β coefficients of the impact matrix, defined as Π = αβ . The β
coefficients are normalized on the Swedish stock index series. k refers to the number of lags, where k = 11
minimizes AIC and k = 1 minimizies SBIC. 1%, 5% and 10% significance levels are indicated by ***, **
and * respectively.

there is a deviation from the cointegration relationship, all markets other than the U.K.

market will adjust in order to reduce the disequilibrium. One implication of this is that

the U.K. stock market is likely to be the first to display any effect of an external economic

shock among the six indices. The other stock markets will thereafter respond to this change

in the long run, as indicated by the size of their respective α coefficients. The results in

table 6 suggest that Sweden, Netherlands and France are the three most responsive indices,

whereas Spain and Austria demonstrate a relatively weak reaction to fluctuations in the

common trend.

The effect of the α coefficients can be understood by inspecting the error-correcting rep-

resentation of the cointegrating relationship, which is an equivalent representation of the

cointegrating relationship. Recall that Eq. (1) can be rewritten on error-correcting form

as

                   ∆Xt = Γ1∆Xt−1 + · · · − βμ + ΓkXt−k + εt, (6)

                                                                                                                                                             ′
where Γi = −I + Π1 + · · · + Πi, i = 1, ..., k. Note that Γk = Π = αβ . The error-

correction equation is a VAR in differences, with one additional term made up of the

level at k lags. Recall that β is the matrix of cointegrating vectors, however in our case

the results show strong support for only one cointegrating vector. In the error-correction

representation, the α vector is multiplied by the stationary linear combination obtained

                                      17
          Figure 2: Plot of the estimated cointegrating linear combination of stock indices.

                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1 lag

                      0

                     −5
                               2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 11 lags

                      0

                     −5
                               2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

from the cointegration relationship. Thus there is a direct relationship between the change

                               (i)
in the ith series, ∆Xt , and the level of the series obtained from the cointegrating vector,

  ′                                                                                                                                 (i)
β Xt, the strength of which is measured by the α coefficient for that series, α  . For

several indices, the α coefficient measures the dependence on all cointegrating series, and

the differences ∆Xt are dependent upon all of them in the error-correction representation.

The choice of the number of lags in the the VAR representation from which the coin-

tegrating relationship is estimated affects the responsiveness of the constituent series to

deviations of the cointegration linear combination. Inspecting the error-correction repre-

sentation in Eq. (6), we can conclude that the smaller the lag, the sooner the indices start

to correct the deviations of the cointegration series. For the estimated model with k = 1

lags, as indicated by the SBIC, already the next day following a deviation do the indices

start to correct the deviation. In the k = 11 case, as indicated by the AIC, there is an

11-day lag until a correction begins. Thus we expect the linear combination of indices to

adjust more rapidly in the former case, since in the latter case the model does not respond

to any deviations that have taken place during the last 10 days. The level term in the

error-correction representation continues to affect the change in all variables with non-zero

α coefficients until the linear combination has returned to its mean.

In the concluding part of the analysis, we evaluate the directions of short-run dynamics

                                      18
in the k = 1 model, as this specification provides strongest evidence of one cointegrating

vector, according to the results reported in table 5. Given that k = 1 and r = 1, Eq. (6)

implies that the first difference in stock index i can be written as

                                         p                      p
                  (i)              ∑  (i)    (j)       ∑            (i)
                                      (i)  (i)                              (i)        (j)
           ∆Xt = −β  μ  +   γj ∆Xt−1 + α     β  Xt−1 + εt ,
                                      j=1                   j=1

           (i)         (j)                                                                                           (i)
where α   and β   are the already estimated coefficients presented in table 6. The γj

coefficients indicate the short-run responses to changes in other market indices. Note that

the first difference in Xt is equivalent to log-returns of the indices. If there is a significant

non-zero relationship between the daily log-return of one market at time t and the daily

                                                                                                                                    (i)
log-return of another market at time t − 1 (or the same market at time t − 1), the γj

coefficients will capture this dependency. Results are reported in table 7.

                   ∆Francet ∆Spaint ∆Austriat ∆U.K.t ∆Netherl.t ∆Swedent

  ∆Francet−1 -0.15** -0.20*** -0.18*** -0.064 -0.098 -0.036

  ∆Spaint−1 0.031 0.11*** 0.07 -0.011 0.0044 0.036

  ∆Austriat−1 -0.069*** -0.044** -0.023 -0.021 -0.041 -0.11***

  ∆U.K.t−1 0.018 0.0015 0.048 -0.045 0.032 0.11**

  ∆Netherl.t−1 0.056 0.061 0.10** 0.063 -0.00088 0.027

  ∆Swedent−1 0.073** 0.033 0.067** 0.037 0.063** -0.020

Table 7: Short run responses between stock market log-returns. 1%, 5% and 10% significance levels are
indicated by ***, ** and * respectively.

As shown, the only market that is not affected by any other market is the U.K., supporting

the claim that U.K. is the first market to display the effects of an exogenous shock. This

result suggests that the U.K. is weakly exogenous to the system. In turn, the U.K. affects

the Swedish stock market, which thereafter impacts stock markets in France, Austria and

Netherlands. By the same logic, the French market influences indices in Spain and Austria,

and the Austrian market effects the French, Spanish and Swedish stock indices, whereas

the Dutch market has significant effects on the Austrian market. Spain, in contrast, seems

to be the only market that has no evident impact on other indices. An overview of these

directions of causality are illustrated in figure 3. Note, that the data suggest that there

are unidirectional as well as bidirectional relationships.

                                      19
                  Figure 3: Short-run linkages between stock market log-returns.

6 Implications

Our tests indicate strong support for one cointegrating vector among the six equity in-

dices, as described in the previous section. We will interpret the uncovered cointegration

relationship and analyze its financial implications. In order to do so, it is important to

have a thorough understanding of its characteristics as a statistical measure.

As mentioned, through specifying that the linear combinations of the cointegration space

follow a stationary process, cointegration is a measure of long-term dependence. A sta-

tionary process has constant mean, and it will always retract back towards the mean if it

has deviated from it. In fact, a stationary process will cross the mean an infinite amount

of times as time tends to infinity – in other words there is zero probability that the series

will diverge never to return to the mean. Additionally, the idiosyncratic noise in each

index will not have any effect on the final outcome of the relative movements, since we

know that the series will converge to the mean sooner or later. Thus, exogeneous, ran-

dom effects that affect individual indices will abate over time. Indeed, for any stationary
        ∑+∞            ∑+∞
series Zt = μ +   j=0 θj εt−j we must have   j=0 |θj | < +∞, leading to the effects of indi-

vidual perturbations εi becoming arbitrarily small over time. Although being somewhat

counterintuitive, this is not a contradiction, but simply a statement of the cointegration

– exogeneous shocks will affect individual contituent assets in the cointegration relation-

ship, but since markets are integrated, these will die out over time or spread to the other

markets, maintaining the long-run relationship between them. Furthermore, it would be

fair to assume that there are dependencies that can not be spotted if only investigating

                                      20
time series pairwise, and as mentioned above cointegration can indeed be a joint property

of several time series.

Be that as it may, there are a few problems with cointegration that must be kept in

mind when interpreting our results from a point of view of their economic significance.

One such thing is the fact that cointegration is unlikely to be observed among tradable

assets in efficient markets. The stationarity of a linear combination of assets would imply

that risk-free arbitrage strategies could be devised, as there is no uncertainty about that

the portfolio of assets constructed from the cointegrating relationship will revert back

to its mean once a deviation has taken place. The feasibility of arbitrage strategies is

equivalently an effect of that the idiosyncratic risk factors of the constituent assets have

no lasting impact on the final outcome of the relative movements.

With these properties of cointegration in mind, we analyze the economic significance of the

results obtained from our statistical tests. Being a long-term, unchanging relationship, we

used a long time period to estimate the cointegrating vector, as explained in the previous

section. The essence of cointegration is that the relationship will hold over an extended

period of time, or the time series could not be considered stationary, and the measure as

such would be of little use. Furthermore, our study is to the best of our knowledge the most

recent investigation of cointegration among equity indices, thus allowing us, for example,

to analyze the behaviour of the cointegrating vector during and after the financial crisis.

Since we found significant cointegration among our data, this indicates that a linear com-

bination of European stock indices can be described by a stationary time series represen-

tation. But what does this really mean? We already know that they are highly correlated

and exhibit strong comovement, mostly due to the correlation. So what does cointegration

bring to the table? The correlation between the indices tells us that if one index goes up,

the others tend to do that as well on the same day. However, over time this might translate

into very different outcomes for the index levels, so nothing can be said about these over

any longer period of time. One could calculate the monthly correlation, or the yearly one,

or whichever period one prefers, but the idiosyncratic components of the index returns will

make the explanatory power of the correlation very blunt in the long run. Cointegration,

                                      21
rather than stipulating that assets will comove simultaneously, describes an inherent lag

in the comovements. Inspecting the plot of the cointegrating linear combination in figure

2, it deviates quite substantially from its mean, but always falls back. Assume that the

linear combination is at its equilibrium, and then some stock markets with predominantly

positive weights in the linear combination have higher relative return than the rest. Then

the series will deviate positively from the mean, as can be seen at multiple occasions in the

plot. However, since the linear combination always comes back to the mean, a period will

follow when the indices with predominantly negative weights have a higher relative return.

Thus, over time, the indices tend to follow each other, although the comovements exhibit

a lagging behaviour. Thus this dependency structure hypothesized by the cointegration

measure, and as confirmed by our statistical tests, is really nothing more than a lead-lag

structure in relative returns among the indices with negative and positive weights in the

linear combination.

An economic interpretation of correlation among stock indices is straightforward - Euro-

pean stock markets exhibit simultaneous comovement because they are all affected by the

same economic events, and they are all affected at the same time. Geographical proximity

and a high degree of economic integration in various forms naturally increase the corre-

lation. Cointegration makes a slightly different statement. Events that affect all indices

in relation to their exposure to systematic risk factors leave the cointegration vector un-

altered, or affects it only marginally. Cointegration is an expression of another type of

economic integration of national markets – the cointegrating vector changes as a result

of events that affect only one country, or certain countries disproportionately, effects that

then abate as the national stock indices again approach each other. Alternatively, cointe-

gration measures the effect of events that affect different countries at different points in

time – they begin in one country and then spread to the others. The statistically signifi-

cant cointegration among the European indices tells us that in addition to being affected

simultaneously by many global events and that events in one market tend to have an effect

on other markets in the region, as shown by the high correlation among the indices, the

indices tend to follow each other in the long run. It is unlikely that one index will deviate

from the rest for an extended period of time, i.e. that it has significantly lower or higher

                                      22
relative growth rate.

A number of factors could explain these dependencies between relative growth rates. If the

deviation of some indices is caused by a favourable macroeconomic climate, these effects

are likely to spread to other European economies, given the strong degree of economic

integration and capital mobility. In such cases, other financial markets will tend to main-

tain the co-integrating relationship by following the initial deviating markets. In contrast,

if the extreme performance in the deviating market is rather caused by inaccurate expec-

tations, or irrational fad behaviour, this deviation will be likely to reverse, leading the

deviating index to experience a period of lower relative growth.

Furthermore, the existence of cointegration in Europe has several other important implic-

tions. Firstly, it implies that there are no real benefits from diversifying a portfolio among

the six indices in the long run, since these stock markets will be likely to move together

in this time frame. Hence, investors with long-run holding periods will face limited risk

reduction possibilities through international diversification across these six markets. In-

vestors failing to take cointegration into account, and basing their portfolio diversification

solely on covariance, will find themselves exposed to much higher risk than expected. Tra-

ditional portfolio diversification techniques are based on minimizing the idiosyncratic risk

factors – but the stationarity of the cointegrating relationship leads to that any idiosyn-

cratic effects will die out over time, impliying limited gains from traditional diversification

in the long run.

The strong evidence of co-integration in our results possibly suggest significant predictabil-

ity of returns in the long run, as claimed by Richards (1995). This is due to the stationary

characteristics of the cointegrating linear combination, which is expected to return to its

equilibrium whenever there is a deviation from this state. However, no conclusions re-

garding whether this is a violation of the efficient market hypothesis can be drawn from

our reults unless risk-adjusted returns are considered. Market effciency is only violated

if co-integration enables risk-adjusted returns above the risk free rate. In addition, the

convergence speeds of the linear combinations must be considered, in order to evaluate

whether these are fast enough to generate risk-free returns. Furthermore, we have not

                                      23
adressed structural breaks in this paper, yet such phenomena are detected by e.g. Davies

(2005). Structural breaks is a potential source of unpredictability, since they imply time

varying co-integrating vectors. Unless these variations can be predicted, the possible pre-

diction benefits implied by co-integration relationships might be lost.

From the results we can deduce what dependency structures are in place between the dif-

ferent countries. One important parameter in this analysis is the α values of the estimated

cointegration relationship, which measures the degree of response exhibited by a series to

deviations of the linear combination from its long-run mean. In other words, it is this

parameter that drags the series back to equilibrium, through acting on the constituent

indices. Obviously, the greater the magnitude of the α coefficients, the more rapid the ad-

justment to the mean. Furthermore, the sign of the α coefficients determine the direction

of the change, depending on whether the cointegration linear combination is above or be-

low its mean. Thus note that the change in any one variable given by the error-correction

term can work either to bring series back towards the mean or further away from it. On

average, though, the effect to bring the series back to the mean will be stronger than the

opposite.

In the cointegration model with k = 11 lags, all indices had statistically significant alpha

coefficient, implying that all indices are affected by the deviations. In the k = 1 case,

the U.K. was the only country where the index did not have a statistically significant α

coefficient, indicating that it does not respond to deviations of the cointegration linear

combination. Thus, another important conclusion from our study is the exogenous prop-

erties of the U.K. market. Since the data does not support that any other market within

the sample has temporal causal effects on the London exchange, we conclude that this

index is to a large extent independent from the other five markets. Our results indicate

that the other markets, more often than not, lag the London stock exchange by one or

a few days, implying that the effects of an external shock is first displayed by the Lon-

don exchange, and thereafter spread throughout the other five stock markets successively.

Hence, it seems that new information is absorbed more effectively by the U.K. stock mar-

ket, compared to the rest of the indices. This can be interpreted in light of the events

of the recent financial crisis. The cointegration relationship would indicate that the U.K.

                                      24
would respond first to certain events, which is also what could be seen during the crisis. It

is a common fact that the financial crisis originated in the United States and then spread

to Europe. In Europe, the U.K. was the first country where the financial crisis manifested

itself, with decreased GDP growth and bankruptcies. The U.K. bank Northern Rock was

the first bank in Europe to fail and be taken over by the government as the crisis hit, in

the beginning of 2008.

One explanation of this phenomenon is uncovered by considering the relative market cap-

italizations of the six indices. The London stock exchange, is one of the largest stock

exchanges in the world. By far, it exhibits the largest market capitalization in the Euro-

pean region. As of December 2010, the total market capitalization of the stocks traded on

the London exchange amounted to approximately 3400 000 MUSD, whereas the French

stock market, which is the second largest in Europe, demonstrated a corresponding value

                       3
of 2800 000 MUSD.

Masih and Masih (2002) discuss the implications of market capitalization to stock market

independence, and refer to the differential information hypothesis. According to this

theory, if the cost of information search is constant across different markets, regardless

of market size, then a large market will have more incentives to search for mispricings,

compared to a small market. As a consequence of this, at each point in time, the larger

market will have access to more information than a small market. This suggests that the

asset prices in the larger market will tend to reflect information to a larger extent than

prices in a smaller market. Hence, the superior size of the U.K. stock market, compared

to the other five indices, offers a possible explanation of its exogenous characteristics.

Another possible explanation of the exogeneous properties of the U.K. is the country’s

position as Europe’s financial centre. Furthermore, our result is in line with Masih and

Masih (2002), which show that the U.K. stock market has influential importance to stock

indices across the world. Most studies mapping stock market linkages across the world,

however, typically indentify the U.S. stock market as exongenous to other markets. This

is not surprising, given the strong global economic influence of the U.S. economy. In

addition, due to strong financial linkages between the U.S. and the U.K. economies, one

   3
    Stock market capitalizations have been collected at World Federation of Exchanges (WFE)

                                      25
can expect that the U.S. stock market has particularly strong impact on the London index.

This is supported by the results provided by Masih and Masih (2002), and further suggests

that performance in the U.S. stock market is a potential source of external shocks to the

European indices, initially reflected by the U.K. index.

There are still many questions that are unanswered about cointegration as a measure

of market dependencies. One open debate is whether cointegration violates the efficient

market hypothesis, a contribution to which would be to investigate the risk-adjusted return

of a cointegrating vector, which is an interesting idea for future research. The research

about regime-switching models based on Markov chains could also be extended with more

generous models. Instead of the cointegrating relationship switching between two fixed

values, a model where cointegration switches between a state of being active and a state

where no cointegration is present could be investigated. Cointegration remains a very

relevant statistical measure and any research that would continue to clarify its implications

for real-world economic events would be very welcome.

7 Conclusions

Our statistical tests showed that the six European equity indices treated in this study

follow a cointegration relationship with one cointegrating vector, which indicates that the

indices tend to move together in the long run. There is a lead-lag structure in the relative

returns of the indices, and periods of positive or negative relative returns will be followed

by reversals. Our findings imply that events that affect only one market at first, such as

favourable macroeconomic conditions, will later spread to the other markets and effects

of idiosyncratic events only present in one market will abate over time. This could be

explained by the high level of economic and financial integration among the countries.

The existence of long-run dependencies between relative performance further means that

portfolio diversification techniques based on covariance will be less effective in the long

run. We further investigated the effect on the indices of deviations of the cointegrating

linear combination from its mean, and find that the U.K. is weakly exogeneous and thus

will be the first market to respond to events that later spread to the other countries. This

                                      26
could be explained by the the U.K. being Europe’s financial centre and the largest stock

market in Europe, and by its close ties to the United States, the world’s largest economy.

Evidence of this relationship could be seen during the recent financial crisis, when the

U.K. was the country to be hit first by the crisis, before any of the other countries noticed

any effects.

                                      27
References

Baillie R.T., Bollerslev T., Common Stochastic Trends in a System of Exchange Rates,

  The Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, No. 1 (1989), pp. 167-181

Blackman S.C., Holden K., Thomas W.A., Long-term relationships between international

  share prices, Applied Financial Economics, 4 (1994) pp. 297-304

Booth G.G., Mustafa C., Long-run dynamics of black and official exchange rates, Journal

  of International Money and Finance, 10 (1991) pp. 392-405

Brockwell P.J., Davis R.A., Time Series: Theory and Methods, New York: Springer (1991)

Choudhry T., Stochastic trends in stock prices: Evidence from Latin American markets,

  Journal of Macroeconomics, Vol. 19, No. 2, (1997) pp. 285-304

Corhay A.,Tourani Rad A., Urbain J.P., Common stochastic trends in European stock

  markets, Economics Letters 42, (1993) pp. 385-390

Davies A., Testing for equity market integration using regime switching cointegration

  techniques, Review of Financial Economics 15 (2006) pp. 305-321

Dickey D.A., Fuller W.A.Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive Time Series

  With a Unit Root, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 74, No. 366

  (1979), pp. 427-431

Dwyer G.P.; Wallace M.S., Cointegration and market efficiency, Journal of International

  Money and Finance 11 (1992), pp. 318-327

Engle R F.; Granger C. W. J., Co-Integration and Error Correction: Representation,

  Estimation, and Testing, Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 2. (1987), pp. 251-276

Fama E., Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work, Journal of

  Finance, Vol. 25, No. 2 (1970) pp. 383-417

Granger C. W. J., Some properties of time series data and their use in econometric model

  specification, Journal of Econometrics No. 16, (1981) pp. 121-130

Granger C. W. J., Weiss A.A., Time series analysis of error-correcting models, Studies

                                      28
  in Econometrics, Time Series, and Multivariate Statistics. New York: Academic Press,

  (1983) pp. 255-278

Granger C.W.J., Developments in the study of cointegrated economic variables, Oxford

  bulletin of economics and statistics, 48, 3 (1986) pp. 213-228

Hakkio C.S., Rush M., Market efficiency and cointegration: an application to the sterling

  and deutschemark exchange markets, Journal of International Money and Finance 8

  (1989) pp. 75-88

Hamilton J.D., Time Series Analysis, Princeton: Prineton University Press, (1994)

Johansen S., Stastistical analysis of co-integration vectors, Journal of Economic Dynamics

  and Control 12, (1988) pp. 231-254

Johansen S., Juselius K.Maximum likelihood estimation and inference on cointegration -

  with applications to the demand for money, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics

  52, 2 (1990) pp. 169-210

Kasa K., Common stochastic trends in international stock markets, Journal of Monetary

  Economics 29, (1992) pp. 95-124

Lence S.; Falk B., Cointegration, market integration and market efficiency, Journal of

  International Money and Finance 24 (2005), pp. 873-890

Masih A.M.M., Masih R. Propagative causal price transmission among international stock

  markets: evidence from the pre- and post globalization period, Global Finance Journal

  13 (2002) pp. 63-91

Murray M.P., A drunk and her dog: An Illustration of Cointegration and Error Correction,

  The American Statistican 48 (1994) pp. 37-39

Philips P.C.B., Perron P. Testing for a unit root in time series regression, Biometrika

  (1988) pp. 335-346

Richards A.J., Comovements in national stock market returns: Evidence of predictability,

  but not cointegration, Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (1995) pp. 631-654

                                      29