            CEO – the explicit value

                                       M            A
                               Micka Lin , Anton Lund

                                 30 May 2011

                                   Bachelor Thesis
                           Stockholm School of Economics

Abstract: The purpose of this essay is to examine the value connected to a company’s CEO. CEO
remuneration is a topic that is often addressed in the media and a central topic in research. The
value added by a CEO is often questioned and hard to test for. We approach this by looking at the
impact of CEO death on OROA. Using an extensive Swedish data set, we find a significant negative
effect on operating return on assets from a CEO death event. The event is not followed by any over
performance, meaning that losses are permanent. Smaller firms based on number of employees are
hit harder by the event. CEO characteristics do not show significant differences aside from CEO
tenure, which shows some impact only for the event year. Overall, the results exhibit CEO
importance to Swedish firms.

Keywords: CEO death event, CEO Turn over, CEO characteristics, Firm performance

Tutor: Laurent Bach, Assistant Professor

M
   21744@live.hhs.se
A
   21686@live.hhs.se
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank our tutor Laurent Bach for his incredible
guidance and support throughout the process of this thesis paper. He has provided great
insight to both the subject and to the methodology of empirical finance research. His help
has been very much appreciated.

1 Introduction

What it is exactly that the CEO does and more importantly, what value is attached to the CEOs? What
does this value consist of? To answer these questions some academics have studied CEOs’
personality traits, corporate governance systems and how they relate to company performance, and
produced masses of literature. There is a problem with endogeneity as firms to do not select their
CEOs randomly, and there are certainly differences across industries. This paper seeks to numerically
determine the contributions of a CEO, by looking at CEO deaths, which are assumed to be
exogenous. Firms can be benchmarked against other firms over the same periods around the death
of a company’s CEO. Over a large sample any difference should be attributable to this isolated event.
This can then be interpreted as some sort of measurement of the inherent value of the CEO. We
believe that this would contribute to the ongoing debate over management remuneration and
whether it is reasonable or not. This will not answer what leadership or management is or what it is
they are doing to create value for a company, but looking at the disruptive event of the death of a
CEO will give a new perspective of that value.

In our empirical tests we identify a negative impact of 1.94 percentage points on operational return
on assets (OROA) for the event of a CEO death. The effect starts one year before the year of death,
which implies some expectancy in the event. There is no indication of the event being succeeded by
overperformance, which means that the losses are permanent. When firms are grouped in terms of
size based on number of employees, the effect is considerably weaker for the largest quartile. There
is a statistically significant differential in performance between the smallest and largest quartile.
Under the assumption that the event of a CEO death does have an effect, dividing firms using size of
sales does not render any new perspectives. Looking at difference in age of the deceased CEOs we
did not find any statistically significant difference in firm performance. For CEO tenure a significant
effect can be found only for the event year, suggesting that CEO successors quickly come to grips
with their new job tasks. For 28 % of firms where the death of a CEO occurred, the firm was
registered for bankruptcy in the years following. For these firms, the event had a significantly more
negative impact on firm performance.

                                        1
We also tested the effect on the logarithm of sales growth, which surprisingly yielded a significant
positive impact. We have no probable explanation for this and we cannot think of any sources of
error.

We were interested in examining the effect on the death of a family member of a CEO on firm
performance. Unfortunately we could not find any data on family relationships, which forced us to
use restrictive proxies. This method was too strict and did not yield enough observations to generate
statistically significant results. Although insignificant, they lean toward indicating the possibility of a
negative impact on OROA, which could be examined further.

1.2 outline of study
In Section 2, previous research will be presented. A brief part will cover relevant literature that
touches upon the question of “What value is the CEO to the company?” It will focus on the empirical
work as that relates more closely to this paper. The qualitative research offers suggestions as to
where more quantitative analysis can be done.

In Section 3, the data used in this essay will be described.

In Section 4, the handling of the data and the statistical methods that have been used will be
described. It will also discuss the encountered restrictions.

Section 5, presents the results

In Section 6, the results will be analyzed

In Section 7, the conclusion will be summarized and presented.

In Section 8, possible future research will be discussed and suggested

Section 9, contains all references that have been used to write this thesis.

In the Appendix, all tables referred to in the paper will be displayed.

                                        2
2 Previous Research

2.1 Related fields
To determine how much value a CEO adds one can start by looking at the tasks and skills that are
required of executives. In management literature you find that managers are dissected into their
personal traits, what style of management they employ, the situations in which they conduct their
management and much more. It is also discussed whether the relationships between management
and the employees come closer to capturing the essence of management rather than looking at the
individual manager - “leadership is a process whereby an individual influences a group of individuals

                               1
to achieve a common goal”. Another frequently discussed topic is how much room there is to
practice management. Obviously, a CEO has more freedom to practice his work than middle
management, but to some extent the CEO is also limited by the board and cultural and institutional
constraints. [2] With the low level of agreement regarding what constitutes management within this
area of research, and the many authors with their own definitions it will be hard to deduce a
quantitative indication of CEO value using only management literature. We hope that our study can
bring a new perspective to this discussion. One benefit from our approach is that it is relatively
separated from the field of management.

Executive pay is often the subject of public debate, their salary being several million dollars without
clear justification. This leads us to CEO hiring practices. From an economics perspective, the skill of a
CEO for a specific position is unobservable at the signing of the contract. Several researchers argue
that running a modern company now favors general skills that are relatively transferable, as opposed
to company specific knowledge, which would favor internal hiring. They see the trend that more
executives are hired externally as confirmation of the hypothesis. A manager who is performing well
at another firm is a good indication of aptitude, but a general skill set leaves uncertainty at the
signing of the contract for both sides. In the field of labor market economics, Harris and Holmström
present a dynamic wage model of efficient wage contracts. This model is applicable under the
conditions that are mentioned above. The model assumes that the firm is risk neutral and that the
agent is risk averse. Once the CEO starts working for the firm, output that is freely observable is
produced. Output is considered to be positively correlated with ability.

The CEO compensation can then span from being completely fixed to giving the agent 100% ability
related risk. Given that the agent is risk neutral we will not see the latter kind. Also, giving fixed
contracts is not feasible as an agent cannot commit to refuse future offers should his ability turn out
higher than expected. The option left is partial insurance with downward rigidity. If the manager’s

1
 Jönsson, S., Strannegård, L., Ledarskapsboken, Författarna & Liber AB, edition 1.1 page 14

                                        3
ability is lower than expected then the company is stuck with taking negative profits. It is hard to
discern the real reason for a CEO’s departure, but there is some evidence suggesting that it is fairyly
uncommon for a CEO to be terminated due poor performance. [3] If the manager turns out to be
better than expected the company has to raise compensation as other employers compete for the
employee. This picture should not be unfamiliar as one view how compensation packages are
structured for top management and CEOs in presently listed companies.

2.2 Turnover empirical research
Stewart D. Friedman and Harbir Singh tested empirically what affects the CEO succession. They found
that stockholders reacted heterogeneously to news of succession. The performance context is a good
predictor to board initiated succession events and market reactions to successions. When firm
performance indicates ineffective management and the company board replaces the CEO, the
market tends to react favorably. Their hypothesis was that poor pre succession performance allowed
for considerable latitude for action, and that communicating change in strategic direction is a
positive signal of adaption.

Their data partially supported that disruptive succession, cases of CEO death or disability, were met
with negative reactions. Another result was a negative relationship between stockholder reaction
and pre succession performance, suggesting that if performance is good then all successions will be
seen as disruptive. However, their data is limited by the small scope of succession cases studied.
Results were not consistent across different regression models. [4]

Brian F. Smith and Ben Amoako-Adu studied management successions in 124 family-owned Canadian
firms. Management literature suggests that family interests interfere with the goal of shareholder
wealth at the time of CEO successions. Some fundamental questions they try to answer are whether
companies appoint family members, non-family insiders or outsiders, what factors will affect this
decision and what the characteristics are of these three types when they are appointed.

A multinomial logit analysis indicates that the only significant factor that leads to the choice of a
family member as CEO successor is high concentration of family members in senior management and
the absence of another large shareholder. In firms with another large shareholder it might even be
the case that there is dissension as to which family should assume the senior executive role. Non-
family insiders and outsiders are more often appointed as successors in poorly performing firms.
Analysis of the stock price reaction to announcement of inside family succession shows a significant
loss of shareholder value. Over the days around the announcement (-1 1) the stock return was
estimated to -3.20 %. This negative effect does not extend to non-family insiders or outsiders. A

                                        4
cross-sectional regression indicates that age of the successor and the company size are significantly
related to stock price reaction. They argue that negative reaction from the succession of a family
member is due to the greater uncertainty of management quality when family members are
appointed. [5]

Corporate governance is a proponent of succession planning which is believed to help organizations
prepare for internal resource needs when unforeseen events occur, such as CEO deaths. This would
include training qualified candidates for senior management positions which reduces the attrition of
the high performing work force who tend to “job-hop” and put effort into looking into other career
alternatives. Despite the benefits, a survey the Financial Executives Institute made in 1999 showed
that 82 % respondents answered no to the question: “Were you groomed for your current CFO
position by a mentor in the firm?” One possible explanation is that it is difficult to implement and the
results are uncertain and difficult to measure. In a study published in 2005, Bruce K. Behn, Richard A
Riley Jr. and Ya-wen Yang, map out some succession plans in American companies. The data used
was found in the Factiva database for years 1984-2002, using the search criteria: “Death, Dies, Died
or Dying and CEO”. The study was limited to bigger companies that were listed on stock exchanges.
Some descriptive statistics are interesting to note. The average tenure of the CEOs was 14.1 years.
Successions were internal in 72.6 % of the cases and the average age of the deceased was
approximately 62 years. Higher tenure of a CEO increases the probability that someone from within
the firm will be named successor.

Firms were considered to have a succession plan if there was a person holding the title of either
president or COO (or both) and who was at least five years younger than the incumbent CEO. In their
empirical research part they found evidence of shareholders valuing the presence of a succession
plan, or at least the impression of there being one in place. It actually did not matter if the perceived
successor in the end did not get promoted. [6]

2.3 Similar research
Morten Bennedsen, Francisco Pérez-Gonzalez and Daniel Wolfenzon used an extensive Danish data
set to first test the performance of firms whose CEO dies to comparable firms. This evaluates the
negative effect of losing the contribution of the incumbent CEO combined with the shock of losing
any CEO. They also assessed a wider array of executive and firm characteristics that could affect a
manager’s influence on firm performance, e.g. how the death of a family member of a manager
affects the company. Their model was built on previously made assumptions regarding allocation of
time between productive work and other activities, mainly household activities. If a family member

                                        5
of a manager did not work for the same firm then the effect of this family member dying should only
be through the person who does. The hypothesis is that the death of a family member will alter the
allocation of time toward family activities and reduce the capacity at which the manager can perform
on the job. This provides a high level of separation and is likely to be exogenous.

They were able to identify 6753 deaths occurring to CEOs and the nucleur family; of which 1015
deaths were CEOs, 733 deaths were spouses of CEOs, 282 deaths were children of CEOs, 3061 were
parents and 1364 deaths were parents in law of CEOs. The study found that the death of the CEO and
his or her nucleur family is likely to cause both statistically significant and economically large impacts
on firm profitability. The industry adjusted operating return on assets, OROA, falls by 0.9 percentage
points annually over a two year window around any death to either the CEO or the nucleus family. If
the CEO dies the direct effect is estimated to 1.7 percentage points annually and if it is a family
member the effect is estimated to 0.7 percentage points. In robustness tests they found that the
results are significant for the event year and the two following years. After that the results are
insignificant, meaning that the losses are permanent and that shocked firms do not experience any
over performance reversals afterwards. The effects are not dependent on any single year. There are
no indications of differential performance prior to the event, strengthening the case for a causal
relationship in which death affects performance and not the other way around. The effect of deaths
of board members cannot be shown at an acceptable significance level. A limitation in this kind of
study is that expected deaths cannot be isolated. It could be that some cases, but too few to show up
significantly, involve expected deaths with the event effect somewhat spread out. However, the
logical implication would be that for unexpected deaths the actual event should be even more
negative than the results found. [7]

Our current understanding is that the data in their study have two major weaknesses:

    1. Danish firms can opt to not be included in their national registry of firm accounting
        information,
    2. They have no data on the number of employees in each firm.

The first point raises the question: Do firms that are doing poorly to a different extent choose to opt
out than firms that are doing well? This kind of bias could lead to results being distorted in either
direction. The second point is a shortcoming when investigating the magnitudes of impacts between
bigger and smaller firms. They made a proxy variable using the size of assets of the firm. We consider
this a rough proxy as industries differ in both labor and capital intensity.

                                        6
W. Bruce Johnson, Robert P. Magee, Nandu J. Nagarajan and Harry A. Newman published a paper
(“An analysis of the stock price reaction to sudden executive deaths”) in 1984 on shareholder wealth
dependent on continued executive employment. They studied 53 selected companies and looked
into the stock reaction the day the CEO was mentioned in the obituaries. The selection criteria were
that the deceased executive was working for a listed company which stocks were traded daily and
that the cause of death was not due to “prolonged illness”.

They did not find a systematic abnormal return on the average common stock. However, a bigger
dispersion of returns was observed indicating that stock price adjustments were being made
following the news. There are many factors that affect the net benefit of shareholders, i.e. the
difference between incumbent and replacement executives’ net contribution to equity value. They
found a positive correlation with excess return and the incumbent executive also being the founder,
although founder-managers appeared to receive a larger share from their employment contracts.
The excess return was negatively associated with the death event of more senior management than
their subordinates. The authors hypothesized that the value is mostly connected to the higher levels
of firm specific human capital that higher management has had more time to acquire, meaning that
the common stock returns were more negative when a CEO died than his subordinates, not because
of the level of importance of the role, but rather the loss of firm specific human capital which is more
difficult to salvage when replacing a lost employee.

The relationship between excess return and recent firm performance appeared unclear. The authors
could not find a direct relationship between poor recent performance and higher expected value of
new management. The combination of poor performance and a large shareholding of the deceased
CEO was particularly interesting, as it was associated with higher announcement period excess
returns. The interpretation here was that larger shareholdings enabled the CEO to impose higher
transaction costs on the other shareholders during re-contracting initiatives. The article mentioned
some limitations in the end: “In the absence of a well-developed theory linking managerial abilities,
employment contract characteristics and external labor market opportunities to shareholder cash
flows, the selection of appropriate independent variables for cross-sectional tests remains
problematic”. *8+

                                        7
3 Data

To pursue our study we have used the following data sources:

Extract from Sveriges Dödbok, Sveriges släktforskarförbund – A registry containing information on all
the deaths in Sweden between the years 1901 and 2009. In this paper, an excerpt for the years 1996
to 2009 was used. The data includes dates of birth and death, name, addresses and social security
number of the individual. The source of the data is a collection of civil registry data from the church
of Sweden and the Swedish Tax Agency.

Accounting data, PAR AB – Accounting data for Swedish firms from the early eighties to the year of
2008. This data set contains information on organization number, dates of financial reports and most
relevant accounting data from the balance sheet and the income statement. It also contains some
miscellaneous data such as number of employees.

Legal data, PAR AB – This contains the legal data collected by Statistics Sweden at the end of each
year from 1997 to 2008. The data set includes information on organizational number, legal form and
the industry classification according to Statistics Sweden. The industry specification is based on the
“Svensk Näringsgrensindelning (SNI), which in turn builds on the EU standard NACE (Nomenclature
statistique des activités économiques dans la Communauté européenne). The SNI is a five digit
number with increasing level of detail from the left to right.

Board members and managerial data, PAR AB – A data set of information of board members,
managers and accountants for Swedish companies from 1988 to 2008. The information included is
the individual’s position, social security number, address, start date and end date of their position
and the company’s corresponding organization number.

Bankruptcy & merger data, PAR AB – A data set containing records on bankruptcies, liquidation,
cancellations and mergers. This includes information on which stage of a bankruptcy or liquidation
the company is in and which date the status changed.

                                        8
4 Methodology

The manipulation of the data and all the statistical analysis has been performed using Stata, a
general-purpose statistical software package. The analysis can be replicated using the scripts written
by the authors. Interested parties may inquire for the programming code.

4.1 CEOs – merging the data
To begin with, the data from the Swedish death registry and the Board and managerial data was
matched using the social security number to create a data sheet consisting of all the dead CEOs. This
information was merged with the industry classifications from the legal data.

The yearly legal data only contains information on industry specification when such specification had
changed from the previous year. As different industry specification for different years for the same
firms makes firm specific analysis problematic, we decided to keep the oldest known specification for
each firm to get an industry specification that is accurate for the longest amount of time. We then
dropped the following industries: financials, real estate, government, healthcare, sewage,
associations, culture, embassies and utilities. This is because accounting data is not always
economically relevant in public companies or the industry might be too tightly regulated, e.g.
utilities. The specification standard from 1992 was used as this was the one with the most complete
coverage of the data set.

Using the accounting data, yearly and industry specific averages were calculated for the measures
used in the regression, i.e. operational return on assets and sales growth. This was then merged with
the data above and the data set on bankruptcies and mergers. Our definition of bankruptcy was any
company being either declared bankrupt, having been liquidated or cancelled at the company’s own
request.

4.2 Family members – merging the data
The merging of the family data was essentially the same. However, there was no data on family
relationships as in the Danish paper. The Swedish Tax Agency holds information on these
relationships, but only gives out information on specific cases. We were therefore forced to match
family relations as best we could. This resulted in a matching with CEOs from the Board member and
managerial data with deaths from the Swedish death registry on family name, street name, street
number and postal code. This multidimensional matching did reduce the observations significantly
but we thought it best to err on the side of caution. No other method gave clear indication of the
matches being from the same family. A small caveat of this matching is if there are people with the

                                        9
same family name living in the same house but not being part of the same family. This should
however only understate the results from any analysis.

4.3 CEOs – the statistical methods
The main outline of the statistical analysis is an event study where the identified event is when a CEO
or a family member of a CEO dies. If we have several deaths for the same firm, there will be several
event firms corresponding to the same firm. The year when the event occurs is called the event year
and all the other data points will be compared relative to this event year. Specifically, this means the
data set is a panel data set where the time variable is amount of years before or after the event and
the panel variable is every unique combination of social security number and organization number.

The goal of the study is to establish quantitative relationships between the event and different kinds
of accounting information. The typical regression will be:

Where is the dependent variable for event firm i and time t, are different kind of time
dummies and are event firm specific fixed effects and is the error term.

For simpler regression, a post event dummy will be used. This regression will put the observations
into two groups, before and after the event. This kind of regression is good to use if more
observations are needed to get significant results. The general regression will then be:

Where is a dummy that takes the value one when the observation is after the event and zero
otherwise.

As dependent variables we will use:

     OROA – Operating return on assets defined as . Of the return
         to assets ratios, this is the ratio least susceptible to managerial discretion. It should thus be a
        clean measure of how the profitability of operational activities changes. The OROA variable

                                               st         th
        has been Winsorized using the 1  and 99  percentile to correct for outliers. As a measure of
       abnormal OROA, we will subtract the event firm OROA from the year and industry specific
        average OROA calculated for the entire population of Swedish firms.
    GS – Growth in sales defined as ⁄ . In companies where CEOs are
        working with customer relations, GS will measure the capability of an event firm to attract
        and withhold customers. The logarithm of the growth is used to correct for outliers and also
        make the result easier to interpret.

                                       10
When the data permits, in terms of number of observations, we will look for differences in various
non-accounting variables such as size of the company, age and tenure of the deceased CEO. The
groupings in these cases will use the median as a cutoff point except for the age of the deceased
CEOs where the cutoff point is 65, the Swedish state pension age.

Especially for small companies, the death of a CEO could mean the end of the company. Using
dummies for companies which go bankrupt will make it possible to determine if these firms perform
statistically worse relative to the rest of the event firms.

4.4 Family members - the statistical methods
For the case of deceased family members, the hypothesis is that the death of a close relative (i.e.
spouse or child) will shift the time allocation of the CEO toward the family and from work. It can thus
be seen as an instrumental variable for the managers’ focus. In the case where the family member is
not working at the same company as the CEO, it is not very likely that the death is endogenous to any
firm variable. If the statistical analysis is restricted to only family members under the age of 18 or
over the age of 65, the Swedish state pension age, it can be assumed with high probability that the
instrument, i.e. the death of a family member, is not correlated with the error term in the
explanatory equation. These will in the following sections be categorized as non-working family
members. The small number of observations puts a restriction on what kind of statistical and
statistical methods that can be performed. Significant results can unfortunately only be achieved
using post event dummies.

                                       11
5 Results

5.1 Descriptive statistics
The data manipulation of deceased CEOs described in section 4 resulted in a dataset consisting of
1,935 identified events and 31,243 corresponding observations. This gives an average of about 16
years of data for every unique combination of deceased CEO and company.

Summary statistic 1 – this shows how the observations of yearly accounting information are spread out

Summary statistic 2 – the left graph shows the age distribution of CEOs in the full population. The right graph shows the age
distribution of the deceased CEOs.

The distribution of the financial year variable is slightly negatively skewed. This is probably because
our records of deceased CEOs start from the year 1996. The data is however consistent during
several business cycles which should correct for any bias in the accounting variables.

The graphs above show a comparison of the age of the deceased CEO compared to that of the
average age of the CEO population which has been calculated using the social security number of

                                       12
       every individual compared to the average date of their period as CEO. As can be seen in the graphs,
       the distribution of the age of deceased CEOs has a slightly higher kurtosis than the distribution of the
       average age of The CEOs. It is also quite naturally biased toward older individuals. This might create a
       problem if the performance of young and in particular old CEOs is consistently different compared to
       that of middle-aged CEOs.

          .25

             .2

          .15
Density
             .1

          .05

           0
                    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                              Year of bankruptcy relative to event year

       Summary statistic 3 – this shows the lag to a bankruptcy for firms that do go bankrupt after a CEO death event.

       In 537 firms or 28 % of the identified event firms the death of a CEO was succeeded by the company
       going bankrupt in the following years. The mean and median of time to bankruptcy is three and two
       years respectively relative to the event year. Of firms going bankrupt, 364 firms or 68 % of firms were
       defined as small relative to the median number of employees.

                                             13
       For deaths of family members, 451 individual cases with 5,447 corresponding observations were
       identified. The distribution of the age of deceased family members is centralized around the median
       of 70 years. 37 of the individuals are 18 or under and 270 are older than the Swedish state pension
       age. As expected, the method of matching described in section four yields a gap in the middle-ages
       where family members are less likely to live at the same address.

         .04


         .03


         .02
Density


         .01

          0
               0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                            Age of the deceased family member

       Summary statistic 4 – this graph shows the age of the deceased family member in a CEO family death event.

       5.2 Main statistical tests
      For the following test on OROA the measure has been demeaned using fiscal year and industry
       specifications based on the first four digits of the SNI. We also tested for SNI with only two levels of
       specificity and as the results were similar we chose four digits as it had lower variance.

       Table 1A shows the results from regressing OROA on a variable post defined as one for every year at
       or after the event and zero else. The regression is restricted to three years before and after the
      event. The regression has 9723 observations. The constant and the independent variable are
       significant at the 1 % level. The Coefficient is -0.0238 and -0.0194 of the constant and the post
       variable respectively.

       In table 1B are the results from regressing OROA on time dummies for six years before and five years
       after the event. For this regression we have 27251 observations. From to there is a highly
       significant (<1%) negative effect on OROA. The regression coefficient is -0.0308 for -0.0337 for
         , -0.0460 for , -0.0278 for , and -0.0221 for ,. The other time variables were economically

                                             14
close to zero and not significant except , which had a small coefficient of -0.0175 but still a t-
statistics of -2.156. We have graphed the regression results below.

   Table 1B - OROA on time dummies
     0
  -0,005
   -0,01
  -0,015
   -0,02
  -0,025                                                                            Regression coefficients
   -0,03
  -0,035
   -0,04
  -0,045
   -0,05

Results graph 1: table 1B plotted. Industry demeaned OROA (operational return on assets) regressed on yearly time
dummies. The regression constant has been excluded.

The table also shows a regression for only events where observations are available all three years
before and after. The only significant coefficient is -0.0261 for the year .

The two regressions in table 2A are the same kind as the one in table 1A, but they are divided into
big and small companies with the cutoff for big companies being three or more employees. For small
companies we have 4910 observations, the constant (-0.0275) and the independent variable post (-
0.0337) are significant at the 1 % level. For big companies we have 4813 observations, the constant (-
0.00925) is not significant at the 5 % level, the independent variable post (-0.0133) is significant at
the 5 % level. The test was done on 27233 observations.

In table 2B we have tested all OROA on the post variable. The firms are divided into quartiles based
on number of employees and all quartiles are measured against the first one with firms having the
smallest amount of employees. The first quartile has a highly significant and negative effect, -0.0414.
Compared to the first quartile the fourth one had a highly significant and positive effect. 0.0369.

Table 2C shows the results of regressing OROA on time variables that are separated into small and
big (the cutoff for a big company is three or more employees). Tdminus3 is the coefficient for small
firms at .If you add the coefficient for tdminus3_big_antanst you get the coefficient for big firms
at the corresponding time. The same goes for all the other time variables. Due to the amount of
variables please see the table in the appendix for further details. The resulting coefficients are
graphed below.

                                       15
   Table 2C - OROA on time dummies (size employees)
  0,01

    0
           T-3 T-2 T-1 Event T1 T2 T3
  -0,01

  -0,02                                                                                           Small firm

  -0,03                                                                                             Big firm

  -0,04

  -0,05

  -0,06

Results graph 2: table 2C plotted. Industry demeaned OROA (operational return on assets) regressed on yearly time
dummies. The regression constant has been excluded. Firms have been separated into big and small based on median
number of employees.

Table 3A shows OROA regressed on the post variable for three years before and after the event. The
firms are divided into big and small firms based on the size of their sales with the cutoff for big firms
being the median revenue, 2,583,055 Swedish Crowns. For small firms we have 4926 observations,
the constant (-0.0354) and the “post” variable (-0.0386) are both significant at the 1 % level. For big
firms we have 4797 observations, the constant (0.00526) and the post variable (-0.0114) are not
significant at the 5% level.

Table 3B shows OROA regressed on the post variable. The firms are divided into quartiles based on
size of sales. All quartiles are measured against the first one which contains the smallest firms. The
first quartile is significant and negative, -0.0247. Relative to the first quartile, the fourth one is
positive but lacks statistical significance. The test was done on 27235 observations.

Table 3C shows OROA regressed on time dummies and differentiated between big and small on size
of sales. There are 27251 observations. We present the results in a graph below for readability.
Please see the table in the appendix for details and numerical values.

                                       16
   Table 3C - OROA on time dummies (size sales)
  0,01

    0
           T-3 T-2 T-1 Event T1 T2 T3
  -0,01

  -0,02
                                                                                                  Small firm
  -0,03
                                                                                                     Big firm
  -0,04

  -0,05

  -0,06

  -0,07

Results graph 3: Coefficients from table 3C plotted. Industry demeaned OROA (operational return on assets) regressed on
yearly time dummies. The regression constant has been excluded. Firms have been separated into big and small based on
median size of sales.

Table 4A shows OROA regressed on the post variable for the three years before and after and with
deceased CEOs divided into young and old. The cutoff point for old CEOs is the Swedish state pension
age, 65 years. For firms with young CEOs (5952 observations) the variable post (-0.03) is significant at
the 1 % level, the constant is both economically and statistically insignificant. For firms with old CEOs
(3771 observations) the variable post (-0.0131) is insignificant, the constant (-0.0413) is highly
significant at a 1 % level .

Table 4B tests OROA on the post variable. The observations are divided into quartiles based on age
of the deceeased CEO. The first quartile contains the youngest CEOS. The effect of the first quartile is
significant and negative, -0.0229. Compared to the first quartile, the fourth was positive at 0.00842
but not significant. The test was done on 27235 observations.

Table 4C shows OROA regressed on time dummies with CEOs differentiated by an age dummy,
young or old. The regression has 27251 observations. We present the results in a graph below for
clarity. Please see the table in the appendix for details and numerical values.

                                       17
   Table 4C - OROA on time dummies (old CEO)
   0,01
  0,005
     0
 -0,005     T-3 T-2 T-1 Event T1 T2 T3
   -0,01
 -0,015                                                                               Young CEO
   -0,02                                                                                  Old CEO
  -0,025
   -0,03
  -0,035
   -0,04
  -0,045

Results graph 4: Coefficients from table 4C plotted. Industry demeaned OROA (operational return on assets) regressed on
yearly time dummies. The regression constant has been excluded. Firms have been separated in terms of age of the
deceased CEO where an old CEO is defined as being older than 64.

Table 5A tests OROA on the post the variable that is differentiated on tenure. A CEO is considered to
have tenure if the tenure on the CEO position is 5 years or above. For CEOs without tenure the
coefficient of the constant is negative at -0.0196 but not significant at a 5 % level. The post variable
coefficient is negative at -0.0182 but statistically insignificant. For CEOs with tenure the constant is
negative at -0.0156 and highly significant (<1%) and the post variable is negative at -0-0252 and
highly significant.

Table 5B tests OROA on the post variable where firms are divided into quartiles based on CEO
tenure. The first quartiles contains CEOs with the shortest tenures. The first quartiles is negative at -
0.0238 but not statistically significant. Compared to the first quartile, the fourth is positive at 0.0317
but not statistically significant. The test was done on 7105 observations.

Table 5C shows OROA regressed on time dummies with CEOs differentiated on tenure (with a cutoff
of 5 years). The regression has 27235 observations. We present the results in a graph below for
readability. Please see the table in the appendix for details and numerical values.

                                       18
   Table 5C - OROA on time dummies (CEO tenure)

  0,04

  0,02

    0
           T-3 T-2 T-1 Event T1 T2 T3
                                                                                        Short Tenure
  -0,02
                                                                                     Long Tenure

  -0,04

  -0,06

  -0,08

Results graph 5: table 5C plotted. Industry demeaned OROA (operational return on assets) regressed on yearly time
dummies. The regression constant has been excluded. Firms have been separated based on the median level of CEO tenure.

Table 6A tests OROA on the post variable where firms are separated into firms who do go bankrupt
later some year following the event. For firms that do not go bankrupt the coefficient of the constant
is -0.0137 and highly significant. The post variable is -0.00961 and statistically insignificant. For
companies that do go bankrupt both the constant and the post variable are statistically significant
and negative, -0.0283 and -0.0856 respectively.

Table 6B shows OROA regressed on time dummies, but separates firms that also go bankrupt after
the event. The regression has 27235 observations. We present the results in a graph below for
readability. Please see the table in the appendix for details and numerical values.

   Table 6B - OROA on time dummies (bankruptcy)

  0,02

    0
           T-3 T-2 T-1 Event T1 T2 T3
  -0,02

  -0,04
                                                                                   No bankruptcy
  -0,06
                                                                                   Bankruptcy
  -0,08

   -0,1

  -0,12

  -0,14

                                       19
Results graph 6: table 6B plotted. Industry demeaned OROA (operational return on assets) regressed on yearly time
dummies. The regression constant has been excluded. Firms have been separated based on whether or not they become
bankrupt sometime after the event.

Table 7A shows growth of sales regressed on the post variable with 7875 observations for the three
years before and after the event. The constant (-0.0343) is significant at the 5 % level and the “post
variable (0.236) is significant at the 1 % level.

Table 7B shows growth of sales regressed on time dummies. We have 23322 observations for this
regression. We present the results in a graph below for readability. Please see the table in the
appendix for details and numerical values.

   Table 7B - Sales growth on time dummies
 0,35

   0,3

 0,25

   0,2
  0,15                                                                             Regression coefficients

   0,1

 0,05

    0
          T-3 T-2 T-1 Event T1 T2 T3

Results graph 7: table 7B plotted. Yearly sales growth regressed on yearly time dummies. The regression constant has been
excluded.

Table 8-11 are regressions of death events for family members. The number of observations that we
have for these regression are between 1494 to 2554. OROA regressed on the post variable shows
negative values for both all family deaths and those who were classified as “non-working family
members”, -0.014 and -0.0215. However, the values are not significant at the 5 % level. In table 10
sales-growth regressed on “post” was positive, 0.0842, and significant at the 5 % level. For sales-
growth regressed on non-working family members (table 11) the post variable was 0.0106 and
significant at the 5 % level.

                                       20
6 Analysis

In table 1A the coefficient for the post variable is as expected both significant and negative, -0.0194.
Firms that experience a CEO death event will perform worse compared to firms that do not
experience an event. The noteworthy part is that the coefficient of the constant is significant and
negative, -0.0238. That means that firms that are going to experience an event perform worse
already before the event.

In table 1B we see that there is a negative effect during the event year and the three following years.
The effect was expected as a CEO death should be a loss of human capital for a firm as well as a
disruption to business operations. The fact that the negative effect starts one year before the event
is somewhat problematic and has several implications. First of all it made us question if the statistical
analysis had been done correctly as the Danish study did not find any differential performance prior
to the event. Second, it might be because of logical causes. Deaths can be preceded by sickness and
inability to perform properly. Prolonged illness prior to death would spread the impact over several
years. The effect on the actual event year would then be diminished. We are however skeptical of
this pre-event effect and consider it to be a topic that can be picked up for further research.

The insignificant values for and could, unlikely but possibly, be the result of fewer observation
points. Outside this time span the number of observations could have dropped. The more likely
explanation is that the CEO death event does not significantly affect firms past three years. This is in
line with the Danish study, which also found a significant effect for the three following years. Firms
will have managed to replace the CEO, revised operations and the business plan. Insignificant
difference between event firms and non-event firms past three years also means that firms that
experience an event do not experience a recovery effect. The value lost during CEO death event is
permanent.

The results in table 2A show that there is a more negative effect in smaller companies. In table 2B the
biggest quartile is measured against the smallest and shows that the difference is significant and
almost entirely attributed to the quartile with the largest firms. This supports the hypothesis that
bigger firms have succession plans that minimizes the event effect. In smaller firms the CEO is more
likely to be the founder, who possesses more firm specific knowledge. In economics there are
theories positing that the skill set of a CEO is more important than firm specific knowledge based on
the tendency of bigger firms to look externally for new CEOs. The general skills set of externally hired
management will most likely be higher than internal management as you have a much deeper pool
to choose from. This suggests a difference between bigger and smaller firms. Bigger firms have bigger
boards that have a wider reach. Bigger firms look externally for management with higher general skill

                                       21
set. This leads to their CEOs having less firm specific knowledge. A death event would lead to smaller
firms losing more firm specific knowledge. Bigger firms that have traded firm specific knowledge for a
higher general skill set CEOs can much more easily replace what is lost when the CEO dies. Another
explanation might be that firms defined as small on the basis of number of employees suddenly lose
a higher fraction of their workforce and will be suffering a bigger shock to business operations.

Table 2C essentially describes the results in table 2A separated into a time dummy for each year. This
perspective is somewhat perplexing. Smaller firms do cumulatively have a more negative effect, but
the effects are postponed one to two years relative to bigger firms. We have not encountered any
research regarding the time lag of CEO death events. Without any guidance of a theoretical
framework we have created a hypothesis that smaller firms differ in their accounting procedure. It
can be that changes are registered later or that their assets experience a much lower turn-over than
assets in bigger firms. The event effect would then be dormant until that revaluation took place and
cause our regression to show delayed event effects for smaller companies. Consistent with table 1B
we find negative effects already in . We can also see that any differential performance between
small and big firms is not significant to any specific year. In table 3A we see OROA regressed on the
post variable but divided into big and small firms based on size of sales. We argue that it was dubious
of the Danish study to divide firms into two size categories based solely on size of assets. We
mentioned that different industries have different capital/labor intensity. However, the results show
that this proxy yields the same kind of effect as a “size-proxy” based on number of employees:
smaller firms take a bigger hit from the event than bigger firms. In table 3B we get some interesting
results on the fourth quartile which is not significant. This might hint to some possible inferences that
can be made on in management theory. A CEO death where small and big firm based on number of
employees perform differently, but not small and big firms based on size of sales. The value created
is tied to employees and the higher the number the better, whereas higher sales do not lead to a
significant difference in CEO value.

Table 4A shows some interesting results for OROA regressed on the post variable where firms are
differentiated on age of the deceased CEO. The event has a bigger effect on younger CEOs and not
even a significant negative effect for older CEOs. Testing the youngest and oldest quartiles against
each other did not yield a significant difference. The constant only shows a negative effect for old
CEOs, -0.0413. This means that firms with an old CEO in general performs worse compared to an
average firm. We do not have data on CEO ownership but this could be the effect described in the
empirical finance study “An analysis of the stock price reaction to sudden executive deaths” [8]
where a CEO may impose transaction costs and latch onto the position through higher bargaining
power in re-contracting negotiations. Another reason could be that the older CEOs more often are

                                       22
also the founder of the firm and has more influence over board decisions on top management and
CEO selections. Although we mentioned previous research that found a positive correlation when the
CEO was also the founder and excess return, this might be contingent on age. We do not have data
on firm founders. If it is possible to obtain such data then further empirical studies can shed light on
whether age matters in the correlation between incumbent CEO also being the founder and excess
return. Since we did not get a significant difference on a joint basis it was expected that table 4C
would not yield a difference for any individual year.

For CEOs with tenure we can see in table 5A that there is a significant negative event effect. CEOs
with tenure actually perform comparatively worse than the average with a pending death event as
the coefficient of the constant is negative and significant as well. For CEOs without tenure we can
neither conclude that the event effect is different from zero or that they are significantly different. It
is understandable that the absence of CEOs with tenure would have a bigger impact on a firm,
considering that the knowledge of that specific position cannot be replaced immediately even if a
replacement were hired internally. We see in table 5B that no joint significance exists between the
first and the fourth quartile. But table 5C actually does show a significance difference at the median
level between those with or without tenure for one year, . With the risk of reading too much into
the result, it would suggest that the lost value (knowledge) is heavily located to the event year and
that any replacement quickly acquires this knowledge. Significant differential performance is not
seen past .

Table 6A shows quite expected results. Companies that eventually file for bankruptcy have significant
and economically very negative performance. In fact, the post variable for companies that do not go
bankrupt is not even statistically significant. This difference between bankrupt and non-bankrupt
companies is so strong that we can even see the differential performance in each year in table 6B.
Considering that the data is of all Swedish firms of which many are very small with only a handful of
employees we would imagine an extremely high correlation between CEO death and bankruptcy. We
argue that it is causal for a firm with its CEO dying to experience higher risk of going bankrupt.
Fortunately for us we do not need a specify causality in the other direction, crudely put, since it is
financially uninteresting whether the CEO dies to a higher degree after firm bankruptcies.

In table 7A and 7B the regressions shows that the event has a positive impact on sales growth
implying that the CEO dying is good for a firm. The accounting item sales is a straight forward
measure and defining sales growth as ⁄ should not create any bias. We cannot
find a theory that would predict this effect and can therefore not make anything of this result.

                                       23
Regarding family regressions we see from the results that our way of filtering out family members is
too strict. The event does have negative impact on OROA but no real analysis can be made as the t-
statistics is too low, which is possibly due to the low amount of observations. The same positive
event effect can be seen on sales growth, which has no real explanation here either.

                                       24
7 Conclusions

In this study we have empirically tested the event “CEO death” under several circumstances. The
death of a CEO is arguably exogenous. This allows us to isolate CEO impact and frame one
perspective of the “value” a CEO is considered to contribute to its firm. To pursue these empirical
tests, we used a proprietary Swedish data set over company information and accounting data
combined with a Swedish civil register of deceased people. We find that the event has a negative
impact on firm performance. We also find that firms that experience a CEO death event perform
relatively worse prior to the event. The effect of the event seems to set in one year prior to the
event. Much of this negative effect seems to be captured in firms that eventually go bankrupts a
couple of year past the event. Smaller firms have a larger negative effect and appear to be more
susceptible to the effect. As for the CEO characteristics, they did not seem to be that significant.
Tenure could be differentiated against CEOs without tenure only for the event year with significance.

We did an ad-hoc solution to try to establish a family relationship to enable us regress the family
death events. However, the filtering was too strict and we were not able to get enough observations
to reach any significant conclusions.

                                       25
8 Further Research

Our findings of event effects one year prior to the event are questionable and this would be
interesting to investigate. It is not that the results are inconceivable; however, the inconsistency with
what was found in the Danish paper raises some concerns.

We used relatively rough cut-off points to separate CEO characteristics and firm characteristics. It
would be interesting to see other criteria for grouping firms based on theories from other academic
fields. We avoided using any too carefully selected cut-off points as to how to separate our
observations. We felt that it would be like retrofitting our analysis to produce results. This would not
be a problem if the cut-off points were justified by theories based on corporate or managerial
observation.

The Swedish tax agency holds data on family trees but as far as we know it can only be requested on
individuals and not in the form of a major data base. This is of course due to privacy issues. However,
it is not unheard of that Swedish authorities cooperate with SCB (Statistics Sweden) and anonymizes
data so that it can be used for academic research without intruding on privacy rights.

                                       26
9 References

[1] Jönsson, S., Strannegård, L., Ledarskapsboken, Författarna & Liber AB, 1.1 uppl. page 14-27, 158-
   182

[2] Jönsson, S., Strannegård, L., Ledarskapsboken, Författarna & Liber AB, 1.1 uppl. chapter 1

   Jacobsen, D. I., Thorsvik J., Hur moderna organisationer fungerar, Fagbokförlaget, 3.2 uppl.
   chapter 12

[3] Hayes R. M., Schaefer S (1999), How much are differences in management ability worth? Journal
   of Accounting and Economics, volume 27 page 125-148

[4] Friedman S. D., Singh H (1989), CEO SUCCESSION AND STOCKHOLDER REACTION: THE INFLUENCE
   OF ORGNIZATIONAL CONTEXT AND EVENT CONTENT, Academy of Management Journal, volume
   32, No. 4 page 718-744

[5] Smith B. F., Amoako-Adu B. (1999), Management succession and financial performance of family
   controlled firms, Journal of Corporate Finance, volume 5 page 341-368

[6] Behn B. K., Riley Jr R. A., Yang Y. W. (2005), The Value of an Heir Apparent in Succession Planning,
   Corporate Governance: An International Review, volume 13 Issue 2 page 168-177

[7] Bennedsen M., Pérez-Gonzalez F., Wolfenzon D. (2009), Do CEOs Matter? Unpublished working
   paper

[8] Johnson W. B., Magee R. P., Nagarajan N. J., Newman H. A. (1984), AN ANALYSIS OF THE STOCK
   PRICE REACTION TO SUDDEN EXECUTIVE DEATHS, Journal of Accounting and Economics 7 (1985)
   page 151-174

                                       27
Appendix

Regressions on deceased CEOs

Table 1A

                                                  OROA test with post event dummy
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0194*** (0.00590) -3.289 0.00101
Constant -0.0238*** (0.00583) -4.084 4.43e-05

Observations 9,723
Number of id 1,864
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as 1 for the event
year and every succeeding year and 0 else.

M
   21744@live.hhs.se
A
   21686@live.hhs.se
Table 1B

                     OROA test with time dummies OROA test for event with observations available all three years before and after
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus6 -0.00765 (0.00833) -0.918 0.358
tdminus5 -0.00891 (0.00823) -1.083 0.279
tdminus4 -0.0175** (0.00810) -2.156 0.0311
tdminus3 -0.00579 (0.00801) -0.722 0.470 0.000871 (0.0105) 0.0832 0.934
tdminus2 -0.00636 (0.00795) -0.800 0.424 0.00531 (0.0104) 0.512 0.609
tdminus1 -0.0308*** (0.00793) -3.887 0.000102 -0.0261** (0.0103) -2.529 0.0114
td0 -0.0337*** (0.00800) -4.210 2.56e-05 -0.00743 (0.0102) -0.726 0.468
td1 -0.0460*** (0.00846) -5.436 5.51e-08 -0.0121 (0.0101) -1.205 0.228
td2 -0.0278*** (0.00921) -3.017 0.00255 -0.0153 (0.00995) -1.539 0.124
td3 -0.0221** (0.00997) -2.218 0.0266 -0.0177* (0.0100) -1.766 0.0774
td4 -0.0146 (0.0108) -1.354 0.176
td5 -0.00870 (0.0118) -0.736 0.462
                               -
Constant             0.00882*** (0.00276) -3.193 0.00141 -0.00727** (0.00288) -2.521 0.0117

Observations 27,251 14,792
R-squared 0.002 0.001
Number of id 1,910 865
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and time dummies where td0 is the event year
and all other dummies relative to td0. The regression to the left is for +/- 5 years and the regression to the right is for when every observation is available all
three years before and after for a specific event.
Table 2A

             OROA test with dummy for big companies based on number of      OROA test with dummy for small companies based on
            employees                                                  number of employees
                                                                                                           t                                                                                         t
                                                                          statisti  p-                                                  statistic
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error   cs      value Coefficient Std. Error   s p-value

post -0.0133** (0.00654) -2.033 0.0421 -0.0337*** (0.0106) -3.184 0.00146
Constant -0.00625 (0.00466) -1.341 0.180 -0.0275*** (0.00722) -3.803 0.000145

Observations 4,813 4,910
R-squared 0.001 0.003
Number of id 863 1,001
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The left
regression for is on firms with number of employees larger than the median of the population and the right regression is on firms with number of employees
smaller than the median.
Table 2B

                                                Test on OROA on post dummy with regards to number of employees and comparing all quartiles to the first
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

_Ipost_1 -0.0414*** (0.00923) -4.482 7.44e-06
_IposXqua_1_2 0.0176 (0.0129) 1.365 0.172
_IposXqua_1_3 0.00428 (0.0126) 0.341 0.733
_IposXqua_1_4 0.0369*** (0.0123) 3.005 0.00265
Constant -0.0117*** (0.00221) -5.301 1.16e-07

Observations 27,233
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,911
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The firms
are divided into different quartiles with regards to the number of employees and every quartile is compared to the first.
Table 2C

                                                   OROA test with combined dummy variables for companies based on number of employees
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus3 0.00409 (0.0110) 0.370 0.711
tdminus2 0.00373 (0.0109) 0.343 0.732
tdminus1 -0.0146 (0.0108) -1.352 0.176
td0 -0.0245** (0.0110) -2.234 0.0255
td1 -0.0484*** (0.0118) -4.088 4.36e-05
td2 -0.0377*** (0.0132) -2.865 0.00417
td3 -0.00884 (0.0145) -0.608 0.543
tdminus3_big_antanst -0.0110 (0.0156) -0.703 0.482
tdminus2_big_antanst -0.0115 (0.0155) -0.744 0.457
tdminus1_big_antanst -0.0248 (0.0155) -1.601 0.109
td0_big_antanst -0.0100 (0.0156) -0.641 0.522
td1_big_antanst 0.0134 (0.0165) 0.808 0.419
td2_big_antanst 0.0273 (0.0181) 1.507 0.132
td3_big_antanst -0.0165 (0.0197) -0.839 0.402
Constant -0.0128*** (0.00223) -5.767 8.16e-09

Observations 27,251
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,910
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets with time dummies as defined in table 2. The
bottom variables are combined of . The dummy is in this table 1 for companies with number of employees larger than the median and 0 else.
Table 3A

                            OROA test with dummy for big companies based on size of sales OROA test with dummy for small companies based on size of sales
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0114* (0.00683) -1.669 0.0952 -0.0354*** (0.0103) -3.427 0.000617
Constant 0.00526 (0.00484) 1.087 0.277 -0.0386*** (0.00709) -5.442 5.60e-08

Observations 4,797 4,926
R-squared 0.001 0.003
Number of id 865 999
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The left
regression for is on firms with size of sales larger than the median of the population and the right regression is on firms with size of sales smaller than the
median.
Table 3B

                                                     Test on OROA on post dummy with regards to size of sales and comparing all quartiles to the first
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

_Ipost_1 -0.0247*** (0.00946) -2.610 0.00906
_IposXqua_1_2 -0.0194 (0.0129) -1.507 0.132
_IposXqua_1_3 0.00236 (0.0128) 0.185 0.853
_IposXqua_1_4 0.0114 (0.0124) 0.914 0.361
Constant -0.0119*** (0.00221) -5.399 6.75e-08

Observations 27,235
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,912
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The firms
are divided into different quartiles with regards to the size of sales and every quartile is compared to the first.
Table 3C

                                                  OROA test with combined dummy variables for companies based on size of sales
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus3 0.00573 (0.0110) 0.519 0.604
tdminus2 0.00123 (0.0109) 0.112 0.911
tdminus1 -0.0306*** (0.0108) -2.831 0.00465
td0 -0.0316*** (0.0109) -2.893 0.00382
td1 -0.0595*** (0.0117) -5.073 3.95e-07
td2 -0.0391*** (0.0131) -2.984 0.00285
td3 -0.0200 (0.0145) -1.379 0.168
tdminus3_big_oms -0.0148 (0.0156) -0.947 0.344
tdminus2_big_oms -0.00705 (0.0155) -0.454 0.650
tdminus1_big_oms 0.00794 (0.0155) 0.513 0.608
td0_big_oms 0.00377 (0.0156) 0.241 0.809
td1_big_oms 0.0353** (0.0165) 2.134 0.0329
td2_big_oms 0.0295 (0.0181) 1.634 0.102
td3_big_oms 0.00389 (0.0197) 0.198 0.843
Constant -0.0127*** (0.00223) -5.706 1.17e-08

Observations 27,251
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,910
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets with time dummies as defined in table 2. The
bottom variables are combined of . The dummy is in this table 1 for companies with size of sales larger than the median and 0 else.
Table 4A

                             OROA test for deceased CEO:s of old age OROA test for deceased CEO:s of young age
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0131 (0.00944) -1.386 0.166 -0.0300*** (0.00813) -3.693 0.000224
Constant -0.0413*** (0.00656) -6.292 3.58e-10 -0.00135 (0.00569) -0.237 0.813

Observations 3,771 5,952
R-squared 0.001 0.003
Number of id 694 1,170
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The left
regression is on firms with deceased CEOs of older age than the Swedish state pension age and the right regression is on firms with deceased CEOs of
younger age than the pension age.
Table 4B

                                                Test on OROA on post dummy with regards to age of the deceased and comparing all quartiles to the first
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

_Ipost_1 -0.0229*** (0.00829) -2.759 0.00580
_IposXqua_1_2 -0.0155 (0.0118) -1.317 0.188
_IposXqua_1_3 -0.00249 (0.0125) -0.200 0.842
_IposXqua_1_4 0.00842 (0.0122) 0.693 0.488
Constant -0.0119*** (0.00222) -5.373 7.81e-08

Observations 27,235
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,912
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The firms
are divided into different quartiles with regards the age of the deceased CEO and every quartile is compared to the first.
Table 4C

                                                  OROA test with combined dummy variables for difference in age of the deceased CEO
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus3 -0.00185 (0.0102) -0.181 0.856
tdminus2 0.00367 (0.0101) 0.365 0.715
tdminus1 -0.0179* (0.0100) -1.784 0.0745
td0 -0.0365*** (0.0101) -3.622 0.000293
td1 -0.0416*** (0.0107) -3.904 9.48e-05
td2 -0.0236** (0.0115) -2.052 0.0402
td3 -0.0200 (0.0123) -1.617 0.106
tdminus3_old 0.00100 (0.0159) 0.0632 0.950
tdminus2_old -0.0142 (0.0158) -0.900 0.368
tdminus1_old -0.0219 (0.0158) -1.388 0.165
td0_old 0.0183 (0.0160) 1.146 0.252
td1_old 1.74e-05 (0.0169) 0.00103 0.999
td2_old 0.000589 (0.0186) 0.0317 0.975
td3_old 0.00653 (0.0203) 0.322 0.748
Constant -0.0128*** (0.00223) -5.758 8.59e-09

Observations 27,251
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,910
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets with time dummies as defined in table 2. The
bottom variables are combined of . The dummy is in this table 1 for firms with deceased CEOs of older age than the Swedish state pension age
and 0 else.
Table 5A

                             OROA regressed on post (CEOs with tenure) OROA regressed on post (CEOs without tenure)
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0252*** (0.00675) -3.732 0.000192 -0.0182 (0.0150) -1.216 0.224
Constant -0.0156*** (0.00467) -3.349 0.000817 -0.0196* (0.0108) -1.815 0.0698

Observations 7,535 2,194
R-squared 0.002 0.001
Number of id 1,396 483
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The left
regression is on firms with CEOs having worked longer than the median and the right regression is on firms with CEOs having worked shorter than the
median.
Table 5B

                                                    Test on OROA on post dummy with regards to CEO tenure and comparing all quartiles to the first
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

_Ipost_1 -0.0238 (0.0164) -1.457 0.145
_IposXqua_1_2 0.00657 (0.0299) 0.220 0.826
_IposXqua_1_3 0.00170 (0.0238) 0.0713 0.943
_IposXqua_1_4 0.0317 (0.0287) 1.106 0.269
Constant -0.0120** (0.00481) -2.503 0.0123

Observations 7,105
R-squared 0.001
Number of id 648
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The firms
are divided into different quartiles with regards to CEO tenure and every quartile is compared to the first.
Table 5C

                                                      Test on OROA with dummies for CEO:s having had the positions for more than five years
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus3 -0.00121 (0.0186) -0.0652 0.948
tdminus2 0.00885 (0.0176) 0.502 0.616
tdminus1 -0.0162 (0.0171) -0.951 0.342
td0 -0.0183** (0.00871) -2.097 0.0360
td1 -0.0511*** (0.0171) -2.996 0.00274
td2 -0.00386 (0.0185) -0.209 0.835
td3 0.0283 (0.0203) 1.398 0.162
tdminus3_tenure -0.00133 (0.0204) -0.0653 0.948
tdminus2_tenure -0.0137 (0.0196) -0.698 0.485
tdminus1_tenure -0.0121 (0.0191) -0.636 0.525
td0_tenure -0.0531*** (0.0190) -2.787 0.00533
td1_tenure 0.0148 (0.0194) 0.763 0.445
td2_tenure -0.0264 (0.0211) -1.250 0.211
td3_tenure -0.0587** (0.0231) -2.542 0.0110
Constant -0.0129*** (0.00223) -5.767 8.15e-09

Observations 27,235
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 1,912
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets with time dummies as defined in table 2. The
bottom variables are combined of . The dummy is in this table 1 for companie swith tenure larger than the median and 0 else.
Table 6A

                                OROA regressed on post (firms that go bankrupt) OROA regressed on post (firms that do not go bankrupt)
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0856*** (0.0168) -5.097 3.87e-07 -0.00961 (0.00652) -1.474 0.140
Constant -0.0283*** (0.0103) -2.731 0.00639 -0.0137*** (0.00469) -2.928 0.00343

Observations 2,049 7,680
R-squared 0.016 0.000
Number of id 496 1,373
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets and a post dummy defined as in table 1. The left
regression is on firms which go bankrupt sometime after the event year and the right regression is on firms which do not go bankrupt.
Table 6B

                                                      Test on OROA for companies who go bankrupt after the event
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus3 -0.00470 (0.00899) -0.523 0.601
tdminus2 -0.00375 (0.00888) -0.423 0.673
tdminus1 -0.0247*** (0.00881) -2.802 0.00508
td0 -0.0171** (0.00872) -1.966 0.0493
td1 -0.0309*** (0.00911) -3.391 0.000696
td2 -0.0136 (0.00981) -1.387 0.165
td3 -0.00345 (0.0104) -0.331 0.741
tdminus3_bankruptcy_5 0.00768 (0.0182) 0.422 0.673
tdminus2_bankruptcy_5 0.00398 (0.0183) 0.218 0.828
tdminus1_bankruptcy_5 -0.00863 (0.0186) -0.463 0.643
td0_bankruptcy_5 -0.0640*** (0.0195) -3.279 0.00104
td1_bankruptcy_5 -0.0568*** (0.0214) -2.648 0.00811
td2_bankruptcy_5 -0.0730*** (0.0251) -2.915 0.00356
td3_bankruptcy_5 -0.112*** (0.0301) -3.706 0.000211
Constant -0.0125*** (0.00223) -5.604 2.12e-08

Observations 27,235
R-squared 0.003
Number of id 1,912
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for regressions on operational return on assets with time dummies as defined in table 2. The
bottom variables are combined of . The dummy is in this table 1 for companies who go bankrupt some year after the event and 0 else.
Table 7A

                                                     Test on sales growth with post event dummy
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post 0.236*** (0.0250) 9.443 0
Constant -0.0343** (0.0168) -2.035 0.0419

Observations 7,875
R-squared 0.014
Number of id 1,640
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on the logarithm of sales growth and a post dummy defined as in table 1.
Table 7B

                                                      Test on growth of sales with time dummies
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

tdminus3 0.00198 (0.0264) 0.0753 0.940
tdminus2 0.0104 (0.0262) 0.397 0.691
tdminus1 0.0469* (0.0265) 1.770 0.0768
td0 0.192*** (0.0272) 7.073 0
td1 0.315*** (0.0295) 10.66 0
td2 0.163*** (0.0324) 5.019 5.25e-07
td3 0.0791** (0.0351) 2.255 0.0241
Constant -0.0120 (0.00740) -1.622 0.105

Observations 23,322
R-squared 0.008
Number of id 1,789
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on the logarithm of sales growth and time dummies as defined in table 2
Regressions on deceased family members

Table 8

                                                        Test on OROA with post event variable for 5 years before and after
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0140 (0.0118) -1.191 0.234
Constant 0.00101 (0.00816) 0.124 0.901

Observations 2,554
R-squared 0.001
Number of id 384

This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on the operational return on assets for all firms with deceased family member of
a CEO and a post dummy defined as in table 1.

Table 9

                                                           Test on OROA with post event variable for 5 years before and after for non-working family members
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post -0.0215 (0.0146) -1.471 0.141
Constant 0.00702 (0.0104) 0.678 0.498

Observations 1,683
R-squared 0.002
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on the operational return on assets for all firms with deceased family member of
a CEO of non-working age and a post dummy defined as in table 1.
Table 10

                                                     Test on salesgrowth with post event variable for 5 years before and after
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post 0.0842** (0.0424) 1.985 0.0473
Constant -0.104*** (0.0288) -3.597 0.000331

Observations 2,247
R-squared 0.002
Number of id 361
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on the logarithm of sales growth for all firms with deceased family member of a
CEO and a post dummy defined as in table 1.

Table 11

                                                   Test on salesgrowth with post event variable for 5 years before and after for non-working family members
VARIABLES Coefficient Std. Error t statistics p-value

post 0.106** (0.0536) 1.970 0.0490
Constant -0.138*** (0.0374) -3.681 0.000242

Observations 1,494
R-squared 0.003
Number of id 239
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
This table provides statistics with event specific fixed effects for a regression on the logarithm of sales growth for all firms with deceased family member of a
CEO of non-working age and a post dummy defined as in table 1.