Stockholm School of Economics
Bachelor thesis in Finance, course 649
Spring 2011

Trade fragmentation and its impact on pre-
trade liquidity

                  π                Ω
Josefin Bergholtz   Tommy Chen

Abstract: The MiFID was introduced in November 2007 to enhance market quality and consumer
protection. One dimension of the directive was the abolishment of the former concentration rule, which
allowed for the emergence of competition between stock exchanges. As a result, trade flow has
fragmented over several trading venues. It is not clear whether fragmentation is beneficial for liquidity.
On one hand, exchanges compete for order flow, which reduces liquidity costs. On the other hand,
investors might experience difficulties in adjusting their trading behavior to the multimarket
environment which increases liquidity costs. In this thesis we describe the current debate and its
background. We contribute to the review of MiFID by studying the effects of fragmentation on the
constituent stocks of the OMXS30 from November 2010 to April 2011. Our results indicate that
fragmentation is beneficial but with a declining marginal effect. We also find that order flows are routed
to the venues with the best quotes to a higher extent today than one year ago.

Keywords: Market fragmentation, Market microstructure, MiFID, Liquidity, Bid-Offer Spreads

Tutor: Francesco Sangiorgi
Discussants: Jakob Pettersson & Victor Kihlgren
Presentation: May 14 2011

π21510@student.hhs.se
Ω
 21315@student.hhs.se
Preface
We would like to thank our tutor Francesco Sangiorgi for his guidance. We would also like to thank
Thomson Reuters for granting us free access to their newly launched product EMSR, and for providing
us with great product support and training. Furthermore, we extend our thanks to Jessica Olsson at
Dagens Industri who arranged so that we could attend DI Trading Conference for free, which was a day
of many inspiring seminars related to our topic. With this said we hope that you as a reader will take
great interest in learning more about the how the European financial landscape has changed over the
past few years.

Terms and abbreviations
MiFID= Markets in Financial Instruments Directive

EMSR=Equity Market Share Performance

MTF=Multilateral trading facility

RE=Regulated exchange

SORT=Smart order routing technology

Local BBO=the currently best bid or offer price quote for an individual trading venue

Consolidated BBO= the currently best bid or offer price quote across all trading venues

Trading venue= a regulated exchange or a multilateral trading facility

LBO=Limit order book

OTC=Over the counter

LSE= London Stock Exchange

VWAS= Volume Weighted Average Spread

EWAS= Equally Weighted Average Spread

HHI= Herfindahl-Hirschman Index

                                                                                      1
1. Introduction
The European trading environment has been largely altered since the European Commission introduced
the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive in November 2007. The main objective of MiFID is
increased competition, enhanced consumer protection and the creation of a single pan-European
financial market. As part of its work to create a more transparent and stable financial system, the
European Commission is currently evaluating the implications of MiFID. The official consultation
document sent out to investment firms is now closed and under review, but the proposed revision made
on the basis of their responses has not yet been publicly presented.

The changes in European financial regulation put an end to the former concentration of equity trading

                               1
to the regulated exchanges  on which the firms are listed, and opened up for the emergence of new
trading venues. On one side stand the new entrants arguing that competition leads to gains in improved
liquidity and fee reductions sufficient to compensate for the technology costs required by investors. On
the other side stand REs claiming that a more fragmented trading landscape has made price discovery
more difficult and therefore increases liquidity costs. They argue that as trading becomes more dispersed
over a number of trading venues, trade volume for each exchange will be insufficient to the degree that
none of the exchanges has capacity to absorb large transactions without causing the investor adverse
price impact. Large investors would then be forced to seek other transaction alternatives.

Trading fragmentation’s impact on market quality in general and liquidity in particular, has since long
interested researchers and regulators. However, over the last years rapid technological process has greatly
simplified multi-market access for investors allowing them to monitor several markets simultaneously.
This has put multimarket trading in a new light and it is therefore important to not draw conclusions
from previous studies but to investigate what the implications are today.

Our thesis adds to the post-MiFID literature by researching the development of the most traded stocks
in Sweden over recent years. We provide evidence that consolidated bid-offer spreads improve when the
level of fragmentation increases. Second, we provide evidence that investors’ ability to discover and
allocate their orders to the trading venues with the best quotes has increased over time. More efficient
price discovery suggests that the positive impact of fragmentation will continue to improve as
monitoring technology and multi-market trading knowledge becomes more widespread.

Based on the findings from our empirical tests, based on OMXS30 data, we note that:

     Higher levels of fragmentation appear to benefit investors in the form of lower liquidity costs.

1
 Henceforth abbreviated as REs

                                                                                      2
     Investors’ ability to allocate their orders to venues providing the best quotes appears to have
       improved over time.

2. Purpose
Our thesis has two separate purposes; one descriptive and one practical.

Equity investors are affected by the new directive but tend to have limited knowledge about it and its
implications for their trading strategies. Our descriptive purpose is therefore to increase investor
knowledge of the MiFID.

As trading platform competition is a new phenomenon, the scope of empirical tests on its implications
for traders is rather limited. This is particularly the case in the Nordic region. As we have not
encountered any previous studies investigating MiFID’s implications for investors trading Swedish
stocks, we think our results could be a valuable contribution to the Nordic debate and evaluation of the
MiFID. Hence, our practical purpose is to provide evidence for the impact of fragmentation on liquidity
costs among Swedish stocks.

2.1 Descriptive purpose
As the questions addressed in the debate on MiFID are complex and without any clear-cut answers, we
think it is important to provide the reader with a substantial overview of the current debate. We
therefore go through the background to and reasons for the regulatory changes that have been made,
and present arguments for and against the emergence of competition and fragmentation. We thereafter
present previous research on fragmentation’s impact on liquidity, as well as other interesting research on
trading behavior post-MiFID. After having fulfilled out descriptive purpose the objective is that the
reader, assumed to have no prior knowledge of the topic, fully understands the assumptions behind our
practical purpose

2.2 Practical purpose
The second purpose of our thesis is to perform empirical tests on how the liquidity of Swedish stocks
has been affected by the fragmentation.

Results from previous studies on fragmentation have been quite mixed but tend to conclude that
fragmentation is beneficial for traders, both in terms of direct and indirect trading costs (liquidity). If our
results are in line with these, we provide evidence that the relationship not only holds in continental
Europe, but also in the Nordics. It is likely that post-MiFID fragmentation in Sweden has evolved
differently than in other European markets. The long distance to the London-based MTFs and the
Nordic-specific example of Burgundy, may affect the competiveness of the pan-European MTFs and
their implications for Nordic equity trading.

                                                                                      3
As there is a large variety of liquidity measures we limit our test to only concern the quoted spread,
which is a pre-trade liquidity measure.

2.3 Research questions
We have defined two research questions which we address in our empirical tests:

    1. How does fragmentation of trading volume affect pre-trade liquidity for OMXS30 stocks?
    2. Are market orders for OMXS30 stocks being routed to the trading venues with the best available
        price quotes to a higher extent in Q1 2011 than in Q1 2010?

                                                                                      4
3. Outline
In section 1, Introduction, we briefly introduce our topic and what our main conclusions are from our
empirical tests.

In section 2, Purpose, we describe the two purposes that we wish to fulfill with this thesis, and the
research questions that we wish to answer.

In section 3, Outline, we provide an overview of the sections of our thesis and their content.

In section 4, Qualitative Description, we focus on our descriptive purpose of providing the reader with
background information. We consider this necessary in order for the reader to understand the
assumptions that our empirical tests are based on.

In section 5, Previous Research, we give an overview of related research and describe the studies that
have inspired us the most in our work. Previous studies are also useful as they provide us with an
intuitive feel for what results we expect from our empirical tests.

In section 6, Hypotheses, based on the information in Qualitative Description and Previous Research
sections, we transform our two research questions into mathematically expressed hypotheses.

In section 7, Data, we describe how we proceeded to collect the data, and describe the trading venues,
stocks and time windows that are included in our empirical tests.

In section 8, Methodology, we specify the regression models and various statistical tests that we employ
when testing our two hypotheses.

In section 9, Descriptive Summaries, we present descriptive statistics on some of the variables in our
dataset.

In section 10, Results, we report the results from the empirical tests regarding the sizes, signs and
statistical significance of the coefficients and constants. We also discuss the meanings of the estimated
coefficients and possible reasons for why we observe them.

In section 11, Conclusions, we reach conclusions based on the results from our empirical tests. We are
however careful about the extent to which the results can be generalized or used as a contribution in the
current revision of MiFID.

In Appendix I: Explanation of variables, we explain the variables that appear in our regressions. For
every potential control variable we describe how it might affect liquidity and fragmentation, and discuss
our decision whether to include it or not in the regression.

In Appendix II: Trading venues, we provide an overview of the venues in our dataset and their different
characteristics.

In Appendix III: Descriptives and Results, we present all our results and other interesting graphs.

                                                                                      5
4. Qualitative Description

4.1 Basics on stock exchanges and liquidity

On- and off-exchange stock transactions
Stock transactions can be carried out either off or on exchanges. Off-exchange transactions, or over-the-
counter-transactions as they are commonly referred to, are based on price negotiations between the two
counterparties, whereas stock exchange transactions are based on traders responding to price quotes.
The large trade volumes and continuous turnover of shares that we see on today’s financial landscape
would certainly not be possible without exchanges as they facilitate for interested parties to engage in the
trade of stocks, bonds and other securities by matching buyers and sellers. (Bodie, Kane, & Marcus,
2009)

Investors seek OTC-opportunities to mitigate the risk of adverse price impact during the buying or
selling process and to avoid exchange fees. However, potential cost savings of OTC are in most
circumstances offset by search related costs. As search costs and the potential for OTC cost savings
differ between investors depending on transaction size and the firm’s ability to find a counterpart, there
is room for both exchange- and OTC-trade in the financial landscape. (Pagano, 1989)

From initially requiring physical presence, stock exchanges have taken the next step to become
automatic, electronic systems that match orders without the need of the involved parties to ever meet
face to face. Electronic markets solve the issue of investors being located remotely from each other.
They also reduce the issue regarding asynchronous arrival of buyers and sellers on the marketplace by
allowing the primary counterpart to submit and store an order at one point in time for having it executed
as soon as a secondary counterpart arrives. Some uncertainty to the primary counterparts nevertheless
remains, which is why liquidity costs emerge.

Quote-driven and limit order exchanges
An exchange’s structure affects the probability for its participants to find counterparts, and consequently
also execution time uncertainty. Traditionally, exchanges have been organized as “quote-driven markets”
on which dealers initially post their quotes on the market. Investors then submit market orders to have
the transactions executed. Today’s electronic trading systems have largely abandoned this old model of
designated dealers and instead apply limit order systems. Without dealers, the investors themselves are
responsible for providing the quotes, which they do by submitting limit orders. In order to submit a limit
order the investor sets an upper (lower) limit to which he is willing to buy (sell) a certain quantity of the
security. The time of execution is uncertain, but it is known that the transaction price could never exceed
(be less than) the limit. (O'Hara, 1995)

                                                                                      6
Hybrid exchanges allow public investors to submit limit orders, but contract market makers to augment
their order volume. E.g. London Stock Exchange and New York Stock Exchange contract market
makers across all stocks, Euronext Paris on selected stocks, whereas Tokyo Stock Exchange and the
Australian Stock Exchange do not contract any market makers. (Aitken, Cook, Harris, & McInish)

Usually market makers pay a fee to be registered as market makers. In return, they benefit from lower
trading fees. Therefore they have incentives for providing volumes so that the fee reductions
compensate for the fixed fee payment. (Riordan, Storkenmaier, & Wagener, 2010) In the past market
makers had to be officially registered. This is no longer the case, which makes it much easier to join an
exchange as a market maker today. (Andersson & Holmgren, Panel discussion - from a screen based
trading infrastructure to the next generation trading tools, 2011)

The limit order system is a continuous auction system. Even though most trade is conducted through
continuous auctions, major European equity markets, including Stockholm, use call auctions to open and
close the trading days. Investors then have their accumulated orders matched simultaneously, usually at a
market clearing price set to maximize trade volume. The main objective is to avoid large jumps between
one day’s closing price and the next day’s opening price. (Stoll, Market Microstructure, 2003)

The choice between market and limit orders
Up to now we have classified orders in quote-driven markets as market orders, and orders in limit
markets as limit orders. Although we focus on limit order systems in our thesis, we use both terms for
practical reasons. A market order is by our definition a limit order priced for immediate execution,
whereas a limit order is nonmarketable at the time of submission. This distinction is common in
financial literature, as it creates more clarity about the different roles of primary and secondary
counterparts in a transaction even though the order submission process is identical.

Stock transactions thus occur when a market order investor buys (sells) to the current market price,
which is the lowest (highest) price that is accepted by the limit order investors. Demsetz argued that the
two types of orders occur due to temporary imbalances between buyers and sellers. There are two types
of investors; those that want immediate execution and those with less need for immediacy. (Demsetz,
1968) A limit order buyer (seller) is prepared to wait for the number of sellers (buyers) to increase so that
the price becomes lower (higher). Therefore he stores his order in the LOB. He then faces the risk that
the market price will move away from his limit so that his order will not be executed, or that the market
price might move past his quote so that the investor has to execute to an unfavorable price. A market
order investor does not face these risks since he per definition is guaranteed immediate execution. The
market order investor hence pays a premium for immediacy. Later we give a more complete explanation
of the risks faced by the primary counterparts, and how he can mitigate the different types of risk. (Liu,
2009)

                                                                                      7
Incoming limit orders are stored in a limit order book which at any given point in time contains the
quantities and prices of the orders that have not yet been executed. Execution priority is usually given to
orders with the best price (BBO) and secondary priority to order submission time. (Foucalt &
Menkveld, 2008)

Information disclosure in a limit order market
The LOB only displays to investors the orders that have not been hidden. Exchanges apply different
rules regarding information disclosure in the LOB. Investors submitting large orders generally wish to
submit hidden orders since the revelation of excess supply (demand) on the market place could lead to
adverse price effects. It could be very costly for large traders to openly reveal their intentions, and they
therefore have strong incentives to search for off-exchange transaction opportunities as the adverse
price effect component is large relative to the off-exchange search cost. Hence, in order to remain an
attractive alternative for large investors, exchanges often not require full disclosure from them. The
permitted amount of hidden orders is subsequently a trade-off for exchanges. Less disclosure demands
make an exchange more attractive for large block investors, whereas disclosure increases the LOB’s
displayed volume and subsequently attract more investors to the market as the possibility to find a
counterpart increases. (Moinas, 2010)

Most exchanges handle this trade-off by displaying only a certain fraction of large orders. When
execution of the initially displayed fraction has taken place the system automatically refreshes and
displays another fraction of the order. This process is repeated until the entire order has been executed.
Empirical studies have shown that a significant amount of orders are hidden, implying that the LOB has
more volume than real time tick data suggest. (Moinas, 2010)

The importance of liquidity
The need for liquidity not only differs between investors depending on the order size, but also differs
dependent on their investment horizons. It is not as important for long-term investors to be able to
quickly get in and out of a trading position as it is for short-term traders. Long-term investors are willing
to wait longer for secondary counterpart arrivals and therefore have a relatively small aversion for illiquid
securities. (Bodie, Kane, & Marcus, 2009) Many investment firms and banks apply strategies based on
exploiting small magnitude pricing inefficiencies leading them to exit positions shortly after having
entered them. The return from every single position is very small and could become completely eroded
by high liquidity premiums. Liquidity costs are therefore crucial for the implementation of their high-
frequency trading strategies. Due to differences in structure, disclosure rules and number of traders,
exchanges differ in their ability to provide non-expensive immediacy to HFT traders. Since liquidity also
differs across stocks, HFT traders choose only to include large, liquid stocks in their trading strategies.
(Degryse, Jong, & Kervel, 2011)

                                                                                      8
4.2 The liquidity premium and its components
The LBO makes immediate execution possible for those traders that are willing to pay a premium for
immediacy, revealing to them the best available prices and the quantities supporting those prices at any
given point in time.

The ability for a trader to find matching quotes on the exchange when he wishes to buy or sell a certain

                                                                      2
quantity of a security, without having to pay a large premium to have it immediately executed, is what
defines the concept liquidity. Ideally it should be possible also to have large orders immediately executed,
without having to buy or sell order fractions at large deviations from BBO, Liquidity is important for
exchanges as it is widely recognized as the most important measure for market quality and is a main
deciding factor in investors’ order allocation decisions. (O'Hara, 1995)

Bid-offer spreads
The most popular method to measure the liquidity premium is in terms of bid-offer spreads, which
measure the cost of entering a position to immediately have it exited. Other proxies for liquidity costs
also exist, since not only BBOs matter to investors, but also the LBO depth and size. Regardless of the
specific spread construction, liquidity premiums are small when the best bid and offer prices are close to
each other and supported by sufficiently large quantities so that transactions can actually be executed at
those price levels. (Cohen, Maier, Schwarts, & Whitcomb, 1981)

Quoted and effective spreads
Our objective is not to cover the different liquidity measures in depth, but for a better understanding of
the liquidity measures that appear in related literature, we point out the difference between the quoted
and effective spread:

Both expressions use the midpoint between Bid and Offer as the denominator in order to make spreads
comparable between firms with different stock prices. (Riordan, Storkenmaier, & Wagener, 2010) The
measures can be adjusted to also take different aspects of LBO depth or breadth into account,
depending on what the user considers as the most important liquidity aspects for him.

The quoted spread is calculated using the quotes that appear in the LBO. It is an ex-ante measure which
indicates what the expected transaction cost is. The effective spread is the cost actually paid. The variable
D in the effective spread calculation is a variable representing the direction of the trade with -1 for sell
and +1 for buy.

2
 The price difference in between submitting a market order compared to a limit order

                                                                                      9
Theoretical works concerning liquidity spread are largely theories about quoted spreads, although we
have come across studies on ex-post liquidity. In our analysis we will focus on ex-ante liquidity.
(Riordan, Storkenmaier, & Wagener, 2010)

What determines the size of the spread?
In quote-driven markets the cost of immediacy may partially be an effect of dealers collaborating and
engaging in non-competitive pricing, raising their own profits at the expense of market order investors.
In limit order markets collaborative behavior between limit order investors is assumed to be impossible.
The large number of liquidity providers indicates fierce price competition pushing quotes to the point at
which all liquidity provision-related costs are covered but no profits made. (Stoll, Inferring the
Components of the Bid-Ask Spread: Theory and Empirical Tests, 1989)

If limit order investors were risk-neutral and incurred equal order handling costs, bid and offer limits
would be the same for all competitive limit order investors. Transaction prices would simply bounce
between the two levels with equal distance to the market price. However, as it is empirically proven that
spreads are non-static, traders must take other factors in account than exogenous order handling costs
when choosing between market- or limit orders.

When spreads are wide investors have much to gain from submitting limit orders instead of market
orders. The order becomes executed to a much better price than a market order, whereas execution
probability remains high. This follows because if the trader’s order is at BBO, he is chosen for the
transaction as soon as an immediacy-demanding investor arrives. Investors therefore shift from market
orders to limit orders. Spreads then become narrow as more liquidity is added to the LBO. But as
spreads decrease, traders increasingly prefer certain execution since the gains from a limit order is small
relative to the execution risk. They shift back to market orders and the spreads consequently return to
their initial size. (Cohen, Maier, Schwarts, & Whitcomb, 1981)

This theory implies that spreads always exist and depend on traders shifting between market orders and
limit orders. As a spread approach zero, traders increase their fraction of market orders relative to limit
orders, which increases the spread. Short-term changes in liquidity costs thus depend on changes in
supply and demand for immediacy. In turn, supply and demand for immediacy depends on the risks
involved in submitting limit orders. We now describe these risks:

Inventory risk
The term refers to the opportunity cost of tying up resources. With faster execution an investor could
have had sold his stocks earlier to have the money invested elsewhere. Due to the delay he does not
obtain the gains that would have resulted from the other investment. Analogously, when buying stocks
with delay investors need to carry cash since it is not possible to dispose of another investment for

                                                                                     10
untying cash after the transaction has been agreed on due to the second counterpart’s requirement for
immediacy. (O'Hara, 1995)

It also refers to the risk of adverse public information arriving after execution. Expected value of new
information is zero since it is equally likely to be positive as negative, but as investors are assumed to be
risk-averse they require compensation for uncertainty. It is more difficult to predict the market price
shortly after execution if time from submission to execution is expanded. (Stoll, Market Microstructure,
2003)

Option effect
The option effect refers to the risk of public information arriving between order submission and
execution, changing the market price so that the transaction is favorable for the second counterpart but
no longer the first. A limit order thus gives an option to the market to execute when the quote appears
attractive but does not impose any obligations to do so. When the transaction is executed unfavorably,

                                     3
the investor becomes picked-off. (Stoll, Market Microstructure, 2003)

Adverse selection risk
Adverse selection risk is similar to option risk in that it refers to market order investors only reacting to
quotes that are favorable to them. It however differs in that the new information is not public, but only
revealed to some traders which quickly exploit their superior information. Liquidity suppliers lose on
transactions with better informed traders and therefore require compensation for this, which is carried
on to the uninformed traders. (Bessembinder & Venkataraman, 2009)

Methods to reduce risk
The different forms of inventory and adverse selection risks are highly dependent on the risk for delayed

                                                                                               4
execution and rapid price changes. A non-aggressive order increases execution risk  but simultaneously
reduces the risk that private or public information changes market prices to the extent that the investor
is picked-off. To a certain extent, there is hence a trade-off between execution risk and the risk of being
picked-off. (Aitken, Almeida, Harris, & McInish, 2007 )

A higher execution risk means that a larger compensation for having placed a limit order is required. But
as the limit order investor submits a less aggressive quote ensuring him a larger profit, execution risk
increases as the probability of finding an interested counterparty has decreased. It is difficult to know
whether the premium is large because of high execution risk or if the high execution risk has occurred
due to limit order investors trying to extract large premiums.

Both execution and adverse price risk can be mitigated with better monitoring technology. If news arrive
prices move, the quote could be changed to be more aggressive or defensive. Other factors affecting the

3
 A commonly used expression in market microstructure research
4
 Execution risk not only refers to the risk of non-execution, but also the risk of delayed execution

                                                                                     11
risk components are trade volume, price and volatility. In Appendix I: Explanation of variables we
continue the discussion on HFT and other liquidity affecting factors. (Liu, 2009)

4.3 MiFID

The introduction of MiFID
Previously, the concentration rule required all European equity transactions to be carried out on REs.
The rule’s objective was to create a single and fair market with high levels of disclosure so that all
investors would trade on similar conditions. Consequently, the traditional REs enjoyed monopoly
positions which enabled them to charge excessively high trading fees from investors and listing fees
from companies. A noteworthy indicator of the excessive pricing came when the UK Office of Fair
Trading forced LSE to lower listing fees by 25%. (Cherbonnier & Vandelanoite, 2008)

To make equity markets more competitive the MiFID was introduced in November 2007. The directive
abolished the concentration rule and authorized exchanges to offer trading on firms without the firm’s
approval. Multilateral Trading Facilities, e.g. Chi-X, Turquoise and BATS emerged as soon as the
content of the directive was known. (Jeffs & Fairless, 2008). MTFs are usually initiated by investment
banking groups which were previously restricted from creating their own trading systems. Their
objective at launch was to create a market with lower fees and faster computer systems, primarily
targeting HFT-based investment firms. Some of them have been successful in gaining market shares, due

                                                                                                                                           5
to their low fees and liquidity enhancing strategies such as asymmetric pricing and market making . They
have had great impact on the Res’ fee schedules and innovative efforts, making REs feeling obliged to
also reduce prices, invest in new technology and apply asymmetric pricing. (Cherbonnier &
Vandelanoite, 2008)

Figure 2 shows the market shares on their own listed securities that Stockholm and some other national
exchanges have lost to MTFs in recent years. Spain is an exception among European Res, which Pan-
European MTFs attribute to extensive administrative post-trading procedures, reducing their competiveness.
(Gsell, Gomber, & Lutat, 2011)The rapidly downward market share trend for LSE, Xetra and Stockholm is
representative for most European REs.

Best execution, pre- and post trade transparency
 To enhance end-investor protection, MiFID also set out a number of obligations for intermediate
investment firms in terms of transparency and execution quality. One such principle is that of “best
execution”, obliging brokers to make reasonable efforts to obtain the best available conditions when
trading for their clients, with respect to price, liquidity, transaction costs and speed of execution. It is a
broad definition allowing European brokers to define the best-execution benchmarks themselves. Thus,

5
 More on the liquidity enhancing strategies in section 4.5

                                                                                     12
they can choose to trade on the national exchange only, arguing that the costs of monitoring several
venues and splitting orders between them would outweigh potential gains from multi-market trading.
This principle differs from its US equivalent, which obliges brokers to always execute clients’ trades on
the venue at consolidated BBO. In the US, new entrants are therefore guaranteed to attract order flow
when being at BBO, which is not the case in Europe. Nevertheless, the European venues do compete on
their ability to display the best prices, and do gain market shares on the basis of their BBO performance.
(Degryse, Jong, & Kervel, 2011)

MiFID also contained new regulations requiring pre-trade and post-trade transparency. Pre-trade
transparency requires regulated markets and MTFs to publish listed security quotes on a continuous
basis, whereas post-trade transparency requires them to publish transaction information after the trades
have been executed. (Cherbonnier & Vandelanoite, 2008)

Smart order routing technology
The competition between trading venues is not only a consequence of regulatory changes but also of
improvements in technology. Human traders are increasingly becoming replaced by smart order routing
technology (hereafter referred to as SORT), which identify the best destinations and slice up investors’
orders. In the next step the suborders are routed to different venues to optimize execution. (Gsell,
Gomber, & Lutat, 2011)

Due to the ambiguous definition of best execution and investor preferences assumed to be
heterogeneous, different types of SORT have accordingly been created too. Investors that prioritize
price would ideally opt for SORT solutions accessing a certain price level at multiple venues at once,
whereas investors with preference for speed would choose to access multiple trading venues at multiple
price levels at once. (Foucalt & Menkveld, 2008)

Some of the MTFs, such as BATS and Turquoise, offer smart order routers to their participants, not
very surprising considering that they are dependent on widespread smart order routing usage to have
their prices discovered by investors. Regulated exchanges, such as Stockholm, are now responding by
starting their own SORT offerings, also offering access to all competing trading venues. (Sibbern,
2011)SORT with ability to discover hidden orders in the LOB have also been developed, but are not yet
nearly as widely used as the lit counterparts. (Salmon, 2010)

SORT requires substantial investments in technology and know-how. Not all brokers are willing to bear
these costs, which is why far from all European brokers take advantage of algorithmic trading
opportunities despite the potential for future reductions in transaction costs. There is a concern that
end-customers to the investment funds that choose not to make use of SOR will be damaged. Therefore
there are ongoing discussions whether the European definition of Best Execution should be dropped in
favor for the US equivalent, which obliges brokers to invest in SORT. (Degryse, Jong, & Kervel, 2011)

                                                                                     13
However, there is disagreement what investments are required. In a recent panel debate, Peter
Holmgren, ULLINK (SOR-provider), stated that multimarket connectivity development requires a large
workforce of highly-skilled engineers, and therefore is very expensive. Continuous technology
improvements force brokers to incrementally invest more to be in line with competition in getting first
to the best prices. Martin Andersson, Nordnet Bank confirmed this by saying that his company has
taken large SORT investments as a response to MiFID. (Andersson & Holmgren, 2011) Of another
opinion was Claes Cramer, Montgomery Capital, arguing that SORT prices have come down
substantially due to more aggressive competition between SORT providers, and that more basic versions
of SORT are today so cheap so that the cost argument is no longer a valid excuse for investment firms
not to invest. (Cramer, 2011)

4.4 Market consolidation
In February 2011, London Stock exchange acquired Toronto Stock Exchange, NYSE Euronext and
Deutsche Boerse announced their intent to merge, and Nasdaq Group made official its desire to acquire
NYSE Euronext (Bunge, 2011). Not only regulated markets are merging their operations in order to
compete with MTFs but BATS simultaneously announced the takover of Chi-X Europe and their plans

                                                                                  6
to diversify into derivatives trading and a listing business . (Jeffs & Spicer, BATS buying Chi-X Europe,
challenge national rivals, 2011) Wenow describe the background to the lively M&A activity, and provide
arguments for why consolidation improves liquidity.

Cost structure of exchanges
Operating an exchange is costly. Setting up the trading platform requires large upfront investments, and
then there are substantial expenses related to monitoring, listing, clearing and settlement, storage and
presentation of financial data. Many of the required costs are largely fixed, indicating that an exchange is
able to significantly lower their cost per trade if they operate on a larger scale. Lower costs could then be
used to lower prices. Since most exchanges are for-profit organizations however, it is likely that lower
costs only lead to improved margins.

Positive network externalities
Another commonly cited argument for large, consolidated exchanges is that of positive network
externalities for traders, which occur when more traders allocate their orders to the same venue. The
more buyers and sellers there are in a market, the higher is the market’s ability to match buyers and
sellers. The LOB expands as a natural consequence of an increasing number of limit orders and the
quotes become more aggressive as investors try to reduce execution risk by providing better quotes than
other limit order investors do. Price competition between limit order investors lead to lower indirect
transaction costs, and hence improved market quality.

6
 The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter 2011, and has therefore not had any implications for our
analysis, in which they are two separate venues over the full time-period.

                                                                                     14
Concentration and its impact on liquidity
Due to positive network externalities, concentration of exchanges has been assumed to compensate for
the lack of downward fee pressure and limited technological innovativeness incurred by the
monopolistic market. The centralized national exchanges have widely been regarded as the best possible
solution in order to ensure liquidity to investors. (O'Hara & Ye, 2009) Early theoretical work has argued
that equilibrium with trading in more than one market could never remain stable. As soon as a venue
displays greater liquidity than the others, all orders would automatically flow to that market (Pagano,
1989). The argument however assumes trading venues and investor strategies to be homogenous, and
will be discussed more in the section on fragmentation. Nevertheless, even if equilibrium with a more
fragmented financial landscape can remain stable, it might not be in traders’ best interest. The probability
of finding a counterparty is reduced when investors become more scattered which consequently lowers
execution probabilities. (Degryse, Jong, & Kervel, 2011) Traders have to invest in SORT to overcome
the problem of scattered order flows.

Summary of arguments why consolidation lowers transaction costs
Economies of scale  lower cost per trade  lower direct prices charged by the exchanges

More market participants at the same venue  reduced execution uncertainty  smaller required liquidity premium

4.5 Market fragmentation
The model that two market venues could never co-exist without all trade flow gravitating towards the
most liquid market is based on the assumption of homogenous markets and investors.Investor strategies
however are not considered homogeneous. They for example differ in how active or passive they are.
For active high frequency traders every millisecond as valuable and they therefore see high-speed
technology as a key criterion when allocating their orders, whereas more passive investors do not attach
the same importance to speed but attach larger value to specific pre- or post- trade services. They also
differ depending on transaction size, which creates heterogeneous preferences, highlighted in the
following commonly applied theoretical model:

In the model there are two markets that differ in depth, with the deeper market having higher direct
trading costs. Only large traders are willing to pay higher direct transaction costs to enjoy a larger LBO
and thus cluster on the deeper market, whereas small traders attach more importance to the BBO levels
and thus cluster on the shallow market. This means that two exchanges which are differentiated from
each other and have benefits that are valued differently by traders both can exist in equilibrium.
(Pagano, 1989)

The theoretical model of different types of investors clustering at separate markets is consistent with the
fact that Burgundy has captured up to 90% of volume in certain small- and microcap securities. It is
proven that institutional investor with large average transaction sizes mostly focus on mid- and large cap

                                                                                     15
securities, whereas retail investors are more prone to invest in small- and microcap stocks. Since
institutional investors are more concerned about LBO depth and the risk of adverse price impact they
tend to keep much of their trading at Stockholm despite higher direct transaction costs. For retail
investors BBOs are of relatively higher importance than depth, and they therefore cluster at Burgundy
with their small- and microcap security holdings. (Aronsson, 2011)

New entrants’ strategies to attract order flow and their impact on liquidity
The MTFs launched their platforms in Europe accompanied by the introduction of asymmetric pricing.
Asymmetric pricing models mean that market order investors are charged extra for removing liquidity,
while limit order submitters receive a rebate for their liquidity provision. It has been proven to help
MTFs to quickly gain market share. For example, when BATS announced a fee schedule by which
passive liquidity providers were rebated 0.4 bps and liquidity takers were charged 0.2 bps, its UK market
share was doubled in the course of one month. (News) REs now also employ asymmetric fee regimes
but are not as aggressive in their fee asymmetry as the MTFs are.

Most of the MTFs also contract market makers, typically the owners of the MTFs. Market makers
commit for a certain size and spread, and thus guarantee liquidity that is meant to attract further volume
to the LBO. This is done in order for the market to reach a critical mass of liquidity on which further
liquidity is generated by the already displayed liquidity. When that critical point is reached market makers
are no longer needed. Market makers are able to provide aggressive price quotes due to their rebates, and
in doing so they ought to improve BBOs. In a study on Euronext Paris it was concluded that the
presence of a market maker decreased quoted spreads by 22%. (Aitken, Cook, Harris, & McInish, 2007)

Optimized multi-market trading (queue jumping)
It is also predicted that consolidated volume at different prices should increase with fragmentation due
to the absence of time priority across markets. First priority is usually given according to price, and
second priority to time of order submission. If there was only one market, a limit order investor would
have to provide his quote one tick size (price step) better than BBO to obtain first priority. If there is
another market with same BBO but with less quantity supporting it, he can queue-jump by submitting a
quote that equals BBO and have it executed before some of the BBO submitters in the first market. The
possibility to queue jump leads liquidity suppliers to provide quotes on more than one market to increase
the likelihood of rapid execution which leads to a higher aggregated volume. (Foucalt & Menkveld,
2008)

Summary of arguments why fragmentation lowers transaction costs
Aggressive pricing by market makers trying to attract order flow  improved BBOs  smaller spreads

Absence of time priority across markets  queue-jumping and multimarket limit order submission  increased
consolidated volume at certain price levels

                                                                                     16
4.6 Concentration or fragmentation?
The discussion whether market fragmentation is better than market concentration for total transaction

      7
costs  generally revolves around the trade-off between the welfare losses incurred by monopolies (such
as lack of price-competition and quality-improving efforts) and the network externalities that are lost in a
more fragmented market. We only focus on liquidity costs which is why we do not take into account the
potential for fee cuts and innovative efforts that the abolishment of monopoly implies. Instead we
address whether the benefits of competition offsets the benefits of concentration. The key to this
discussion concerns whether SORT is sufficiently widespread and well-developed to allow a sufficiently
large number of investors to trade as if they acted on a single, centralized market. If this is the case, then
competition, and the fragmentation that comes with competition, leads to a reduction of liquidity costs.
If not, then centralization is preferable, in particular for those traders that do not have the resources to
employ SORT.

Clara Furse, chief executive of the London Stock Exchange, summarizes the issue by putting it this way:
-“The test for MiFID will be whether competition will increase liquidity and efficiency. The risk is that
the benefits of competition for investors will be lost to the increase in fragmentation. Wider spreads and
an increase in the cost of trading and the cost of market data would undermine the whole aim of
MiFID.” (Jeffs & Spicer)

5. Previous Research
In the field of market microstructure; the study of financial market frictions at a micro level, numerous
studies have been undertaken aiming to answer questions about liquidity. Research questions have
typically studied the implications for liquidity for different listing locations, quote-driven vs. limit order
systems and different news announcements at the macro- and corporate level. Although there
unarguably is a great scope of research available that covers asset liquidity, the amount of previous
research on the impact of fragmentation on consolidated stock liquidity is scarce due to the novelty of
fragmented trading.

5.1 General research overview
For our analysis we have mostly been interested in post-MiFID research, particularly European. US
research has proven quite interesting as well as US stock trading is highly fragmented. However, the US
version of best execution is different from its European equivalent, in that it obliges investment funds to
trade on the venue currently offering BBO. This makes it more difficult to compare US effects to
European post-MiFID effects since fragmentation in US is taking place in a different regulative
environment. On the other hand, US best execution has lead to US investment funds/brokers being at

7
 Includes direct fees charged by the exchanges and the liquidity costs extracted by limit order submitters

                                                                                     17
the forefront of multimarket trading. It might therefore be easier to see and verify the results of
fragmented trading in the US, which would give European legislators an idea of the implications when
routing technology becomes more widely spread.

Market microstructure studies that we have looked at have used either matched sample estimation or panel data
regressions. The matched sample approach usually matches stocks according to similarities in certain firm
characteristics, such as market cap, but that differ in some crucial aspect that might have an impact on
liquidity. After having constructed the matched samples a statistical test of the observed differences in
bid-offer spreads between the matched pair components is calculated in order to interfere whether the
differential factor has had an impact on the spread or not. (Davies & Kim, 2009)

Following list displays the matching characteristics from 16 different matched samples studies. These
factors have been employed as they are believed to imply similar liquidity costs.

                   Matching characteristics: Nr of studies:

                 Market capitalization 15

                 Share price 12

                Trade volume 11

                 Volatility 9

                 Tick size 1

                Book value and debt level 1

These characteristics are all potentially important to control for in our test. There seems to be consensus
regarding control variables, but as some of the studies are rather old the technological development has
introduced new potentially important factors that do not appear in the list.

5.2 Specific research
In this section we will cover four of the research articles that we have read in greater detail. We have of
course read other related research as well in order to understand the liquidity concept, but these have
proven more helpful for us when we try to find answers to our research questions. The first two articles
described below have been helpful for the main research question, whereas the other articles have been
helpful for our second research question.

                                                                                     18
Fragmented trading in the Netherlands and its impact on liquidity
The article that we have been mostly influenced by is from January 2011, in which Hans Degryse, Frank
de Jong and Vincent van Kervel evaluates the impact of fragmentation on liquidity on Dutch equities,
both for traders with access to all markets through SORT and for traders with access only to the
traditional market. The study is conducted using panel data with 52 stocks from 2006 to 2009. The time
dimension is set to include time before the MiFID, in order to observe greater variation in
fragmentation.

To estimate how fragmentation can predict liquidity they have specified their regression as

In the base specification, they also control for time fixed effects by including quarter dummies.

                                                                                                                                                    2
The positive sign of the coefficients for Fragmentation and the negative sign of that for Fragmentation
indicate that predicted liquidity first strongly increases with fragmentation and then starts to decrease
after having reached a critical point, i.e. when the negative effect of the quadratic Fragmentation term
becomes larger than the positive effect of the linear Fragmentation term. They therefore conclude that
additional fragmentation is good for rather concentrated firms, but harmful for already fragmented
firms.

Fragmented trading in Europe and its impact on liquidity
Post-MiFID Spanish stocks are special as they have almost not experienced any fragmentation at all.
This difference is used by Markus Gsell, Peter Gomber and Marco Lutat (2011) in their study of
fragmentation’s impact on liquidity. In their sample of stocks they include stocks with high levels of
fragmentation (stocks listed on Xetra or LSE) and stocks with low levels of fragmentation (Spanish
stocks), but otherwise comparable in terms of market capitalization. For this they select a total of 48
stocks and extract order book snapshots from Tick History, using two different time windows; 60 pre-
MiFID trading days, and 60 post-MiFID trading days. The panel regressions are specified as:

                                                                           8                      9
As liquidity measures they employ the quoted spread, XML  and quoted value . Control variables are
traded volume, price, volatility and minimum tick size.

For Spanish stocks, they find that liquidity has slightly decreased in the post-MiFID window, whereas it
has greatly increased in the post-MiFID window for non-Spanish stocks. In their concluding discussion
they attribute the positive impact to the competition between trading venues, arguing that traders submit
more aggressive quotes in order to attract order flow if they operate in a more competitive environment.

8
 The execution cost of immediately entering and exiting a position; a post-trade measure
9
 The total value of volumes at BBO

                                                                                     19
Fragmented trading in USA and its impact on liquidity

                                                          10
An article that uses the matched sample approach  is Maureen O’Hara and Mao Ye’s study from May
2009 on the impact of fragmented trading on trading quality in U.S. markets. The matched samples are
used to compare the execution quality of stocks with more fragmented trading to that of stocks with
more consolidated trading. Execution quality refers to metrics such as transaction costs, execution
speed, short-term volatility and price efficiency.

Their sample consists of 2574 equities. They use January-March 2008 data to measure each stock’s
volume by trading venue, and then they use April- June 2008 data to investigate how market quality
measures differ between firms with fragmented trading and firms with concentrated trading.

They construct a matching variable which compares the firms’ market cap and stock price, and matches

                                                          11
together those firms with smallest discrepancies.   Furthermore, they divide the matched pairs in
categories based on market cap to see how the impact of fragmentation on liquidity differs depending on
firm size.

The overall conclusion is that fragmentation does not appear to harm market quality. Market

                                                                                                                                     12
fragmentation tends to be good for liquidity costs, execution speed and price efficiency , however
short-term volatility increases slightly. Among the three subsamples, the results show that fragmentation
benefits large and small stocks, whereas medium stocks remain unaffected.

Market competition in the UK and its impact on order flow
Another analysis of the European post-MiFID landscape was published by Ryan Riordan, Andreas
Storkenmaier and Martin Wagener in June 2010. In their paper they study the competition between LSE
and the MTFs Chi-X, Turquoise and BATS during April-May 2009, which is regarded as a period with a
stable market structure not disturbed by any major macro shocks or changes to the markets'
microstructures, fees, or trading systems.

The authors take an opposite approach to ours. Rather than investigating fragmentation’s impact on
liquidity they investigate to what extent traders take into account different market quality measures when
allocating their traders, such as BBOs, smaller spreads or increased depth. Put differently, they treat
fragmentation as endogenous and liquidity as exogenous.

Their results support the theory that investors are more prone to allocate their trades to an MTF when
its bid-ask spread decrease and depth increases. They also provide evidence that when an MTF is at
consolidated BBO, the likelihood of attracting an order increases. The authors state that the results may

10
  Not included in the list on matched sample characteristics
11

12
  Prices are considered efficient when they follow a random walk

                                                                                     20
not be very surprising but nevertheless important since they provide clear evidence on how investors
base their allocation decisions on the liquidity measures that the exchanges present.

The venues do not display equal correlations between being at BBO and the probability of attracting a
trade. When LSE presents the best price it attracts 96% of order flow, whereas Chi-X similarly attracts
84%. BATS and Turquoise also increase their likelihood dramatically when they are at BBO but still have
lower probabilities of attracting order flow than LSE and Chi-X have, even though the prices that they
offer are better.

                                                                                        13
They also find that LSE leads the price formation process , due to a higher presence of informed
traders. By possessing private information the trades of informed traders lead to permanent price
changes. The authors find evidence for and argue that informed traders attach less importance to price
and more importance the execution speed and reduced market impact. LSE is the most liquid market for
FTSE100 equities, which causes it to attract more informed traders and lead price formation.

Market competition in the Netherlands and its impact on order flow
An influential article by Thierry Foucalt and Albert Menkveld studies the introduction of the MTF
EuroSETS in the Dutch equity market. They find that consolidated LOB depth increases after its entry,
due to increased competition among limit order investors. The regulated Dutch market NSC also
displayed better liquidity after EuroSETS entry, which might be surprising but explained by a reduction
in direct trading fees that were introduced as a response to the new competitor. Lower trading fees imply
a higher trade volume and improved liquidity.

They also find that NSC is more likely than EuroSETS to attract order flow when it is not at BBO. They
argue that this is due to lack of SOR. Of course, there was no need for SOR when trading was
centralized in NSC. After its entry however, there is still not much benefit of investing in SOR because
the limit orders at EuroSETS are not aggressively priced enough, which they say is due to the low
probability for EuroSETS to attract order flow despite being at BBO. Hence, there is a severe chicken-
or-egg-problem in the Dutch market, which is likely to be as severe in all markets where there is no
installed base of smart order routers.

13
  Price change due to changing supply/demand for a security instead of imbalances in limit/market orders

                                                                                     21
6. Hypotheses

Hypothesis 1: Fragmentation has no impact on liquidity
The first research question concerns trading volume fragmentation’s impact on pre-trade liquidity for
Swedish large cap stocks. We aim to answer the question by running a panel-data regression from which
we can see the fragmentation level’s estimated impact on the consolidated quoted spread. Hence, if is
the coefficient on the fragmentation variable, we define the null-hypothesis as:

       Against

The alternative hypothesis is two-sided. This follows from the arguments in section 3.3 which indicated
that trading venue competition and fragmentation theoretically could lead both to improved or reduced
liquidity. Given that the size of the coefficient is statistically significant we therefore accept both signs in
order to reject the null-hypothesis.

Hypothesis 2: The causal relationship between a trading venue’s competitive performance and market
share has not increased over time
The second research question concerns if a trading venue’s ability to attract order flow through offering
investors the best prices has increased over time. We aim to answer this question by first running stock-
level regressions which provide us with a venue’s BBO performance’ impact on its market share. We
then test if the causal effect is stronger in our second time period than it is in the first time period.

The alternative hypothesis is one-sided. This is because all theory and empiric research has pointed
towards more widespread adoption of SORT. As European investors can freely choose whether to
invest or not in SORT, and might not be using it in order to always trade at consolidated BBO, it is not
evident that we will observe a significantly higher coefficient in the later time period. However, no
theory supports that we would observe a decrease, hence we employ a one-sided hypothesis test.

                                                                                     22
7. Data

Databases
Most previous studies have been made using Thomson Reuter’s Tick History, which provides
millisecond tick data from all market venues going back over eleven years in time. Practitioners use the
product to back-test their algorithmic trading strategies and determine evaluate compliance with best
execution. Degryse et al. (2011),Chlistalla and Lutat (2009), and Foucault and Menkveld (2008), all use it
to extract snapshots of the venues’ LBOs. A snapshot captures the ten best bid and offer prices and
their associated quantities and is typically taken every one to five minutes.

Unfortunately, the database was very expensive. We therefore tried to collect the data from the
exchanges. At Burgundy they had to extract the snapshots manually, which would have required too
much of their resources. At Stockholm they had changed their computer systems, limiting their data
access.

Thomson Reuter agreed to set us up for a free trial account of their product Equity Market Share

             14
Reporter . EMSR is a new product, used by practitioners to identify differences in liquidity across
trading venues. EMSR does not reveal the tick data to clients but uses it to construct its own liquidity
measures which are displayed. We have therefore not been able to construct our own consolidated
LBOs but have instead used the measures provided by EMSR.

As EMSR is a brand-new product, it has continuously been developed during the time that we have
worked on our thesis. Post-trade data can be downloaded but the corresponding function for pre-trade
data is not yet available. Therefore we have spent considerable time adding data points in Excel.
Although this has been time-consuming, the novelty of the product at least guarantees that we possess a
data set not readily available for most others.

The usage of an independent database ensures that the data is objective. Collecting data from the venues
could have led to them providing us with incompatible data points and different definitions of key

             15
measures . We have extracted price and size data from Factset.

Stocks
                                                       16
Data has been extracted for OMXS30 . The underlying logic for choosing this particular sample is that
the stocks included are per definition the largest in terms of traded volume (turnover) on the OMX
Stockholm exchange. Since empirical research supports the theory that traded volume has a positive

14
  Henceforth referred to as EMSR
15
  Due to the lack of consensus about categorization of e.g. lit, hidden, off-exchange and auction trades.
16
  With the exception of Atlas Copco B. OMXS30 includes both A- and B-class stocks, and we chose to only extract data
for A-stocks, which are the most liquid.

                                                                                     23
impact on liquidity, and low-cost MTFs largely focus on liquid stocks, choosing this sample ought to
provide us with well-fragmented. This is good since it increases the likelihood of sample variation in
fragmentation over time, which is required in order to accurately define the regression’s slope and
intercept estimates.

All stocks are listed on Stockholm, but ABB, Nokia and Astra Zeneca have dual listings.

Trading venues
Trading venues that appear in our data set and our regressions are Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, Burgundy,

                                                                                                   17
Chi-X, BATS and Turquoise. In May 2011 the five venues accounted for over 99%  of turnover in
Stockholm OMX, which is why we have chosen to limit our analysis to them. In Appendix: Trading
venues we provide an overview of them and their different characteristics, and in Figure 1 we display
the market share development for the five venues in the Swedish OMX Index.

                                                                                      18
When looking at total traded volume both on- and off-exchange, BOAT  accounts for a significant
share of trading across OMXS30. BOAT is a project owned by nine major investment banks, which use
it to report their over-the-counter or off-exchange share trades. As it is not an exchange we do not
include it as one of our competing venues.

17
  Same calculation method as that described in note 10
18
  ABN AMRO, Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and UBS
are the owners of project BOAT

                                                                                     24
8. Methodology
In order to test our first hypothesis, we have constructed multivariate regression models in order to
analyze how the degree of fragmentation on OMXS30 stocks affects their bid-offer spreads. Our dataset

                                         19
is a panel consisting of N=29 stocks  and T=125 days (November 2010-April 2010).

For testing our second hypothesis we have as a first step constructed two regression models to study the
causal relationship between a venue’s share of volume at consolidated BBO and its share of total traded
volume. The first regression is based on the first three trading months in 2011, and the second
regression is based on the same three months, but in 2010. As a second step, we compare the extracted
coefficients from the two regressions, in order to see if the impact of relative BBO performance on trade
volume has increased over time. We expect the correlation to have increased over time as investment in
SORT has become more widespread across investment firms, and as more experienced SORT users
enable it to be used more efficiently.

In the regressions specified in the next section we have included a number of control variables, so that
we do not end up with a biased coefficient on our fragmentation variable. The first criterion for
including a factor in our regression is that it has a causal relationship with VWAS. The second criterion
for adding it is that the factor and fragmentation are correlated with each other.

8.1 Fragmentation’s impact on consolidated quoted spreads
Our regression specification uses CVWAS as the dependent variable and HHI and other liquidity
affecting factors as independent. Complete explanations for all variables used in the regressions are
provided in Appendix: Explanation of variables. For extra clarity we however cover the most important
variables in this section too.

Variables

CVWAS
The spreads displayed in EMSR are Volume Weighted Average Spread bps and Equally Weighted Average

               20
Spreads bps  . They are both calculated on the price quotes placed during the trading day. The different
steps applied by EMSR for deriving them are presented in Appendix: Explanation of variables, in which
our choice to only focus on VWAS is covered in more detail as well.

EMSR uses the pre-trade quoted volumes for consolidating VWAS when more than one trading days or
stocks are chosen, whereas it uses pre-trade number of quotes for consolidating EAS. We follow that

19
  OMXS30 includes both Atlas Copco A- and B-class stocks. We chose to only use for the more liquid A-stocks
20
  EMSR uses the term Quoted Spread bps, we however refer to it as EWAS to make it more distinguished it from its
volume-weighted equivalent

                                                                                     25
methodology and therefore also use pre trade quote data for consolidating spreads since more than one
venues are chosen. To obtain the consolidated VWAS we have for each stock taken each venue’s daily
quoted volume divided by that stock’s total quoted volume, and multiplied that ratio with the
corresponding venue’s VWAS bps. This provides us with venue spreads that are weighted according to
how much the venue accounts for of the stock’s total quoted volume. We then summarize the venue-
weighted spreads, which gives us the consolidated VWAS bps.

Since VWAS bps is a measure that relates the stock’s spread to its price we also investigate the absolute
values of the CVWAS in order to test for robustness of the model. To do this we have constructed a
Consolidated Absolute VWAS (CAVWAS) by multiplying the daily CVWAS with the volume weighted
average price of the stock in question.

Winsorization of the CVWAS and CAVWAS

Extreme values add noise to statistical tests and increase the kurtosis of distributions. Conventional
methods to extreme values are to exclude upper and lower percentiles, drop observations with extreme
values altogether or to log values. These methods are easy to apply, but dropping observations or logging
values is a waste since the observation’s effect on the dependent variable then is lost completely. This is
very unfortunate since low or high values are those that are potentially most interesting for the analysis.
Winsorization reduces this problem. Therefore we have winsorized our data; a process that we explain
much more in detail in Appendix: Explanation of variables.

HHI
To measure the degree of market fragmentation we have used the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index. It is
based on the market shares of the venues and its mathematical expression is as follows:

The HHI variable can assume values between 0 and 1.The value is an indicator for the level of industry
concentration, and is commonly used in academic work. Further description of HHI is provided in
Appendix: Explanation of variables. In Section 9: Descriptive and inferential statistics, we also describe
how different values of HHI are generally interpreted as an indicator for industry concentration, and
how the interpretations of the HHI-values may differ in the stock exchange industry compared to those
of other industries.

Panel data regressions

                                                                                     26
Our main regression is a panel data regression which absorbs firm specific effects by the inclusion of
firm dummies. It is specified as:

In order to weed out time specific effects we also test to include dummies for each of our 6 months. To
take into account heterogeneity of variance issues we run the regression using robust of standard

        21
errors , and also try slightly different regression specifications in order to verify the results of our
regression model.

As a second approach we use instrumental variable analysis. There might be factors out there that
indirectly affect our liquidity measure. We believe that our fragmentation variable may be biased in the
sense that it is correlated with the error term on the explanatory side of the equation. Except for having
to be correlated with the endogenous term, an instrument cannot suffer from the same endogeneity
problem as the endogenous term does, nor be correlated with the error term itself. We think that lagged
fragmentation variables and the average order size of venues are good instruments for our fragmentation
variables in the sense that they may explain variance in our fragmentation variables given the other
covariates.

The regression specification is similar to our main regression except for that we run a number of first
stage regressions in order to capture the effects of our instrumental variables in accordance to the 2-
Stage Least Squares method.

Stage 1: Regress the endogenous variables on instruments and save the predicted values.

Where , the instruments, are uncorrelated with . Saving the estimates from this stage hopefully gives
us non-biased endogenous variables.

Stage 2: Regress the CVWAS on the predicted endogenous variables from stage 1

Regressing the estimates from stage 1 on our dependent variable gives us results free from the variance
that the instruments have taken away from the endogenous variables.

8.2 BBO volume and its causal relationship with trade volume
One dimension of the MiFID “Best Execution” protocol is for brokers to provide their clients with the
best price. Although it is less restrictive than its US equivalent and allows other factors than BBO to be
taken into account, it does oblige firms to communicate their order allocation strategies to their clients.

21
  i.e. take into account heteroscedasticity

                                                                                     27
The increased focus on routing decisions is expected to lead to more orders being allocated to the
venues being at consolidated BBOs, as achieving the best price is normally considered to be in the
client’s best interest. At any given time, the venue that displays the best available price, either on bid or
offer side, across all trading venues, is reported to be on consolidated BBO. As EMSR provides us with
data on the number of shares for each venue that reach the consolidated BBO position, we possess all
data that we need to investigate the relationship between BBO volume and actual trade. We test if this
relationship has become stronger over the course of a year, which is expected as a result of investment in
SORT and better compliance of the MiFID. To do this we will compare the first three trading months
of 2010 with their equivalents 2011. We have extracted market share data for BBO volume and traded
volume, both measured in number of shares, for January, February and Mars 2010 and 2011 for each
venue in order to test our hypothesis. We do this in two steps that complement each other and add
robustness to our results.

Test 1: Panel Regression
For each venue of interest e employ a single variable regression model approach with firm dummies
included. The specification will be run on all five venues and both time periods in order to compare how
the correlation between BBO volume and trade volume has increased over time across our five venues.

The rationale behind the regression is that the market share of traded volume should follow the market
share of BBO volume to a certain degree. Investors are expected to increase their trading on
marketplaces on which they get the best deal regardless of whether they want to purchase or sell stocks.

Test 2: T-test/signed rank test
By running the above stated regression in our first step on individual stocks we are able to extract the
coefficients for the BBO variable. By using the coefficients as data points in our second step we test if
there is a difference in the causal relationship between BBO volume and trade volume between the two
periods. More specifically, we test the null hypothesis that the coefficient mean is unchanged against the
alternative hypotheses that the 2011 mean is higher.

We employ two separate tests when testing our hypotheses; a normal t-test and a signed rank test. The
reason for using all three is to add robustness to the hypothesis test and overcome problems arising with
assumptions of distributions. We do not volume weight the firm level coefficients but treat them with

                                                                                     28
equal importance in our test. This is because we want to see if a potential increase has occurred across all
stocks, not only in the largest stocks.

9. Descriptive and inferential statistics
In this section we present our descriptive findings on the variables we have constructed in order to know
if we safely can reject our two null-hypotheses. The variables and their implications for liquidity are
explained in Appendix: Explanation of variables. In the appendix we include variables that we would
have liked to control for but are unable to construct properly due to data limitations.

In this section we present following descriptive statistics:

     Liquidity measures on stock level
     Fragmentation measures on stock level
     Price competiveness measures
     Control variables on an aggregated level

Consolidated Volume Weighted Average Spreads
All spreads are measured in basis points and are presented in table 1 after having been winsorized. As
seen in the table, the mean CVWAS across most of the stocks are not far from the aggregated mean of
12.85 bps. AstraZeneca, H&M, ABB and Ericsson report spreads well below the aggregated mean,
whereas Lundin Petroleum and MTG report spreads well above that. The table’s fifth column displays
the coefficients of variance which have been constructed by dividing the stock’s standard deviation with

          22
its mean.  The stocks with the lowest coefficients of variance are Nokia, ABB, SEB and Ericsson with
values around 0.10. On the other end of the spectrum are Getinge, Lundin Petroleum and Securitas with
values ranging between 0.25 and 0.30. Overall the values range from 0.081 to 0.295. One likely
explanation to the seemingly large differences in variance is that the companies with low CVWAS means
tend to be large and stable. ABB and AstraZeneca are very large companies with dual listings at LSE and
SIX Swiss, providing them a diversified investor base which limits the risk of large daily deviations. The
kurtosis indicator varies widely across the stocks. It is interesting that many of the stocks’ spreads exhibit
excess kurtosis of 0 or close to 0, implying mesokurtic distributions. The majority of the stocks
demonstrate absolute skewness characteristics lower than 1, meaning that spread distributions are
somewhat symmetric. Since most of the stocks with symmetric distributions also demonstrate excess
kurtosis close to 0, they are considered as approximately normally distributed.

Fragmentation

                                                                                                      23
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for our fragmentation variable . The aggregated mean HHI is
0.483. In general, a market with HHI taking on values below 0.15 is deemed as fragmented, while values

22
  Using coefficients of variance is a well recognized method to compare differently sized variances
23
  For an explanation of our fragmentation variable, see Appendix: Explanation of variables

                                                                                     29
                                                                                                                                             24
in the range between 0.15 and 0.25 classify the market as a moderately concentrated market . An
industry HHI above 0.25 is considered concentrated. However, in the context of exchanges and their
turnover there are no official classification limits of fragmentation. The limits should be adjusted to take
into consideration the nature of the industry. The entry barriers to the stock exchange industry are high,
due to considerable economies of scale and positive network externalities. Furthermore, compared to
other industries, stock exchanges are quite heterogenous and cannot charge premium prices
compensating for low volumes.

Compared to the HHI in Degryse (2011) of 0.725 for 2009, fragmentation in our sample is quite high.
European fragmentation has been rapid and recent however, therefore data within our time frame is not

                                                         25
perfectly comparable to data from 2009  .

The most fragmented stock is ABB with a mean HHI of 0.310, followed by Nokia with a HHI of 0.383.
On the other end of the spectrum are Sandvik, Atlas Copco and Investor with values of 0.557, 0.546 and
0.542. This is not surprising since ABB and Nokia are large firms with dual listings, indicating that pan-
European MTFs have relatively large volumes in comparison to Stockholm. However, we are careful
when interpreting the values for dually listed firms, as we do not know what HHI we would observe if
including their other main venue.

The majority of the stocks do not deviate much from the mean, indicating that the fragmentation trend
has progressed about the same across firms. The stock specific HHI variables are in overall close to
being normally distributed except those for Nokia, Nordea, ABB, H&M and Ericsson.

The coefficients of variance range between 0.064 and 0.143. ABB, AstraZeneca and Boliden display the
lowest values whereas Getinge, Securitas and Alfa Laval display the highest.

Comparison of descriptive statistics
Comparing the CVWAS and HHI tables indicate that there are some interesting relationships between
the CVWAS and HHI variables. Dually listed firms such as ABB and AstraZeneca have the lowest
CVWAS means and the lowest HHI means, which indicates that there is a positive relationship between
the two.

The range of coefficients of variance values is very narrow for HHI compared to the equivalent range
for CVWAS. It thus appears that fragmentation over time at firm level is far more stable than
consolidated spreads over time, also that on firm level.

24
  U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission’s classification
http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/guidelines/hmg-2010.html
25
  Degryse’s HHI includes venues with a combined 99% of lit volume, whereas our venues also represent 99%

                                                                                     30
10. Results
In this section we present and analyze the results obtained in our empirical tests. The first sub-section
covers our primary research question and includes results from the panel data regression as well as the
separate time series regressions. The second sub-section is devoted to our instrumental variable
approach. The third and final sub-section details our findings from the hypothesis tests we run. All our
test results are presented in tables found in the appendix.

In addition to results quoted in CVWAS bps, we have also included regression outputs where we replace
it with its absolute value counterpart. All absolute value results are presented in columns to the right of

                                                                                                                                                    26
the basis point regressions. Everything else is held constant except for the exclusion of the MTG stock.

10.1 Regression results
Before moving on we would like to explain how our fragmentation variables work. In order to get an
intuitive feel of fragmentation’s effect we have inverted our HHI variable by subtracting it from 1.
Doing this means that fragmentation increases with a higher value instead of the opposite. The results of
our panel data base specification regression are found in table 4. It is interesting that the coefficients on

                                                                                    2
the variables of interest, Fragmentation and Fragmentation , are both significant but with opposite signs.
The linear term is negative whereas the squared is positive. This indicates a non-linear relationship
between CVWAS and fragmentation. The main implication of the non-linearity is that incremental
fragmentation is positive for certain levels of initial fragmentation up until a certain point where the
quadratic effect eclipses the linear one. This potentially implies an optimal level of fragmentation.

The coefficient on the squared term has a smaller absolute value than the linear, which means that our
fragmentation variable needs to be larger than 1 for the squared term to outweigh the negative effect of
the linear. Since our fragmentation variable can never take on a value above 1, additional fragmentation
always reduce predicted quoted spreads.

The coefficients of the control variables are also presented in table 4. The volume coefficient is strongly

                                                                                                                                                    27
significant and leads to a reduction in predicted quoted spreads, which is what we initially expected.
The coefficient on our OTC/Dark trade variable indicates that additional dark trade enlarges spread
sizes. Our price variable and our proxy for algorithmic trade also contribute to larger spread sizes. The

                                                                                                                                                   28
coefficients on OTC trading and algorithmic trade are not as we had expected but can be explained  .
Our findings do not contradict those of Degryse’s as he obtained the same signs on the coefficients.

We have also tried to improve our base regression through the usage of monthly dummies. Including
these barely affects our results. All coefficients remain of the same sign but lose some statistical

26
  MTG’s spread values are noisy and therefore disturb our results
27
  See Appendix: Explanation of variables for more details on volume’s expected impact on spreads
28
  See Appendix: Explanation of variables for more details on OTC and HFT’s expected impact on spreads

                                                                                     31
significance which is not surprising as more explaining factors have been added. In particular the
important coefficients on the two fragmentation terms remain largely unchanged.

If we exclude our squared fragmentation variable altogether we still obtain a negative coefficient on the
linear fragmentation term which is about as big as the difference between the coefficients on the linear
and squared terms in our base specification. The statistical significance improves substantially if we only
use fragmentation as a single linear variable. Doing this however means that we do not detect the
declining marginal effect of fragmentation if do not split fragmentation into two separate terms.

10.2 Robustness tests
To test the robustness of our results we have constructed a number of alternative regression
specifications. In the first one we have replaced our fragmentation variables with the market share of
Stockholm and its squared counterpart. The results are presented in table 5 and tell us that there exists a
non-linear relationship here too. The linear term is negative whereas the quadratic is positive. Since the
latter factor has a larger absolute value it implies a breaking point located somewhere within the possible
fragmentation range where the net effect of a larger market share for OMX Stockholm switches signs
and hurts pre-trade liquidity.

Our base specification tells us that the breaking point is located at approximately 0.79, meaning that the
spreads shrink in size until OMX Stockholm reaches a market share of approximately 80%. Running this
test across all venues however give us different optimal level for all five venues, which are impossible to
combine since market shares can only sum to 1. Nevertheless, having verified that the effect on spreads
only increases up to a certain breaking point supports the notion that there while there are gains from
having a concentrated market, a fragmented one takes it a step further.

We have also run the regressions on market share for OMX Stockholm without using time dummies and
with absolute spread values as dependent variables and obtain similar results. If we remove the quadratic
term we get a positive spread size coefficient on the market share of OMX Stockholm which translates
into worse pre-trade liquidity the more market share that is captured by the main exchange. In essence,
this supports the arguments made by supporters of fragmentation and is well in line with the main
regression results.

Another robustness test we have run takes into account the first differences, or daily changes, of our
fragmentation variables. By doing this we aim to remove long term effects of fragmentation that might
affect the spread size. Doing this however did not change our base regression results much. The first
difference coefficients do not reach statistical significance. Adding monthly time dummies and removing
the squared term does not significantly alter any results. The results are presented in table 6.

                                                                                     32
10.3 Instrumental Variables
As our final approach to the matter we have employed two instrumental variable approaches in
accordance to that of Degryse (2011) in order to alleviate eventual endogeneity and omitted variable
problems. Since there might exist variables that are correlated with our independent variables it is in our
interest to control for indirect causal impact. First we have a specification where we instrument our
fragmentation variables with their one day lagged counterparts. Degryse argues that the fragmentation
coefficients could be biased because daily shocks might affect liquidity and fragmentation
simultaneously. In that case there might not only be a causal relationship between fragmentation and
liquidity, but the source of the daily shock is causally related with both. The second approach is also
inspired by Degryse’s paper, instrumenting our fragmentation variables with the daily average order size
of each of our five main venues. This is done in order to avoid an eventual self-selection bias if
fragmentation of a firm’s stock is a result of the average order sizes of different venues. We have
employed a 2 step least-squared methodology with firm dummies for both of our tests. Monthly
dummies are used to isolate time-specific effects.

Instrumenting our variables of interest with their lagged counterparts does not change our main results
from the base regression. The magnitude of our coefficients differs somewhat but all the signs remain
intact. This regression setup pushes our variables of interest just outside of significance in the base setup.
The linear term however retains its significance when month dummies and when the quadratic term are
excluded. The coefficient of the quadratic fragmentation term is still smaller than the linear which means
that fragmentation’s positive effect on quoted spreads is still present. . This particular result differs from
that of Degryse but their coefficients lose significance which ours do not always do. The results are
displayed in table 7. We do not present our first stage regression results for the sake of simplicity but the
output shows that there is next to no correlation between our instrumented and instrumental variables.
In other words, daily shocks do not have any significant effect on either the quoted spreads or the daily
fragmentation variables that they instrument.

Our second instrumental regression takes into account the possibility that average trade size of
marketplaces and their effect on the degree of fragmentation under the logic that order allocation
migrates to venues with already high activity. The results of this specification can be found in table 8.
The quality of the venues themselves might therefore affect quoted spreads by increasing fragmentation,
leading to a self-selection bias. Our five first pass regressions, which we will not present, show that there
indeed exists a causal relationship between the average order size of a venue and fragmentation. The
results are mixed and are only significant when we choose to run the specification without time
dummies. Since the number of instruments exceed the number of our regressors we have employed an
over identifying test in order to test our instruments. Doing this however rejects the null hypothesis that

                                                                                     33
our instruments jointly are valid instruments, meaning that they seem to affect liquidity both through
fragmentation and directly. We will therefore not make any attempt to interpret the results.

10.4 The causal relationship between price competitiveness and order allocation

Panel regressions for 2010
The results from our panel regressions, with market share of trade volume as dependent and market
share of BBO volume as independent variable, are reported in table 9 for each of our venues. In the
table we clearly see that there is a positive relationship between the total BBO market share and the
traded volume market share. The results for OMX Stockholm are particularly interesting. Whereas the
other venues have constants close to zero in period 1, OMX Stockholm’s is as high as 0.418. We
conclude that during the first quarter of 2010, OMX Stockholm was able to capture a large volume
market share despite not offering the BBOs. Other trading venues had much lower market shares before

                                                                                                               29
the effect of their competitive performance is included. This trend can also be seen on stock level  with
many shares having constants higher than 0.50. Possible reasons for the high constants are that OMX
Stockholm either fulfills other “Best Execution” criteria such as execution speed or depth, or because
brokers lack the SORT required to gain access to the consolidated BBOs. Without multi-market access
brokers or investment managers execute their orders on OMX Stockholm because they are used to
doing so. In time period 1 Stockholm also has a much larger coefficient than the other venues, which
indicates that when Stockholm is at BBO it attracts order flow to a much higher extent than the other
venues. This could also be due to lack of SORT among investors which constrain them from allocating
orders to the other venues despite them being at BBO.

Chi-X, the MTF in our sample with the highest market share among the MTFs, has across the MTFs the
highest constant but the weakest coefficient on BBO in both time periods. Reasons behind this might be
that Chi-X has many market participants guaranteeing a certain degree of volume, and that it does not
rely as much on its price performance since the market participants trade there regardless of order flow.
For those that are not members of Chi-X however it is difficult to allocate orders there than on OMX
Stockholm. This might be a reason why the two exchanges differ so in betas despite having the highest
alphas in the sample. The other three MTFs have higher betas than Chi-X despite not providing easier
market access than Chi-X does, which might possibly be because they have a lower guaranteed order
flow than Chi-X which existence brings down the relative importance of price competition for an
exchange.

Panel regressions for 2011
The columns with panel regression output for the first quarter of 2011 show that coefficients are higher
for all venues compared to 2010. The differences, with the sole exception of OMX Stockholm, are
considerable in magnitude. CHI-X has gone from a coefficient of a mere 0.023 to 0.223. Burgundy and

29
  For the sake of simplicity we do not report the results on individual stock bases.

                                                                                     34
Turquoise’s coefficients have more than doubled themselves, going from 0.080 and 0.065 in period 1 to
0.185 and 0.173 in period 2 respectively. The biggest change is attributed to BATS for which the BBO
coefficient has gone up from 0.019 to 0.314. OMX Stockholm on the other hand enjoys a slight increase
from 0.184 to 0.223. It thus seems like the effects of price competition is more equal across the venues
in period 2. As all aggregated coefficients are coupled with significant t-values we can conclude that the
relationship between BBO market share and traded volume market share has become stronger over the
year that separates the two time periods.

The only constant that has changed significantly in magnitude is OMX Stockholm’s which has gone
down from 0.418 to 0.327. The high BBO coefficient combined with a smaller constant indicates that
OMX Stockholm has migrated to relying less on guaranteed volume and more on the ability to provide
BBO. It is thus more affected by the competition from MTFs in the second period. The actors on OMX
Stockholm seem to have become more rational when it comes to price. It is however evident that there
are still many other factors affecting order allocation since the coefficients are far from 1.0 which would
be the case if price is the only parameter that matters and perfect SORT is available to all investors. It is
also clear that the MTFs are fighting an uphill battle; even though they price compete on the same
conditions as OMX Stockholm they do not have the automatically granted volume that Stockholm
appears to have as a result of its history as a national regulated exchange.

Testing the difference between regression results from 2010 and 2011
We employ three different tests to see if the difference between the firm level means of coefficients on
BBOs between the two time periods is significant. In the tests we use the betas discussed in the section
above and we have done them for each of the 5 venues we have studied so far. The results are presented
in table 9. As the Student’s t-test requires the two samples to follow normal distributions and have the
same variances we have run normality and variance ratio tests on all 10 samples. The results from these
tests enable us to run the paired t-test on only the OMX Stockholm and CHI-X samples since at least
one of the two samples for each of the remaining three pairs are distributed significantly differently than
if following a normal distribution. We present the results for the t-tests and sign tests in tables 10 to 11.
Table 10 shows that the average firm BBO coefficient on OMX Stockholm is not significant larger in
the second time period even when applying a significance level of 10%. This is a disappointingly weak
result but at least confirms the sign of our panel regression comparison where Stockholm displayed a
slight improvement. CHI-X on the other hand demonstrates an improvement of the average coefficient
between the two periods, which is significant at all reasonable significance levels.

The sign tests for OMX Stockholm and CHI-X support the results from the t-tests although the test for
OMX Stockholm does not reach significance. We see that BATS has a significantly improved coefficient
whereas the results for Burgundy and Turquoise are too noisy for us to be able to draw any conclusions.
The output is shown in table 11.

                                                                                     35
The overall significant and consistent results from the different types of hypothesis tests seem to support
the fact that price discovery is significantly higher in the first quarter of 2011 than it was in 2010. The
hypothesis test results should however be carefully interpreted for generalization purposes as we have
not weighted the coefficients on basis of volume or any other important metric. Nevertheless, the results
from the significance tests suffice for the purpose of testing whether the results from our panel
regressions are reasonably reliable.

11. Conclusions
The financial landscape has been significantly altered since the implementation of the MiFID. The
intention of the directive is to increase competition and enhance investor protection. This paper aims to
analyze the impact of the MiFID in two ways. The first is to analyze a more fragmented financial
landscape’s effects on liquidity, and the second is to analyze whether investors’ ability to allocate their
orders to venues exhibiting the best quotes has become better over time.

In order to answer whether fragmentation reduces liquidity costs or not we have constructed a number
of regressions that have been run on our sample of stocks which consists of the 29 most traded stocks
on the OMX Stockholm exchange. Our main result is that fragmentation is good for liquidity in the
sense that quoted spreads tend to decrease when fragmentation increases. We also observe a quadratic
effect of fragmentation on the quoted spreads of our sample. This effect is however dominated by the
linear which means that additional fragmentation is always good across all plausible levels of initial
fragmentation. We can therefore not observe an optimal level of fragmentation. By construction the
stocks in our sample has high traded volume. The high volume can be split over separate venues without
completely eroding liquidity from the individual venues’ LBOs. Therefore the negative effects of
fragmentation may not be as strong in our sample as if we had also included stocks with volumes not
sufficiently large to support fragmentation. In our sample the marginal effect of fragmentation may
therefore never reach the breaking point after which it starts harming liquidity, since the general negative
effects are underestimated. We therefore do not state that fragmentation is good for all stocks, but think
it is very likely to observe breaking points in other samples. To add robustness to our results we have
employed numerous regression variations including two instrumental variable setups. These do not
contradict the results from our main regression. For example, substituting our linear and squared
fragmentation terms with the linear and squared market shares of OMX Stockholm support our
findings.

The MiFID’s “Best Execution” protocol states that brokers acting on behalf on their clients are obliged
to execute their trades on the venue with the best quotes, assuming that all other execution criteria are

                                                                                     36
                30
held constant.  Our results show that number of traded shares follows number of shares at BBO to a
much higher extent the first quarter of 2011 than it did the corresponding time period 2010. In particular
this is the case for the MTFs. This indicates that MiFID compliance has become better which could be
the result of market actors becoming more aware of MiFID, better SORT or a combination of the two.
The various hypothesis tests which we have employed, in order to verify that the causal relationship
between BBO volume and traded volume is in deed higher in the second time period than in the first,
all support that the improvement is statistically significant.

Overall, for the aspects of market quality we have studied, we assess that the added competitive
dimensions of trade that the MiFID has introduced have been beneficial for liquidity. Brokers have also
become better at routing their trades to BBOs which is welfare enhancing for the investors acting
indirectly through them.

30
  E.g.execution speed and LBO depth

                                                                                     37
Suggestions for further research
A natural extension to our study would be to include a larger sample of stocks exhibiting larger variation
in characteristics. Since the stocks in our sample all exhibit high trade activity it might have affected our
results. The inclusion of low trade activity stocks is particularly interesting in the Nordic region. This
follows because of Burgundy and its strategy of capturing volume not only on large stocks but also on
micro, small and midcaps. This stands in stark contrast to the high liquidity strategies of the pan-
European MTFs. This has led to the Nordic stock market becoming unique in the sense that
fragmentation has occurred across all stocks. Therefore the Nordic region is very interesting for future
research on the impact of fragmentation on liquidity.

As the implications of MiFID are currently being revised in order to form the basis for further changes
to financial regulations in Europe, the competition between exchanges and its consequences
undoubtedly deserves more academic attention.

The rapid development of SORT and algorithmic software makes the new phenomenon extremely
interesting for deeper investigation as the development might have large implications on stock exchange
liquidity. As the large increase in fill/cancel ratios has lead to exchanges proposing to introduce
minimum times for orders to remain at the market before cancelled, their implications for market quality
aspects need to be verified.

                                                                                     38
Appendix I: Explanation of variables

Pre-trade data
EMSR provides analysis of liquidity and price performance across European trading venues. The
performance analysis is separated into the Best Bid Offer (BBO) view and the spread analytics view. In
this section we will first derive the spread calculations, how and why we use them for our empirical tests.
Then we will explain how cross-market BBOs are computed and what their competitive implications are
for our tests.

Bid-offer spreads
Since EMSR’s performance data is pre-trade data, all spreads are quoted spreads. Spreads are displayed

                                         31
as Volume Weighted Average Spread bps  and Equally Weighted Average Spreads bps. Daily average spreads are
calculated on the price quotes placed during the trading day. The VWAS bps is calculated in 4 steps:

    1.

    2. Volume Weighted Average Bid price

    3. Volume Weighted Average Offer price:

    4.

Similarly, the EWAS bps is calculated as:

    1.

    2.

We initially regarded both VWAS and EWAS as potentially interesting and therefore extracted both
measures. In order to properly consolidate the spreads at a later stage we also needed data on the quoted
volumes and number of quotes. We ensured ourselves of the accuracy of this approach by verifying what
method EMSR applied to consolidate spreads when more than one stock or trading day was selected.

However, it soon became apparent that EWAS was an extremely volatile measure, as low-volume-quotes
were treated equally as high-volume-quotes. The EWAS were for most days in line with VWAS but
could also take on extremely high values, presumably due to low-volume-quotes far away from local

31
  Henceforth referred to as EWAS bps

                                                                                     39
BBO. We did not want these quotes to distort the liquidity measure, and therefore stopped extracting
EWAS and the number of quotes.

Extracting data for 29 stocks and 5 venues within our chosen time period has resulted in 3617
consolidated daily spread observations built from 36378 underlying observations.

Consolidated Volume Weighted Average Spread
As mentioned above, EMSR uses the quoted volumes when it consolidates VWAS, which is why we also
use quoted volumes for consolidation purposes.

For us to obtain the consolidated VWAS we have for each stock taken each venue’s daily quoted volume
divided by that stock’s total quoted volume, and multiplied that ratio with the venue’s VWAS bps. This
provides us venue spreads that are weighted according to how much the venue accounts for of the
stock’s total quoted volume. We then summarize the weighted spreads, which gives us the consolidated

                32
VWAS bps .

Consolidated Absolute Volume Weighted Average Spread
VWAS bps is a relative measure, relating the spread to the corresponding stock price. In order to test for
robustness of the model we also investigate the absolute values of the CVWAS. Therefore we have
constructed a Consolidated Absolute VWAS (CAVWAS) by multiplying the daily CVWAS with the

                                   33
volume weighted average price  of the stock in question.

Winsorization of the CVWAS and CAVWAS
Extreme values add noise to statistical tests and increase the kurtosis of distributions. Conventional
methods to extreme values are to exclude upper and lower percentiles, drop observations with extreme
values altogether or to log values.

These methods are quite easy to apply. But dropping observations or logging values is a waste since the
observation’s effect on the dependent variable then is lost completely, which is very unfortunate since
low or high values are those that are potentially most interesting for the analysis. Winsorization is a
method reducing this problem. The method means that values outside predetermined percentile ranges
are transformed into the value located closest to, but inside, the percentile limit. An additional advantage

32
  Henceforth referred to as CVWAS
33
  VWAP are based on the main venue’s prices for each stock, but we have verified that they do not differ much
between venues

                                                                                     40
of using this method is that we do not have to reduce our dataset, which would have limited its ability to
provide us with statistically significant results.

CAVWAS have not been explicitly winsorized. The variables are based on the already winsorized
CVWAS, and prices proved to be much more stable than quoted spreads with no observations suddenly
taking on extreme values , we did not see the need for additional winsorization of CAVWAS..

The BBO Measure
The second performance analytics view provides various statistics on the market venues’ BBO
performance. At any given time, the venue that displays the best available price, either on bid or offer
side, across all trading venues, is reported to be on consolidated BBO. In the event that two venues
share the same best price the venue with the greatest order volume at that price is reported as BBO. If
volume also would happen to be the same, then the venue with the earliest quote wins. If the same
venue displays the best price both on bid and offer side, it is given double credit in the consolidated MP
statistics. Hence, BBO is a measure of price aggressiveness, with priority given as follows to price,
volume and submission time. A venue can therefore reach BBO either by posting a more aggressive
quote, or by expanding the order’s volume if it’s local BBO is the same as that of the venue at
consolidated BBO.

It is very important for a venue to be at global BBO in order to attract order flow, since investors are
seeking the best prices. EMSR uses three different BBO-related benchmarks:

     Duration at BBO – seconds during the trading day that the venue is on global BBO.
     Frequency at BBO – number of times that the venue goes up to the BBO position
     Volume at BBO – total number of shares bid or offered when the venue is at BBO during the day

For the empirical test concerning BBO and its impact on traded number of shares, we only consider
Volume at BBO as a relevant measure.

Post-trade data
EMSR stores post-trade data from January 2008, which includes data on daily turnover in Euro, number
of traded shares and number of transactions, all on stock level. For our main test we have used post-
trade data to control for traded volume, but have also used it to construct a variable which measures the
degree of the market fragmentation.

The market fragmentation measure
Following the methodology of Degryse, De Jong and Van Kervel, we use traded visible volume defined
as turnover in Euro in order to construct our fragmentation measure. The amounts of traded stocks or
transactions do not include the full extent and magnitude of the transactions and therefore do not

                                                                                     41
convey the entire truth about trade volume evolution. We have therefore extracted turnover on stock
and venue level.

To measure the degree of market fragmentation we have used the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, an
industry concentration measure named after economists Orris Herfindahl and Albert Hirschman. It is
based on the market shares of the venues and its mathematical expression is as follows:

HHI tells us the relation between independent venues’ volumes and the total volume of the market. The
measure has a range from 0 to 1. A value near 0 indicated that there are many small actors on the
market, whereas a value near 1 implies that the market is dominated by one actor.

We have calculated the market share for each venue during that trading day, using the daily turnover. To
simplify the analysis we have defined our market as the aggregated trade volume of BATS, Burgundy,
Chi-X, OMX Stockholm and Turquoise. This restriction has saved as considerable time and will not
distort our results, as these five venues capture over 99% of total turnover. To include other market
venues would have been time-consuming but not likely to alter neither our consolidated spreads nor our
fragmentation measure since their values are extremely low. The market share for an individual venue is
therefore its turnover divided with total turnover for all five. The turnover that we have used is based
only on visible orders. Since EMSR only calculates the spreads on visible quotes, we do not want to
include hidden orders in our fragmentation measure.

Other factors
In this section we discuss variables for which there is strong theoretical and empirical support they need
to be controlled for in order not to risk a biased estimator for the coefficient on fragmentation. To
illustrate why omitting variables from the regression might lead to biased coefficients, we provide the
following example using volume as a potential factor:

Since there is positive correlation between HHI and volume, a high value of HHI indicates that volume
is high as well for that observation. Volume is proven to have a positive impact on the VWAS. If volume
is wrongly left out of the model it would thus seem as if it is the high value of HHI that causes VWAS to
improve, even though volume is the actual source to the improvement. Hence, given positive correlation
between HHI and volume, and between volume and VWAS, the coefficient on HHI becomes
overestimated; i.e. a positive bias occurs. (Wooldridge, 2009)
In order to know whether we risk having a biased coefficient of fragmentation if omitting a variable, we
need to investigate its potential for correlation with HHI and VWAS. For each variable in the regression
we provide possible reasons to correlation in Appendix: Explanation of variables.

                                                                                     42
Size
When the matched sample approach is used in market microstructure studies, and matching is based on
a single characteristic, then standard practice is to match firms according to market capitalization. Across
all research articles we have studied, market capitalization is used as a control variable. Its effect on
liquidity appears to be taken so for granted that researchers never provide any explanations for why they
use it. It is obviously easier to find counterparties for immediate execution when transacting with
securities in a large firm than a small firm.

The correlation between HHI and firm size is rather clear-cut. We have earlier described the MTFs
large-stock-strategies, indicating that fragmentation mostly occurs for high-volume stocks. We have also
described theories suggesting that larger stocks attract more dispersed investors with heterogeneous

                34
preferences , consequently seeking different trading venues.

Traded volume
Although volume is highly correlated with the size variable, many empirical tests employ both trade

                                                                                   35
volume and size as their implications are slightly different.
Pagano has constructed a theoretical model that when the number of traders increases, the mean
fraction held by an investor decreases. The further away that the size of a transaction is from the mean
fraction, the larger is the adverse price impact. Hence, a high number of traders implies a lower elasticity
of the market price to net demand. For any given transaction size, the need to climb down or up the
order book decreases, which keeps the spread tight. (Pagano, 1989) Note that in order to use this model
to explain correlation between volume and VWAS, we assume that a larger turnover is consistent with a
larger number of traders on the market.We expect positive correlation between HHI and volume which
is largely due to the strong correlation between Volume and Size.

 As with HHI, volume is defined as total turnover of lit trades, because only lit orders appear in the bid-
offer spreads.

Stock Price
Price is often controlled for in empirical studies on factors potentially affecting liquidity. Institutional
investors tend to avoid low-priced stocks as they are considered more risky. A low-priced firm could be
a firm with poor recent performance with a corresponding drop in share price, making it questionable
whether the firm will eventually break the downward trend, or it might be that the share price is low
because it is a young firm that has only been on the stock market for short time. The price hence

34
  Different types of traders are e.g. institutional-, retail- and HFT investors
35
  E.g. Degryse et al (2011), Aitken, Cook, Harris and McInish (2006), Jain and Kim (2006)

                                                                                     43
contains some risk dimensions, increasing the risk that limit order investors not having their orders
executed or being “picked-off”.

A high stock price could also increase execution risk, if the stock price is so large that investors refrain
from entering a position, since even a single stock would make it overrepresented in the investor’s
portfolio. The price then does not include the riskiness of a firm, but reduces the number of potential
transaction parties. Hence, the correlation between price and liquidity is not clear-cut but its sign could
differ between ranges.

Correlation between price and HHI is also likely. Firms with high fragmentation tend to be old firms,
whose stock prices have often increased over the years. Although we do not expect prices to have a
strong, straight-forward impact, it fulfills the criterion for why we it may include it in the regression.

High Frequency Trading/Algorithmic Trading

A trend that has gained immense momentum during recent times is the increased prevalence of high
frequency trading, HFT for short. AT/HFT traders today account for a large portion of volume. There
are no clear cut definitions of what exactly is classified as HFT, but it is estimated that over 70 % of the
US stock trading is HFT. (Hendershott, Jones, & Menkveld, 2011)

HFT allows traders to rapidly cancel and submit new quotes, which reduces both execution risk, the
option effect and adverse selection risk. If the market price moves away from a limit order quote and
execution risk increases, the HFT investor can track the market price with a more aggressive order.
Analogously, if the price moves in the other direction and the risk of being picked-off increases, the
quote can be changed to a more defensive level. Often HFT orders are designed to be cancelled if not
filled within a certain time, limiting the option provided to the market. Since limit order investors
experience lower risk through the use of algorithms, they ought to require a smaller premium for
providing liquidity. Theoretically spreads are therefore predicted to narrow as algorithmic trading
increases. Industry experts are concerned that HFT and the consequently high cancel/fill ratios improve

                                                                                  36
pre-trade liquidity measures, but not post-trade measures.

The implications of increased algorithmic trading have been studied empirically, but the results are
mixed. Hendershott et al. (2011) find that the impact on liquidity costs is positive, whereas Degryse et al.
(2011) obtain a statistically significant coefficient of the opposite sign, although of small economical
magnitude. This contradiction implies that the relation between HFT and liquidity might not be as
theory and general beliefs suggest. It might be that the orders changed to more defensive levels widen
the spread more than the orders changed to more aggressive levels narrow the spread. Our proxy for

36
  The concern was shared between panel debate participants at DI Trading Conference

                                                                                     44
                                                                                            37
HFT resembles that used by Degryse, which is the number of electronic messages  divided by traded
volume, whereas our proxy uses the quoted volume divided by traded volume.

Correlation between HFT and HHI is more straight forward to derive since HFT investors by definition
possess advanced tracking technology, which most likely grants them multimarket access too.

OTC Trading
OTC means that investors abandon the exchanges to seek off-exchange transaction opportunities. It
therefore reduces exchange volume which is unarguably bad for liquidity. However, as the number of
traders is largely controlled for through the volume variable, we need to investigate the nature of the
transactions that are executed OTC. Actors prefer OTC as their transactions might adversely impact the
market price. A transaction with adverse price impact is in general a large transaction which needs to
climb several layers in the LBO for complete execution, thus removing much of the liquidity. Since
OTC’s impact on exchange volume is already controlled for through Volume one could expect OTC to
have a positive impact on liquidity, since it is the liquidity removing orders that tend to go OTC.
However, since investors choose between limit or market orders conditional on the probability that
there will be matching market orders, the number of liquidity suppliers is to be reduced as well. The true
relationship between OTC and liquidity is therefore difficult to predict. Degryse (2011) obtains a
statistically significantly negative impact on liquidity. OTC therefore seems to capture liquidity at the
expense of exchanges in a way that is not entirely incorporated in the volume variable. A possible
reason for this apparently strange relationship is that informed traders quickly want to exploit price
inefficiencies and consequently have a large demand for immediacy. Therefore they turn to exchanges,
which means that exchanges have a larger proportion of informed traders than OTC venues do. The
adverse selection risk is therefore larger on exchanges and liquidity premiums hence increase as
disproportionately many uninformed traders seek OTC opportunities.(Riordan, Storkenmaier, &
Wagener, 2010)

There are reasons to expect correlation between OTC and HHI, depending on what type of traders
turning to OTC venues. One possibility is that investors seeking OTC largely are investors with low
search costs relative to the costs of adverse price impact. These investors are often large in size and have
the capacity to invest in SORT, implying a negative relationship since a disproportionately large share of
traders that abandon exchanges in favor of OTC, are those that would have had their order flows
fragmented between trading venues.

37
  Electronic messages are either submit-, cancel- or change an order

                                                                                     45
Relevant factors not included in the regression

Volatility
In previous research we showed the frequent usage of volatility in academic research as a characteristic
in grouping stocks projected to have similar liquidity costs. Empirical research indicates that an increase
in volatility affects liquidity partially through its effect on turnover but also has a direct impact on
liquidity costs. (O'Hara, 1995) An example of its impact on liquidity costs is through its impact on the
option effect. Option value functions include volatility as a key component. As the term option effect
implies, its value depends on the same factors as option values do.

Riordan (2010obtained results indicating that more volatile firms have remained less fragmented after
the introduction of MiFID. This is possibly an effect of its correlation with volume, which correlation
with HHI is easier to derive. Most economic theories point towards negative correlation between
volatility and volume. Higher volatility induces risk-averse traders to reduce their trading in the security,
which limits the number of traders.

The volatility measure used in academic research is however intraday realized volatility. We are unable to
construct this variable due to limited intraday data. We can therefore not construct the variable but at
least capture much of its effect due to its correlation with volume and price.38

Macroeconomic events
Theoretical models predict that these events should increase the adverse selection component of the
spread, since different investors have varying capabilities to interpret news announcements. Increased
risk for limit order investors to meet better informed traders increases their required compensation for
liquidity provision. (Kim & Verrecchia, 1994). There are empirical studies supporting the theoretical
argument, providing evidence for an increase of bid-offer spreads around macroeconomic
announcements. (Green, 2004)

However,the data collection needed to construct the control variable is most likely too time-consuming
relative the variable’s potential to improve the regression model. We therefore do not make an attempt
to control for it. To some extent we include it by controlling for volume, since trading volume tends to
increase when there is new information about a security given dispersed interpretations of the news.

38
  See Appendix: Explanation of variables

                                                                                     46
Appendix II: Trading venues

Stockholm
In 1993 the Swedish Stock Exchange was the first RE ever to become a for-profit limited company. It
merged with Helsinki, Tallinn, Riga, Vilnius, Copenhagen and Iceland stock exchanges before it was
acquired by the US stock exchange group Nasdaq in 2007, currently owning 24 financial markets
worldwide. (Nasdaq OMX acquisitions)

MiFID has had large implications for Stockholm, which pre-MiFID charged the highest direct trading
fees of all major REs globally, despite the inability to offer competitive indirect transaction costs.
(Cherbonnier & Vandelanoite, 2008) As a response to competition Stockholm has lowered transaction
fees with over 40% between 2008 and 2010, and has invested in technology projected to enable further
reductions. (Liedholm, 2010) Fees however remain high comparison to those charged by MTFs.

As an RE Stockholm has the important first mover advantage. Investors without SORT allocate their
orders to Stockholm. It is seen as the natural place for liquidity suppliers and seekers. The enviable
position as the traditional main venue almost automatically asssures it high levels of natural liqudity.
Stockholm does not contract any market makers but applies assymetric maker-taker pricing; both
transaction counterparties are charged but fees are higher for the second counterparty. (NASDAQ
OMX Nordic Cash Market Pricelist) Stockholm also uses call auctions to open and close trading days.

In September 2008 OMX Stockholm launched a London-based MTF, Nasdaq OMX Europe, but had to
close down its operations in May 2010 as competition was too intense (The NASDAQ OMX Group).

Burgundy
14 Nordic investment firms and banks initiated Burgundy in May 2009, as a response to the high fees
charged by Stockholm and concerns that power was to be transitioned away to USA following Nasdaq’s
acquisition of Stockholm. Today Burgundy has around 25 trading participants, although trading is
concentrated with four banks accounting for 60% of total turnover. (Burgundy)

As opposed to a narrow focus on large, liquid stocks which is usually the strategy of low-cost MTFs,
Burgundy has chosen to focus on Nordic stocks regardless of their size. Shares traded at Burgundy are
listed at Stockholm, First North Sweden and Denmark, AktieTorget, Oslo Börs and Oslo Axess, Nasdaq
OMX Helsinki, Nasdaq OMX Copenhagen, NGM Equity. It is possible also for retail investors to trade
on Burgundy through e.g. online brokers. Burgundy applies market making through agreements with
investment firms, to have them offer pre-specified order volumes. Currently Burgundy only offers
market making in selected large cap stocks, but more specific details are confidential.

                                                                                     47
Chi-X
Instinet, an agency broker owned by Japanese Nomura Holdings, initiated the London-based Chi-X
Europe trading platform in March 2007, as soon as MiFID’s regulatory changes were known. Initially it
offered trading in selected German and Dutch stocks, but has expanded its geographic scope so that it
today offers stocks trading in 15 European countries. It entered the Swedish market in March 2008.
(Chi-X Europe)

It has rapidly increased turnover and was in May 2011 the market leader of Europe with 17% of

                                                                                                    39
turnover, despite the strategy to only offer trading in the most liquid European stocks.  Across our 29
stocks it only trails Stockholm with 20% of turnover. Graham Dick, Chi-X, expects further growth as
technology adoption becomes more widespread across investment firms. (Bursell, 2010)

No positive earnings indicators have ever been released by Chi-X. The aggressive business model is
often criticized for not generating profit, but is only used as a mean for the financially strong owners to
scare off competitors from the industry. Jens Henriksson, CEO at Stockholm, believes that the strategy
will prove unsustainable in the long run. (Herin, 2011)

BATS
BATS Europe is the European division of US BATS Global Markets. In Europe it operates an MTF
with both visible and non-displayed liquidity, as well as a Dark Pool with only non-displayed liquidity. It
offers trading on selected high-liquidity stocks in 15 European countries, ETFs, exchange traded
commodities and exchange traded currencies.

BATS applies both market making and an aggressive rebate/charge schedule. Across our sample of
stocks, it reported a market share of 6.5 % in May.

Turquoise
Turquoise was initially founded by a consortium of nine investment banks, and is now owned by twelve
leading investment banks. It operates a MTF with one trading platform for equities and one for
derivatives. The equity platform covers over 2000 securities over 19 countries across Europe and United
States.

Customers are global banks and brokers to institutions with local, regional and sector focus, and
specialist trading and market-making firms. Hence retail investors do not have access.

39
  Currently approximately 1300 stocks

                                                                                     48
Bibliography
Aitken, M. J., Cook, R. M., Harris, F. H., & McInish, T. H. (2007). The role of market makers in electronic
         markets: liquidity providers on Euronext Paris. Unpublished draft.

Aitken, M., Almeida, N., Harris, F. H., & McInish, T. H. (2007 ). Liquidity supply in electronic markets. Journal
        of Financial Markets, (10) pg. 144-168.

Andersson, M., & Holmgren, P. (May 25 2011). Panel discussion - from a screen based trading infrastructure
        to the next generation trading tools. (N. Beattie, Interviewer)

Aronsson, J. (May 25 2011). The puzzle with fragmented market data in the Nordics. (N. Beattie, Interviewer)

BATS. Extracted from BATS Global Markets, May 09 2011: http://www.batstrading.co.uk/features/

Bodie, Z., Kane, A., & Marcus, A. J. (2009). Investments (8th edition). New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.

Burgundy. Extracted from Burgundy corporate webpage, May 09 2011 http://www.burgundy.se/

Bursell, J. (March 18 2010). Nu ska Chi-X erövra Norden. Extracted from E24, May 15 2011:
         http://www.e24.se/business/bank-och-finans/nu-ska-chi-x-erovra-norden_1933595.e24

Chi-X. Extracted from Chi-X corporate webpage, May 09 2011: http://www.chi-xeurope.com

Cohen, K., Maier, S., Schwarts, R., & Whitcomb, D. (1981). Transaction Costs, Order Placement Strategy, and
        Existence of the Bid-Ask spread. Journal of Political Economy 89 (2), pg. 287-305.

Cramer, C. (May 25 2011). Taking the algo Leap - from manual click trading to colo or proximity based
        machine trading. (N. Beattie, Interviewer)

Davies, R. J., & Kim, S. S. (2009). Using matched samples to test for differences in trade execution costs.
        Journal of Financial Markets (12), pg. 173-202.

Degryse, H., Jong, F. D., & Kervel, V. V. (2011). Equity market fragmentation and liquidity: the impact of
       MiFID. 1st ERIC Doctoral Consortium. Stuttgart, Germany: University of Hohenheim.

Demsetz, H. (1968). The Cost of Transacting. Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (1), pg. 33-53.

Foucalt, T., & Menkveld, A. J. (2008). Competition for Order Flow and Smart Order Routing Systems. The
        Journal of Finance 63 (1), pg. 119-158.

Grant, J. (April 28 2010). Nasdaq OMX to close European arm. Financial Times.

Gsell, M., Gomber, P., & Lutat, M. (2011). Competition among electronic markets and market quality.
        Presented on 14th Conference of the Swiss Society for Financial Market Research. Zurich,
        Switzerland: University of Bamberg.

Hendershott, T., Jones, C. M., & Menkveld, A. J. (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve liquidity? The
         Journal of Finance 66 (1), pg. 1-33.

Herin, P. (May 5 2011). En dörröppnare utan börskoll. Veckans Affärer, pg. 36-43.

                                                                                     49
Jeffs, L., & Spicer, J. (February 18 2011). BATS buying Chi-X Europe, challenge national rivals.Extracted from
        Reuters UK, May 27 2011: http://uk.reuters.com/article/2011/02/18/uk-chixeurope-bats-
      idUKTRE71H5K420110218

Liu, W.-M. (2009). Monitoring and limit order submission risks. Journal of Financial Markets 12 (1), pg. 107-
       141.

Moinas, S. (2010). Hidden Limit Orders and Liquidity in Order Driven Markets. IDEI Working Papers (600).

Nasdaq OMX. Extracted from Nasdaq OMX corporate webpage, May 09 2011:
       http://www.nasdaqomx.com/whoweare/quickfacts/acquisitions/

NASDAQ OMX to Close Its Pan-European Equity MTF NASDAQ OMX Europe. Extracted from Nasdaq OMX
        corporate webpage, May 09 2011: http://ir.nasdaqomx.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=464105

O'Hara, M. (1995). Market Microstructure Theory. Blackwell Publishers: Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Pagano, M. (1989). Trading volume and asset liquidity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (2), pg. 255-
       274.

Riordan, R., Storkenmaier, A., & Wagener, M. (2010). Fragmentation, competition and market quality: a
        post-mifid analysis. Presented at the 3rd Erasmus Liquidity Conference. Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Salmon, I. (2010). Dark pools and internal crossing engines. i T. T. News, Accessing fragmented liquidity -
        trading effectively in lit and dark markets. The Trade News.

Sibbern, B. (May 25 2011). Panel discussion- The future for exchanges and trading venues in the Nordic
        countries. (N. Beattie, Interviewer)

Stoll, H. R. (1989). Inferring the Components of the Bid-Ask Spread: Theory and Empirical Tests. The Journal
        of Finance, vol 44, nr 1 , pg. 115-134.

Stoll, H. R. (2003). Market Microstructure. Handbook of the Economics of Finance (ss. 553-604). Editors: G.
        Constantinides, M. Harris, R. M. Stulz . Elsevier.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2009). Introductory Econometrics - a modern approach. Stamford: South-Western,
       Cengage Learning.

                                                                                     50
Appendix III: Tables and graphs

Table 1 – Cross Sectional Consolidated Volume Weighted Average Spreads
Descriptives
The mean is calculated arithmetically by dividing the sum of all daily observations with the number of
days. SD is the standard deviation of the quoted spreads. SD/Mean is a ratio that gives us a comparable
descriptive of the magnitude of standard deviations. Skewness is a measure of asymmetry while kurtosis
gives us an idea on the peakedness of the distribution. All measures are on daily levels.

Firm N Mean SD SD/Mean Skewness Kurtosis Median Min Max
ABB 125 9.001 0.768 0.085 0.773 3.409 8.870 7.750 10.920
Alfa 125 15.047 1.783 0.119 0.510 2.390 14.760 12.300 18.810
Assa 124 13.228 1.941 0.147 0.431 2.184 12.975 10.270 17.100
Astra 125 6.030 0.868 0.144 2.418 9.423 5.800 5.160 9.240
Atlas 125 10.341 1.807 0.175 1.215 4.315 9.960 8.010 15.470
Boliden 125 14.758 3.017 0.204 1.451 4.657 13.930 11.220 23.250
Electrolux 125 12.336 2.001 0.162 0.800 3.001 12.130 9.710 17.200
Ericsson 125 9.003 0.954 0.106 1.055 4.176 8.990 7.650 11.650
Getinge 125 16.477 3.602 0.219 0.768 2.897 15.890 11.700 25.310
Svenska Handelsbanken 124 10.103 1.357 0.134 0.940 3.418 9.840 8.310 13.650
HM 125 7.657 1.159 0.151 1.321 4.391 7.430 6.220 10.840
Investor 125 14.243 2.874 0.202 1.424 4.673 13.610 10.700 22.370
Lundin Petroleum 125 20.359 4.934 0.242 1.143 4.035 19.280 13.140 33.850
MTG 125 19.706 3.260 0.165 0.643 2.793 18.890 14.740 27.260
Nokia 125 12.126 0.987 0.081 0.378 3.014 12.050 10.320 14.450
Nordea 124 12.130 1.701 0.140 0.654 2.976 11.950 9.430 16.120
Sandvik 125 13.130 1.685 0.128 0.630 2.619 12.890 10.670 16.850
SCA 125 13.906 2.418 0.174 -0.322 3.396 13.940 8.350 18.780
Scania 124 13.968 1.762 0.126 0.320 2.427 13.930 11.120 17.690
SEB A 125 11.952 1.207 0.101 0.636 2.507 11.690 10.250 14.570
Securitas 125 15.926 4.036 0.253 1.211 3.996 14.960 11.020 27.140
Skanska 125 14.087 1.930 0.137 0.321 2.802 14.150 10.600 18.440
SKF B 125 10.738 1.519 0.141 0.695 2.874 10.560 8.460 14.270
SSAB 124 13.701 1.684 0.123 -0.002 2.510 13.659 10.540 16.920
Swedbank A 124 12.372 1.939 0.157 0.162 2.020 12.295 15.790 15.960
Swedish Match 124 13.636 2.823 0.207 0.852 3.197 13.005 19.920 20.720
Tele2 125 12.607 2.391 0.190 0.288 2.162 12.520 8.670 17.300
Telia 124 12.445 2.157 0.173 0.034 3.061 11.980 7.620 16.720
Volvo 125 11.909 1.733 0.145 -0.692 3.248 12.140 7.780 14.750
Total 3617 12.860 3.799 0.295 1.072 5.937 12.490 5.160 33.850

                                                                                     51
Table 2 – Cross Sectional HHI Descriptives
The mean is calculated arithmetically by dividing the sum of all daily observations with the number of
days. SD is the standard deviation of the quoted spreads. SD/Mean is a ratio that gives us a comparable
descriptive of the magnitude of standard deviations. Skewness is a measure of asymmetry while kurtosis
gives us an idea on the peakedness of the distribution. All measures are on daily levels. Do note that this
is the raw form of our fragmentation variable where 0 signifies a perfectly fragmented market and 1 a
concentrated market.

Firm Observations Mean SD SD/Mean Skewness Kurtosis Median Min Max
ABB 125 0.310 0.020 0.064 0.732 5.395 0.308 0.266 0.394
Alfa 125 0.471 0.055 0.117 0.304 3.481 0.462 0.328 0.657
Assa 124 0.474 0.053 0.111 0.429 2.566 0.466 0.351 0.602
Astra 125 0.478 0.039 0.083 0.123 3.171 0.482 0.372 0.589
Atlas 125 0.546 0.050 0.091 0.354 3.155 0.541 0.435 0.693
Boliden 125 0.520 0.044 0.085 0.166 2.682 0.519 0.430 0.650
Electrolux 125 0.495 0.043 0.086 0.666 3.698 0.488 0.411 0.655
Ericsson 125 0.469 0.041 0.087 0.664 4.234 0.466 0.379 0.620
Getinge 125 0.525 0.073 0.139 0.117 3.897 0.526 0.321 0.742
Svenska Handelsbanken 124 0.474 0.048 0.101 0.664 3.247 0.470 0.384 0.626
HM 125 0.477 0.046 0.097 0.423 4.343 0.479 0.357 0.658
Investor 125 0.542 0.058 0.106 -0.166 3.089 0.539 0.387 0.681
Lundin Petroleum 125 0.506 0.057 0.112 -0.197 3.277 0.511 0.353 0.664
MTG 125 0.482 0.052 0.109 0.307 2.745 0.481 0.378 0.624
Nordea 124 0.438 0.051 0.115 1.631 9.209 0.434 0.335 0.691
Sandvik 125 0.526 0.054 0.103 0.127 3.223 0.529 0.378 0.648
SCA 125 0.496 0.056 0.113 0.393 3.256 0.492 0.380 0.680
Scania 124 0.461 0.049 0.106 -0.066 2.515 0.467 0.348 0.575
Securitas 125 0.487 0.059 0.122 0.380 3.497 0.484 0.343 0.657
Skanska 125 0.525 0.049 0.094 0.298 2.937 0.518 0.408 0.658
SKF B 125 0.519 0.052 0.101 -0.005 2.609 0.515 0.398 0.654
SSAB 124 0.515 0.052 0.101 0.222 3.072 0.515 0.395 0.646
Swedbank A 124 0.486 0.045 0.092 0.189 2.887 0.485 0.366 0.607
Swedish Match 124 0.487 0.057 0.116 -0.257 2.689 0.494 0.341 0.626
Tele2 125 0.460 0.047 0.102 0.520 3.417 0.456 0.344 0.610
Telia 124 0.437 0.048 0.110 0.351 2.617 0.434 0.341 0.564
Volvo 125 0.474 0.054 0.113 0.212 2.433 0.472 0.369 0.612
SEB A 125 0.496 0.045 0.090 0.184 3.563 0.497 0.378 0.636
Nokia 125 0.383 0.044 0.115 1.916 12.443 0.376 0.299 0.650
Total 3617 0.483 0.069 0.143 -0.244 3.487 0.486 0.266 0.742

                                                                                     52
Table 3 – Cross Sectional Variable Descriptives
                                                                                                             2
Below are the means of the rest of our variables we include in our regression specifications. HHI  is
simply our HHI from above squared. Price is the volume weighted average price of each of the stocks.
LN volume is the natural logarithm of total turnover in €1000s. We only include lit orders since quoted
spreads only exists for lit trade. Algo is our proxy for algorithmic trade and is obtained by dividing
quoted volume with traded volume. LN OTC is the natural logarithm for OTC trade conducted through
BOAT in €1000s. We have excluded the absolute values of CVWAS since they are dependent on stock
prices and therefore not always comparable between stocks.

Firm Observations HHI2 Price LN Volume Algo LN OTC
ABB 125 0.097 149.264 18.561 23.983 17.135
Alfa 125 0.225 131.997 17.047 10.709 15.217
Assa 124 0.227 182.332 17.272 7.561 15.876
Astra 125 0.230 314.178 18.545 7.281 16.801
Atlas 125 0.301 159.843 18.207 7.110 14.001
Boliden 125 0.273 131.767 17.597 6.853 15.161
Electrolux 125 0.247 169.213 17.755 4.644 15.893
Ericsson 125 0.222 77.663 18.526 15.021 17.247
Getinge 125 0.281 150.618 16.510 4.870 13.975
Svenska Handelsbanken 124 0.227 213.934 17.574 7.056 15.805
HM 125 0.229 220.697 18.548 3.749 16.801
Investor 125 0.297 145.356 17.122 8.653 15.436
Lundin Petroleum 125 0.259 79.824 16.607 9.215 14.039
MTG 125 0.235 468.797 16.605 1.983 14.172
Nokia 125 0.149 63.463 18.367 91.969 17.802
Nordea 124 0.194 72.280 18.352 32.436 16.610
Sandvik 125 0.280 121.420 18.056 10.591 16.235
SCA 125 0.249 104.900 17.056 10.835 15.511
Scania 124 0.215 145.686 17.055 6.053 15.305
SEB A 125 0.248 56.049 17.812 26.863 15.764
Securitas 125 0.241 75.684 16.369 10.541 14.258
Skanska 125 0.278 129.041 17.000 8.586 15.021
SKF B 125 0.271 181.429 17.835 4.936 16.097
SSAB 124 0.267 101.820 17.128 8.709 15.042
Swedbank A 124 0.238 101.860 17.935 13.406 16.220
Swedish Match 124 0.240 197.720 16.718 5.020 15.298
Tele2 125 0.214 144.096 17.271 6.232 15.646
Telia 124 0.193 53.472 17.943 46.245 16.300
Volvo 125 0.227 108.306 18.644 6.906 17.094
Total 3617 0.236 146.511 17.587 14.066 15.716

                                                                                     53
Table 4 – Main Regression
The dependent variables (1) and (2) are given by consolidating and averaging the VWAS of all venues.
(1) is the relative basis point term while (2) is the calculated absolute counterpart. The fragmentation
variable is given by subtracting 1 with our HHI concentration index, resulting in a variable that becomes
bigger as the degree of fragmentation increases. LN volume is the natural logarithm of total turnover in
€1000s. We only include lit orders since quoted spreads only exists for lit trade. OTC is a relative term
calculated by summing Dark and Off Exchange volume and then dividing it by total volume. Algo
proxies algorithmic trade by dividing quoted volume with traded volume. LN price is the natural
logarithmic version of the VWAP.

                              CVWAS bps (1) CVWAS Absolute (2)

  Coefficients Base Spec.    Without time      Without      Base       Without time       Without
                        (a)         dummies (b)      Frag2 (c)     Spec. (a)      dummies (b)        Frag2 (c)

      Frag -25.052** -25.581** -4.787*** -0.325** -0.326** -0.049***

                         (-2.850) (-2.860) (-5.180) (-2.760) (-2.750) (-4.230)

     Frag2 20.122** 20.265** N/A 0.2740** 0.2714** N/A

                   (2.340) (2.310) N/A (2.370) (2.340) N/A

   LN Volume -0.981*** -0.866*** -0.971 -0.013*** -0.011*** -0.013***

                          (-9.190) (-8.390) (-9.120) (-9.000) (-8.190) (-8.910)

     OTC 0.165** 0.095 0.172* 0.004 0.002 0.004

                     (1.590) (0.930) (1.640) (2.210) (1.520) (2.240)

      Algo 0.012** 0.011** 0.012** 0.000 0.000 0.000

                        (2.770) (2.670) (2.740) (-0.580) (-0.420) (-0.590)

    LN Price 1.270* 0.076 1.174* 0.141*** 0.135*** 0.139***

                     (1.510) (0.100) (1.400) (14.070) (15.140) (14.000)

    Constant 30.521*** 35.266*** 25.823*** -0.205*** -0.191*** -0.269***

                        (6.320) (7.780) (5.620) (-3.490) (-3.510) (-4.870)

   Number of       3611 3611 3611 3486 3486 3486
  observations

       R2 0.6629 0.6549 0.6622 0.7964 0.7920 0.7959

 Monthly Time      Yes No Yes Yes No Yes
   dummies

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001

                                                                                     54
Table 5 - OMX Stockholm Market Share
The dependent variables (1) and (2) are given by consolidating and averaging the VWAS of all venues.
(1) is the relative basis point term while (2) is the calculated absolute counterpart. The fragmentation
variables are replaced by OMX Stockholm’s market linear and squared market shares. LN volume is the
natural logarithm of total turnover in €1000s. We only include lit orders since quoted spreads only exists
for lit trade. OTC is a relative term calculated by summing Dark and Off Exchange volume and then
dividing it by total volume. Algo proxies algorithmic trade by dividing quoted volume with traded
volume. LN price is the natural logarithmic version of the VWAP.

                                CVWAS bps (1) CVWAS Absolute (2)

   Coefficients Base      Without time      Without      Base      Without time      Without
                      Spec. (a)     dummies (b)     OMXShare2   Spec. (a)     dummies (b)     OMXShare2
                                                                 (c)                                                 (c)

OMX Market share -7.195* -8.324** 3.837*** -0.109** -0.119** 0.035***

                            (-2.620) (-3.100) (4.500) (-2.610) (-3.000) (3.300)

OMX Market share2 9.069*** 10.139*** N/A 0.120*** 0.130** N/A

                      (3.730) (4.230) N/A (3.430) (3.860) N/A

    LN Volume -0.963*** -0.847*** -0.835*** -0.013*** -0.011*** -0.013***

                              (-9.020) (-8.210) (-8.080) (-8.820) (-8.020) (-8.740)

       OTC 0.175** 0.104 0.110 0.004** 0.003** 0.004**

                         (1.680) (1.020) (1.070) (2.270) (1.590) (2.290)

       Algo 0.013** 0.012** 0.010** 0.000 0.000 0.000

                            (2.910) (2.880) (2.560) (-0.380) (-0.140) (-0.580)

     LN Price 1.432** 0.210*** -0.189 0.004** 0.137*** 0.138***

                          (1.670) (0.270) (-0.250) (2.270) (15.070) (13.880)

     Constant 22.667*** 27.569*** 25.866*** -0.297*** -0.280*** -0.316***

                            (4.870) (6.590) (6.060) (-5.470) (-5.690) (-5.790)

    Number of         3611 3611 3611 3486 3486 3486
    observations

        R2 0.6618 0.6537 0.6523 0.7959 0.7915 0.7952

  Monthly Time       Yes No Yes Yes No Yes
    dummies

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001

                                                                                     55
   Table 6 - First Differences
   The dependent variables (1) and (2) are given by consolidating and averaging the VWAS of all venues.
   (1) is the relative basis point term while (2) is the calculated absolute counterpart. The fragmentation
   variable is given by subtracting 1 with our HHI concentration index, resulting in a variable that becomes
   bigger as the degree of fragmentation increases. LN volume is the natural logarithm of total turnover in
   €1000s. We only include lit orders since quoted spreads only exists for lit trade. OTC is a relative term
   calculated by summing Dark and Off Exchange volume and then dividing it by total volume. Algo
   proxies algorithmic trade by dividing quoted volume with traded volume. LN price is the natural
   logarithmic version of the VWAP.

                                  CVWAS bps (1) CVWAS Absolute (2)

    Coefficients Base Spec.    Without time      Without       Base        Without time        Without
                            (a)         dummies (b)      Frag2 (c)     Spec. (a)       dummies (b)         Frag2 (c)

         Frag -36.770*** -38.352*** -4.896*** -0.520*** -0.530*** -0.048***

                                 (-3.230) (-3.320) (-4.51) (-3.420) (-3.460) (-3.390)

       Frag2 31.600** 32.350** N/A 0.468*** 0.470*** N/A

                        (2.850) (2.870) N/A (3.150) (3.150) N/A

First Difference Frag 14.373 15.599 0.096 0.248** 0.258** -0.003

                             (1.490) (1.610) (0.110) (1.960) (2.030) (-0.230)

First Difference Frag2 -14.137 -14.735 N/A -0.249** -0.252** N/A

                             (-1.520) (-1.570) N/A (-2.030) (-2.050) N/A

     LN Volume -0.986*** -0.869*** -0.972*** -0.0130*** -0.011*** -0.130***

                                 (-9.210) (-8.390) (-9.090) (-9.040) (-8.210) (-8.880)

       OTC 0.168 0.098 0.174 0.004** 0.002 0.004**

                           (1.600) (0.950) (1.660) (2.210) (1.540) (2.270)

        Algo 0.012** 0.011** 0.012** 0.000 0.000 0.000

                               (2.800) (2.730) (2.670) (-0.450) (-0.300) (-0.610)

      LN Price 1.214 0.051 1.074 0.140*** 0.135*** 0.138***

                           (1.430) (0.070) (1.270) (13.830) (14.950) (13.680)

      Constant 33.825*** 38.757*** 26.380*** -0.152 -0.138** -0.262***

                              (6.510) (7.890) (5.650) (0.017) (-2.310) (-4.670)

     Number of           3582 3582 3582 3458 3458 3458
    observations

         R2 0.6634 0.6556 0.6623 0.7964 0.792 0.7956

   Monthly Time Yes No Yes Yes No Yes

                                                                                        56
  dummies

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001

Table 7 – Instrumental Variables Approach 1: Lagged Frag and Frag2
The dependent variables (1) and (2) are given by consolidating and averaging the VWAS of all venues.
(1) is the relative basis point term while (2) is the calculated absolute counterpart. The fragmentation
variable is given by subtracting 1 with our HHI concentration index, resulting in a variable that becomes
bigger as the degree of fragmentation increases. LN volume is the natural logarithm of total turnover in
€1000s. We only include lit orders since quoted spreads only exists for lit trade. OTC is a relative term
calculated by summing Dark and Off Exchange volume and then dividing it by total volume. Algo
proxies algorithmic trade by dividing quoted volume with traded volume. LN price is the natural

                                                       2
logarithmic version of the VWAP. Frag and Frag are instrumented with their lagged counterparts
        and in order to control for daily shocks.

                              CVWAS bps (1) CVWAS Absolute (2)

  Coefficients Base Spec    Without time       Without       Base       Without time       Without
                       (a)         dummies (b)       Frag2 (c)     Spec (a)      dummies (b)        Frag2 (c)

      Frag -88.076* -93.849** -7.632** -1.381** -1.419** -.041

                          (-1.950) (-2.070) (-2.470) (-2.310) (-2.390) (-0.980)

     Frag2 81.810* 85.135* N/A 1.322** 1.337** N/A

                   (1.880) (1.940) N/A (2.300) (2.330) N/A

   LN Volume -1.021*** -0.929*** -0.888*** -.013*** -.012*** -.013***

                          (-8.350) (-7.890) (-8.030) (-8.180) (-7.670) (-8.300)

     OTC 0.147 0.072 0.102 0.003** 0.002 0.004**

                     (1.390) (0.680) (0.980) (1.990) (1.270) (2.290)

      Algo 0.012** 0.012** 0.011** 0.000 0.000 0.000

                        (2.730) (2.890) (2.670) (-0.450) (-0.040) (-0.660)

    LN Price 1.463* 0.376 -0.017 0.145*** 0.139*** 0.138***

                      (1.670) (0.460) (-0.020) (13.610) (14.370) (13.790)

    Constant 45.921*** 51.815*** 32.160*** -0.041 -0.017 -0.353***

                        (3.850) (4.440) (7.100) (-0.260) (-0.110) (-4.870)

   Number of       3582 3582 3582 3458 3458 3458
  observations

      R2 0.6564 0.6464 0.6534 0.7888 0.7838 0.7955

                                                                                     57
 Time dummies Yes No Yes No Yes

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001

Table 8 – Instrumental Variables Approach 2: Venue Average Order Size
The dependent variables (1) and (2) are given by consolidating and averaging the VWAS of all venues.
(1) is the relative basis point term while (2) is the calculated absolute counterpart. The fragmentation
variable is given by subtracting 1 with our HHI concentration index, resulting in a variable that becomes
bigger as the degree of fragmentation increases. LN volume is the natural logarithm of total turnover in
€1000s. We only include lit orders since quoted spreads only exists for lit trade. OTC is a relative term
calculated by summing Dark and Off Exchange volume and then dividing it by total volume. Algo
proxies algorithmic trade by dividing quoted volume with traded volume. LN price is the natural

                                                       2
logarithmic version of the VWAP. Frag and Frag are instrumented with the logarithms of each venue’s
average order size in order to control for self-selection bias.

                                CVWAS bps (1) CVWAS Absolute (2)

  Coefficients Base       Without time       Without      Base       Without time       Without
                    Spec. (a)      dummies (b)       Frag2 (c)     Spec. (a)      dummies (b)       Frag2 (c)

      Frag 142.892 209.185** -2.527* 1.557 2.851 -0.017

                       (1.600) (2.050) (-1.650) (1.560) (0.017) (-0.890)

     Frag2 -143.441 -208.354** N/A -1.554 -2.823 N/A

                      (-1.630) (-2.080) N/A (-1.580) (0.016) N/A

   LN Volume -0.848*** -0.692*** -0.826*** -0.011*** -0.009*** -0.011***

                          (-6.830) (-5.460) (-7.860) (-7.020) (-5.340) (-7.710)

     OTC 0.226* 0.181 0.106 0.004 0.004 0.003

                     (1.800) (1.310) (1.040) (2.380) (1.790) (1.630)

      Algo 0.010’’ 0.007 0.010 0.000 -0.000 0.000

                        (2.110) (1.370) (2.470) (-0.840) (-1.130) (-0.710)

    LN Price 0.443 -1.113 -0.075 0.130*** 0.117*** 0.132***

                        (0.440) (-1.090) (-0.100) (10.720) (9.280) (14.840)

    Constant -4.821 -13.890 35.155*** -0.749 -0.1036 -0.363

                         (0.821) (-0.580) (6.830) (-3.120) (-3.710) (-6.260)

   Number of       3593 3593 3593 3468 3468 3468
  observations

      R2 0.6154 0.5635 0.6511 0.7753 0.731 0.791

 Time dummies Yes No Yes Yes No Yes

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001

                                                                                     58
Table 9 – BBOs and Price Discovery
The dependent variable Traded Volume Market Share is given by the aggregated market share of traded
stocks minus those sold in auctions a venue has. The BBO Volume coefficient is the aggregated market
share a venue has on the consolidated BBO.

                                             Traded Volume Market Share

Coefficients Stockholm Period 1 CHI-X Period 1 Burgundy Period 1 BATS Period 1 Turquoise Period 1

BBO Volume 0.184*** 0.023*** 0.080*** 0.019*** 0.065***

                      (8.300) (14.950) (16.630) (6.240) (6.230)

  Constant 0.418*** 0.093*** 0.022*** 0.030*** 0.029***

                      (26.110) (73.370) (25.880) (63.740) (58.330)

     N 1710 1710 1710 1710 1710

     R2 0.815 0.335 0.292 0.285 0.272

 Coefficients Stockholm Period 2 CHI-X Period 2 Burgundy Period 2 BATS Period 2 Turquoise Period 2

BBO Volume 0.223*** 0.189*** 0.185*** 0.314*** 0.173***

                      (7.000) (13.040) (8.070) (14.180) (4.980)

  Constant 0.327*** 0.108*** 0.041*** 0.039*** 0.024***

                      (15.020) (46.040) (29.540) (67.230) (50.370)

     N 1736 1736 1736 1736 1736

     R2 0.746 0.465 0.409 0.365 0.448

*p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.001

                                                                                     59
Table 10 – Student’s t-tests on coefficient mean differences for OMX Stockholm
and Chi-X
The t-tests are constructed by subtracting period 2 (Q1 2011) with period 1 (Q1 2010) values. The test-
statistics are therefore negative when coefficients on average are larger in the second period and vice
versa.

Paired t test Stockholm Observations Mean Std. Dev.

Period 1 29 16.41 % 21.49 %

Period 2 29 24.52 % 17.24 %

Diff 29 -7.78 % 32.27 %

Degrees of freedom 28

t-value: -1.2979 P-Value: 0.1024

Ha: mean(diff) < 0

Paired t test CHI-X Observations Mean Std. Dev.

Period 1 29 6.64 % 8.01 %

Period 2 29 21.60 % 12.20 %

Diff 29 -14.97 % 11.78 %

Degrees of freedom 28

t-value: -6.8403 P-Value: 0***

Ha: mean(diff) < 0

                                                                                     60
Table 11 – Sign Tests on coefficient mean differences
The sign tests are constructed by subtracting period 2 (Q1 2011) with period 1 (Q1 2010) values. The
following tests are all one-tailed towards the left-tail.

Sign test Stockholm OMX Observed Expected

Negative 18 14.5

One Sided Test Pr(Number of negative>=11)=Binomial(n=29,x>=18, p=0.5)

Ho: median of period1 - period2 = 0
                                                              P-value = 0.1325
Ha: median of period1 - period2 < 0

Sign test CHI-X Observed Expected

Negative 27 14.5

One Sided Test Pr(Number of negative >=28)=Binomial(n=29,x>=27, p=0.5)

Ho: median of period1 - period2 = 0
                                                               P-value = 0***
Ha: median of period1 - period2 < 0

Sign test Burgundy Observed Expected

Negative 13 14.5

One Sided Test Pr(Number of negative >=14)=Binomial(n=29,x>=13, p=0.5)

Ho: median of period1 - period2 = 0
                                                              P-value = 0.7709
Ha: median of period1 - period2 < 0

Sign test BATS Observed Expected

Negative 24 14.5

One Sided Test Pr(Number of negative >=25)=Binomial(n=29,x>=24, p=0.5)

Ho: median of period1 - period2 = 0
                                                             P-value = 0.0003***
Ha: median of period1 - period2 < 0

Sign test Turquoise Observed Expected

Negative 17 14.5

One Sided Test Pr(Number of negative >=18)=Binomial(n=29,x>=17, p=0.5)

Ho: median of period1 - period2 = 0
                                                              P-value = 0.2291
Ha: median of period1 - period2 < 0

                                                                                     61
Graphs and illustrations

Figure 1 – Market share development for OMX Stockholm constituents
The graph displays market shares for the different venues on stocks listed at Stockholm OMX. Other
REs except Stockholm OMX have been removed so that the breakdown only includes Stockholm OMX
in relation to MTFs. This is done due to stocks having dual listings. Other Res are not considered to
compete with Stockholm since they do employ the strategy of offering trading on stocks that are not
listed on their exchanges, which is what the MTFs do.

Figure 2 - Market share development of regulated exchanges
The graph displays market shares for the main venues on four European indices. As in figure 1 we
removed other REs except the traditional RE for every index when we calculated the market share, in
order to display the market shares that are lost due to competition from MTFs.

                                                                                     62
Figure 3 - The relationship between CVWAS and Fragmentation
Below is a scatter plot diagram showing us the aggregate relationship between the degree of
fragmentation and quoted spreads. Our inverted fragmentation variable is on the x-axis and quoted
spreads on the y-axis. The trend-line tells us that the degree of fragmentation has a negative size impact
on quoted spreads.

Figure 4 - The relationship between CVWAS and Turnover
Below is a scatter plot diagram showing us the aggregate relationship between the logged trade turnover
in €1000 and quoted spreads. Our volume variable is on the x-axis and quoted spreads on the y-axis. The
trend-line clearly shows us that trade activity has a negative size impact on quoted spreads.

                                                                                     63
Figure 5 - Histogram of the CVWAS
The graph shows us the distribution of our consolidated quoted spreads in basis points.

Figure 6 - Histogram of the Inverted HHI
The histogram shows us the distribution of our Inverted HHI variable.

                                                                                     64