   Commodities To Solve For The Swedish
            Pension Fund Decit

                                                             ∗
             Viktor Fredriksson and Ramil Hakim

                       Bachelor Thesis
               Stockholm School of Economics
                   Department of Finance
                      Tutor: Paolo Sodini

                       May 11, 2012

                             Abstract
          Currently there is a decit in the unfunded Swedish pension system
      that according to forecast will remain for a steady future. The Swedish
      pension (AP) funds act as buer funds and thereby have the mission of
      covering this decit. Therefore, it is crucial that the targets of the AP
      funds are met. Currently that is not the case. Our conjecture states
       that one of the limiting factors for achieving their targets is the current
      AP fund regulation, which prohibits investments in commodities. By
      analyzing the eects of adding commodities to the portfolio, our goal is
      to conclude if this, in retrospect, would have been advantageous, and if
      this will be benecial for the future. An AP portfolio was synthetically
      replicated, followed by a exible model, which enabled the simulation
      of new AP portfolios including commodity exposure. All commodity
      indices added in this study proved to increase return and lower the
      risk in the AP portfolio. Our conclusion is that, in order to make it
      possible for the AP funds to fulll their goals, the regulation should
      be changed to allow for commodity investing.
     Keywords: Commodities, Swedish AP Funds, Regulation, Portfolio
      Simulation

   ∗
    Correspondence to: Viktor Fredriksson (Stockholm School of Economics)
22014@student.hhs.se. Ramil Hakim (Stockholm School of Economics) 22018@stu-
dent.hhs.se

                                 1
1 Acknowledgements

We are grateful to our tutor Paolo Sodini (Associate Professor, Department
of Finance SSE), Kathryn M. Kaminski PhD (CIO, Alpha K Capital; Visiting
Lecturer at SSE and MIT)), Gustaf Hagerud PhD (Vice President at AP3),
Torbjörn Iwarson (Head of Commodities at SEB), Håkan Lyckeborg (Lec-
turer from the Department of Economic Statistics at SSE), Kamil Hakim
(M.sc. Computer Engineering) and Dylan Ceynowa for their valuable in-
sights.

                                 2
Contents

1 Acknowledgements 2

2 Introduction 5
   2.1 Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
         2.1.1 Commodities as an Asset Class . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
         2.1.2 Commodities in Fund Portfolios . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
         2.1.3 Thesis Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

3 Background 9
   3.1 Investments in Commodities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         3.1.1 Commodities: Denition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         3.1.2 Investment Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         3.1.3 Exchanges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.2 Background Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.3 Swedish Pension Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
         3.3.1 Denition and Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
         3.3.2 Regulation of Investment Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

4 Methodology 18
   4.1 Data Collecting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   4.2 Data Analyzing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
         4.2.1 Currency Conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
         4.2.2 Performance Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
         4.2.3 Portfolio Replication and Simulation . . . . . . . . . . 20
         4.2.4 Portfolio Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   4.3 Portfolio Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   4.4 Extreme Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

5 Results 28
   5.1 Monthly Performance 5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   5.2 Monthly Performance 15% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   5.3 Yearly Performance 5% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   5.4 Yearly Performance 15% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   5.5 Portfolio Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   5.6 Extreme Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
   5.7 Results Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

6 Conclusions 41

7 Ethics and CSR 42

                                 3
8 Problematization & Future Research 44

9 References 46

                                 4
2 Introduction

The Swedish AP funds have been struggling to reach their targets (KPI +4 %
                   1
returns per year)  since inception, without success. The performance target
is set to cover the decit in the pension system and it is therefore crucial to
                                                                                          2
accomplish. Over 850 billion SEK is currently managed by the AP funds ,
which should be invested in the most ecient way in order to maximize the
well fare for the Swedish population. inecient use of the hard worked labor
capital eciently is not only irresponsible, but also equal to destroying the
well fare for the retirees. The expectations of people that have worked hard
and are looking forward to a certain amount of living standards in their
well-deserved retirement should be met.
   Portfolio theory aims to maximize returns and minimize risk, in other
words, to hold the most eciently diversied portfolio. Not allowing the pen-
                                                                       3
sion funds to invest in all assets classes reduces diversication.  Currently
                                                                        4
Swedish pension funds are not allowed to invest in commodities.  This im-
plies that their returns might not be optimized at their given volatility level.
                                                                                          5
Commodity trading markets today are highly liquid and highly developed ,
and should therefore be a great candidate for diversication.

    This thesis aims to investigate whether integrating commodities in Swedish
                              6
government owned pension  fund portfolios would have been benecial for
their performance.

    Integrating commodities into portfolios is a highly discussed topic within
nancial markets worldwide. Leading international nancial magazines, such
                              7                    8              9
as The Wall Street Journal , Financial Times and Reuters have been cover-

   1
    Annual report AP2 fund
   2
    Annual report AP1-AP6
   3
    Schneeweis, T Karavas, V Georgiev, G. (2002). p2f.
   4
    Regulated in:The National Pension Insurance Funds (AP Funds) act (SFS 2000:192),
Section 12
   5
    You, Leyuan Daigler, R.T (2010)
   6
    There are 6 dierent buer funds within the Swedish pension system. The rst to
fourth AP funds are investing heavily in equities and bonds. AP5 was merged with the
rst four during 2001. The AP6 fund is specialized in private equity. The thesis is only
replicating the rst four AP funds since they manage the major part of the capital and
are identical regarding their investment objectives.
   7
    The Wall Street Journal (2011)
   8
    Financial Times (2010)
   9
    Reuters (2010)

                                 5
ing the subject. Easing the restrictions of the investment regulations, thereby
allowing commodities in pension fund portfolios, is an ongoing debate in Swe-
     10
den.   Mexico, for instance, recently allowed commodity investing in their
pension funds, which was a result of the ongoing debate. Due to the recent
discussions, the Swedish government has currently launched an investigation
of the AP funds investment rules, amongst others, the inquiry of allowing
commodity investments. This investigation is to be presented in September
      11
2012.

2.1 Literature Review
Previous research within the elds of commodity investing is wide spread.
The benets of commodities in comparison to traditional asset classes have
been covered and demonstrated in several nancial papers and essays.
   Due to the nature of commodities the correlation to traditional asset
classes is low, and therefore makes it a suitable candidate for diversication
              12
in portfolios.   For the individual investor, investing in commodities is con-
                                            13
sidered to be associated with high risk.   However, this is not the case for
an investor holding an already well diversied portfolio, such as a pension
      14
fund.

2.1.1 Commodities as an Asset Class
Since commodities are real asset, they provide a better hedge against unan-
ticipated ination, since real assets prices are strongly correlated with the
ination rate. Traditional asset classes, such as equities and bonds are nom-
inal assets since they generate xed income streams and are not xed in
                                         15
supply in opposite to real assets.

  10
    Dagens Industri (2012)
  11
    Investigation of AP-funds regulation (Original title in Swedish: Översyn av AP-
fondernas regelverk), Dir 2011:84. Ministry of Finance, Sweden
  12
    The negative correlations contribute to the lowered standard deviation, i.e. increased
diversication which can be observed in the portfolio variance formula:

                          2     2  2           2  2
                   σ = ω σ1 + (1 − ω) σ2 + 2ω(1 − ω)ρσ1σ2

Low or negative correlation lowers the value of the variance and thereby increases diver-
sication.
  13
    Risk is dened as the volatility in returns, measured by the standard deviation, which is
commonly used within the nancial industry. A denition is provided in the methodology.
The risk partly stems from the diculty to invest for individual investors.
  14
    Ankrim, E./Hensel, C. (1993): p. 22
  15
    Greer, R. J. (2005): p. 24

                                 6
   Negative correlation between commodities and traditional asset classes
is according to Gorton and Rouwenhorst due to dierent behavior in the
                 16
business cycles.   When markets plummet, investors tend to see commodities
as a safe haven. This leads to a negative correlation in bearish markets,
providing a diversication benet. However, evidence show that this might
                                           17
not be true for short periods of time.    For example this was seen during
the recent nancial crisis during 2008 when we were not only experiencing
systematic risk but also systemic risk.
   Also worth noting is that, as for all assets, the mentioned benets pro-
vided above varies over time. Erb and Harvey showed this in a study in 2005,
were they could see that commodities measured during the time period from
1969 to May 2004 has higher return and lower volatility than S&P500 while
                                                                    18
the opposite is true for the time period from 1975-2005.

2.1.2 Commodities in Fund Portfolios
Satyanarayan and Varangis, two World Bank researchers, contributed to the
debate in 1994 by showing that the ecient frontier of a portfolio including
                                                                    19
commodities always exceeds a portfolio without commodities.    The shift in
the ecient frontier is likely to occur from the fact that commodities provide
a hedge against ination and have a negative correlation to traditional asset
classes, as discussed above. This further enhances the result showing the
benets of having commodities in a portfolio.
                                                                                   20
   One of the largest pension funds in Europe, the Dutch PGGM  , con-
ducted an internal study in 2005 about investing in commodities. They
reached the conclusion that including commodities into their current portfo-
lio could increase return and at the same time decrease the overall volatility
                      21
of their portfolio.

  16
    Gorton G./Rouwenhorst G. (2005): pp. 12.
  17
    Lummer, S.L./Siegel, L.B. (1993): pp. 75. Gorton G./Rouwenhorst G. (2005): pp.
12.
  18
    Erb, C.B./Harvey, C.R. (2005): p. 2
  19
    Satyanarayan, S./Varangis, P. (1994): p. 19
  20
   http://www.watsonwyatt.com/europe/pubs/gim/render2.asp?id=15491
  21
    Beenen J (2005): pp 18.

                                 7
Figure 1: Ecient frontier improvement when including GSCI (Source:
Satyanarayan, S./Varangis, P. (1994): p.19)

2.1.3 Thesis Contribution
As claried by earlier studies there is a strong case for integrating commodi-
ties into diversied portfolios. This thesis contributes to the research eld by
showing how a Swedish AP funds portfolio performance could have looked
like, if they would have been allowed to invest in commodities. The the-
sis rst investigates the general eect of integrating a couple of commodity
indices. It will then go deeper into nding the optimal combination of the
chosen commodity indices and the original AP portfolio. As well as look into
an extreme case scenario. Even though this study is limited to Sweden and
the time between 2000 and 2012, this thesis aims to act as a guideline for
future investment decisions.

                                 8
3 Background

3.1 Investments in Commodities
3.1.1 Commodities: Denition
In the narrow sense commodities are dened as non-nancial assets, such as
biological resources and natural elements. These are generally divided into
hard and soft commodities. Were biological resources are dened as soft
commodities and include agriculture and livestock. The hard commodities
include precious metals, industrial metals and energy.
   Furthermore, there are also semi-nished goods that are classied as com-
modities, for example electricity, orange juice and steel. Additionally, there
are also so called negative commodities such as emissions which limits the
usage and production of other commodities (e.g. emission credits). In recent
years, modern commodities have emerged due to technical innovations, such
                                                                    22 23
as bandwidth which is usually referred to as a commodity.

3.1.2 Investment Vehicles
There are many ways to gain exposure to commodities. Below the most
commonly used investment vehicles are dened.

Investing in the Physical Commodity Taking a long position in the as-
      set directly (e.g. buying gold). This is usually inecient since it gener-
      ally requires high storage and maintenance cost. The nancial industry
                                                      24
      rarely trades the physical commodities.

Commodity-Linked Equity is when the investor takes a position in a
      company which has its core business in a certain commodity (e.g. oil
                                        25
      renery or a mining company).   However, this is generally not an e-
      cient investment to gain exposure to commodities, since the companies
      usually hedge a great ratio of their own commodity exposures. There-
      fore, equity linked commodities might have a low or negative correlation
     to commodity prices. Even if the commodity related company does not
     hedge their commodity exposure the equity might not reect the per-
                                                                                     26
     formance of the underlying commodity due to management risk.

  22
    Demidova-Menzel, N./Heidron, T (2007): pp. 5f.
  23
    The reader should be aware that there is not really a clear denition of commodities.
However, the denition provided above is generally accepted within the nancial industry.
  24
    Pulvermacher, K. (2005a): p. 6
  25
    Gorton, G./Rouwenhoorst, K.G. (2004): pp. 26f.; Pulvermacher, K. (2005a): p. 6
  26
    CISDM (2005): pp. 17f.

                                 9
Financial Derivatives with Commodities as the Underlying Asset
      Forwards and futures are contracts that make it possible for the investor
     to gain exposure to commodities by agreeing on certain amounts and
      prices today. Futures are exchange traded derivatives, while forwards
      are generally traded over-the-counter (i.e. not exchange traded).

Commodity Linked Notes A commodity linked note is by denition a
      strip (zero-coupon) bond together with an option in an underlying com-
      modity. This type of investment vehicle is a safer way of investing in
      a commodity since the strip bond acts as insurance, since the investor
      still has the bonds value even if the commodity fails to reach the strike
      price. In the event that the option becomes in-the-money the investor
      also earns the premium between the strike price in the linked option
      and the actual price of the commodity. Also worth noting is that the
      maturity of the option and the strip bond has to be exactly the same.
      This type of investment limits the downside risk, but still provides
     exposure to commodities.

Commodity Swap The most common commodity swaps are total return
      swaps. Were the investor pays a xed fee that consists of the risk-free
      rate plus a premium in return, for the return, of a single commodity or a
     basket of commodities. The benets of using a swap to get commodity
      exposure is mainly because of the zero tracking error that follows from
      this instrument, since the counterparties pays the actual total returns.
     This type of instrument is traded OTC.

Futures Commission Merchant (FCM) An investor with an FCM ac-
      count has the power to invest directly in options, futures contracts and
      other derivatives through a commodity exchange. This type of invest-
      ment vehicle is one of the most direct ways of investing in commodities.
      However, this method is only suitable for sophisticated investors with
      knowledge of the industry.

Commodity Trading Advisors (CTA) Since it can be dicult to invest
      in commodity contracts as an individual, a licensed manager can take
      exposure in future contracts for a client's account. The CTA licensing is
      a thorough process involving several government authorities approvals
      in order to verify that the person is suitable for commodity investments
      on behalf of clients. CTAs can take exposure in any type of future for
      a client, but the original purpose was for investments in commodities
     and therefore the name.

                                10
Commodity Pool Operator (CPO) Analogous to the CTA, the CPO is
      responsible for investing on behalf of a client in the commodity futures
     market. However, the CPO can pool the assets in one account and
      invest the entire masse. By pooling the assets, the CPO has increased
      purchasing power and increased ability to use leverage.

Master Limited Partners (MLP) MLPs are private partnerships that
      are traded on public exchanges, focusing on energy infrastructure. The
      fact that it is a partnership implies that they only pay tax on an individ-
      ual level, and therefore avoid any corporate tax. The other advantage
      is that it delivers all of its cash ows directly to the shareholders, which
      yields a higher return for the investor.

Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) This type of investment vehicle is easy
      to use for investors since the funds are privately run and traded on pub-
     lic exchanges. The ETF tracks individual commodities or commodity
      indices.

Commodity Mutual Funds Mutual funds aim at tracking the performance
     of commodity indices or companies dealing with commodities. Com-
      modity mutual funds are suitable for traditional investors who are used
      to investing in for example equity mutual funds but want exposure to
     commodities.

Commodity Indices Commodity indices have the same goal as traditional
      equity indices, i.e. to track commodities for benchmarking and in-
      vesting purposes. Financial institutions construct and provide the in-
      dices. The index construction methodology is dierent depending on
      the nancial institution and index. An investor can access the indices
                                                               27
      through ETFs or through the futures market.

3.1.3 Exchanges
Commodity exchanges provide a liquid market for commodity trading. CME
group is the leading operator of commodity derivative exchanges. It was
formed during the 2007 merger when the Chicago Mercantile Exchange merged
with Chicago Board of Trade and formed the largest futures and deriva-
tives exchange in the world. They currently own and operate four of the
leading commodity exchanges; NYMEX (New York Mercantile Exchange),
CBOT (Chicago Board of Trade), CME (Chicago Mercantile Exchange) and

  27
    CME Group Educational Resources, Glossary

                                11
                                           28
COMEX (Commodity Exchange, Inc).   The benet from the usage of ex-
change traded contracts is amongst others increased liquidity and reduction
in counterparty risk in comparison to over-the-counter contracts.

3.2 Background Study
To complement previous research ndings presented in the introduction part,
we have conducted a background study. This aims to describe commodities
as an asset class in relation to traditional asset classes over the time period
that is going to be used in the portfolio replication.

 Background Study
  Index Monthly Yearly Monthly Yearly Monthly Yearly
                                Return Return St.Dev St.Dev Sharpe Ratio Sharpe Ratio
  Merrill Lynch Government Bonds 0,56% 6,8% 2,1% 7,0% 0,263 0,968
  MSCI Sweden (SEK) 0,12% 2,9% 6,9% 29,9% 0,016 0,093
  MSCI World -0,01% 0,8% 4,9% 21,6% -0,003 0,035
  S&P500 0,04% 0,6% 4,7% 19,1% 0,007 0,025
  Bloomberg Europe Real Estate 0,09% 7,4% 7,9% 39,7% 0,011 0,184
  S&PGSCI Commodities 0,61% 8,8% 7,1% 28,1% 0,084 0,311
  DJUBS Commodities 0,59% 8,1% 5,1% 20,8% 0,113 0,388
  MLM Commodities LongNeutral 0,75% 9,6% 3,2% 12,4% 0,229 0,772
Table 1: Performance measures for indices representing dierent asset classes
(Data source: Bloomberg).

Figure 2: Performance measures for indices representing dierent asset
classes. (Data source: Bloomberg)

   On a monthly basis, commodities as an asset class (represented by three
commodity indices) have the highest return. The best performing commodity

  28
    CME (2005): p.10

                                12
index had an average return of 0,75% (MLM) per month in comparison to for
example the equity indices ranging between -0,01% and 0,12%. Real estate
had a performance similar to equities, while the bond market performed
second to best with a return of 0,56% on average per month. On a yearly level,
the trend in performance amongst the asset classes is the same. However,
real estate had a return close to bonds and commodities on a yearly basis.
   Regarding the standard deviation, commodities had a higher risk than
bonds, but a similar risk as equities, with slight variations depending on the
index. Comparing for example the best commodity index (MLM) with a low
risk at 3,2%, to the least volatile equity index at 4,7 % (S&P500) it is clear
that the commodity index has been a safer investment. The dierence is also
noticeable regarding the returns at 0,75% (MLM) to 0,04% (S&P 500) on a
monthly basis.
   The risk adjusted return, measured by the Sharpe ratio, shows that bonds
had by far the highest Sharpe ratio, both on a monthly and yearly basis.
However the turbulent nancial markets during the end of the last decade
have probably contributed to the high Sharpe ratio. This is probably related
to the risky environment during this time period where investors were looking
for safe havens. However, the three commodity indices outperformed real
estate and equities on a Sharpe ratio basis.
   The background study conrms that commodities indeed have higher
risk-adjusted return in comparison to traditional asset classes during the
time period. As earlier mentioned, this is of course heavily dependent on the
time period. Therefore, the result does not have to be true for another time
period. However, the purpose with this study is not to show that commodities
are a superior asset class, but rather to show the diversication eect when
included in a portfolio. However, it is important for the reader to know how
the asset classes have performed over the time period. The positive eects
of diversication eect is more consistent over time.

  Correlation Matrix
 Correlation Matrix Government Bonds MSCI Sweden MSCI World S&P500 Real Estate S&PGSCI DJUBS MLM LN
 Merrill Lynch Government Bonds 1,00
 MSCI Sweden (SEK) 0,18 1,00
 MSCI World 0,22 0,87 1,00
 SP&P500 -0,03 0,86 0,95 1,00
 Bloomberg Europe Real Estate -0,17 0,42 0,66 0,65 1,00
 S&PGSCI Commodities 0,40 0,23 0,59 0,43 0,52 1,00
 DJUBS Commodities 0,71 0,33 0,62 0,39 0,42 0,90 1,00
 MLM Commodities LongNeutral 0,96 0,28 0,36 0,11 -0,02 0,57 0,83 1,00
Table 2: Correlation matrix for the indices in table 1, between 1999-12-31
and 2011-12-31.

   None of the commodity indices have a correlation higher than 62 % with
the equity or real estate indices. The systemic risk was high during the
nancial crisis which occurred in the chosen time period; The commodity

                                13
indices therefore have a bit higher correlation, than suggested in the previous
literature.

                                   Crisis Correlation
                                 Indices MSCI World
                                GSCI 0,981
                               DJUBS 0,978
                            MLM 0,759
Table 3: Correlation matrix between commodities and equities for the time
period: 2008-06-30 - 2009-04-30

   The negative correlation that normally would have been expected during
the crisis period could therefore not be observed. For example the correlation
was close to 1 (0,98) between the GSCI index and the MSCI World index
during the crisis period (2008-06-30 - 2009-04-30), this has contributed to
the overall correlation during the full time period. Therefore, Rouwenhorst
and Gortons motivation of the negative correlation due to dierent behavior
during business cycles does not seem to apply to the full extent.
   However, the MLM index had a low correlation (between 0,36 and 0,11)
in relation to the equity market. This study cannot clearly support the
previous literature, since negative correlation cannot be observed. However,
the correlation is low, which is also suggested by previous studies. One of
the explanatory factors could be due to the option of the MLM index to go
neutral during time of crises. The only negative correlation eect that is
visible, is between the MLM and the European Real Estate market (-0,02).
Generally the GSCI and DJUBS are highly correlated, while the MLM has a
low correlation to the two other commodity indices. An interesting nding is
that the MLM index had a very high correlation (0,96) to the bond market.
This is likely to have occurred from the fact that investors saw both asset
classes as safe havens during the nancial crisis. The ndings have slight
dierences in comparison to earlier studies. However, the time period is
much shorter than those used in previous research, therefore not as many
business events and cycles are covered, which might aect the results.
   The graph (Figure2 ) visualizes the indexed performance for traditional
asset classes and commodity indices. Over time, commodities (red color
scale) have outperformed traditional asset classes. Equities have in general
had a negative performance since inception. The only steady asset class, not
object to cyclical changes are bonds. Furthermore, bonds have not only had
steady performance, but also the next to highest total return at the end of
the time period, only beaten by the MLM long-neutral index. An interesting
nding is that real estate does not follow the same trend as equities, bonds or
commodities. The higher volatility seen in commodity markets is visualized

                                14
by the high variations over time, especially during the 2008 nancial crisis.
This relates to earlier studies which suggest that commodities as an asset
class are riskier than equities, for an individual investor. As stressed in
previous studies, commodities add a diversication eect to an already well
diversied portfolio. This is why this type of investment should be perfect
to, for example, a pension fund.

3.3 Swedish Pension Funds
3.3.1 Denition and Purpose
The current labor force is funding the public pension system, which implies
that no assets are set aside from the time the retirees constituted the labor
force. In the event that the ratio of retirees to the labor force increases, a
decit will occur. The discrepancy between the outgoing payments and the
inow of capital is covered by the buer funds, which in Sweden are called the
AP-funds (In Swedish: Allmänna Pensionfonderna). In order to guarantee
that the gap is suciently covered; the AP funds should always strive to
                      29
maximize returns.
   A large part of the population that is currently contributing to the sys-
tem, have recently gone into retirement. Therefore, these individuals have
stopped contributing, and started receiving money from the system. Accord-
ing to forecasts produced by the Swedish Pension Authority (In Swedish:
Pensionsmyndigheten), net outows will continue to be negative until the
middle of the 2040s. The pension system debt is usually adjusted for with
the increase in the income index. Therefore the assets in the pension system
needs to grow at least as much as the income index in order to match the
           3031
liabilities.

3.3.2 Regulation of Investment Plan
According to the national pension insurance funds (AP funds) act (SFS
2000:192) chapter 4 section 1, the objective of the funds is to manage the
assets in such a manner that they will achieve the highest possible return.
The investments should also have a low risk characteristic, invested with a
long time perspective. As long as the regulations stated below are followed,
the APs can be exible in their investment decisions. Section 3 to 18, chapter
4, entails the detailed investment rules.

  29
    Annual report 2011, AP3 fund
  30
    Annual report 2011, AP4 fund
  31
    Annual report 2011, AP1 fund

                                15
                 Figure 3: The Swedish Pension System.

   Section 12: The First to Fourth AP Funds may not invest fund assets in
options, futures, or other similar nancial instruments for which commodities
constitute the underlying asset.

   Other investment rules are summarized in gure 3:

   • Investments may occur in any instruments on the capital market as
      long as it is liquid and noted on an exchange.

   • At least 30 % of the fund's assets have to be placed in xed income
      assets with low credit and liquidity risk.

   • Not more than 40 % of the asset may be exposed o currency risk.

   • Not more than 10 % of the fund's assets may be exposed to more than
      one issuer or one group of issuers with a close relationship.

   • The fund may not hold more than 2 % of the market capitalization of
     one single Swedish exchange traded company.

   • Not more than 5 % of the fund's assets may be placed in non-exchange
      traded assets.

                                16
 • These assets have to be acquired through private equity companies or
    such. Exceptions are stocks or other holdings in companies within the
                  32
    real estate.

32
  The National Pension Insurance Funds (AP Funds) act (SFS 2000:192)

                               17
4 Methodology

4.1 Data Collecting
The main source of data was provided from the Bloomberg database. This
database is used by many professionals worldwide within the nancial in-
dustry. The study was constructed in such a way that investment managers
easily can replicate it and apply it in their endeavor to increase risk-adjusted
returns.
   In this study we will analyze the benet loss of the regulation that came
into eect in the beginning of 2000, the data was collected for the time period
1999-12-31 to 2011-12-31. After discussion with the Vice President in one of
                           33
the Swedish AP funds  , we together reached the conclusion that an average
rebalancing period is approximately one month. This was why we decided
to use monthly data. Closing prices for the last trading day in each month
was used.
   During the discussion with the AP fund, one of the major topics that
came up was whether to use the exact holdings in the AP funds in opposite
to replicating with indices. Using actual data would have included alpha from
the portfolio manager, alpha that we would have decreased when including
commodities. In each rebalancing period, the portfolio managers at the AP
funds made active choices with respect to the future expectations at the time
of the decision, which has added an alpha. In order to add commodities in an
unbiased way, indices were used to synthetically replicate the AP portfolio
which removes all alpha.
    Due to the strict regulation of the AP funds, they all invest their assets
in a similar way. A general AP fund can therefore be replicated using their
benchmarks indices, which was discussed as an excellent solution to use in
opposite to the actual AP portfolio.

   The following indices were used:

   • Merrill Lynch Swedish Governments (SEK) The index tracks Swedish
     government bonds, hedged in Swedish Krona.

   • Merrill Lynch Global Government Bond Index II (USD) The index
     follows dierent government bonds worldwide, denoted in USD.

   • MSCI Sweden (SEK) An index representing the Swedish stock market,
      where their largest holdings are also the largest market capitalized stock
     in Sweden (For example; H&M, Ericsson, Nordea and Volvo).

  33
    Gustaf Hagerud, Phd. Head of Asset Management at the AP3 fund

                                18
   • MSCI World A global stock index with over 1600 world stocks in-
      cluded. The stocks are from 24 dierent developed markets (i.e. there
      are no emerging markets included in the index). This is one of the
     worlds most common proxies for the world stock markets also used by
     the Swedish pension fund AP3.

   • USDSEK Exchange rate The FX ratio between USD and SEK.

   • Standard and Poors Goldmans Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI) Is one
      of the most common commodity indices which currently comprises of 24
      dierent commodities in precious metals, livestock, energy, agriculture
      and industrial metals with a high exposure to energy (currently above
      78% and more than 40% of crude oil). Prices are quoted in USD and it
      is a passive index only that since they invest in future contracts they
     have to roll them forward each month.

   • DJUBS (Dow-Jones UBS commodity Index) It is a well diversied index
      with the goal to minimize the concentration to one single commodity or
      sector. It currently compromises of 19 commodities in seven dierent
     sectors. None of the commodities have less than 2% or more than 15%
                                                                        34
      of the weight in the index. Prices are quoted in USD.

   • Mount Lucas Management Long/neutral index (MLM) It is an equally
      weighted index consisting of 11 dierent commodities. It only takes
     long positions in markets that are determined by Mount Lucas to be
                                              35
      rising while it is neutral otherwise.   The collected data was veried
      by comparison to data presented in the AP funds annual reports.

4.2 Data Analyzing
4.2.1 Currency Conversion
Since the indices were exported in dierent currencies, United States Dollars
(USD) and Swedish Krona (SEK), the USDSEK spot FX ratio was used to
convert the index values to SEK only. The AP funds present their results
in SEK, why it was important to convert all foreign indices to SEK to make
the results comparable.
   The commodity indices used were quoted in USD and were converted
back to SEK. The fact that the indices are priced in USD, the FX exposure
in the AP portfolio increases.

  34
    Bloomberg Corporation.(Data and descriptions exported from Bloomberg terminal)
  35
   https://www.mtlucas.com/Content.aspx?content=CommIndexCommodityLN

                                19
4.2.2 Performance Calculations
Performance was calculated in two currencies. When calculating the per-
formance for the background study, the original currencies were used. The
reason for using the original currencies was to exclude any impact (i.e. FX-
risk) on performance, which was not relevant for describing the asset class.
   We also calculated performance in SEK, since the local currency per-
formance is relevant for replicating the return of the AP and commodity
portfolios.
   The performance was calculated monthly and yearly. During the discus-
sions with the AP funds a representative rebalancing period for the general
AP fund indicated to be on a per month basis, therefore monthly data was
used. Furthermore, monthly data for the 12 year period gives a more signi-
cant amount of data (144 observations) than if yearly data would have been
used.
   Since the industry standard is to measure and present return and risk
gures on a yearly basis, this was also included into the performance calcu-
lations. Furthermore, a yearly rebalancing period, in opposite to a monthly,
includes larger variations. This also implies that asset classes that perform
well get a bigger weight in the portfolio for a longer period of time and vice
versa.
   Performance was calculated by dividing the spot index value with the
index value in the observation prior to the spot (formula below).

                                      It
                Return =    − 1 (I = Index value)
                               It−1

4.2.3 Portfolio Replication and Simulation
To replicate the AP portfolio the weights had to be divided into the major
asset classes, which are; equities, xed income and alternative investments.
First the weights were split up between equities and xed income, to make it
possible to include commodity exposure as the alternative investment. Dur-
ing discussions with the AP funds the actual portfolio weights for a general
AP portfolio were determined; this was also compared and veried against
the annual reports. 55 % of the capital was allocated to equities and 45 % into
xed income. Within equities, 25 % was allocated to Swedish equity (syn-
thetically replicated with the MSCI Sweden equity index) and the remaining
75%was allocated to equity markets outside of Sweden (synthetically repli-
cated using the MSCI world equity index). Since the AP funds manage over

                                20
                             36
850 Billion Swedish Krona  and have the objective to produce as high return
with as low risk as possible and the Swedish market is small, they have to
diversify their equity exposure to dierent equity markets worldwide. Within
xed income, half of the assets are invested in Swedish Government bonds
(synthetically replicated with the Merrill Lynch Swedish Governments bond
index); the second half is invested in foreign government bonds (synthetically
replicated with the Merrill Lynch Global Government Bond Index II).
   According to the Swedish regulation a maximum of 40 % of the portfolio
can be exposed to FX risk. The model therefore adjusts the hedge ratio so
that the FX exposure does not exceed 40 % of the total portfolio. Hence, the
hedge ratio is adjusted and not xed in order to be compliant with the regu-
lation. To replicate the portfolio return, the return of each index in each time
period was multiplied by the portfolio weight given to that particular index.
The sums of these multiplications were added in order to get the portfolio
return in each time period (monthly and yearly). No transaction fees were
included in the calculations. However, transaction fees should be considered
when implementing this strategy in reality, since monthly rebalancing would
add 12 times the transaction fee in comparison to yearly rebalancing.
   The original AP portfolio had to be adjusted in order to include commod-
ity exposure. In order to include a weight we had to multiply the original
portfolio with one minus the wanted exposure, so that the total exposure
would add up to 100%. The USD exposure was not included in the multipli-
cation in order to keep the currency hedge at a constant level. Therefore, the
hedge is always at a constant level, disregarding if it is a commodity port-
folio or not. This means that the commodity portfolios have a higher USD
exposure, since the commodity indices are quoted in USD. This assumption
was made in order to only prove the commodity eect and not the FX ef-
fect. When adding the commodity exposure, the SEK return of an index was
multiplied by the desired weight, and then added to the reduced original AP
portfolio. Return, risk and Sharpe ratio were calculated on a monthly and
yearly basis.
   The return and risk measures were calculated using the below formulas:
Sample standard deviation was calculated by squaring the sum of each return
value subtracted by the average return, on a monthly and yearly basis. The
total sum is then divided by the number of observations minus one, in order
to adjust for the fact that it is a sample. The sample standard deviation is a
common industry measure for risk and is therefore applied in the study. The

  36
    Total assets under management for the rst to fourth AP fund, calculated from gures
presented in the annual reports. Exact gure: AP1 (213b SEK), AP2 (217b SEK), AP3
(214b SEK), AP4 (213b SEK), gures as of 2011-12-31. (Source: Annual report AP1-AP4)

                                21
calculations were repeated for the three commodity indices and for the two
weights.
              √
                  √     N
               √ 1  ∑
                     s = √       (r − r)2
                                                        i
                           N − 1 i=1

   Average return was calculated by dividing the sum of the return values by
the number of observations. This measure is also recognized by the industry
as valuable measure for return and is therefore applied in the essay.

              ∑n
                      1            1
            rarithmetic =      rarith,i =  (rarith,1 + . . . + rarith,n)
                       n i=1         n

   Total return was used in order to compare, both graphically and numer-
ically, the replicated commodity portfolios.

                 ∑T
                           rT =   (1 + ri) ∗ ri−1
                                        i=1
   Sharpe ratio is a risk-adjusted return measure used in order to compare
the eciency in the portfolios. However, the portfolio evaluation has to
include several perspectives, and not only the Sharpe ratio in order to get a
diversied view and conclusion.
                                       r − rf
                      Sharpe ratio =
                                          s

4.2.4 Portfolio Weights
After careful consideration and comparisons between dierent large pension
funds which are allowed to invest in commodities, a reasonable amount to
invest was determined to be about 5 %. The largest pension fund in Eu-
                                      37
rope, PGGM, invests almost 7 %   of its assets in commodities. In order
to simulate the portfolios realistically, 5 % of commodity exposure was used
as the rst weight. To show the eects more clearly the second weight was
set to 15 %. The AP3 fund has 17 % in alternative investments why 15 %
                                                 38
in commodities was a reasonable amount.    In order to replicate the AP
portfolio, benchmark indices used by the Swedish pension funds were used.
To replicate the equity exposure the MSCI World and MSCI Sweden indices
were applied. The MSCI World was chosen since it covers stock markets in

  37
    Investments and Pensions Europe(2007)
  38
    Beenen J (2005): pp 18.

                                22
24 countries, which means that it reects the world stock markets to a high
extent. These indices are commonly used and recognized by the nancial in-
dustry. Since they include a multiple of stocks they can be considered to be
diversied and a good proxy for the stock market. Furthermore, the MSCI
world does not invest in emerging markets which makes the index applicable
in our case since pension funds aims at investing at a low risk, when emerging
markets are generally characterized by higher risk.
   To replicate the xed income exposure, the Merrill Lynch Swedish Gov-
ernment Bonds and Merrill Lynch Global Government Bond Index II were
used. These indices are also used as benchmark indices by the Swedish AP
funds, which makes them a good proxy when replicating the general AP
portfolio. Since the AP funds are aiming at investing at a low risk with a
long investment horizon, they therefore mainly invest in government bonds.
The two bond indices were therefore considered to be representable for the
original portfolio.
   The FX ratio between USD and SEK has been used to hedge and convert
the currency exposure, since all indices except MSCI Sweden are denoted in
USD. According to Swedish regulations, the AP funds may not have foreign
currency exposure exceeding 40%.
   In order to get a full and fair view of a commodity portfolio, three dif-
ferent commodity indices were used. GSCI and DJUBS are two of the most
commonly used commodity indices, with a wide exposure to dierent com-
modities. Investing in GSCI and DJUBS index funds is straight forward
since they are exchange traded. From a liquidity perspective the index funds
are very ecient, why pension funds may realistically invest in commodi-
ties. Since these indices provide such an easy access to commodities this is a
reasonable way for a pension fund to gain exposure to commodities.
   Some major dierences between DJUBS and GSCI are that GSCI in-
vests more heavily in energy related commodities. In opposite to the GSCI,
DJUBS has a more diversied view were the index tries to minimize the
concentration in one single commodity or sector. Since our study aims to
replicate a commodity portfolio it is necessary to include several indices to
get a broader view. Furthermore, it is easier to see the general trends when
commodities are included and not observing the investment strategy of the
indices themselves.
   The MLM index chosen was a Long/neutral index and diers from the
two other indices by the fact that the management of the index might chose
to not go long in a commodity and be neutral over time. When the market is
determined to go up, the index takes a long position and a neutral position
otherwise. It is therefore a good proxy for a fund that makes active decisions.

                                23
                                                        39
Since real commodity prices tend to fall over time   a long neutral strategy
might provide a better ination hedge than the always-long strategy itself.
This index is therefore a good alternative to passive only indices. Since the
index includes active management it might be a good alternative for pension
funds that lack the experience or do not have the competence needed for
investing in commodities. Furthermore, these indices were lso approved by
the head of portfolio management at AP3 as good proxies for a general AP
fund.
    In order to perform the analysis, a exible excel model was created, which
could take into account all the investment rules; the weights, hedge ratios,
xed income exposure, risk free rate and also the possibility to calculate the
portfolios based on either excess or total return. This made it easier to verify
that all the dierent angles were covered, in this way we could easily handle
massive amounts of data swiftly.

4.3 Portfolio Optimization
Markowitz developed the modern portfolio theory, we apply his denition of
return and risk, as dened below:

                   E(r) = ωE(rAP ) + (1 − ω)E(rC )

                   2      2  2              2  2
            σ = ω σAP + (1 − ω) σC + 2ω(1 − ω)ρσAP σC

                         −1 ≤ ρ ≤ 1

    In the thesis, the rst asset is dened as one of the commodity indices, and
the second asset as the original AP portfolio. Markowitz second contribution
was the theory of diversication. The diversication principle (dened below)
states that: The standard deviation of the combination is less than the
combination of the standard deviations.

                                    2     2                           2
           [ωσAP − (1 − ω)σC ] ≤ σ ≤ [ωσAP + (1 − ω)σC )]

                ρ < 1 → σ ≤ [ωσAP + (1 − ω)σC ]

    The diversication eect is interpreted as holding a portfolio that elimi-
nates the individual risk and only holds the market risk, i.e. β. The literature

  39
    MLM Corporation (Index Description)

                                24
review suggests that integrating commodities into the AP portfolio gives a
diversication eect. Hence the individual risk was minimized in the new
portfolios in comparison to the original AP portfolio. Below the diversica-
tion eect is dierentiated:

                                              1
                       Suppose: ωi = n , i = 1, . . . , N

   ∑n ∑n       ∑n     ∑n ∑n      ∑n     ∑n ∑n
 2          1       1         1                 1      2   1
σ  =        2 σij =  2    σii +  2          σij =  2    σi +  2          σij
      i=1 j=1 n        n  i=1      n  i=1 j=1,j 6=i       n  i=1      n  i=1 j=1,j 6=i

                         n → ∞

            ∑n  ∑n         ∑n      2
             1                 1           n − 1
       σij = 2              σij ,  2       σij =    2 σij → σij
              n  − n j=1 j=1,j 6=i         n  j=1,j 6=i         n

   The dierentiation above proves that when the number of assets increases
towards innity, the systematic risk remains. In order to not only analyze
whether commodities can improve the AP portfolio, but also determine to
what extent they would be included, Markowitz Mean-Variance Portfolio
Analysis is applied.
   First the Minimum Variance Frontier is obtained as the solution to:

                       ∑N
                      M inωV ar = (˜rp) = V ar(   ωi r˜i)
                                                         i=1

                 ∑N
                  s.t E(˜rp) = E(   ωi r˜i) = ωiE(˜ri) = r
                                           i=1

                ∑N
                                   ωi = 1
                                         i=1

           ωi ≥ 0 i = 1, . . . , N (N o Short selling Constraint)

   Solving the above problem for dierent values of r gives dierent points
in the chart, connecting the points give the minimum variance frontier. Im-
portant to note is that in the case study, the two assets which were combined
in this model were the original AP portfolio and commodity index. The

                                25
model was set up in Excel, which calculated for the dierent weights. When
excluding the rst constraint (E(˜rp) = r) the Minimum Variance Portfolio
(MVP) was obtained.
   By using the minimum variance frontier, the Optimal Risky Portfolio
(ORP) was obtained by solving the following:

                                E(˜rp − rf )
                       maxω
                                     σ(˜rp)

                s.t. E(˜rp) = ωE(˜rAP ) + (1 − ω)E(˜rC )

       √
     σ(˜r ) =  ω2σ2(˜r  ) + (1 − ω)2σ2(˜r ) + 2ω(1 − ω)Cov(˜r  , r˜ )
         p            AP                C                    AP   C

   Dierentiating with respect to ω and setting to zero, the solving for ω
gives:

                                              2
                           [E(˜rAP )−rf ]σ (˜rC )−[E(˜rC )−rf ]Cov(˜rAP ,r˜C )
    ω∗ = [E(˜r   )−r ]σ2(˜r )+[E(˜r )−r ]σ2(˜r   )−[E(˜r   )−r +E(˜r )−r ]Cov(˜r   ,r˜ )
              AP    f     C      C    f     AP      AP    f     C    f      AP  C
   The weight obtained from the equation gives the weight in the commodity
index; the remaining weight will be in the original AP portfolio. This combi-
nation maximizes the Sharpe ratio and is the portfolio which every investor
should hold, regardless of their level of risk aversion.
   According to the separation theory, the asset allocation problem can be
divided into two problems. First the optimal risky portfolio is determined as
above. Second the combination between the risk-free asset and optimal risky
portfolio is determined, this is known as the investor problem:

                                          1   2
                       U (r) = E(r) −  Aσ (r)
                                    2
   However, determining the risk aversion (A) cannot be simulated since it
is based on arbitrary beliefs. Therefore, the investor problem is never solved,
to avoid any bias. We assume that the optimal risky portfolio is held to 100
%. Hence, the optimal risky portfolio is the portfolio which is tangent to
the ecient frontier and located on the capital allocation line and gives the
highest Sharpe ratio, since it is the slope of the line. The CML is given by:

                                  [E(rM ) − rf ]
                    E(ri) = rf +             σiM
                            σM

                                26
4.4 Extreme Case Scenario
To be able to show what returns the AP funds could have had, an extreme
scenario was created. In the simulation, the weight obtained for the optimal
risky portfolio in the best performing portfolio was used. By borrowing
or investing at the risk-free rate it was possible to create an extreme case
portfolio with the same risk as the standard AP portfolio. This was obtained
by dividing the standard deviation from the AP portfolio over the standard
deviation for the optimal risky portfolio which yielded the leverage ratio.
This ratio was then multiplied with the return of the optimal risky portfolio
for each month to include interest on interest eects. The cost of borrowing
was then deducted from the return on a month per month basis.

                                27
5 Results

5.1 Monthly Performance 5%

Figure 4: Portfolio performance for the replicated commodity portfolios with
5% weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP portfolio.

 5% Weight, Monthly
  Portfolio Simulation Return St.Dev Sharpe Ratio Total Return Draw-Down Draw-Up
  AP Portfolio 0,174% 2,355% 0,071 23,36% -0,082 0,062
  GSCI 0,190% 2,304% 0,079 26,34% -0,090 0,057
  DJUBS 0,188% 2,289% 0,079 26,25% -0,086 0,058
  MLM 0,199% 2,219% 0,086 28,55% -0,074 0,058

Table 4: Performance measures for the commodity portfolios with a 5%
weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP Portfolio.

   If an investor would have invested in the portfolios including commod-
ity indices from the beginning of the year of 2000, the investor would have
outperformed the original AP portfolio. Table 4 shows the total return for
the time period. It is clear that the commodity portfolios have higher total
returns than the original AP portfolio. For example the MLM portfolio had
a total return exceeding the AP portfolio with 519 basis points. Between the
beginning of 2000 until the end of 2002 the commodity portfolios performed
very similar to the AP portfolio. However, from the end of 2002 until the
end of 2007 the commodity portfolios performed considerably better than the

                                28
original portfolio and from the end of 2007 until the end of 2008, the com-
modity portfolios dropped more than the original portfolio. However, the
portfolios still managed to maintain their already accrued higher return. In
the recovery from the beginning of 2009, the commodity portfolios once again
performed better than the AP portfolio. The ndings imply that integrating
commodities, improves the AP portfolio over time, due to the diversication
eect.
    Looking at the table, the higher total return mentioned above, is reected
in the monthly returns where all commodity portfolios have higher returns
than the AP portfolio. For example the MLM portfolio has on an average
25 basis points higher return each month. The risk measured by the stan-
dard deviation shows that the commodity portfolios have lower risk than the
original AP portfolio. The higher return and lower risk is reected in the
Sharpe ratio which is higher for all the commodity portfolios in comparison
to the AP portfolio. The performance gures further support the theory that
the AP portfolio is improved when integrating commodities. Decreased stan-
dard deviation and increased return concretizes the diversication eect and
implies that there are more ecient portfolios. The AP portfolio has lower
drawn-down and higher draw-up in opposite to the previous positive eects
in the commodity portfolios (except for the MLM at -0,074 draw-down).

                                29
5.2 Monthly Performance 15%

Figure 5: Portfolio performance for the replicated commodity portfolios with
15% weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP portfolio.

 15% Weight, Monthly
  Portfolio Simulation Return St.Dev Sharpe Ratio Total Return Draw-Down Draw-Up
  AP Portfolio 0,174% 2,355% 0,071 23,36% -0,082 0,062
  GSCI 0,222% 2,341% 0,091 31,91% -0,106 0,049
  DJUBS 0,217% 2,220% 0,095 31,93% -0,094 0,051
  MLM 0,250% 1,988% 0,122 39,30% -0,058 0,050

Table 5: Performance measures for the commodity portfolios with a 15%
weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP Portfolio.

   Figure 5 has the same trend as the 5% weight graph, only with larger
uctuations due to the larger weight in commodities. However, the positive
eects of commodities are more clearly seen in the large gap between the
commodity portfolios and the AP portfolio over time. Regarding the monthly
return, the returns for the commodity portfolios are not only higher than
the AP portfolio but also higher than the commodity portfolios with the
5% weight. Interesting to note is that the standard deviation is not only
lower for the commodity portfolios but also lower for the DJUBS and MLM
portfolios in comparison to the 5% portfolios, indicating that the minimum
variance portfolio is closer to 15% than 5% for the DJUBS and MLM. Since
the Sharpe ratios are also higher for the 15% portfolios in comparison to the

                                30
5% portfolios, this also supports that these portfolios are closer to the optimal
risky portfolio. The total return was considerably higher in comparison to the
AP, not only for the MLM portfolio (15,94%) but also for the DJUBS (8,57%)
and GSCI (8,55%). Regarding the draw-up and draw-down the trend is the
same; however the draw-down for the DJUBS and GSCI portfolios are higher
than the AP portfolio, while the MLM portfolio still has a lower draw-down.

                                31
5.3 Yearly Performance 5%

Figure 6: Portfolio performance for the replicated commodity portfolios with
5% weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP portfolio.

  5% Weight, Yearly
  Portfolio Simulation Return St.Dev Sharpe Ratio Total Return Draw-Down Draw-Up
  AP Portfolio 2,634% 10,190% 0,250 29,14% -0,152 0,147
  GSCI 2,852% 10,255% 0,269 32,34% -0,166 0,143
  DJUBS 2,816% 10,170% 0,268 31,94% -0,160 0,144
  MLM 2,941% 9,728% 0,293 34,58% -0,139 0,141

Table 6: Performance measures for the commodity portfolios with a 5%
weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP Portfolio.

   The graph visualizes the indexed returns for the AP portfolio and the
commodity portfolios. As for the monthly rebalanced portfolios, an investor
who invested in the commodity portfolios would have outperformed the AP
portfolio during the time period.
   With yearly compared to monthly rebalancing the trend for the port-
folio measures are the same (i.e. increased return and decreased standard
deviation, implying a higher Sharpe ratio) when comparing the commodity
portfolio to the AP portfolio.
   With yearly rebalancing the total return for the 5% portfolios is higher
in comparison to the monthly rebalanced portfolios with the same weight.
For example, the GSCI portfolio with yearly rebalancing (5%) performed
6,03% better than the monthly rebalanced portfolio. Therefore, the increase

                                32
in the total return with yearly rebalancing implies that the return per time
period (year) is higher in relation to the monthly return. The dierence in the
rebalancing period implies that it is not benecial to rebalance frequently, but
instead keep the assets that perform well for a longer time period and earn
the returns. Furthermore, the changed rebalancing supports the fact that
commodities actually have a correlation eect and can act as a diversier
and add to the AP portfolios return.

                                33
5.4 Yearly Performance 15%

Figure 7: Portfolio performance for the replicated commodity portfolios with
15% weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP portfolio.

  15% Weight, Yearly
  Portfolio Simulation Return St.Dev Sharpe Ratio Total Return Draw-Down Draw-Up
  AP Portfolio 2,634% 10,19% 0,250 29,14% -0,152 0,147
  GSCI 3,290% 10,92% 0,293 38,08% -0,195 0,163
  DJUBS 3,181% 10,38% 0,298 37,33% -0,175 0,156
  MLM 3,557% 9,010% 0,385 45,71% -0,113 0,147

Table 7: Performance measures for the commodity portfolios with a 15%
weight in commodities, benchmarked against the original AP Portfolio.

   As seen with the 5% portfolio, the returns increase even more when the
portfolios have exposure to commodities included. As for the standard de-
viation, the MLM portfolio decreases while the DJUBS and GSCI increases
slightly to 10,38% and 10,92%. This implies that the minimum variance
portfolio has less than 15% in commodities, with yearly rebalancing. How-
ever, the Sharpe ratios for all the commodity portfolios have increased. The
increase in Sharpe ratio implies that even though the standard deviation in-
creases above the AP portfolios standard deviation, the increase in return is
able to compensate for it.
   Furthermore, a concrete evidence of the eect of yearly rebalancing is
seen in the total return which is heavily improved. This implies that it
is more benecial to keep an asset which has performed well in the past.

                                34
Something that is also visible with 15% weight is that the MLM managed
to avoid the 2008 crisis better than the other portfolios. The MLM portfolio
has an even lower draw-down than with 5% weight. The biggest increase
in Sharpe ratio can be seen with the MLM index which is 54% higher than
for the AP portfolio and 31% higher than the 5% MLM portfolio. MLMs
ability to minimize the downside during the nancial crisis is explained by
the long-neutral strategy, which is not used by the other commodity indices.
Therefore, the long-neutral strategy clearly proves its benets.
   One important thing to notice is that the commodity portfolios have a
higher exposure to the USD than the AP portfolio. The model was created
to only add the commodity eect, and not take into account the currency
eect. Since the USDSEK FX-rate has declined by around 20% over the
time period, the actual performance could be even higher for the commodity
portfolios. The most realistic case would be to hedge the currency exposure
related to the commodity indices, which in this case would have increased
the returns even more.

                                35
5.5 Portfolio Optimization

                  Correlation
                    Stand Alone Index AP Portfolio
                   GSCI 0,052
                  DJUBS 0,067
                MLM -0,259

Table 8: Correlation matrix between the dierent commodity indices and the
original AP portfolio.

   The correlation between GSCI and DJUBS compared to the AP portfolio
is noticeably low. Between the DJUBS and the AP portfolio the correlation
is 0,067 and GSCI to the AP portfolio at 0,052. The correlation between
MLM and the AP portfolio is negative at -0,259. Low or negative correlation
with the AP portfolio should add a correlation eect, i.e. to increase the
diversication of the portfolio and increases its Sharpe ratio. These ndings
are seen in gure 4-7 and table 4-7 and are in line with previous literature
and our expectations.

   Global Minimum Variance Portfolios
   Index Weight Commodity Weight AP Portfolio St.Dev Return Sharpe Ratio
   MLM 30,4% 69,6% 1,8% 0,33% 0,181
   DJUBS 22,0% 78,0% 2,1% 0,24% 0,110
   GSCI 10,8% 89,2% 2,2% 0,21% 0,092

Table 9: Global minimum variance portfolios for the three dierent commod-
ity indices.

   The commodity weights in table 9 are obtained when minimizing the
portfolios standard deviation, i.e. obtaining the global minimum variance
portfolios located on the minimum variance frontier. The ecient frontier
is based on the portfolios with monthly rebalancing periods. The standard
deviations are lower than for the AP portfolio by 58,9 basis points in the MLM
portfolio and 24 and 11,3 basis points for the DJUBS and GSCI portfolio.
Comparing the portfolios above with the AP portfolio, it is clear that the
returns are higher and standard deviations are lower. The global minimum
variance portfolio strongly supports the theory that there are more ecient
portfolios than the AP portfolio, regardless of which commodity index that
is integrated.
   The table 10 is obtained when maximizing the Sharpe ratio, i.e. obtaining
the weights in the commodity index that yields the optimal risky portfolio.

                                36
   Optimal Risky Portfolios
   Index Weight Commodity Weight AP Portfolio St.Dev Return Sharpe Ratio
   MLM 47,7% 52,3% 2,0% 0,41% 0,203
   DJUBS 43,2% 56,8% 2,3% 0,29% 0,122
   GSCI 25,4% 74,6% 2,4% 0,25% 0,101

   Table 10: Optimal risky portfolios for the dierent commodity indices.

Comparing the Sharpe ratio to the minimum variance portfolio, and to the
AP portfolio the optimal risky portfolios always have a higher Sharpe ratio.
Figures 8-10 visualize that the optimal risky portfolios have a higher return
with a slightly higher standard deviation. The Sharpe ratio for the MLM
portfolio increases by 187% in comparison to the AP portfolio with monthly
rebalancing. The Sharpe ratio of the DJUBS portfolio increased by 72% and
the GSCI increased with 43%.
   The evidence that integrating commodities creates more ecient portfo-
lios is heavily supported by the optimal risky portfolio, with Sharpe ratios
much higher than the original AP portfolio. In nancial theory, the optimal
risky portfolio should always be held, regardless of risk aversion. The AP
portfolio is clearly not the best diversied portfolio and therefore not invest-
ing in the best interest of the shareholders, i.e. the Swedish population.

Figure 8: Ecient frontier for an AP portfolio including the MLM index at
dierent weights.

   The ecient frontier for the dierent commodity portfolios are visualized
in gures 8-10. The red square represents the AP portfolio today, the triangle
represents the current risk-free rate and the circle represents the optimal risky

                                37
Figure 9: Ecient frontier for an AP portfolio including the GSCI index at
dierent weights.

Figure 10: Ecient frontier for an AP portfolio including the DJUBS index
at dierent weights.

portfolio. The slope of the capital allocation line, tangent to the optimal risky
portfolio, is the same as the Sharpe ratio. We can see that for all indices
the curve is shifted to the left showing the decrease in standard deviation
and the increase in return that is possible. The GSCI is the only index that
has an optimal risky portfolio that has higher standard deviation than the
standard AP portfolio.

                                38
5.6 Extreme Case

         Figure 11: Extreme case scenario against the AP portfolio

   The graph visualizes the eect when comparing the AP portfolio, and a
portfolio with the same volatility, located on the capital allocation line. The
weight in the MLM has been derived from the optimal risky portfolio and
then levered with 0,223%. From the graph it is clear to see that there is
a huge dierence between the original AP portfolio, and the extreme case
portfolio. The striped area visualizes where an AP funds returns could have
been without increasing their risk. It is clear that this is indeed an extreme
case; however it implies that the capital could have been managed in a much
more ecient way.

      Extreme Case
        Measures Extreme Case AP Portfolio Dierence
       Monthly Return 0,46% 0,17% 0,29%
       Total Return 87,28% 23,36% 63,92%
        St.Dev 2,36% 2,36% 0,00
       Leverage Ratio 0,223% 0% 0,223%

                                39
5.7 Results Summary
When including commodities into the AP portfolio, it can be observed that
for 5% and 15% weights and all rebalancing periods, the portfolios including
commodities always have higher performance, measured in Sharpe ratio. To-
tal return is always higher, standard deviation is almost always lower with
few exceptions. The correlation between the stand alone commodity indices
and the synthetically replicated AP portfolio is low. The Markowitz port-
folio optimization proves that there are more ecient portfolios than the
current AP portfolio. In an extreme case scenario, with the same standrard
deviation, the returns of the extreme case portfolio always exceeds the AP
portfolio.

                                40
6 Conclusions

The purpose of this study was to see if the Swedish pension fund regula-
tion, prohibiting AP funds from investing in commodities have aected their
performance. We have concluded that the performance have been greatly
reduced due to the regulation and should be changed to allow for commodity
investing going forward.
   By replicating a scenario were commodity investments are allowed we
have shown that the AP funds over the last 12 years have missed out on
16,57% additional return which estimates around 92,8 billion SEK in extra
                                                                              40
revenue approximating around 46 000 SEK per pension taker  . This is
crucial amount of additional return that could have contributed to their goal
achievement.
   Except for the additional return, the risk, measured in volatility, could
have been lowered. The minimum variance frontier is shifted to left when
including commodities implying that the AP funds do not have the most
ecient portfolio at the moment. The AP portfolio should therefore be
allowed to invest in commodities in order to hold the most ecient portfolio,
consequently complying with their goal to deliver steady and reliable returns
for the Swedish population.
   Hence, the essay managed to prove the theory that including commodities
provides a diversication eect due to low or even negative correlation in
comparison to traditional asset classes. The above ndings are in line with
the expectations stated in the introduction.
   If the Swedish pension fund regulation continues to prohibit commodity
investments, the reason for their existence is superuous, since they currently
cannot fulll their own purpose. Their goal is set in order to guarantee the
future welfare of the Swedish population. If the current system cannot reach
the necessary goals, the capital should be allocated in a dierent way.
   At present, the AP funds are destroying the Swedish pension capital by
not being allowed to hold the most ecient portfolio, i.e. not investing in
the best interest of the Swedish population. Investing in the most ecient
portfolio should always be the goal of investment management and public
authorities should not be an exception.

  40
    Based on initial value of 560 billion SEK and 15% weight in MLM with 2 mil-
lion pension taker and no additional cash in or outows. (Source: http://www.
forsakringskassan.se/omfk/statistik_och_analys/pension/alderspension)

                                41
7 Ethics and CSR

Commodity investing is a highly debated topic within the nancial indus-
try, as mentioned in the introduction. The debate is constantly criticizing
commodity investing and the eects commodity trading derivatives might
have, especially harming the population in developing countries. Since the
Swedish AP funds invest the populations capital, the ethical issues are of
great importance.
   The AP funds are investing in order to provide future consumption for
the Swedish population. Therefore investing in commodities consumed by,
or which are benecial for, the Swedish population should be the optimal
allocation of capital directed in commodities. For example Sweden has the
                                                                          41
8th highest electricity consumption per capita in the world (2009).   A rise
in electricity prices would therefore greatly aect the consumption of not
only electricity, since it is needed for heating, but also other goods that the
population would have to give up to compensate for the higher price. If
however a pension fund invested in commodities that the country is greatly
dependent on, such as electricity in Sweden, a rise in that commodity price
would be compensated for by a higher pension. This creates a more stable
environment for the pension takers. Besides the obvious eect this has for
the pension takers it will also stimulate, in this example, the energy sector
which can ensure and lock in future revenues and thereby minimize their
own risk. The investments are meanwhile compliant with the investment
guideline, which is to have a long term investment horizon, which in turn
provides long term benets.
   The nancial market oers multiple investment vehicles for commodity in-
vesting. Commodity futures are widely used with dierent purposes. Swedish
commodity producers can benet from nancial derivatives using commodi-
ties as an underlying asset in order to, for example, hedge their cash ows.
This generates steady cash ows for commodity producers, beneting not
only the producers, but also the population by making it attractive and safe
from an economical perspective to produce commodities and at the same
                                          42
time provide resources for Sweden.
   The causality between prices of commodity derivatives and the underlying
commodity prices themselves are minimal. When trading with derivatives,
no physical commodities are added to or drawn from the market. Hence,
the supply and demand structure cannot be aected. This concludes that
trading with speculatory purposes in commodity derivatives do not aect

  41
    http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.USE.ELEC.KH.PC
  42
    Head of Commodities at SEB, Torbjörn Iwarson. Discussions with the CSR depart-
ment at SEB.

                                42
the real commodity market and thereby do not aect the population in a
                43
negative way.
    Regarding the eect of commodity investing on food prices, which is one of
the main ethical issues discussed, the criticism seems to be groundless. Stud-
ies conducted by the World Bank and the University of Wageningen have
failed to prove that a connection between food prices and prices on commod-
ity futures exists. This is one of the reasons why for example PGGM actively
invests in commodities. Until there are sucient and uniform evidence that
commodity investing can aect food prices in a harmful way, the criticism
                                   44
should be seen as groundless.
   The criticism from an ethical point of view directed towards commodity
investing is, as discussed above, unsupported by facts. Of course, the ethical
perspective is always important to keep in mind going forward, always making
sure to invest the populations capital in a responsible way. However, it is
important to not only to be critical of the asset class itself, but also the
criticism directed towards it.

  43
    Responsible Investment, Annual Report 2011, PGGM
  44
    University of Wageningen (2008)

                                43
8 Problematization & Future Research

Since our results points towards that one observation depends on another.
Yearly rebalancing improves our results compared to monthly rebalancing,
implying that weak market hypothesis does not hold. Since our model de-
pends on the previous observations return (interest on interest), the obser-
vations can not be regarded as independent. Hypothesis testing is heavily
dependent on the assumption that all observations are independent, the com-
monly used t-test for hypothesis testing can therefore not be applied to our
          45
results.
   The model used for replicating the portfolios is based on several assump-
tions, which the reader should be aware of. The AP funds have active invest-
ment management in each rebalancing period, which cannot be replicated in
the study without being biased due to the fact that events during the time
period could be exploited. The model therefore assumes passive investments
to avoid the bias. Regarding the indices, the total return version is used in
opposite to for example an excess return variant. Total return indices include
all costs, making them representable as an investment vehicle. The reader
should however be aware that there are dierences between the index types,
which could aect the outcome of the study.
   It is important to notice that the study aims at showing a dierence in
portfolios and not the true replication of an AP portfolio. The AP portfo-
lios have an active management which we could not replicate without being
backward biased. Therefore our portfolio is likely to have performed slightly
worse than a true AP portfolio. The AP funds also have alternative invest-
ments that we could not replicate due to several reasons. For example they
have private equity that is not listed and therefore hard to replicate. We have
therefore assumed no alternative investments in the standard AP portfolio.
    When Sharpe ratios are calculated, the current short term risk free inter-
est rate is used. The goal is not to calculate true Sharpe ratios, but rather
to display for any dierences in Sharpe ratios between the portfolios.
   Traditional performance measures are used to compare the portfolios
making the conclusions of the essay sensitive to the measures used. The
outcome when applying a dierent analytic approach has not been tested
and we can therefore not reject that another approach would give other re-
sults.
   As discussed in the introduction, and seen in the results section, the
outcome is heavily dependent on the time period used. The results could
therefore uctuate when applying it on another time period. These eects

  45
    Concluded in discussions with the Statistics Department at SSE

                                44
have not been tested and the extent of the impact is therefore unknown.
   A hedge ratio of 40% is applied in order to keep the currency exposure
within the 40% limit. Since the results must be calculated and presented
in SEK, the conversion from USD indices into SEK is necessary. Using a
currency hedge aects the results by gaining on any downside in the FX
ratio.
   Going forward this study could be developed by analyzing the eect of
using dierent investment vehicles. As discussed in the background there are
several way to invest in commodities, replicating the study with a dierent
vehicle could change the results in a positive or negative direction.

                                45
9 References

[1] Ankrim, E. M./Hensel, C. R. (1993): Commodities in Asset Allocation:
    A Real-Asset Alternative to Real Estate? ; in: Financial Analysts Journal,
   Vol. 49, Issue 3, May/June 1993,pp.20-29

[2] Annual report 2011 AP1 ; Download: http://www.ap1.se/en/
   Financial-information-and-press/Reports/

[3] Annual report 2011 AP3 ; Download: http://www.ap3.se/sites/
   english/financial_reports/Documents/Annual%20Report%202011.
   pdf

[4] Annual report 2011, AP4 ; Download: http://www.ap4.se/web/
   templates/FileListing.aspx?id=283

[5] Beenen, J. (2005): Commod investing: a pension fund perspective.
   Futures industry, September/October 2005; Download: http://www.
   futuresindustry.org/fi-magazine-home.asp?a=1059

[6] Bloomberg Corporation. (Data and descriptions exported from Bloomberg
   terminal) Visit at;www.bloomberg.com

[7] CISDM (2005): The Benets of Commodity Investment, 2005 Update,
   Center for International Securities and Derivatives Markets (CISDM),
   June 2005; Download: cisdm.som.umass.edu/research/pdffiles/
   benefitsofcommodities.pdf

[8] CME Group (2005): An Introduction to CME Commodity Products;
   Download: http://www.cme.com/edu/co/onres/cobrchrs15544.html

[9] Dagens Industri : AP Fondernas Jättemiss No.45 Vol.37 (2012-02-24)

[10] Demidova-Menzel, N./Heidron, T (2007): Commodities in Asset Man-
   agement. Frankfurt School- Working Paper series, No.81, August 2007;
   Download: www.frankfurt-school.de/dms/.../Arbeits81.pdf

[11] Erb, C.B./Harvey, C.R. (2005): The Tactical and Strategic Value of
   Commodity Futures; NBER Working Paper 11222; Downloaded (2012-04-
   07, 14:52): faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~charvey/Research/Working_
   Papers/W77_The_tactical_and.pdf

[12] Financial Times: US Pension fund eyes commodity invest-
   ments; 2010 May 31. Downloaded (2012-03-13, 09:45): http:

                                46
   //www.ft.com/cms/s/e05113da-6cd3-11df-91c8-00144feab49a,
   Authorised=false.html?_i_location=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ft.com%
   2Fcms%2Fs%2F0%2Fe05113da-6cd3-11df-91c8-00144feab49a.html&_
   i_referer=#axzz1s0ZRSU6u

[13] Greer, R.J. (2000): The Nature of Commodity Index Returns; In: The
   Journal of Alternative Investments, Summer 2004, pp.45-53

[14] Gorton, G./Rouwenhoorst , K.G. (2004): Facts and fantasies about com-
   modity futures, Yale ICF Working Paper No.04-20, February 2005; Down-
   loaded (2012-02-25, 11:12):http://ssrn.com/abstract=560042

[15] Investigation of APfunds regulation (Original titel in Swedish: över-
   synav AP-fondernasregelverk), Dir 2011:84. Ministry of Finance, Swe-
   den.; Downloaded (2012-03-27, 12:54):http://www.regeringen.se/sb/
   d/14255/a/176799 (Swedish Only)

[16] Investments and Pensions Europe(2007) PGGM to focus on in-
    ation linked investments; Download:http://www.ipe.com/news/
   pggm-to-focus-on-inflation-linked-investments_27692.php

[17] Lummer, S. L./Siegel, L.B. (1993): GSCI Collateralised Futures: A
    Hedging and Diversication Tool for Institutional Investors; In: Journal
   of Investing, Summer 1993, pp.75-82

[18] Mount Lucas Corporation, Index description; Downloaded (2012-
   04-15, 13:32): https://www.mtlucas.com/Content.aspx?content=
   CommIndexCommodityLN

[19] Pulvermacher, K. (2005a): What are Commodities? March 2005;
   Downloaded (2012-03-02, 16:31):http://www.gold.org/value/stats/
   research/index.html

[20] Reuters, Pension fund Calstrs eyes 2,5$ billion in
    commodities; 2010 23 Sept., Downloaded (2012-05-01,
   15:31): http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/09/23/
   us-commodities-calstrs-idUSTRE68M4JL20100923

[21] Satyanarayan, S./Varangis, P. (1994): An Ecient Frontier for
    International Portfolios with Commodity Assets, Policy Research
   Working Paper 1266, The World Bank, March 1994; Downloaded
   (2012-01-24, 19:52): www-wds.worldbank.org/WDSP/IB/1994/03/01/
   000009265_3961006020009/Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf

                                47
[22] Schneeweis, T / Karavas, V /Georgiev, G. (2002): Alternative
    Investments in the Institutional Portfolio, Alternative Investment
   Management Association (AIMA); Downloaded (2012-04-12, 18:16):
   http://didattica.unibocconi.it/mypage/upload/49203_20100215_
   063949_ALTINVININSTITPORT_SCHNEEWEISKARAVASGEORGIEV.PDF

[23] The National Pension Insurance Funds (AP Funds) act (SFS 2000:192);
   Downloaded (2012-01-20): http://www.ap1.se/upload/reports/The%
   20National%20Pension%20Insurance%20Funds%20Act.pdf

[24] The Wall Street Journal: The Case Against Commodities; 2011 4
   Oct.; Downloaded (2012-03-23): http://online.wsj.com/article/
   SB10001424053111903703604576585091338444116.html

[25] University of Wageningen, Impact on global food prices, 17 Jul
   2008 (report 2008-040) http://www.wageningenuniversity.nl/UK/
   newsagenda/archive/news/2008/Impact_on_global_food_prices.
   htm

[26] You, Leyuan / Daigler, R.T (2010): A Markowitz Optimization of Com-
    modity Futures Portfolios, McCoy college of business administration;
   Downloaded (2012-04-28, 10:34): http://www.southwesternfinance.
   org/conf-2011/swfa2011_submission_28.pdf

                                48