 Mutual Fund Behavior in Volatile Markets - a
Study of the Swedish Premium Pension System

                                ∗                            †
         Oscar Göransson      Carl Michael Tidebäck

                       May 21, 2012

                            Bachelor thesis in Finance
                        Stockholm School of Economics
                   Supervisor: Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal

                             Abstract
         The Swedish Premium Pension system is constructed to allow investors
     the freedom to choose between a multitude of active and passive funds.
     Active funds carry higher fees in return for their activity while delivering
     meagre returns during the twelve years since the inception of the system.
     However, the opacity of the system makes it possible for managers to
     follow a closet indexing strategy while branding their funds as active. This
     thesis investigates the behaviour of actively managed funds and how their
     level of activity has been aected by the large shifts in market volatility
     of recent years. We construct several measures of activity and use both
     forward- and backward-looking measures of volatility. Our results prove
     inconclusive with two measures suggesting maintained activity and one
     indicating closet indexing. However, we argue that investors may want to
     consider choosing passively managed funds in light of the performance of
     active funds.
    Keywords: Mutual funds, Volatility, Premium Pension System,
     Active Management, Closet Indexing

  ∗
   22016@student.hhs.se
  †
   21945@student.hhs.se

                                 1
Acknowledgements

We would like to express our gratitude to our supervisor Professor Ulf von
Lilienfeld-Toal for his helpful guidance. We would also like to thank Nikita
Koptyug and Professor Jan Eklöf for last-minute pointers as well as Bengt Nor-
rby and Yassin Elgadmioui at the SPA for their help in acquiring vital data.

                                  2
Contents

1 Introduction 5
   1.1 The Swedish pensions system - a short introduction . . . . . . . 6

2 Previous research 7
   2.1 Studies of particular relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   2.2 Timing ability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   2.3 A short overview of portfolio theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   2.4 Active management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   2.5 Market uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.6 Recessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3 Methodology 12
   3.1 Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
        3.1.1 Dependent variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
        3.1.2 Independent variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   3.2 Two-dimensional clustering and xed eects . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   3.3 Regressions on monthly data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   3.4 Pre/post analysis on daily data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   3.5 Data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
        3.5.1 Funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
        3.5.2 Inclusion rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
        3.5.3 Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
        3.5.4 Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
        3.5.5 A note on currencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

4 Results 18
   4.1 Absolute excess returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
        4.1.1 VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
        4.1.2 Standard deviation of benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   4.2 Tracking Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
        4.2.1 VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
        4.2.2 Standard deviation of benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
          2
   4.3 R  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
        4.3.1 Recession dummy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
        4.3.2 VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
        4.3.3 Standard deviation of benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   4.4 The Treynor-Mazuy model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   4.5 Results on daily data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   4.6 Absolute excess returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
        4.6.1 VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
        4.6.2 Standard deviation of benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
          2
   4.7 R  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
        4.7.1 VIX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
        4.7.2 Standard deviation of benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   4.8 σ of benchmark and VIX combined specication . . . . . . . . . 23

5 Implications for investors 24

6 Conclusions 25

                                  3
7 Future research 26

A References 27

B Figures 30

C Tables 31

                                  4
1 Introduction

The Swedish pension system is one of a few in the world that allows for investors
to choose how they want to invest their endowments. Active investors are en-
couraged to choose between over 800 funds that participate in the system, most
of them actively managed. At the same time, the consensus view in nancial
literature has long been that active managers, on average, destroy value for their
clients. The legitimacy of the system rests upon the assumption that the right
to choose is so valuable that we are willing to accept a certain amount of risk
that some of us make a bad choice. Due to the eects of the nancial crisis, the
system has come under re for delivering inferior returns to too large a share of
investors while fund managers are pocketing hefty fees at investors' expense.
   The twelve years that the system has been in operation have been some of
the most volatile times in recent history:

              Figure 1: MSCI World and CBOE VIX indices

   It is generally believed that the more volatile the market, the greater the
                                      1
opportunities for active fund managers.  Still, because of the opacity of funds'
day-to-day operations there are incentives for managers to minimize their losses
in bad times and simply stick to the benchmark in order to keep investors
from eeing, thus turning the fund into an expensive index fund. Given the
large sums accumulated over a lifetime of hard labor, it is important both for
individual investors and for the legitimacy of the system that the incidence of
closet indexing is minimized.
   This thesis aims to investigate the behavior of mutual funds in the Swedish
premium pension system during volatile markets. Do they stick to their active
mandate or hide behind an indexing strategy when the market turns sour?
   We employ three dierent measures of activity: absolute excess return,

   1
   The Big Myth: Active Managers Shine in Volatile Markets,
http://money.usnews.com/money/blogs/On-Retirement/2011/09/22/the-big-myth-active-
managers-shine-in-volatile-markets

                                  5
                         2
Tracking Error and R . Although no similar studies have been done on the
Swedish pension system, there is a large body of research on the topic of active
management. Our results are less clear-cut than those of our main previous
studies, proving inconclusive in the end. More specically, we nd that both
the CBOE VIX index and the σ of benchmark returns have a positive rela-
tionship with activity when run separately, indicating that managers are either
sticking to their active strategy or adjusting slowly to a more passive strategy.
                 2
The results for R  suggest the contrary - that managers do engage in indexing
behavior.
   We proceed as follows: the introduction concludes with a run-down on the
characteristics of the pension system. Section 2 presents previous studies of
particular relevance to our topic, followed by a summary of concepts used in
this paper. Section 3 presents our statistical methodology including variables of
interest and specications used, as well as a description of the dataset. Section 4
breaks down the results of our regression specications by activity and volatility
measures. Section 5 oers analysis of the volatility-adjusted performance record
of our sample. Section 6 presents our conclusions and a discussion of potential
aws in our analysis. Finally, section 7 oers suggestions for future research on
the topic.

1.1 The Swedish pensions system - a short introduction
In 1994, it was decided by the Riksdag that the pensions system needed a
complete overhaul. The decision was driven in part by a realization that future
demographic changes will put an unsustainable strain on the system, and in
part by eects of the crisis of the early 90's that uncovered weaknesses in the
current system. Implementation was nalized in 2000 with the inception of the
pension fund system.
   Currently, Swedish pensions are divided into income pension, guarantee pen-
sion and premium pension, where the latter will be the focus of this paper. 2.5%
of Swedes' monthly gross (but net of social charges) salary up to SEK26,125 is
retained in the premium pension system and may be distributed between up to
ve funds within the system. If an individual chooses not to invest, the money
is invested in the AP7 Såfa fund, the state alternative, which has an all-equity
component and a mixed xed income and equity component. At the end of 2011,
2,764,852 investors (43.1%) had some or all of their premium pension invested
with the state alternative. At SEK104.6bn, the default state alternative made
up 26.6% of the total net assets in the system. Given that 43.1% of investors
went at least partly with AP7, we can conclude that at least 56.9% of investors
have made an active fund choice.
   The SPA has taken a number of measures to make the system more accessi-
ble. Choosing funds and reallocating your investment is very easy, and each fund
has a fact sheet readily available on the SPA web page. The fact sheet details
fund characteristics such as "risk" (constructed as a function of annual standard
deviation and placed into categories of green to red, low to high), "category"
(there are a total of 30 categories; examples include Sweden index, Global, Tele-
coms & IT and "Pension in more than 20 years" which is constructed to deliver
high risk to those investing for the very long term) and return compared to
benchmark. However, despite the accessibility of information, most investors
realize that making an informed choice demands a high level of understanding

                                  6
of nancial markets. Media attention has exacerbated the belief that it is no use
even trying to choose a fund because the counterparty (that is, fund managers)
are not acting in investors' best interest, for example by levying higher fees than
the state alternative. Moreover, because the system is relatively young, only a
very small part of current and soon-to-be pensioners' pensions actually derive
from the premium pension placements, thus making the upside to active choice
very limited. On the other hand, the SPA argues that for those entering the
labor market today, the premium pension will make up 10-40% of total pension
        2
benets.  In conclusion, despite the SPAs eorts, there are still high barriers to
becoming a truly active pension fund investor.
   The system is constructed to give investors access to a multitude of funds
at a lower cost compared to the open market (for detailed information on the
fee rebate system, see ter Laak (2011)). However, an unintended consequence
of the fee rebate system has been that it keeps index funds from entering the
system - because they are already very cheap, further pressure on fees might
make it unprotable for these funds to participate. The SPA has acknowledged
that this might be the case and notes that changes to the system might increase
the amount of index funds, giving investors a high degree of diversication at
          3
low cost.

2 Previous research

2.1 Studies of particular relevance
Literature in the eld of mutual fund performance seems to suggest that actively
managed mutual funds, in general, underperform their benchmark indices after
fees. Petajisto (2010), however, found that even though the above is true for
the average fund (and, indeed, a large set of funds) the most active ones seem to
outperform the benchmark. He uses a combination of Tracking Error and Active
Share to grade funds' activity and found that the most active fund managers by
Active Share and Tracking Error consistently outperform the market, whereas
"closet indexers" consistently underperform. He also found that the incidence of
closet indexing increases with volatility. The Active Share measure, introduced
in Cremers & Petajisto (2009) is dened as

                 ∑n
                               1
                 ActiveShare =      |wf und,i − windex,i|
                               2
                                         i=1
Due to our lack of information about funds' holdings over time, we will not
be able to replicate the study, nor do we have any way of distinguishing stock
picking ability. However, other measures of activity exist and will be elaborated
on in the methodology section.
   Kacperczyk et al. (2011B) argue that average fund performance increases
in a recession due to increases in volatility and in the price of risk. Moreover,
they found that fund managers who displayed signicant stock picking ability
in times of low volatility also had signicant market timing ability in recessions.
Another notable result is that funds on average increase the cash proportion of

   2
    Analytiskt testamente (2010), https://secure.pensionsmyndigheten.se/3325.html
   3
    Analytiskt testamente (2010)

                                  7
their portfolios in recessions, as well as shifting to lower-beta stocks and sectors.
Albeit of some signicance to our research question, we cannot test the latter
result as we do not have sucient data to notice any shifts in cash positions or
short-term sector rebalancing.
   Using their measures for stock picking and market timing, Kacperczyk et
al. managed to nd that for the top 5% of managers (by skill), the eect of
recession on the deployment of skill (that is, variations in timing and picking
skills) was much larger (quadruple and double for timing and picking respec-
tively) compared to the median manager. This result conrms their hypothesis:
given that a manager has skill, he or she will be using that skill for stock picking
in good times and market timing in a recession.
   Kacperczyk et al. also suggest that market timing could be captured by the
  2
R of a regression of market excess returns on fund excess returns:

                      Ri,t = αi + βiRI,t + σi,εεi,t

Using their sample of 3,477 funds between Jan 1980 to Dec 2005, they found
                         2
a signicant increase in R  of 3% (from 77% to 80%) in recessions, indicating
that there might be evidence of market timing ability in the sample.
   Amihud & Goyenko (2012) suggested another interpretation of the same
                                              2
measure. According to their paper, (1 − R ) is a viable measure of "selectivity"
                          2
and they nd that lower R signicantly predicts higher fund alpha. They also
           2
nd that R is positively related to fund size and negatively related to expenses
                                        2
and the fund manager's tenure. Their R  is the result of a CAPM regression
using a multi-factor (Fama-French-Carhart) index because they lack information
on funds' benchmarks.
                               2
   The basis for interpreting R stems from the following:

                                  2                               2
           2         RM SE           SystematicRisk
         R = 1 −          =         2         2
                V ARIAN CE   SystematicRisk + RM SE

                                                                  2
Here, RMSE is idiosyncratic volatility. Thus with a lower R , a fund's returns
are driven more by idiosyncratic volatility than systematic volatility, indicating
that a manager is keeping his portfolio weights dierent from the index. Amihud
& Goyenko (2012) further tested whether their results were simply the eect of
  2
R was due to pricing of volatility. They did this by testing whether passively
managed portfolios displayed the same characteristics and found that they did
                                 2
not. Thus, they concluded that R is a good measure of activity.

2.2 Timing ability
It is generally assumed that managers who generate positive alpha do so through
superior skill (indeed, this is a tautology given that skill is dened as alpha).
"Skill", in turn, consists of two components: stock picking ability and market
timing ability. The timing component of skill refers to the ability of a manager
to forecast movements in the market and use these forecasts to his or her ad-
vantage, generating superior returns. Treynor and Mazuy (1966) constructed
a model using a nonlinear component as a proxy for fund managers' market
timing ability. They postulated that the returns of a manager with zero timing
ability would be linearly related to the return of the market, and thus any non-
linear relationship would derive from timing ability. Their specication looked

                                  8
as follows:
                                                   2
                      ri = αi + βirm + δirm + ei
The δi above would, if positive, signify market timing ability on part of the
manager. Their results failed to show the existence of such a relationship - the
managers in their sample did not display any signicant market timing ability.

2.3 A short overview of portfolio theory
Much of the nancial literature regarding portfolio theory originates from the
model developed by Markowitz (1952). It is often boiled down to the two-fund
separation theorem which means that an investor should hold a combination
of the optimal risky portfolio (the ORP) and a risk-free asset depending on
the risk aversion of the investor. The ORP is obtained through the allocation
amongst risky assets which yields the best possible return-risk relationship, by
                                        [E(˜rp)−rf ]
maximizing the Sharpe Ratio, Sp =   σ(˜rp) (Sharpe, 1966). This combination
of risky assets uses the concept of diversication. By combining a large number
of securities with imperfect correlation, it is possible to construct a portfolio
which reduces individual asset's risk and has a risk-return relationship superior
to any individual risky security.
   The Capital Asset Pricing Model, independently developed by Sharpe (1964),
Lintner (1965) and Mossin (1966), builds on the mean-variance analysis (in-
vestors will only accept the largest possible expected return, given a level of
risk). The model concludes that in equilibrium, everyone will hold the optimal
portfolio, i.e. the market. This leads to the fact that investors should only
be compensated for bearing systematic risk (beta), the risk of the market as
a whole, not asset specic (idiosyncratic) risk. The market portfolio should
include all assets in the world, it is in a sense unobservable, since it not only
includes unequitized assets, but even more or less quantiable assets such as hu-
man capital. Due to the unobservable nature of the market portfolio, standard
practice is to use a proxy, such as a broad equity index.
                                                            4
   The CAPM has received a lot of criticism over the years.  It seems like it
is possible to obtain a return which is not entirely explained by a portfolio's
exposure to the market, its beta. One of the most popular models exploring
these anomalies is the three-factor model proposed by Fama and French (1996).
It tells us that the expected excess return above the risk-free rate of a portfolio is
due to the factor loadings (the slopes in a time-series regression) of the expected
premiums of the market (rM − rf ), a portfolio which is long small stocks and
short large stocks (SMB), and of a portfolio which is long stocks with a high
book-to-market value and short stocks with a low book-to-market value (HML).
Additional factors has been proposed, such as momentum (Carhart, 1997) and
macro factors (e.g. Chen, Roll & Ross, 1986; Jagannathan & Wang, 1996).
   The Ecient Market Hypothesis (EMH), which is closely related to asset
pricing models such as the CAPM, states that known information is reected
in assets' prices. By known information one usually distinguishes between past
prices, public information and private information, which has resulted in the
weak-form, the semi-strong form and the strong form of the EMH. Shiller (1981)
challenges this theory since stock prices are too volatile to be explained by

   4
    For an interesting discussion on the topic, see "The CAPM Debate" by Jagannathan and
McGrattan (1995)

                                  9
changes in dividends. The fact that momentum in stock prices exists, is also
often used to reject the weak form of the EMH. Fama (1999) argues that the
market is still ecient, only that there appears to be anomalies which are caused
by use of the wrong methodology.

2.4 Active management
Active management is usually dened as a portfolio strategy which seeks to
outperform a passive index. A manager of such a fund does not follow the
ecient market hypothesis and tries to nd undervalued assets to buy and
overvalued assets to sell.
   Models rely on theoretical assumptions and, given the anomalies found by
empirical research, it is maybe not that strange that there is a large active man-
agement industry. However, several studies (e.g. Gruber, 1996; Fama & French,
2010) do in fact nd that actively managed funds signicantly underperform pas-
sive indices, which indicates that a passive market portfolio might be is the way
to go after all. Although passive indexing has grown, it has not decreased the
share of active management by much. One explanation to the size of the active
management industry, though quite unsatisfying, is that investors are irrational.
Pástor and Stambaugh (2012) propose another explanation: decreasing return
to scale. They argue that an increasing number of active managers trying to
generate returns above a passive index for their investors, dilutes the possibil-
ities to do so. If all investors understand that there is a negative relationship
between industry size and returns, but not exactly the degree of correlation, the
result will only be a slow decrease of their invested share in actively managed
funds, although the size of the industry will remain substantial.
   When evaluating an actively managed fund, there is a shortcoming with the
Sharpe Ratio, namely, the risk-free rate. By using the risk-free rate, the fund
manager is assessed in the same way, irrespective of their investment strategy.
If a fund's return is compared against an benchmark which better captures this,
the comparison between funds will be more reasonable. If we put this excess
return, the alpha, in relation to the standard deviation (the Tracking Error)
of these returns we get the Information Ratio (also known as the Appraisal
                 rp−rb
Ratio) IRp = σ(rp−r ) (Treynor & Black 1973). It represents the active return
                            b
in relation to the active risk, the consistency of alpha.
   Sharpe (1991) reasoned that if costs are ignored, the average active return
should be the same as the average passive return. Given the zero-sum game
properties of the market, this would make sense. The theory requires that the
active manager can only invest within the benchmark, which should be a viable
assumption, given that the benchmark is appropriate. If a normal distribution
of returns around the passive return is assumed, a positive IR would indicate
                                        5
that the fund manager is above average.  The problem with this reasoning is
that the assumption of a normal distribution is not necessarily correct. This
combined with survivorship bias, the fact that fund's that underperform too
                                                                     6
long will go out of business, makes it more dicult to interpret the IR.  A rule
of thumb proposed by Grinhold and Kahn (1995) is that an IR of 0.5 is "good"
and an IR of 1 is "exceptional".

   5
    For more on how to interpret the IR, see Clement, C. (2009)
   6
   Clement, C. (2009): Data between 2004-2009, on 247 funds with the S&P 500 as the
benchmark, shows that more than 75% of the funds have an IR above 0.

                                  10
2.5 Market uncertainty
The uncertainty, or the level of risk, in a market is usually measured by its
volatility. It is either thought of as the standard deviation of past returns or
derived from the prices of option contracts, yielding what is known as implied
volatility. By using an option pricing model, such as the Black-Scholes, one can
estimate the volatility which is required to yield a theoretical option price equal
to the current market price. Thus, ceteris paribus, a higher price implies higher
expected future volatility.
   The standard deviation of past returns is a backward-looking measure of
volatility, while the implied volatility is a forward-looking measure, as it is
based on the current market estimate of near-future volatility.
   Kaminski (2012) describes the cyclical behavior of volatility and distin-
guishes between cycles driven by positive and negative stimuli. The positive
volatility cycles originate from overcondence whereas the negative cycles are
initiated and driven by fear and distress. The negative cycles are more extreme
and long-lived due to the loss-averse nature of humans. Tversky and Kahne-
man (1992) found that the slope of the utility function of wealth is steeper by
a factor of 2-2.5 for losses than for gains, that is, the negative utility of a loss
is much greater than the positive utility of an equivalent gain in wealth for a
given reference point.
    The equities markets usually display a negative relationship with volatility.
The correlation has been around -60%, since 1990, but during recent years it
has increased to about -80% (Kaminski (2012), see Fig. 1 for an illustration).
This relationship has for a long time been attributed to Black's leverage eect
(Black, 1976). This suggests that when a company's stock price declines, its
debt in relation to assets becomes larger, i.e. it becomes more leveraged. A
higher leverage often leads to a higher volatility in equity returns. On the other
hand, Hasanhodzic and Lo (2011) nd that this "leverage" eect is even larger
in all-equity nanced companies. Their alternative explanations are, however,
rather ambiguous. One of them centres on conditional risk-taking behaviour,
which means that investors' assessment of a risky situation is based on previous
experiences, such as a nancial crisis.
    Furthermore, during high volatility, the correlation between equities is gen-
erally amplied, especially during market downturns. This asymmetry relates
to the disproportional relationship between return and volatility. Amira et al.
(2011) argue that it is not volatility itself that drives the homogenization, but
rather the market direction. A negative shock has a simultaneous eect on both
the market trend, which aects the correlation, and the volatility. However,
although the volatility decreased in 2010, the correlation between equities re-
             7
mained high.   The importance of macro related news and the popularity of
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) could be an explanation.

2.6 Recessions
With the recent nancial crisis fresh in memory, it is evident that the state of the
economy is strongly linked to returns and volatility (see g. 3 for an illustration).
Apart from low returns and high volatility, there is also evidence of an increased
price of risk, or risk aversion. People lose their jobs during recessions and the

   7
    http://www.risk.net/asia-risk/feature/1895618/equity-correlation-volatility-sync

                                  11
equity market simultaneously goes down, requiring investments to deliver a
higher return per unit of risk. Investors are in other words willing to pay more
                 8
for a high payo.  This variability does not only concern the equity premium,
but also premiums on other assets such as bonds and currencies.
   Although recessions increase the aggregated risk, Kacperczyk et al. (2011A),
could not nd a noteworthy increase in stocks' idiosyncratic risk, further high-
lighting the presence of increased correlation between stocks.

3 Methodology

3.1 Variables
3.1.1 Dependent variables
In order for us to determine whether fund managers become more or less active
during uncertain times, we have to use measures which capture their level of
active management. Since we do not have any detailed information regarding
funds' holdings, we are not able to use their Active Share (Cremers & Peta-
jisto, 2009). Our measures will therefore focus on funds' deviation from their
benchmark indices.
   We believe that funds' absolute excess return (|ri,t − rI,t|, where subscript
"I" represents the benchmark index) captures this deviation in a straightforward
way - if a manager puts their weights in assets dierently from their benchmark,
we will see absolute excess return.
   Another measure which captures how closely a fund tracks its benchmark is
the fund's Tracking Error, which we, in line with Petajisto (2010), dene as the
standard deviation of the excess return (TEit = σ(ri,t −rI,t)). Another approach
would be to do a regression of a fund's return on the benchmark to measure the
residual volatility. However, since a fund's performance more often is compared
to its benchmark, rather than its beta times the benchmark, the volatility of
the excess return better captures the active risk. Furthermore, Petajisto argues
that if a manager for a short time holds a large amount of cash with the intent
to time the market, this risk is not taken into account by the residual volatility,
but it is captured by the rst-mentioned denition.
                                                                                     2
   As previously mentioned, Kacperczyk et al. (2011A), argued that the R
from a CAPM-regression at the fund level could capture fund managers' market
timing. It measures how a fund's portfolio weights co-vary with the market
premium. In other words, a low coecient of determination indicates that the
idiosyncratic volatility is high in relation to the systematic volatility. Amihud &
                                      2
Goyenko (2012) argued that (1 − R ) may be interpreted as a measure of funds'
selectivity. In this paper, we will look at both interpretations when conducting
                                       2
our analysis. We have calculated the R  by doing a 12 month rolling-window
regression of a fund's return above the risk-free rate on the benchmark's return
above the risk-free rate:

                   ri,t − rf,t = αi + βi(rI,t − rf,t) + εi,t

   8
    For more information regarding the counter-cyclical variability of the equity premium, see
Cochrane (2006)

                                  12
We use the 3-month Treasury Bill as the risk-free rate (rf,t) since shorter ma-
                                9
turities are generally too volatile.  While the Kacperczyk et al. study was done
on U.S. equity funds, our data covers funds from all over the world. In our
regression we have replaced the general rm,t with rI,t. Our motivation for using
the benchmark as the "market" is that it should, more or less, represent a fund's
investment universe and capture the level of co-variation between funds' weights
                                            2
and their benchmark. A change in a fund's R should indicate a change in the
portfolio's idiosyncratic risk relative to its total risk.

3.1.2 Independent variables
The independent variable is supposed to capture market uncertainty. In our rst
regressions we are using the price level of the Chicago Board Options Exchange
Market Volatility Index, known as the VIX. It measures the weighted average
of the implied volatility of options on the Standard and Poor 500 index for 30
                                                              10
days, quoted as the annualized standard deviation in percent.   Although it
measures the market expectations of the volatility of the S&P 500 index, it is
often seen as the fear index of the world, due to the importance of the S&P 500
index and its accessibility.
   Our second proposal for an independent variable is to simply use the monthly
volatility (i.e. the standard deviation of the returns) of a fund's benchmark
index. This allows us to relate funds' level of activity to the uncertainty of the
market, to which they are compared to and, presumably, where they primarily
invest.
   By using these two measures of market uncertainty, we can explore the
impact of the market expectations of volatility, on a broader scale, as well as
the ex-post eect of the benchmark-specic volatility.
   Another aspect we want to explore is the impact of the state of the economy
on the funds. Apart from an aggregate increase in volatility during recession,
there is also an increase in the risk premium. The diculty of implementing
such a variable is that we have a large number of fund categories, of which
some are not even specic to an economic region. The National Bureau of
Economic Research Business Cycle Committee denes a recession as the period
                                                11
between the peak and trough of economic activity.   Following the methodology
of Kacperczyk et al. (2011), we have created a dummy variable which takes the
value of one during months of recession and zero otherwise. It should work as
a proxy for a recession, regardless of where the majority of the funds' holdings
are based, due to the importance of the US economy to the rest of the world.
   We will also use the Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI) to ro-
bustness check our results. The CFNAI is a weighted average of 85 monthly
indicators, categorized in the groups: production and income, employment, un-
employment and hours, personal consumption and housing as well as sales,
                      12
orders and inventories.   An advantage with the CFNAI is that it is a con-

   9
    The data on the 13-week Treasury Bill was obtained from Yahoo Finance. Since it is
quoted as a discount we have recalculated it to a monthly rate using a simplifying assumption
that the maturity is 1/4 of a year
  10
   For information on how the VIX is calculated, see http://www.cboe.com/micro/vix/
vixwhite.pdf
  11
    http://www.nber.org/cycles.html
  12
   Further information about the CFNAI can be found at http://www.chicagofed.org/
webpages/publications/cfnai/index.cfm

                                  13
tinuous variable. Furthermore, its design makes it easy to interpret; when the
index is zero, the economy is in line with the trend growth, a positive (negative)
value means that growth is above (below) the trend rate of growth. In order to
increase the readability of our results, we have transformed the CFNAI variable
such that negative values are positive and vice versa.

3.2 Two-dimensional clustering and xed eects
OLS assumes that each time period brings further information. By overlooking
serial (between the same entity over dierent time periods - i.e. rm eects) and
cross-sectional (between dierent entities during the same time period - i.e. time
eects) correlation, there is a risk that the standard error is underestimated,
which can result in overestimated t-statistics (Petersen, 2009). This can in turn
lead the researcher to incorrectly reject a null hypothesis.
   One approach which is often used to address cross-sectional correlation is
the two-step Fama-MacBeth regression (Fama and MacBeth, 1973). The disad-
vantage with this method is that it does not take care of serial correlation and
thus produces biased standard errors, which makes it less appealing for us.
   A starting point to tackle the problem with correlation in our data, and get
a more pure interpretation of our results, is to use a xed eects regression.
Although such a model enables us to control for time- and fund-specic eects,
it will still leave some correlation errors untreated, if for example the factor
sensitivities vary across funds (Thompson (2011)). Petersen (2009) showed that
a regression with xed eects leads to biased standard errors in the case of
temporary rm eects, when the correlation across residuals varies over time.
The same applies to non-constant time eects, i.e. when a shock has a larger
impact on some funds than on others. Since we cannot rule out that there is
such variation in our data (indeed, with a global fund universe this eect is
likely to exist), we have to use additional specications.
   In order for us to compute standard errors which are robust for correlation
across both time and funds, we have to use a two-dimensional clustering ap-
proach together with xed eects. By using standard errors clustered by funds,
the correlation between observations of the same fund in dierent years is taken
into account. The standard errors clustered by time (in this case measured in
months) captures the correlation between dierent funds in the same time pe-
riod. This approach produces unbiased standard errors, whether the rm eects
are constant or not.
   Since most empirical data tend to suer from heteroskedasticity, robust stan-
dard errors are often used by researchers. If, however, a xed eects model is
used, Stock and Watson (2006) showed that the cluster-robust estimator is more
appropriate. Although this has been accounted for in more recent versions of
                                                 13
Stata, it only works with one-way clustering.
   Thompson (2011) proposed the following calculation of the variance-covariance
matrix:
                   V ar̂    βˆ = VˆF irm + VˆT ime,0 − VˆW hite,0

The variance estimate for an OLS estimator βˆ is the sum of the standard errors
clustered by rms and the standard errors clustered by time, which is subtracted

  13
    In Stata version 10, vce(cluster id) is automatically applied when the robust option is
used with xtreg, fe r (Baum, C.F., A. Nichols and M.E. Schaer (2010))

                                  14
by the White heteroskedasticity-robust OLS variance matrix, which includes
the intersection of the two dimensions. The third variance matrix is subtracted
in order to remove the double-counting of cross products, such as within-rm
          14
variance.
   The clustered standard errors are asymptotically consistent if both T and N
         15
are large.   Monte Carlo simulations done by Thompson suggest that 25 rms
and time periods is sucient if one does not allow for persistent common shocks.
If we allow for persistent common shocks, a rule of thumb is between 50 to 100
time periods. Given our large data set (most funds have observations for 136
time periods), we can safely assume that we have enough clusters.

3.3 Regressions on monthly data
Our xed eects model could be expressed in a general way as follows:

          yi,t = β0 + αi + θt + β1xi,t + εi,t, i = 1, ..., N ; t = 1, ..., T

Time (month) and entity (fund) xed eects are represented by θt and αi.
However, since we suspect correlation in the error term, εi,t, we have to use
two-way clustered standard errors, which are clustered on an entity (fund) and
a time (month) dimension. It is especially important to use clustering when the
variable is constant across all funds, such as the VIX and our recession variables.
This is done with the Stata command xtivreg2 (M.E. Schaer, 2010), which
allows for both xed eects and multi-way clustering.
    Our rst xed eects regressions allow us to investigate the impact of volatil-
ity on the absolute excess return of funds. It is specied as follows:

              |ri,t − rI,t| = β0 + αi + θt + β1Volatilityt + εi,t

One regression is done with VIXt as the variable for volatility. This will look at
the eect of the forward-looking volatility on absolute excess return. The other
regression will use the variable benchmark volatility σI,t, which determines the
relationship of our backward-looking measure with funds' deviation from their
benchmark. However, the regressions done with the VIX as a measure for
volatility will not include time dummy variables due to collinearity.
   The second type of xed eects regression explores the eect of market
volatility on funds' monthly active risk:

                TEi,t = β0 + αi + θt + β1Volatilityt + εi,t

The same variables for market volatility, used in previous regressions, apply here
as well.
   Our nal activity measure, run as a dependent variable in our monthly data
regressions will be the coecient of determination:

                       2
                 Ri,t = β0 + αi + θt + β1Volatilityt + εi,t

By adding a variable for recession, we hope to separate the eect of decreased
economic activity from the usually paired increase in market volatility. Since

  14
    A more rigorous explanation can be found in Thompson (2011)
  15
    Proof can be found in the appendix of Thompson (2011)

                                  15
a recession itself may lead to a change in fund manager behaviour we want to
control for this. The recession variable is either represented by a dummy for
a month during recession in the U.S. or a continuous variable for the CFNAI.
When a recession variable is used, time dummy variables are not used due to
perfect correlation.
   Furthermore, we will be running a combined specication in order to separate
the eects of the VIX and the standard deviation of benchmark:

              Activityi,t = β0 + αi + β1VIXt + β2σI,t + εi,t

    Finally, we will be looking at how our volatility and activity measures relate
to funds' excess returns in order to determine whether they aect performance:

                 ri,t − rI,t = β0 + αi + θt + β1σI,t + εi,t

              ri,t − rI,t = β0 + αi + θt + β1Activityi,t + εi,t

3.4 Pre/post analysis on daily data
The Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in 2008 resulted in a huge spike in volatility.
For us to test if this black swan event had any out-of-the-ordinary eect on funds'
behaviour, we will perform a pre/post analysis using daily data. This will also
serve as a robustness check of our previous ndings from the monthly data.
Since we have no access to intraday data on the funds, we cannot calculate their
daily Tracking Error. Therefore, our study will focus on funds' daily absolute
excess return.
   Our model will be similarly specied as the ones used on monthly data, but
with the addition of a post dummy variable, which equals to during and after the
event, as well as an interaction term between the post dummy and the variable
for volatility. Our belief is that a regression with the variable for volatility
together with a post dummy will separate the eect of the general distress after
the announcement from general market volatility. The logic behind this is to
nd whether there is something else, besides volatility, that has an eect on
funds' deviation from their benchmark, i.e. their level of activity.
   The specications are as follows:

   |ri,t − rI,t| = β0 + αi + β1Volatilityt + δ0post + δ1post ∗ Volatilityt + εi,t

The date of the event, the 15th of September, is included since the announcement
was made in the morning and thus the market had time to react. We have
decided to use a window of -45/+45 days around the event date, since this
will capture the spikes in volatility after the event, as well as the relatively low
volatility before the event.
   The entity-xed eects are applied at a fund level. We do not use any time
dummy variables in this case, due to perfect collinearity with the post dummy
variable. We are also clustering our standard errors on fund and date in order
to adjust for serial and cross-sectional correlation in the error term.

3.5 Data description
The primary source of data is the Swedish Pensions Agency (SPA). The Agency
maintains an online archive of all funds participating the pension system from

                                  16
September 2000, as well as statistics and benchmarks from January 2006 (these
will be elaborated on further below).

3.5.1 Funds
The full dataset comprises 1375 funds, identied by specic SPA six-gure iden-
tication numbers. These are funds that have been included in the system for
at least one month during the full period. Funds are open-ended mutual funds,
but the SPA imposes no other restrictions on them besides their fulllment of
the UCITS (Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities)
directives. With the exclusion of funds for which we have no benchmark g-
ures and index funds (more on this under inclusion rules), 669 funds have been
active during for at least twelve consecutive months over the eleven years and
thus constitute our dataset. 443 funds have observations in the last month of
2011 and can be considered as having ongoing operations.

3.5.2 Inclusion rules
A number of modications have been made to the original dataset; these mod-
ications will be laid out and explained below.
   Some funds are primarily or partially interest rate funds. These have been
excluded for comparability reasons. Funds labeled "other countries" and "other
sectors" were dropped due to the lack of a unifying benchmark. Funds in the
categories "Europe/EMU index" and "Sweden index" were dropped because
they are explicitly aiming to follow the benchmark index, thus falling outside
the scope of this paper. The SPA decides which benchmark to use based on
a fund's primary investing style. All funds within a certain category, except
for the "other" categories, share the same benchmark (please see table 1 for
categories and their respective benchmarks). These benchmarks are often, but
not always, the same benchmark that the fund uses for internal performance
measurement and in prospectuses. Thus, we have made sure to match funds
with the benchmark that investors are presented with in choosing whether to
invest, rather than that which funds use for their own evaluations. This also
removes any bias from funds' choosing their own benchmark to look better by
comparison.

3.5.3 Statistics
The SPA statistics database contains information on AUM, fees, categories and
turnover. However, our use of some of these variables (AUM, fees and turnover)
is very limited because gures are somewhat unreliable, prone to inconsistent
formatting and exist for too small a subset of funds and time periods.

3.5.4 Returns
Returns are computed on daily close prices (which in turn are the average of
bid/oer close prices) both for funds and indices and collapsed to monthly fre-
quencies for the full dataset due to computing power limitations. The pre/post
study uses daily data.

                                  17
3.5.5 A note on currencies
The SPA data reports bid/ask prices both in local currencies and in SEK conver-
sions at the prevailing rate. Although the case could be made that SEK returns
better reect the actual returns enjoyed by investors, this approach would make
all our variables subject to unseen eects in currency markets, quite possibly
skewing our results signicantly due to the volatile nature of the Swedish Krona.
Furthermore, maintaining local-currency returns makes for better comparability
with indices as these are more often than not quoted in the correct currency
(mainly SEK, USD and EUR). Errors arising from instances where the local cur-
rency changes over a fund's lifetime (as happens, for example, when the home
market adopts the Euro) have been corrected for by elimination of erroneous
values at the daily level.

4 Results

4.1 Absolute excess returns
The rst set of regressions is done on absolute excess return. Although one could
argue that it is a rather crude measure of a fund's activity we would expect it
to decrease if a fund manager decides to reduce his active risk by shifting the
portfolio weights more in line with the benchmark.

4.1.1 VIX
Our results done with the VIX as a measure for volatility can be found in table
2. When only the VIX variable is included (column 1), we nd that a one point
increase in the volatility index has an estimated eect of 0.144 percentage points
on the absolute excess return and that the coecient is signicantly dierent
from zero at a 1% level. A one point increase of the VIX represents a one
percentage point increase in the annualized standard deviation, expected for
the next 30 days.
   If we add fund xed eects to our basic regression (column 2), the coecient
is increased to 0.00146 and remained signicant at a 1% level. Paired with the
             2
increased R , this implies that the rm xed eects improves the model.
   When we include the dummy variable for recession months in the U.S. (col-
umn 3) we nd that the coecient for VIX loses some of its magnitude, in
relation to our regressions done in columns 1-2. It seems like there is other
aspects of an economic downturn, other than increased volatility, which has an
impact on funds' deviation from their benchmark.
   In column 4, we have used the CFNAI variable as a measure of economic
activity. Although the variable itself is insignicant, the inclusion of it increases
the coecient of the VIX, in comparison to the regression on column 2, (to
0.00152). Seemingly, the CFNAI reduces some of the noise in our data - it
works as an unsuppressor variable. This would make sense as the market can
sometimes react heavily on gures captured in the index. These include unem-
ployment, housing and ordering data.

                                  18
4.1.2 Standard deviation of benchmark
The use of the standard deviation of funds' benchmarks as a measure for volatil-
ity tells about the same story, which can be found in table 3. The coecient
is near 2 in all cases, which means that a 1 percentage point increase in the
standard deviation is associated with almost double the eect on the excess
absolute return.
   The inclusion of both time and fund xed eects (column 2) leads only
to a small reduction in the coecient for volatility but a higher coecient of
determination. Furthermore, the coecient stays highly signicant - i.e. we
have reason to belive that its quite a robust measure.
   If we add our recession varialbes (columns 3-4), the coecients stays signif-
icant and stable above 2. However, the coecients for the recession variables
are not signicant and thus do not seem to bring anything new to the table.
Our interpretation is that funds' deviation from their benchmark is not really
aected by other aspects of economic downturns, other than volatility.
   Our main interpretation of the results done with the absolute excess return
is that the fund managers in our dataset do not get less active, in the sense
that they do not change their weights to more closely follow their benchmark.
Whether managers get more active or remain at their previous level of activity
during volatile markets is more dicult to tell. We would expect the absolute
excess returns to be magnied, ceteris paribus, if market volatility increases.

4.2 Tracking Error
The Tracking Error measures a fund's active risk. Surely, if fund managers
suddenly turn to closet indexing, it would decrease.

4.2.1 VIX
Results from our regressions done with the VIX as our volatility variable can
be found in table 4. The standard OLS regression (column 1) shows a positive
and highly signicant relationship between volatility and funds' active risk.
   When we control for time and fund xed eects (column 2), we nd that the
coecient for the VIX increases.
   However, when add the NBER variable (column 3), the coecient for the
VIX is slightly reduced. The NBER variable has a positive and signicant (at a
5% level) relationship with funds' active risk. In other words, the VIX does not
fully capture the the eect on fund dispersion. If this result persists when we use
our more robust measure for volatility, that could indicate that there is other
factors in a recession, other than volatility, that play part in the dispersion.

4.2.2 Standard deviation of benchmark
As seen in table 5, we once again nd that the standard deviation of the funds'
benchmark is a more robust variable for volatility. It is highly signicant in all
cases with a coecient of around 0.5-0.6. A one percentage point increase in the
standard deviation of the benchmark, is associated with about half a percentage
point increase in the Tracking Error.
   Interestingly, the recession variables are both highly signicant. During a
month of recession in the U.S., the estimated increase on the Tracking Error

                                  19
is 0.116 percentage points. The CFNAI has a coecient of 0.00063, which
indicates that a decrease in economic activity has a positive eect on the active
    16
risk.    A one point decrease in the CFNAI would be associated with a 0.063
percentage point rise of the Tracking Error. When the economy slows down,
there is usually great uncertainty. Our results indicate that there is something
else, other than pure volatility, which has an eect on funds' Tracking Error. It
might be related to an additional eect from negative volatility cycles with the
accompanied increased correlation between stocks and increased risk premiums.
If we look at g. 2, we can see the latest two periods of recession in the U.S.
and the CFNAI values at the time.
   In contrast to our results from regressions done with the absolute excess
return (in table 2 and table 3), we nd that, apart from volatility, other factors
captured in economic activity have an impact on funds' active risk.
   However, the problem inherent in our activity measure persists. A closer look
of the denition of the standard deviation of alpha will highlight our problem:
         √
        σ(rp − rI ) =   Var(rp) + Var(rI ) − 2 ∗ ρ(rp, rI ) ∗ σ(rp) ∗ σ(rI )

During high levels of volatility, the correlation between stocks usually increases.
When the benchmark's variance increases, the portfolio variance will increase
as well. In order for us to detangle these eects on the standard deviation of
alpha, we need detailed information regarding funds' holdings.

         2
4.3 R
The problem with our previous measures of activity is that it is dicult to tell
if the increase in these measures during volatile markets is due to an actual
increase in activity or simply because their holdings get relatively more volatile.
                          2
Regressions done on the R will hopefully remedy this dilemma or at least give
it a helpful angle.
                                    2
   However, the interpretation of R  is not completely straightforward. As
previously mentioned, it is the coecient of determination of a regression of the
index excess return on fund returns, using a twelve-month rolling window. One
                         2
interpretation is that if R is 1, variation in a fund's returns are fully explained
by variation in index returns. Then, the fund would essentially be the index.
Thus, it may be used as a measure of how well a fund tracks its benchmark and
              2
variations in R over time could be interpreted as changes in how active a fund
manager is.
                                        2
   Kacperczyk et al. (2011A) used the R as a proxy for fund managers' timing
                                            2
ability. The reasoning is that an increase in R in a recession would signify that
managers are sensitive to changes in aggregate market conditions. However, it is
                                2
not clear whether an increase in R would actually be due to active management
(managers in recessions rebalancing toward the benchmark) or whether it could
simply be a result of the increased correlation across all asset classes that tends
to be the result of a severe downturn.
   The alternative interpretation, suggested by Amihud & Goyenko (2012),
       2                                               2
uses Ri,t as a proxy for selectivity, where lower Ri,t equals more selectivity, or
portfolio deviation from benchmark in terms of weights. They nd that lower

  16
    We have reversed the signs of the index values for readability reasons

                                  20
  2
Ri,t signicantly predicts alpha and, somewhat contradicting Kacperczyk et al.
                                             2
(2011A), that this holds despite tests of Ri,t as a proxy for market timing. Thus,
they argue that funds that have market timing ability generate less alpha, that
            2
is, lower Ri,t is better.

4.3.1 Recession dummy

                       2
First, we regressed Ri,t on the NBER recession dummy. The results (table 7)
                                                                                  2
suggest a signicant (at the 1% level) 8.3 percentage points increase in Ri in
a recession, from 66.8% to 75.4% (column 1). This result would tell us that
managers do engage in market timing behavior when times get rough and is
consistent with the ndings in Kacperczyk et al. (2011A). Along with the
alternative interpretation, the increase may be attributable to a decrease in
managers' selectiveness - they are engaging in closet indexing.

4.3.2 VIX
The OLS regression (table 6 column 2) yields a signicant coecient of .00466,
meaning that each one point (or, 1 USD) increase in the value of the VIX index
                                               2
is associated with a 0.466% increase in Ri . This result persists when adding
NBER or CFNAI variables, which are both insignicant.
                                        2
   The eect of the VIX index on Ri is less clear-cut than that of the standard
deviation. The eect is generally weaker than that of the standard deviation by
about half (since the average value of the VIX is about 2000 times larger than the
average standard deviation while the coecient is only about a thousandth of
that of the standard deviation). However, the results still indicate that managers
do get less active as the VIX increases.

4.3.3 Standard deviation of benchmark

  2
Ri displays a signicant positive relationship with the standard deviation of the
benchmark using all three specications (table 7). The standard OLS regression
(column 1) yields a coecient of 4.823; with fund and time xed eects and
                                                                                     2
clustering (column 2) this is increased to 4.921, implying a 4.9% increase in Ri
for each percentage point increase in σI . The NBER recession dummy (column
3) and the CFNAI variable (column 4), too, have signicant (at 5%) positive
coecients.
                                                           2
   The standard deviation has a signicant eect on Ri in all of our regressions.
This leads us to believe that managers do engage in some indexing behavior,
maintaining a more active position when markets are calm and going toward
the index as volatility rises.

4.4 The Treynor-Mazuy model
In order to further test managers' market timing ability, we employed the
Treynor-Mazuy specication as laid out in a previous section (see table 8).
Again, we rst ran a standard OLS regression which yielded a signicant neg-
                       2
ative coecient for δ , implying negative market timing ability. When adding
fund and time xed eects, however, the coecient is no longer signicant. We
interpret this as further evidence that the sample lacks signicant market timing

                                  21
                                               2
ability, and that we cannot credibly interpret R  as timing ability in the way
that Kacperczyk et al. (2011A) do, instead leaning on the Amihud & Goyenko
                        2
(2012) view of (1 − R ) as a proxy for selectivity/activity.

4.5 Results on daily data
As we previously mentioned, the regressions done on a daily data frequency will
serve as a pre/post analysis of the Lehman bankruptcy in 2008. Additionally,
a study on daily data will help us determine the robustness of our previous
ndings on monthly data.

4.6 Absolute excess returns
4.6.1 VIX
The results from the regression done with the absolute excess return as the
explained variable and the VIX as an explanatory variable for volatility can be
found in table 9.
    Our robustness check is primarily the results reported in column 1-2. Firstly,
by doing a standard OLS regression (column 1), we nd a highly signicant
connection between the VIX and the absolute excess return. However, when
we use a xed eects specication (column 2) the coecient is insignicantly
dierent from zero. Moreover, the explained variance is increased when we
control for time and fund xed eects.
   Once we turn to our pre/post analysis (column 3), we nd that the coecient
for the VIX is positive (0.000685) and signicant at a 5% level. The post
dummy variable, which indicates if the Lehman bankruptcy has occurred, has
a coecient of 0.0138 and is also signicant. This means that the absolute
excess return is estimated to be 1.38 percentage points higher after the event.
The insignicant interaction term implies that we could not nd a change in
the marginal eect of the VIX on the funds' absolute excess return. In other
words, although the implied volatility, as well as the absolute excess return,
most certainly increased after the Lehman bankruptcy, there was no statistically
signicant change in the relationship between the two.
   The regression done on daily data does not give a uniform conrmation that
there is a signicant positive association between the absolute excess return and
the VIX we found on monthly data. Given that the xed eects specication
                                                                           2
(column 2) results in an insignicance of the VIX and the highest R , it seems
like there are fund and time specic eects that have an impact on whether the
funds' return dier from their benchmark, rather than the implied volatility, at
this high frequency.

4.6.2 Standard deviation of benchmark
Table 10 includes the regression results using the standard deviation of the
funds' benchmark as a measure of volatility. Once again, the main robustness
check of our ndings done on monthly data is to be found in column 1-2. The
coecient is highly signicant and positive in both the standard OLS regression
and our xed eects specication.
   In the pre/post analysis (column 3), we nd that the coecient is 0.117 and
highly signicant - an increase of the standard deviation by 10 percentage points

                                  22
is thus associated by a 1.17 percentage point increase of the absolute excess
return. In this case, the coecient for our post-event indicator is insignicantly
dierent from zero. However, the interaction term at 0.247 is highly signicant.
This indicates that the standard deviation's marginal eect on the absolute
excess return is noticeably increased after the event. A 10 percentage point
growth in the standard deviation of a funds' benchmark is connected to a 3.64
percentage point increase in the absolute excess return after the event.
   Although the aggregated monthly eect of the standard deviation of funds'
benchmark on the absolute excess return is higher, we still nd a positive rela-
tionship in the daily data. At this high frequency, there is probably more noise
aecting the level of deviation from the benchmark - which is indicated by the
low explained variance in all our regressions done on daily data.

         2
4.7 R

                               2
In our study of daily data, the R variable has been recalculated using the same
rolling-window technique but rescaled to the higher frequency of data.

4.7.1 VIX
The post dummy (table 11 column 1) and VIX variable (column 2) both have
signicant coecients using the standard OLS approach. VIX maintains sig-
nicance but the coecient decreases when we add fund and time clustering
(column 3) and fund-xed eects, and when we add post and interaction terms
(column 4) both the post and VIX terms become signicant only at 10%. We
                                                                2
conclude that the VIX seems to have a positive relationship with R at the daily
level, corroborating our ndings at the monthly level.

4.7.2 Standard deviation of benchmark
Again, the standard OLS (table 12 column 1) yields a signicant positive coef-
cient, but when adding fund and time clustering (column 2) the coecient is
no longer dierent from zero. The interaction term (column 3) is signicantly
positive at 5%, indicating that there is a relationship between the benchmark
                             2
standard deviation and R . It would seem that the eects from our monthly
data do exist on a daily level as well.

4.8 σ of benchmark and VIX combined specication
Finally, we ran a regression on each of our dependent variables using both
volatility measures. Results in table 13 show varying signicance as well as
signs. The VIX has a signicant positive eect on activity as measured by
                                                                              2
Tracking Error, and a positive eect on passivity as measured by R . The
standard deviation of benchmark has signicant positive eects on absolute
excess returns and the Tracking Error, but is insignicant in the regression on
  2
R . These results are somewhat contradictory and may cast doubt on our use
    2
of R  as a proxy for activity, given that we would expect global correlation to
increase with volatility.

                                  23
5 Implications for investors

Our results fail to give a conclusive answer as to whether managers are closet
indexing, but we do nd that deviation and dispersion measures increase with
volatility. Given that their portfolios experience signicant increases in these
measures with increases in volatility, how does this aect their performance?
Table 14 reports results of regressions done on excess returns using our measures
of activity. None of the coecients are signicant. Even if fund managers stay
active, we nd nothing in our results to indicate that activity on average adds
any value for investors - even before fees are taken into consideration.
   Kacperczyk et al. (2011B) argued that fund performance improves in re-
cessions, both due to the increased price of risk and volatility. Our simulation
of these ndings can be found in table 15. When we apply a standard OLS
regression (column 1) we do nd this is true for volatility but not for a recession
itself. However, when we rene our model by including two-dimensional clus-
tering and fund xed eects (column 2), the coecient for volatility also turns
insignicant.
   The yearly average returns on funds' benchmark, funds' excess return as
well as other data can be found in table 16. The Eastern Europe, the Swedish
Small Cap, the Latin America and the Emerging Markets indices are the top
performers. However, they are also among the most volatile indices which is to
be expected of such market types.
   Turning to the funds themselves, the excess returns are lacklustre, to say
the least, and surely conrm the academic world's view on active management.
Although the time period was highly volatile, the above mentioned lack of signi-
cance in the relationship between volatility and performance means we could not
expect the higher-than-average returns that Kacperczyk et al. (2011B) found.
Only the categories Asia and the Far East, Global, Japan, Nordic countries,
Emerging Markets and Russia have average returns above their benchmark.
Note that fees have not been included in the analysis - if we consider an average
fee of 2%, the average active management fund does not seem to add value to
their investors in any of the categories.
   If we instead were to take a mean-variance approach by looking at Sharpe Ra-
tios, the best categories would be Eastern Europe, Emerging Markets, Swedish
Small Cap Russia, Asia and the Far East and Latin America. Given the re-
turn above the risk-free rate in relation to the total risk, these categories should
be chosen. Funds in these categories are also investing in the most protable
benchmarks. Although the state alternative, AP 7, has a high excess return,
they have a low average Sharpe Ratio due to the low average returns of their
broad benchmark index.
   However, if we evaluate the fund categories with the Information Ratio, we
nd other results. Active fund managers under- and overweight their bench-
mark, based on their special information. The IR gives an indication of a man-
ager's skill in relation to the additional risk taken. Given the rule of thumb set
by Grinhold and Kahn (1995), not a single category achieves an average yearly
IR near 0.5, which they determine as "good". On the other hand, Goodwin
(1998) argues, based on a study on data stretching for 10 years, that 0.5 is too
high. According to Kidd (2011), an asset manager herself, "the general consen-
sus among the investment profession is that an IR of 0.20 or 0.30 is superior".
If we take this into consideration, AP 7 is performing well with an average IR

                                  24
of 0.25. Furthermore, funds benchmarked against the Japanese index over the
years 2007-2011, with a category average IR of 0.44. The fund managers in this
category, together with AP 7, show the highest average skill.
   Although the Japanese category displays a positive IR, one has to take the
fact that the benchmark has a negative average return into consideration. We
would expect these funds to be less inclined to invest in the stock market and
instead hold cash, given the bad performance of the Japanese stock market.
While IR is a good measure to determine which fund manager is the most
skilled, the Sharpe Ratio is arguably more appropriate if an investor is choosing
where to put all of his or her money, as this gives the highest return in relation to
total risk. The optimum would of course be a fund with a high IR, benchmarked
against an index with high return.

6 Conclusions

The aim of this thesis has been to determine whether funds in the Swedish pen-
sion system get less active during uncertain and volatile markets. We nd some
evidence that this would be the case. When volatility increases the deviation
and the dispersion from the benchmark increases, leading us to conclude that
managers maintain a certain level of activity. However, volatility also has a pos-
                           2
itive relationship with R , which we are interpreting as a measure of activity.
We do realize that this measure might be awed in that correlation would be ex-
                                                       2
pected to increase with volatility, thus yielding higher R regardless. However,
                                                                        2
Amihud & Goyenko (2012) dismissed this explanation after nding that R did
not predict performance for passively managed portfolios, suggesting that it is
a good measure of activity.
   We are thus forced to admit that our results are inconclusive.
   The regressions done with funds' Tracking Error as an explained varible
show that it is not only volatiliy, as measured by our two variables, that has
a positive eect on funds' active risk. This could indicate that they get more
active. We argue that if they held their strategies constant, only an increase
in volatility would have a signicant positive relationship with Tracking Error
whereas we nd that an economic downturn also has an impact. They are in
other words reacting to recessions. This conclusion is in line with Kacperczyk
et al. (2011) who found evidence of fund strategy heterogenisation during re-
cessions - uncertainty leads to a larger dispersion in trading ideas, i.e. funds do
not closet index as Petajisto (2011) found.
   While our results are ambiguous to say the least, perhaps this is not that
strange given the sometimes contradictory conclusions found in previous studies.
   It may still be the case that managers are closet indexing, only that other
eects have a more prominent impact - they may, for example, be too slow in
rebalancing their portfolios. By slow we mean that they are not fast enough
to react to current volatility, yielding positive coecients. However, tests with
lagged volatility measures fail to support such a hypothesis.
    A fund's benchmark should, if chosen appropriately, more or less represent its
investment universe. When the volatility of their benchmark increases, we would
expect an increased deviation and dispersion from their benchmark. Given that
volatility is higher in negative volatility cycles than in positive ones, managers
would want to depart from their active mandate/strategy in order to reduce

                                  25
downside risk. When moving from an active strategy to a passive one in times
of high uncertainty, managers would have to sell and buy stocks at an increasing
rate which would in and of itself lead to an increased dispersion of returns. This
eect may be present in our sample, leading us to overstate managers' level of
activity. Assuming that this is the case, the sample would be more prone to
indexing behaviour than our results suggest. As we have pointed out previously,
information on funds' holdings would remedy these types of bias in our study.
   We nd no evidence of any connection between volatility and excess returns,
nor between activity and excess returns. In light of this, investors may be better
o reducing the fees they pay by investing in passive funds. This view has also
been expressed by the Swedish Pension Authority, which is currently searching
for ways to incentivize index funds to join the system to a greater extent.

7 Future research

Pension systems and the added value of active management are hot topics both
in the academic world and the media. The Swedish government is currently re-
viewing the pension system and its focus on actively managed funds. Naturally,
there is a trade-o between giving investors the right to choose with whom to
invest their pension endowments and maintaining the legitimacy of a system
that consistently delivers inferior returns to those exercising that right (as op-
posed to passively investing in the default state fund). Furthermore, the value
of research done on the premium pension system will only increase with time as
the share of pensions deriving from it grows.
   Throughout the writing of this thesis we have been highlighting the im-
portance of information on funds' holdings. This would enable the calculation
of Active Share, Timing and Picking measures used in Petajisto (2010) and
Kacperczyk et al. (2011A). The problematic part is to nd this data on a
monthly basis for a large dataset, as it is usually reported per quarter or year.
   Furthermore, our analysis of equity mutual funds can be expanded to mixed
and pure xed-income funds. These will normally be recommended to soon-to-
be pensioners who cannot bear the high risk associated with all-equity funds.
Currently, this smaller subset of investors have a very small share of their pension
deriving from their investments, meaning that the economic signicance of such
research will be relatively low. Other measures of market uncertainty could for
instance be credit and credit default swap spreads.
   Another interesting topic is the performance of mutual funds. With more
complete information on funds' fees, we could look into the actual value creation
or as it seems to be in this case, value destruction. This topic is of especially
high relevance now, with funds' fees having been scrutinized in several media
reports lately.

                                  26
A References

                                                     2
Amihud, Y. and R. Goyenko (2012): "Mutual Fund's R as Predictor of Perfor-
mance", working paper, New York University - Stern School of Business, McGill
University - Faculty of Management

   Amira, K., A. Taamouti and G.Tsafack (2011): "What Drives International
Equity Correlations? Volatility or Market Direction?", Journal of Money and
Finance, Vol. 30, No. 6, 1234-1263.

   Baum, C.F., A. Nichols and M.E. Schaer (2010): Stata Conference Boston
http://www.stata.com/meeting/boston10/boston10_baum.pdf

   Black, F. (1976): "Studies of Stock Price Volatility Changes", Proceedings
of the Business and Economics Section of the American Statistical Association,
177-181.

   Cameron, A.C., J.B. Gelbach and D.L. Miller (2006): "Robust Inference
with Multi-way Clustering", NBER Technical Working Paper, No. 327.

   Carhart, M.M. (1997): "On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance", Jour-
nal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 1, 57-82.

   Chen, N., R. Roll and S.A. Ross (1986): "Economic Forces and the Stock
Market", The Journal of Business, Vol. 59, No. 3, 383-403.

   Clement, C. CFA (2009): "The Information Ratio",
http://www.jasonhsu.org/uploads/1/0/0/7/10075125/theinformationratio.pdf

   Cochrane, J.H. (2006): "Financial Markets and the Real Economy", Inter-
national Library of Critical Writings in Financial Economics, Vol. 18

   Cremers, M. and Petajisto, A. (2009): "How Active Is Your Fund Manager?
A New Measure That Predicts Performance"
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=891719

   Fama, E.F. and J.D. MacBeth (1973): "Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Em-
pirical Tests", The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 3, pp. 607-636.

   Fama, E.F. and K.R. French (1996): "Multifactor Explanations of Asset
Pricing Anomalies", The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 1, 55-84.

   Fama, E.F. and K.R. French (2010): "Luck versus Skill in the Cross Section
of Mutual Fund Returns", The Journal of Finance, Vol. 65, No. 5, 1915-1947.

   Goodwin, T.H. (1998): "The Information Ratio", Financial Analyst Jour-
nal, Vol. 54, No. 4, 34-43

   Grinhold, R.C. and R.N. Kahn (1995): "Active Portfolio Management", Ir-
win, Probus, IL.

                                  27
   Gruber, M.J. (1996): "Another Puzzle: The Growth of Actively Managed
Mutual Funds", The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 3, 783-810.

   Guvenen , F. (2009): "A Parsimonious Macroeconomic Model for Asset Pric-
ing," Econometrica, Econometric Society, Vol. 77(6), 1711-1750

   Hasanhodzic , J. and A.W. Lo (2011): "Black's Leverage Eect is not Due
to Leverage", working paper, MIT Sloan.

   Jagannathan, R. and E.R. McGrattan (1995): "The CAPM Debate", Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 19, No. 4, 2-17.

   Jagannathan, R. and Z. Wang (1996): "The Conditional CAPM and the
Cross-Section of Expected Returns", The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 1,
3-53.

   Kacperczyk, M., S.V. Nieuwerburgh and L. Veldkamp (2011B): "Rational
Attention Allocation Over the Business Cycle", NBER Working Paper, No.
FIN-11-050.

   Kacperczyk, M., S.V. Nieuwerburgh, L. Veldkamp (2011A): "Time-Varying
Fund Manager Skill", NBER Working Paper, No. 17615.

   Kaminski, K.M. (2012): "Managed Futures and Volatility: Decoupling a
"Convex" Relationship with Volatility Cycles",
http://www.cmegroup.com/education/les/ED150_Managed_Futures_and_Volatility_article.pdf

   Kézdi, G. (2003): "Robust Standard Errors in Fixed-Eects Panel Models",
http://129.3.20.41/eps/em/papers/0508/0508018.pdf

   Kidd, D. (2011): "The Sharpe Ratio and the Information Ratio, Investment
Performance Measurement Feature Articles, Vol. 2011, No. 1

   ter Laak, J. (2009): "Does the Swedish premium pension provide the right
incentives to its stakeholders?"
http://arc.hhs.se/download.aspx?MediumId=1411

   Lintner, J. (1965): "The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky
Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets", Review of Economics
and Statistics, Vol. 47, No. 1, 13-37.

   Markowitz , H. (1952): "Portfolio Selection", The Journal of Finance, Vol.
7, No. 1, 77-91.

   Mossin, J. (1966): "Equilibrium in Capital Asset Markets", Econometrica,
Vol. 34, No. 4, 768-783.

   Pástor, L. and R.F. Stambaugh (2012): "On the Size of the Active Manage-
ment Industry", working paper

                                  28
   Petajisto, A. (2010): "Active Share and Mutual Fund Performance"
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1685942

   Petersen, M. (2009): "Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data
Sets: Comparing Approaches", The Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), 435-480.

   Schaer , M.E. (2010): xtivreg2: Stata module to perform extended IV/2SLS,
GMM and AC/HAC, LIML and k-class regression for panel data models.
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456501.html

   Sharpe, W.F. (1964): "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilib-
rium under Conditions of Risk", Journal of Finance, Vol. 19, No. 3, 425-442.

   Sharpe, W.F. (1966): "Mutual Fund Performance", The Journal of Business,
Vol. 39, No.1, 119-138.

   Sharpe, W.F. (1991): "Capital Asset Prices with and without Negative Hold-
ings", The Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, No. 2, 489-509.

   Shiller, R.J. (1981): "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justied by
Subsequent Changes in Dividends?", The American Economic Review, Vol. 71,
No. 3, 421-436.

   Stock, J. and M. Watson (2006): "Heteroskedasticity-Robust Standard Er-
rors for Fixed Eects Panel Data Regression", NBER Technical Working Paper,
No. 323.

   Thompson, S.B. (2011): "Simple Formulas for Standard Errors that Cluster
by Both Firm and Time", The Journal of Finance, 99(1), 1-10.

   Treynor, J.L. and F. Black (1973): "How to Use Security Analysis to Im-
prove Portfolio Selection", The Journal of Business, Vol. 46, No. 1, 66-86.

   Treynor, J.L. and Mazuy, K. "Can Mutual Funds Outguess the Market?",
Harvard Business Review 45, 131-136.
   Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1992): "Advances in prospect theory: Cu-
mulative representation of uncertainty", The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
5, 297-323.

   Whaley, R.E. (2008): "Understanding VIX"
, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1296743

   White, H. (1980): "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent CovarianceMatrix Esti-
mator and a Direct Test of Heteroskedasticity", Econometrica 48, 817-838.

                                  29
B Figures

               Figure 2: CFNAI index with recession indicator

                    Figure 3: CFNAI and VIX indices

                                  30
C Tables

                 Table 1: Fund categories and relevant indices
 Category Benchmark Freq. Percent
 Asia and Far East MSCI Pacic ex Japan 4792 8.64
 Biotechnology Nasdaq Biotechnology 276 0.50
 EMU MSCI EMU 1247 2.25
 Europe MSCI Europe 5543 9.99
 Europe/EMU small cap Dow Jones Stoxx Small (200) 1908 3.44
 Global MSCI World Free 7929 14.29
 IT & Telecoms MSCI ACWI Information Tech 3083 5.56
 Japan MSCI Japan 3570 6.43
 China MSCI China Free 956 1.72
 Latin America MSCI EM Latin America 550 0.99
 Pharmaceuticals MSCI Health Care 1792 3.23
 North America & US MSCI North America 4498 8.11
 North America & US small cap MSCI US Small Cap 1750 350 0.63
 Nordics MSCI NOrdic Countries 2295 4.14
 Emerging markets MSCI Emerging Markets 3226 5.81
 Pension in >20 years 50% MSCI World, 50% SIX PRX 2190 3.95
 Russia MSCI Russia 614 1.11
 Swedish & foreign equity 50% MSCI World, 50% SIX PRX 1454 2.62
 Sweden SIX PRX 5053 9.11
 Sweden small cap Carnegie Small Cap Return 1220 2.20
 Eastern Europe MSCI EM Eastern Europe 2933 5.29
                                Total 55479 100.00

                                  31
Table 2: The table reports regressions using absolute excess return as the ex-
plained variable and VIX as our measure of volatility using monthly data from
2000-09 to 2011-12. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column
1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown
in columns 2-4. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Cboevix is
the monthly average of the CBOE VIX index. Nber is an indicator variable
equal to 1 during months of recessions in the U.S., dened by the NBER. Cf-
nai is the monthly value of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, the sign
of which has been reversed for readability of the coecient. A value above 0
is thus a sign of decreased economic activity and a value below 0 is a sign of
increased economic activity. Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%)
and * (p<10%).
                               (1) (2) (3) (4)
 VARIABLES absret absret absret absret

 cboevix 0.00144*** 0.00146*** 0.00122*** 0.00152***
                              (2.53e-05) (0.000401) (0.000427) (0.000527)
                               57.15 3.642 2.852 2.880
 nber 0.0112
                                                                 (0.00780)
                                                                  1.439
 cfnai -0.000834
                                                                                 (0.00464)
                                                                                     -0.180
 Constant 0.0125***
                                 (0.000506)
                                   24.81
 Fixed eects None Fund Fund Fund

 Observations 55,479 55,479 55,479 55,479
   2
 R                       0.12104 0.12744 0.13630 0.12767
 F 3266 13.17 7.229 6.741
 Number of fondnummer 668 668 668
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  32
Table 3: The table reports regressions using absolute excess return as the ex-
plained variable and σI,t as our measure of volatility using monthly data from
2000-09 to 2011-12. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column
1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown
in columns 2-4. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Sdindex is
the monthly standard deviation of benchmark. Nber is an indicator variable
equal to 1 during months of recessions in the U.S., dened by the NBER. Cfnai
is the monthly value of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, the sign of
which has been reversed for increased readability of the coecient. A value
above 0 is thus a sign of decreased economic activity and a value below 0 is a
sign of increased economic activity. Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), **
(p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                              (1) (2) (3) (4)
 VARIABLES absret absret absret absret

 sdindex 2.269*** 1.958*** 2.046*** 2.283***
                              (0.0296) (0.223) (0.420) (0.408)
                               76.58 8.776 4.867 5.596
 nber 0.00831
                                                               (0.00669)
                                                                1.241
 cfnai -0.000536
                                                                            (0.00290)
                                                                                -0.185
 Constant 0.0158***
                                (0.000342)
                                   46.34
 Fixed eects None Fund, time Fund Fund

 Observations 55,479 55,479 55,479 55,479
   2
 R                      0.20706 0.50662 0.19579 0.19065
 F 5865 183.2 15.03 17.05
 Number of fondnummer 668 668 668
                          Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  33
Table 4: The table reports regressions using Tracking Error as the explained
variable and VIX as our measure of volatility using monthly data from 2000-09
to 2011-12. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column 1 and
cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown in
columns 2-4. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Cboevix is the
monthly average of the CBOE VIX index. Nber is an indicator variable equal
to 1 during months of recessions in the U.S., dened by the NBER. Cfnai is the
monthly value of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, the sign of which
has been reversed for increased readability of the coecient. A value above 0
is thus a sign of decreased economic activity and a value below 0 is a sign of
increased economic activity. Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%)
and * (p<10%).
                               (1) (2) (3) (4)
 VARIABLES sd_AR sd_AR sd_AR sd_AR

 cboevix 0.000419*** 0.000425*** 0.000397*** 0.000396***
                               (5.12e-06) (3.38e-05) (3.55e-05) (5.32e-05)
                                81.92 12.56 11.16 7.433
 nber 0.00131**
                                                                   (0.000553)
                                                                      2.380
 cfnai 0.000406
                                                                                    (0.000388)
                                                                                      1.045
 Constant 0.000963***
                                  (0.000100)
                                    9.602
 Fixed eects None Fund Fund Fund

 Observations 55,479 55,479 55,479 55,479
   2
 R                       0.29868 0.39564 0.40010 0.39763
 F 6710 156.5 78.20 89.51
 Number of fondnummer 668 668 668
                               Robust standard errors in parentheses
                          *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  34
Table 5: The table reports regressions using Tracking Error as the explained
variable and σI,t as our measure of volatility using monthly data from 2000-09
to 2011-12. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column 1 and
cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown in
columns 2-4. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Sdindex is the
monthly standard deviation of benchmark. Nber is an indicator variable equal
to 1 during months of recessions in the U.S., dened by the NBER. Cfnai is the
monthly value of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, the sign of which
has been reversed for increased readability of the coecient. A value above 0
is thus a sign of decreased economic activity and a value below 0 is a sign of
increased economic activity. Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%)
and * (p<10%).
                               (1) (2) (3) (4)
 VARIABLES sd_AR sd_AR sd_AR sd_AR

 sdindex 0.593*** 0.533*** 0.580*** 0.561***
                              (0.00648) (0.0347) (0.0195) (0.0199)
                               91.48 15.36 29.78 28.19
 nber 0.00116***
                                                                (0.000368)
                                                                  3.153
 cfnai 0.000630***
                                                                                (0.000162)
                                                                                  3.891
 Constant 0.00276***
                                   (7.13e-05)
                                   38.69
 Fixed eects None Fund, time Fund Fund

 Observations 55,479 55,479 55,479 55,479
   2
 R                       0.41296 0.54917 0.51495 0.51748
 F 8368 472.6 513.9 504.2
 Number of fondnummer 668 668 668
                             Robust standard errors in parentheses
                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  35
                                              2
Table 6: The table reports regressions using R  as the explained variable and
VIX as our measure of volatility using monthly data from 2000-09 to 2011-12.
  2
R is extracted from a twelve-month rolling window regression with fund excess
return above the risk-free rate as the explained variable and benchmark excess
return above the risk-free rate as the explanatory variable. Robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses in columns 1-2 and cluster-robust standard
errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown in columns 3-5. The t-statistic
is shown below the standard error. Cboevix is the monthly average of the
CBOE VIX index. Nber is an indicator variable equal to 1 during months of
recessions in the U.S., dened by the NBER. Cfnai is the monthly value of
the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, the sign of which has been reversed
for increased readability of the coecient. A value above 0 is thus a sign of
decreased economic activity and a value below 0 is a sign of increased economic
activity. Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                              (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 VARIABLES r2 r2 r2 r2 r2

 nber 0.0829*** 0.0238
                              (0.00238) (0.0184)
                                34.87 1.294
 cboevix 0.00466*** 0.00486*** 0.00436*** 0.00457***
                                          (9.75e-05) (0.000623) (0.000752) (0.000855)
                                            47.84 7.798 5.791 5.341
 cfnai 0.00406
                                                                                               (0.00725)
                                                                                                0.560
 Constant 0.668*** 0.580***
                              (0.00129) (0.00259)
                                517.9 223.8
 Fixed eects None None Fund Fund Fund

 Observations 48,148 48,148 48,140 48,140 48,140
   2
 R                      0.01650 0.03589 0.08048 0.08246 0.08078
 p 0
 F 2289 60.32 31.03 31.27
 Number of fondnummer 660 660 660
                                   Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  36
                                            2
Table 7: The table reports regressions using R as the explained variable and σI,t
                                                                         2
as our measure of volatility using monthly data from 2000-09 to 2011-12. R  is
extracted from a twelve-month rolling window regression with fund excess return
above the risk-free rate as the explained variable and benchmark excess return
above the risk-free rate as the explanatory variable. Robust standard errors are
shown in parentheses in column 1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered
on funds and months, are shown in columns 2-4. The t-statistic is shown below
the standard error. Sdindex is the monthly standard deviation of benchmark.
Nber is an indicator variable equal to 1 during months of recessions in the U.S.,
dened by the NBER. Cfnai is the monthly value of the Chicago Fed National
Activity Index, the sign of which has been reversed for increased readability of
the coecient. A value above 0 is thus a sign of decreased economic activity and
a value below 0 is a sign of increased economic activity. Signicance is denoted
as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                              (1) (2) (3) (4)
 VARIABLES r2 r2 r2 r2

 sdindex 4.823*** 4.921*** 4.423*** 4.171***
                              (0.125) (0.930) (0.995) (0.965)
                              38.73 5.289 4.444 4.323
 nber 0.0416**
                                                               (0.0165)
                                                              2.525
 cfnai 0.0169***
                                                                           (0.00562)
                                                                            3.000
 Constant 0.622***
                                 (0.00207)
                                  300.1
 Fixed eects None Fund, time Fund Fund

 Observations 48,148 48,140 48,140 48,140
   2
 R                      0.02603 0.25717 0.06845 0.06873
 F 1500 12.61 27.12 36.34
 Number of fondnummer 660 660 660
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  37
Table 8: The table reports regressions using fund excess return above the risk-
free rate as the explained variable applying the Treynor-Mazuy model using
data from 2000-09 to 2011-12. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses
in column 1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months,
are shown in columns 2-3. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error.
Indx is the benchmark excess return above the risk-free rate. Signicance is
denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).

                                   (1) (2) (3)
         VARIABLES ret ret ret

         indx 0.808*** 0.807*** 0.660***
                                  (0.00336) (0.0241) (0.0209)
                                    240.4 33.52 31.61
         indx2 -0.182*** -0.193 0.000387
                                   (0.0323) (0.145) (0.0959)
                                    -5.616 -1.325 0.00403
         Constant -0.000778***
                                     (0.000164)
                                         -4.752
        Fixed eect None Fund Fund, time

         Observations 55,479 55,479 55,479
           2
        R                  0.69224 0.69299 0.76182
        F 31621 661.1 168.2
         Number of fund id 668 668

                                  38
Table 9: The table reports regressions using absolute excess return as the ex-
plained variable and VIX as our measure of volatility using daily data 2008-08-01
to 2008-10-31. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column 1
and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown in
columns 2-3. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Cboevix is the
daily closing value of the CBOE VIX index. Post is an indicator variable equal
to 1 on and after the 15th of September, the date of the Lehman bankruptcy.
VIXinteract is dened as post multiplied by cboevix. Signicance is denoted as
*** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                          (1) (2) (3)
 VARIABLES absret absret absret

 cboevix 0.000404*** 0.000279 0.000685**
                          (1.51e-05) (0.000344)
                           26.71 1.993
 postdum 0.0138**
                                                          (0.00685)
                                                           2.021
 VIXinteract -0.000396
                                                        (0.000325)
                                                             -1.219
 Constant 0.00225***
                           (0.000810)
                              2.776
 Fixed eects None Fund Fund

 Observations 31,684 31,684 31,684
   2
 R                  0.02067 0.03853 0.02243
 F 713.2 12.95 343.3
 Number of fund id 499 499

                                  39
Table 10: The table reports regressions using absolute excess return as the
explained variable and σI,t as our measure of volatility using daily data 2008-
08-01 to 2008-10-31. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column
1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown
in columns 2-3. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Sdindex
is the standard deviation of benchmark. Post is an indicator variable equal
to 1 on and after the 15th of September, the date of the Lehman bankruptcy.
VIXinteract is dened as post multiplied by sdindex. Signicance is denoted as
*** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                          (1) (2) (3)
 VARIABLES absret absret absret

 sdindex 0.444*** 0.368*** 0.117***
                         (0.0185) (0.108) (0.0409)
                          24.06 3.410 2.869
 postdum -1.02e-05
                                                       (0.00109)
                                                        -0.00942
 sdinteract 0.247***
                                                        (0.0360)
                                                        6.863
 Constant 0.00279***
                           (0.000852)
                             3.279
 Fixed eects None Fund Fund

 Observations 31,684 31,684 31,684
   2
 R                  0.02543 0.03984 0.02327
 F 578.8 64.06 576.9
 Number of fund id 499 499

                                  40
                                              2
Table 11: The table reports regressions using R as the explained variable and
                                                                                     2
VIX as our measure of volatility using daily data 2008-08-01 to 2008-10-31. R
is extracted from a twenty-day rolling window regression with fund excess return
above the risk-free rate as the explained variable and benchmark excess return
above the risk-free rate as the explanatory variable. Robust standard errors are
shown in parentheses in column 1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered
on funds and months, are shown in columns 2-4. The t-statistic is shown below
the standard error. Cboevix is the daily closing value of the CBOE VIX index.
Post is an indicator variable equal to 1 on and after the 15th of September, the
date of the Lehman bankruptcy. VIXinteract is dened as post multiplied by
cboevix. Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                         (1) (2) (3) (4)
 VARIABLES r2 r2 r2 r2

 postdum 0.0507*** 0.101*
                         (0.00348) (0.0535)
                          14.57 1.892
 cboevix 0.00137*** 0.000922*** 0.00414*
                                      (9.11e-05) (9.77e-05) (0.00215)
                                       15.00 9.433 1.926
 VIXinteract -0.00338
                                                                         (0.00219)
                                                                             -1.542
 Constant 0.540*** 0.515***
                         (0.00247) (0.00382)
                          218.7 134.8
 Fixed eects None None Fund Fund

 Observations 31,609 31,609 31,609 31,609
   2
 R                  0.00664 0.00703 0.10642 0.05725
 F 212.3 225.0 3.367 26.60
 Number of fund id 497 497

                                  41
                                              2
Table 12: The table reports regressions using R as the explained variable and
                                                                          2
σI,t as our measure of volatility using daily data 2008-08-01 to 2008-10-31. R is
extracted from a twenty-day rolling window regression with fund excess return
above the risk-free rate as the explained variable and benchmark excess return
above the risk-free rate as the explanatory variable. Robust standard errors are
shown in parentheses in column 1 and cluster-robust standard errors, clustered
on funds and months, are shown in columns 2-3. The t-statistic is shown below
the standard error. Sdindex is the standard deviation of benchmark. Post is
an indicator variable equal to 1 on and after the 15th of September, the date of
the Lehman bankruptcy. VIXinteract is dened as post multiplied by sdindex.
Signicance is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).
                         (1) (2) (3)
 VARIABLES r2 r2 r2

 sdindex 1.850*** 0.745 -0.593
                        (0.0845) (0.550) (0.0893)
                         21.89 1.354 -1.051
 postdum 0.000417
                                                    (0.0196)
                                                   0.0213
 sdinteract 1.472**
                                                      (0.582)
                                                    2.529
 Constant 0.505***
                          (0.00334)
                            151.5
 Fixed eects None Fund Fund

 Observations 31,609 31,609 31,609
   2
 R                 0.01311 0.10752 0.05872
 F 479.1 7.005 13.95
 Number of fund id 497 497

                                  42
Table 13: The table reports regressions using a combined specication with
both our measures of volatility as explanatory variables, the VIX and σI,t,
using monthly data from 2000-09 to 2011-12. The explained variables are abso-
                                         2   2
lute excess return, Tracking Error and R . R is extracted from a twelve-month
rolling window regression with fund excess return above the risk-free rate as
the explained variable and benchmark excess return above the risk-free rate as
the explanatory variable. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in
columns 1, 3 and 5 while cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and
months, are shown in columns 2, 4 and 6. The t-statistic is shown below the
standard error. Cboevix is the monthly average of the CBOE VIX index. Sdin-
dex is the monthly standard deviation of benchmark. Signicance is denoted as
*** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).

                              (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 VARIABLES absret absret sd_AR sd_AR r2 r2

 cboevix -5.90e-05* 1.97e-05 9.14e-05*** 9.40e-05*** 0.00404*** 0.00417***
                             (3.15e-05) (0.000386) (6.59e-06) (2.20e-05) (0.000161) (0.000802)
                               -1.875 0.0510 13.88 4.269 25.00 5.201
 sdindex 2.325*** 2.224*** 0.507*** 0.511*** 0.968*** 1.062
                              (0.0442) (0.499) (0.00970) (0.0258) (0.194) (1.016)
                               52.64 4.457 52.32 19.80 4.997 1.046
 Constant 0.0165*** 0.00182*** 0.582***
                             (0.000429) (8.68e-05) (0.00261)
                               38.31 20.93 222.5
 Fixed eects None Fund None Fund None Fund

 Observations 55,479 55,479 55,479 55,479 48,148 48,140
   2
 R                       0.20714 0.19053 0.41859 0.51772 0.03629 0.08125
 F 2997 16.31 4552 549.1 1158 28.29
 Number of fondnummer 668 668 660
                                           Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                  43
Table 14: The table reports regressions using excess return as the explained
                                                                             2
variable and our activity measures (absolute excess return, σI,t and R ) as ex-
                                                                2
planatory variables using monthly data from 2000-09 to 2011-12. R is extracted
from a twelve-month rolling window regression with fund excess return above
the risk-free rate as the explained variable and benchmark excess return above
the risk-free rate as the explanatory variable. Cluster-robust standard errors
are shown in parentheses. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error.
The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Signicance is denoted as ***
(p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).

                                  (1) (2) (3)
       VARIABLES AR AR AR

         absret -0.0672
                                      (0.0920)
                                        -0.730
        sd_AR -0.112
                                                        (0.187)
                                                        -0.600
         r2 -0.00331
                                                                    (0.00423)
                                                                        -0.784
         Fixed eects Fund, time Fund, time Fund, time

         Observations 55,479 55,479 48,140
           2
        R                  0.22099 0.21956 0.22955
        Number of fund id 668 668 660
        F 10.42 81.26 92.75

                                  44
Table 15: The table reports regressions using excess return as the explained
variable and σI,t as a measure of volatility using monthly data from 2000-09
to 2011-12. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses in column 1 and
cluster-robust standard errors, clustered on funds and months, are shown in
column 2. The t-statistic is shown below the standard error. Sdindex is the
monthly standard deviation of benchmark. Nber is an indicator variable equal
to 1 during months of recessions in the U.S., dened by the NBER. Signicance
is denoted as *** (p<1%), ** (p<5%) and * (p<10%).

                                         (1) (2)
            VARIABLES AR AR

               sdindex 0.243*** 0.315
                                           (0.0333) (0.231)
                                           7.310 1.365
               nber -9.11e-05 -0.000858
                                         (0.000524) (0.00490)
                                            -0.174 -0.175
               Constant -0.00488***
                                             (0.000362)
                                                 -13.45
              Fixed eects None Fund

               Observations 55,479 55,479
                  2
             R                 0.00312 0.00412
              F 32.48 0.970
               Number of fund id 668

                                  45
              0.12-0.990.03-0.23-0.47-0.18-0.19-0.170.07-0.080.41-0.46-0.20-0.36-0.14-0.98-0.26-0.42-1.25-1.35-1.040.23
           IR ('07-'11)


           IR 0.10         0.00    0.03 0.08       0.00    0.06       0.25
                 -0.54-0.07-0.14-0.10 -0.32-0.11 -0.16 -0.21-0.21-0.23 -0.91-0.15 -0.94-0.67-0.69



              0.390.020.150.56-0.210.54-0.170.14-0.07-0.11-0.270.38-0.120.010.20-0.18-0.130.32-0.080.120.440.01
          Sharpe
       Fund



            16.70%11.56%14.35%19.56%7.12%11.86%12.20%8.15%9.89%13.83%12.21%12.18%10.62%10.12%14.64%7.61%14.02%17.58%5.91%6.52%7.59%6.31%

         Annualized TE


       ER
            1.63%-6.23%-0.99%-2.66%-0.68%0.01%-3.87%-0.93%0.30%-2.24%0.99%-2.58%-2.24%-2.30%0.04%-6.96%-2.16%1.03%-5.55%-4.35%-5.22%1.60%




            20.70%19.89%32.05%31.27%19.11%23.19%19.91%18.33%14.73%25.08%17.40%29.64%15.83%24.23%26.23%18.10%12.20%31.57%18.08%20.62%19.71%14.73%

          Annualized Stdev
       Benchmark


         Return9.06%7.73%6.35%19.24%-1.45%14.27%3.01%5.43%0.50%1.24%-3.97%15.09%2.11%3.78%6.30%6.06%2.10%9.90%6.10%8.78%16.35%0.50%









The table reports the yearly average (over the period 2001-2011) of benchmark returns, benchmark annualized standard




       Average performanceCategoryAsia & Far EastBiotechnologyChinaEastern EuropeEMUEmerging marketsEuropeEurope/EMU small capGlobalIT & TelecomsJapanLatin AmericaNorth America & USNorth America & US small capNordicsPension in >20 yearsPharmaceuticalsRussiaSwedish & foreign equitySwedenSweden small capAP7 Såfa
Table 16:deviation, fund excess return, fund annualized Tracking Error, fund Sharpe Ratio, fund Information Ratio and fund Information Ratioover the period 2007-2011.

                             46