         The Need for Speed

     The Importance of Low Latency in a High Frequency Trading
                         Environment

                                                     1                      2
                                  Silvia Tas and Sofia Ternby
                                  Bachelor’s Thesis in Finance
                            Stockholm School of Economics
                                       Spring 2012

Abstract
With the emergence of algorithmic trading, the importance of low latency has suddenly become a
key success factor in capital markets. Many have realized having a “slow” trading system poses a
new kind of risk and potential loss. We will in this thesis give an example where latency becomes
a financial risk factor, potentially affecting the profitability of a bank / liquidity provider by
creating a model and studying the Foreign Exchange market setting. The results show that cost
increases with latency, more specifically that there is an increasing marginal cost of latency. The
results also stress the importance of adapting to the new conditions in the market where high
frequency trading is present.

Keywords: Latency, Speed Arbitrage, Foreign Exchange Market

Tutor: Paolo Sodini

Presentation/Submitted: 2012-05-25

1
  21874@student.hhs.se
2
  21843@student.hhs.se
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our tutor Associate Professor Paolo Sodini for his guidance and advice in
the process of writing this thesis. Many thanks must also be given to Skandinaviska Enskilda
Banken AB, SEB for giving us access to valuable market data and analytical tools. To Pablo
Landherr at SEB for being our main tutor at the bank and for sharing great insights. And lastly to
Dr. Pär Hellström at SEB for acting as a sounding board and for pointing us in the right
direction when inspiration sometimes failed to appear.

                                                                                2
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table of Contents
1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 4

   1.1 Background .................................................................................................................................... 4

     1.1.1 Latency and the Need for Speed ............................................................................................ 4

     1.1.2 Foreign Exchange Market Structure and Characteristics ....................................................... 5

      1.1.3 Latency arbitrage .................................................................................................................... 7

   1.2 Aim of thesis .................................................................................................................................. 8

   2. Previous Literature/ Related Work.................................................................................................. 8

3. Methodology ....................................................................................................................................... 9

   3.1 Model ............................................................................................................................................ 9

   3.2 Data set........................................................................................................................................ 12

      3.2.1 Market data .......................................................................................................................... 12

      3.2.2 Explanatory variables ........................................................................................................... 13

   3.3 Hypothesis testing ....................................................................................................................... 13

   3.4 Regression model ........................................................................................................................ 14

      3.4.1 Volatility................................................................................................................................ 15

      3.4.2 Average Spread .................................................................................................................... 16

4. Empirical results ................................................................................................................................ 16

   4.1 Model simulation results ............................................................................................................. 16

   4.2 Regression Results ....................................................................................................................... 18

   4.3 Cross-sectional descriptive of the independent variables .......................................................... 21

5. Implications and conclusions............................................................................................................. 22

6. Further research ................................................................................................................................ 23

7. References ......................................................................................................................................... 25

8. Appendix............................................................................................................................................ 26

                                                                                3
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

1. Introduction

1.1 Background

                                                                                       3
After releasing the Bank of International Settlement (BIS) report on the FX market in 2010 the
BIS organization asked the 4 trillion dollar question referring to the fact that by 2010 the average
daily turnover on the global Foreign Exchange market reached $4.0 trillion. This was an increase

                                               4
of 20 percent compared to 2007 . One contributing factor was the increased trading activity by
“other financial institutes”. The growth in this category included the increasing occurrence of

                                                                                                              5
high frequency traders and electronic trading, particularly algorithmic trading . This thesis aims to
explore how the increase in electronic trading and more specifically how algorithmic trading has
affected the market microstructure and market participants in the FX market.

1.1.1 Latency and the Need for Speed
With the emergence of algorithmic trading, the importance of low latency has suddenly become a
key success factor in capital markets. Latency can be defined in several ways and the definition
depends on the context. The question of latency is often applied on a millisecond or microsecond
scale, an environment where no human can compete and algorithms rule the world. Synonymous
with delay, latency means a time delay in a system. Latency can be divided into two groups; spatial
latency and internal latency.

Figure 1- Illustrating the difference between spatial and internal latency. Internal latency occurs inside a system (computer) and spatial
latency is a function of distance.

An example of spatial latency is the time it takes for a market quote, sent from New York, to reach
a counterpart in London. Components affecting the spatial latency are the distance between the

3
  A shortening for the Foreign Exchange market is FX market and will be used throughout the thesis
4
  See BIS-report; Global Foreign Exchange market activity in 2010
5
 See BIS-report; The $4 trillion question: what explains FX growth since the 2007 survey?

                                                                                4
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

physical locations as well as the characteristics of the media used to transfer the information.
Different media such as electrical signals, light (optical) signals, as well as radio signals are used to
transfer information, where each media type has its own advantages and disadvantages. Co-
location has become a common way of reducing the spatial latency, where trading entities place
algorithmic engines in close proximity to the market place. An advantage of co-location is getting
important information first and using this to your advantage. Many IT service companies offer
proximity services to reduce the physical distance and thus the spatial latency. However, when it
comes to the Foreign Exchange market, it is difficult to reduce all spatial latency since the FX
market is characterized by geographic dispersion with major trading hubs all over the world.

                                                                                     6
Today the roundtrip time between London and New York ranges from 65 milliseconds and up.
However different companies compete to be first with sub-60 milliseconds cables over the

                                                                                                         7
Atlantic, saving a few precious milliseconds in a highly competitive world . Even though the fight
for reducing the latency of the cross-Atlantic cable is fierce, the speed of light will always be the

                                                     8
limit when it comes to spatial latency .

Internal latency is the time it takes for a system to process received information and act accordingly,
i.e. delay due to data processing. A “normal latency level” is difficult, or maybe impossible to
define, because it depends on the system, its purpose etc. The fastest systems in the world right
now is said to be ultra-low latency defined as below 10 microseconds. However, a more common
latency level is probably still in the millisecond range. In this thesis, the focus is primarily the
internal latency of FX trading systems.

1.1.2 Foreign Exchange Market Structure and Characteristics
To fully understand the model presented here in, it is important to define the institutional setting
of the Foreign Exchange market. The FX market is divided into two participating groups; the market
makers or interbank market and the retail market or customers (Frankel 1996). The interbank
market consists of the largest commercial banks and securities dealers and is normally
characterized by very tight spreads. The spread is defined as the difference between the bid and
ask price. The major banks typically trade both in the interbank market and with its retail clients.
Retail clients are quoted a price, which consists of the interbank quoted price plus an additional
mark-up. This markup results in a slightly wider retail spread. The banks act as both a market
maker and taker in the interbank market.

6 http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/8753784/The-300m-cable-that-will-save-traders-
milliseconds.html#disqus_thread
7 http://low-latency.com/
8 The geographic distance between London and New York is 5576 kilometers, corresponding to a theoretical
minimum latency of 18.6 millisecond (using the speed of light)

                                                                                5
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Figure 2- Illustrates how the Foreign Exchange market participants are connected. The providers (representing the interbank
participants) can be connected both bilaterally (direct link) and through market-like trading venues. The retail clients are connected to one
or more providers depending on the size of the retail client.

Currencies are traded in pairs, each currency with its own international three-letter code. For
example trading Euro against the US Dollar has a code of EUR/USD. Characterized by a

                                                                            9
geographic dispersion, the Foreign Exchange market is open 24/7 with the major trading hubs
located in London, New York and Singapore.

There are three characteristics particularly distinguishing the FX Market; enormous trading
volume, low trade transparency and most of the traded volume is done between dealers (Lyons
2001). The FX market is also characterized by an over-the-counter, OTC, trading structure
(Lyons 2001). Market makers are connected through different electronic trading platforms
instead of a single exchange. Trading platforms link buyers to sellers for different currencies.
Banks and other FX providers can use a number of venues as contact points with the market
including among others EBS, Reuters and Currenex. All the mentioned platforms stream out
current market prices to the connected market makers, showing at what price the market is
willing to sell and/or buy a specific instrument at that point in time.

The Bank for International Settlements (the BIS organization) is a good source of information
regarding the FX market. Every third year they publish a report about the state of the FX market
including turnover categorized by execution method, product, participants, and currency pair.

                                                                                10
The report, which compiles information from over 53 central banks  all over the world, is a
good indicator of the current market situation and where it is heading. The report published in
2010 shows, among other things, a major increase in overall turnover and indicated the execution
method called “electronic methods” being one of the major reasons. Electronic execution

9
 The market is only closed from Friday 5.00 PM New York time to early Sunday morning Singapore time.
10
  See BIS-report; The $4 trillion question: what explains FX growth since the 2007 survey?

                                                                                6
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

methods include single and multi-bank trading systems and the use of algorithmic trading and

                                                                         11
represented 41.3 percent of the executions by 2010  .

Algorithmic trading, a growing trading strategy, is implemented using a system built on
mathematical models that execute orders in the market without human intervention. The
algorithms have strict rules for making the execution decision and strive to optimize timing, thus

                                       12
the price of the order. The algo’s  ability to make trading decisions in just a few milliseconds
changes the rules in trading compared to 10 years ago when most trading were done by phone via
brokers in the interbank market. Through the growth of electronic trading it is hard to tell
whether or not the counterparty is a human or a computer. The change towards electronic
execution has made the importance of low latency a growing issue for market participants and a
fast system is a vital part of operations.

We will in this thesis give an example where latency becomes a financial risk factor, potentially

                                                        13
affecting the profitability of a provider . The focus will be on the interbank market that has the
highest trading volumes and the tightest spreads, implying a high liquidity and market activity.
The frequent price updates, sometimes occurring only milliseconds apart, contribute to the high
liquidity and market activity.

1.1.3 Latency arbitrage
Low latency and co-location has become the latest competitive strategy in the financial markets.
Interbank dealers, brokerage firms and hedge funds compete to be as close to the market as
possible and to introduce ever-faster algorithmic engines. Low latency enables these parties to
gain a profit by capturing arbitrage opportunities that occur when the price of an instrument

                                                                                                  14
from one provider crosses that of another at a certain point in time  . In such a case the trading
firms can explore such arbitrage opportunity by buying a currency at a low price and selling it at a
higher price. It is argued in this thesis that, a contributing factor to the occurrence of such
arbitrage opportunities is internal latency. Furthermore it is argued that latency exposes an
interbank dealer to potential loss as counterparties might exploit arbitrage opportunities.
If latency could potentially create a loss through “giving” away arbitrage opportunities, then
trading entities/providers that want to minimize losses need to adapt to algorithmic trading and
apply low latency trading strategies (Riordan 2010).

11 See BIS-report; Global Foreign Exchange market activity in 2010
12 Algo = Algorithmic system/engine
13
  Throughout this thesis a provider will be used to represent trading entities, such as banks, that act as market
makers, liquidity provider as well as potentially having retail clients.
14
   A client can explore an arbitrage opportunity when there is a gap between the provider’s offer(bid) and the market
bid (offer)

                                                                                7
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

1.2 Aim of thesis
This study investigates how the level of latency affects the profitability of a provider and how it
can result in arbitrage opportunities for counterparties. More specifically we define our questions
as follows:

How is the profitability of a provider affected by latency? Does potential loss increase with the level of latency?

To answer the research question a simple model has been created, that has been simulated using
market data from the Foreign Exchange market. The result from the model quantifies a measure
for cost of latency, which is the number of occurrences of arbitrage opportunities combined with
the size of the arbitrage opportunities. Simulation results are further analyzed by regressions and
hypothesis testing.

2. Previous Literature/ Related Work
So far cost of latency is a relatively unexplored subject in academia even though it is a heavily
discussed subject in business. The research done on the cost of latency has been limited to the
equity market, which is true for much of the market microstructure research. This might be due
to the fact that equities have been predominantly exchange traded and has resulted in a more

                                                                                                                        15
transparent and open market compared to the fairly closed interbank market in FX.

Moallemi and Saglam (2010) quantify the cost of latency in trade execution by using a theoretical
model. Their study is made using data regarding NYSE common stocks from 1995 and 2005.
Since like most papers on the subject has been done on the equity market their results become
relatively irrelevant for this thesis. However, Moallemi et Al suggest that the importance of
latency increases as more volatile or liquid (i.e. tight spread) assets are being traded, which is
similar to the findings presented in this thesis. This could imply that the relationship between
latency and volatility and/or spread is true for all assets (or at least for Equities and Foreign
Exchange).

Moallemi and Saglam (2010) seem to be one of the few persons quantifying cost of latency.
Other areas of the effect of latency have been explored more extensively. There are some papers
studying latency impact on liquidity, market quality and price discovery in the equity market.
However, no conclusion can be made on whether or not these results can be applied to the
Foreign Exchange market, thus making it difficult to apply their findings here in (which aim is to
explore cost and not market quality associated with latency).

15 In the Equity market a private person can trade on the exchange. On the interbank market however, the FX
market is not available for private persons.

                                                                                8
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Moreover, as all of the papers associated with latency are on a graduate level, i.e. not published in

                                           16
any major economic journals , there are weaknesses related to using them as sources in this
thesis.

Rather than working with a solid foundation of related work and previous literature, this thesis is
exploring relatively unknown territory in academia. The lack of work on the subject does not
mean that the subject of latency is irrelevant. It is due to the fact that it is a relatively new
phenomenon as a result of technological advances in recent years. Furthermore, as experienced in
this study, quantifying cost of latency can be tricky. Creating a model explaining the total cost of
latency will need some consideration (which is outside of the scope of this thesis).

3. Methodology

3.1 Model
To explore cost of latency a simple model of reality has been created using the intuition about
how arbitrage opportunities occur. The model is a simulation done using real time market data
and is explained below.

It is intuitive to think that if there are plenty of arbitrage opportunities in the market, a trader
could earn a fortune by buying low and selling high. In the Foreign Exchange market, there are
three parties of interest; the client, the provider (bank) and the market. The provider streams out
a price to its client for a certain volume of a currency pair. The client can either accept the quoted
price and thus make a trade with the provider, or turn the price down in the hope of getting a
better price/deal elsewhere, for instance in the market. The relationship between the three parties
is shown in the picture below.

                                               a = distance (in time) from market to the provider
                                                b = distance (in time) from market to the client
                                                 c = distance (in time) from the client to the provider

Figure 3 – Illustration of the relationship between the market participants in the model. It is assumed that the client/arbitrageur is
connected to both the “market” / the platforms as well as to the provider.

If all three parties have the same quality of wire, that is the same circumstances to obtain the
market information at the same time, then spatial latency should not matter, meaning the sum of

16 where they have been subject of peer to peer review before publishing their findings

                                                                                9
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

b and c equals a (a≈b+c), assuming that distance c is large. Or rather if the internal latency of the
provider is larger than the internal latency of the client (lp ≥ lc) then it would follow that a + lp ≥

b + c + lc. Where lp is the internal latency of the provider and lc is the internal latency of the
client. This implies that spatial latency does not matter and thus only the internal latency will be
analyzed in this thesis.

The most basic assumption in the described model is the assumption that in a simplified world,

                                                             17
the price that the provider streams out to its clients  is exactly the same as the market price,
meaning no additional spread is added. In reality however, the price the provider offers to its
clients may differ from the market quote reflecting the fact that the provider wants to maximize
profit or maximize flows by quoting inside the market. However to simplify the model it is
assumed that there is no incentive for the provider to do this. The only difference between the
streamed out price and the market price is the time at which the provider streams out his price
(see Figure 4)

                                                                                       Blue line= market bid and
                                                                                             offer

                                                                                   Red lines = provider bid
                                                                                         and offer

                                                                       Purple line = when
                                                                                market and provider bid
                                                                                          and offer are the same

Figure 4 -Illustrates the relationship between a provider’s price and the market price, when latency exists. When market bid is larger than
provider’s offer (like in t1) or when the market offer is smaller than provider’s bid (like in t2) an arbitrage opportunity exists. For a
numerical example see explanation of Figure 1 in the Appendix.

Looking at the model above, at t0 the provider receives the price from the market. At t1, the
provider streams out the exact same price as the market had in t0. The difference between t0 and t1

17
  The clients can be both retail and market makers. Remember a market maker can both trade on the interbank
market and with retail client. Retail clients using algorithmic trading have been less unlikely but there is a trend
towards a wider use of algorithmic trading among all kinds of trading entities.

                                                                               10
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

is due to the internal latency of the provider. If the provider has a low latency, meaning the time
for the price to go through the pricing system of the provider and back to reach its receiver is
short, then the difference between the market price in t0 and t1 will be small. This is due to the
fact that it is less likely that the price has moved substantially between t0 and t1. It then follows
that if the latency for the provider is higher than the latency for the client, that is a+ lp > b + c +

lc and the market quote has moved away from the original spread, it can be argued that the
provider is “giving away” a speed arbitrage opportunity. If the client has a lower latency than the
provider, the client will have knowledge of the fact that the price has moved in a favorable way
and will be able to send an order to the provider that will be accepted by the provider before the
new market quote has reached the provider. In this situation the provider has accepted an order

                                                                                            18
even though the market price has moved in an unfavorable way. The arbitrageur  is exploring a
speed arbitrage opportunity, assuming the market quote has increased, by buying low from the
provider and selling high in the market. The same goes if the market price has decreased in t1.

                                                                                                                                         19
Then the arbitrageur can buy at a low price in the market and sell at a high price to the provider  .
Figure 5 also illustrates when arbitrage opportunities occur. The difference between the two
figures is the fact that the price moves gradually in Figure 5, which is visually easier to
comprehend. However, Figure 4 is more accurate in price movements (discrete jumps in price,
i.e. not continuous).

                                                           Red curve: The provider’s bid-offer

                                                            Black curve: Market price feed bid-offer

                                                                          t1-t0: internal latency of the provider

Figure 5- The yellow area represents when an arbitrage opportunity occurs, i.e. when the market bid (lower black line) is above the
providers offer (upper red line) or vice versa. Note that is a snapshot of a half a couple of hundred milliseconds. The time from t0-t1 is
between 50-200 milliseconds depending on what latency level you are investigating. Due to the latency of the provider, it is not until t1 that
the provider streams out the market price from t0.

18
   The Arbitrageur is in fact the client that is trading with the provider. The Arbitrageur is exploiting the fact that the
provider misprices due to latency
19
  Here it is assumed that the trader can observe the new market price at the same time as the streamed out price of
the bank.

                                                                               11
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

The simulation is merely a time shift applied to the market price. Each time a new market quote
arrives it is compared to what the price is after x milliseconds latency (where x is set to 100, 250
and 500 milliseconds). It can be noted that this model is simplified. The length of time that
arbitrage opportunities exist has not been taken into consideration. It is assumed that each time
there exists an arbitrage opportunity, after time shifting the market quote, the arbitrageur
manages to act once (i.e. trade once).

3.2 Data set

3.2.1 Market data
To test the validity of the model, Reuters, Currenex and EBS Live have been considered as data
sources. Even though access to all the major venues price feeds been available, the presented
work will only treat data from Currenex. This restriction was made because EUR/USD, which is
the chosen currency in this study, is not very actively traded on Reuters. EBS Live was excluded
because price updates are throttled to one per 100 milliseconds. These two factors, lack of timely
price updates and periodic instead of real-time price updates, have an adverse effect on the
results. Therefore the obvious choice was the Currenex price feed.

EUR/USD is the most traded currency pair in the world (with a daily turnover of 1,101 billion

                                                                                                           20
dollars by April 2010 representing 28 % of the world trade of currencies) . Since it is the most
traded currency pair in the world, it is very liquid and the price is updated more frequently than
less liquid currency pairs. As implied by the model, the more frequently the currency pair price is
updated, the more speed arbitrage opportunities should occur. However, since this thesis only
explores one currency pair, EUR/USD, it will of course not explore the difference in the
occurrence of arbitrage opportunities between currency pairs. Still, testing the model on the most
active currency pair seems reasonable.

Some of the platforms stream out a multilevel order book with different price levels at different

                                                                                                                                         21
quantity levels. The dataset has been limited and only the top of book prices have been used  .
The reason for using top of book is simple; it enables further simplifying of the model while at
the same time still reflecting reality.

The selected time window is relatively small; one month’s worth of data has been used. The
month selected was March 2012, which consisted of 22 trading days. The time window per day
was also narrowed down to represent a trading day (in Sweden between 08.00-17.00). The
simulation of the model (explained in Section 3.1) was done on three different latency levels; 100,

20 See BIS-report; Global foreign exchange market activity in 2010
21
  Top of book = the best price level with the tightest spread between buy and sell side

                                                                               12
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

250 and 500 milliseconds. The selected latency levels do not necessarily reflect common latency

                                                                                                                            22
levels, since it for apparent reasons is undisclosed information by market participants . Instead,
they are randomly chosen to visualize that the potential loss (cost) increases with latency. Even
though there are probably not many still left with a latency level of 500 milliseconds, it is good to

                                                 23
be able to see how much latency dispersion  can cost.

 3.2.2 Explanatory variables
To be able to answer the research question about how latency affects profit, three main variables
representing cost have been identified.

    1. The average size of arbitrage opportunities
    2. The number of occurred arbitrage opportunities
    3. The ratio between number of arbitrage opportunities and the total number of
        observations for the same time period. The ratio is calculated as

                                                                                           (1)

These variables are quantified by simulation of our model explained and their properties are
displayed in Table 1-2 in Appendix. The Average Size variable represents the average size of the
arbitrage opportunities given such opportunity occurred. (Excluded from the data set in this case
are those observations that did not result in an arbitrage opportunity).

3.3 Hypothesis testing

Firstly, hypothesis testing is done to see that arbitrage opportunities (the measure of potential
loss) exist in the model for the different latency levels. Secondly, the relationship between the
three cost variables and latency is investigated. The hypothesis is that higher latency increases the
risk of giving away arbitrage opportunities and thus losing money.

22 The information being undisclosed is due to the fact that provider do not want provider to know the latency level
                                                                  1                      2
that they have in respectively systems. I.e. it is something you do not want your competition to know.
23 Even systems that have been tuned to provide very low latency exhibit some latency variation or dispersion. Many
systems show increased latency under high load and some systems have occasional latency outliers or spikes due to
the housekeeping activities in the system that interferes with the processing of transactions. It is therefore important
to control the latency variation in addition to the average latency. A latency spike may occur at a time when the best
possible latency is required to protect against latency arbitrage attempts from clients and competitors.

                                                                               13
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

To test the model and hypothesis, t-statistics shows whether or not the average sizes of arbitrage
opportunities are significantly different from zero. The null hypothesis thus become:

                          H0: μnumber, μratio, μavg_size > 0 (2)

Thereafter, the relationship between the cost variables and different latency levels is investigated
by setting up the following null hypothesis:

                H0: Average Size100 > Average_Size250 > Average_Size500 (3)

                H0: Number100 < Number250 < Number500 (4)

                 H0: Ratio100 < Ratio250 < Ratio500 (5)

Hypothesis regarding the relationship of the average size of arbitrage opportunities for different
latency levels (Equation 3), tests if the average arbitrage size of arbitrage opportunities decrease
as latency increases. Even though it might look intuitively wrong, the results will further explain
the implications of this null hypothesis. The last two null hypotheses test if the number of
arbitrage opportunities and the ratio of arbitrage opportunities to total number of observations
increase as latency increases.

Since the p-value indicates the lowest significance level at which the null hypothesis would be
rejected, this value will be looked at primarily.

As shown in Empirical Results, the null hypothesis tested resulted in statistical proven existence
of arbitrage opportunities. Given that the hypothesis failed to be rejected further studies was
made to investigate which factors potentially affect the occurrence of arbitrage opportunities.
This is done using regression analyzes.

3.4 Regression model
OLS regression lines are used in the study of the relationship between existing arbitrage
opportunities and the market volatility and its relation to the bid-ask spread. Volatility and bid-
ask spreads are two common structure components that help explain the market in a decent way.
By using OLS regression, unbiasedness and consistency can be derived and thus more precise
coefficients can be identified.

In order to study the maximum correlation that volatility and bid-ask spreads have on arbitrage
opportunities, four regressions were done with different dependent variables.

                          + + + (6)

                   + + + (7)

                                                                               14
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

                  + + + (8)

                     + + + (9)

In the first regression, the average size of the arbitrage opportunities is the dependent variable
(see Table 5). The dependent variable for this regression is named Average Size. In the second
regression the dependent variable acts as a binary variable, that is it takes on the value 1 if there
exist an arbitrage opportunity and 0 otherwise. This variable is called Exist. In the third
regression, Ratio is used as dependent variable (as defined in Equation 1) and the fourth and final
regression has only the number of arbitrage opportunities as dependent variable, called Number.
Constant for all four regressions are the independent variables, volatility and spread, described
below. Results of these four regressions can be found in Table 5 (Panel A-C).

3.4.1 Volatility
Volatility is one of the most common measure for financial risk and an important tool when
evaluating portfolio selection and asset prices. Since prices on the market changes frequently, it is
of interest to look closely at the volatility of the price changes. To be able to do this, the realized
volatility approach will be used where the calculation is based on the volatility of historical
observations. A traditional way to estimate volatility is to calculate the standard deviation of
historical observations. Other methods such as ARCH and GARCH models that estimate a
fictive variable of volatility as a starting point for estimating the volatility can also be used
(Andersen et Al 2000). However since we have high frequency data we will not use the
mentioned methods, instead the following 2-step formula that Andersen et Al call the realized
volatility has been used:

1. A return is calculated

                                                                                      (10)

        where is the return for the period t, in this case t represent minute intervals, , is the
        price at t and is the price at t-1.

2. The volatility can be calculated using

                                                                              (11)

                                                                               15
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

According to Andersen et Al, this method gives a better estimation of volatility since it is based
on assumption about the volatility of the market price. The traditional models rely on the
assumption that the returns are statistically distributed and thus, the validity of volatility becomes
less precise using the latter. Andersen et Al points out some benefit of using their approach. They
claim that it is hard to get rid of the measurement error in the calculations using the traditional
method; hence the results may not always be as reliable as one think. Therefore it is better, when
evaluating high frequency data to use the realized volatility. The discussed issues do not occur
then since the frequency of the dataset is so high. Thus the measurement error approaches zero
and the volatility measure becomes more reliable and correct.

3.4.2 Average Spread
The FX market is a very liquid market, which is reflected in the tight bid-offer spread, hence the
bid-offer spread acts as a measure of liquidity. Liquidity is an important determinant to market
behavior and there are different models for measuring liquidity, one being the bid-offer spread
(O’Hara 1995). A tighter spread indicates a more liquid market.

The FX market order book consists of different liquidity levels with different spreads. Top of
book, the main focus in this thesis, has the tightest spread (thus representing the “best bid-offer”)
and is also characterized by a lower supply of volume.

Implied by simple logic, results should show that as the spread becomes wider the number of
arbitrage opportunities decreases. To explore this, the spread’s correlation to arbitrage
opportunity size and frequency is tested in OLS regressions. The average spread variable in this
thesis is an average of the difference between offer and bid during each hour, see below.

                                                                            (12)

4. Empirical results

With the main objective to explore whether or not latency has an effect on profitability, the main
results become the simulations and the hypothesis testing done on the results. The cross-
sectional result has an explanatory function, describing all variables and also our data set. The
regressions and its results have a complementary function. It aims to investigate which factors
affect the main result.

4.1 Model simulation results
Table 1 and Table 2 show cross-sectional descriptive for the main results from the model
simulations for the three different latency levels. The results are divided by weekday as well as

                                                                               16
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

statistics for the week as a whole. Descriptive statistics for the latter are captured by the variable
Total in the table. What can be observed, referring to Table 2 Panel B is that the number of
arbitrage opportunities occurrences increases with latency. This is indicated by the increasing
mean and maximum amount of arbitrage opportunities presented in the table. However the
average size of the arbitrage opportunities does not seem to increase with the size of the latency,
as one would intuitive think. It rather seems to be the opposite trend since the mean of the total
week decreases as latency increases (see Table 1 Panel A-C). It is important to note that the
results for the average size of the arbitrage opportunities are expressed in per million traded. The
assumption is that every time an arbitrage opportunity occurs, the arbitrageur manages to trade 1

                                                                                              24
million dollar on the market and with the provider simultaneously  .

                                                                                                                                    25
Hypothesis tests have been performed for the three variables representing cost of latency , to
discern if arbitrage opportunities exist and if the average size of the arbitrage opportunities is

                         26
greater than zero . The results are shown in Table 3 Panel A-C and support the hypothesis that
the cost variables are greater than zero since the p-value is .0000. This is true for all the latency
levels tested.

To support the hypothesis that the average size of arbitrage opportunities do not increase with

                                                                                                        27
latency, hypothesis testing was performed as shown in Table 4 Panel A . The results show that
we fail to reject the null hypothesis with a p-value of .0000, meaning the average size of arbitrage
opportunities when having a latency of 100 milliseconds is higher than the average size of
arbitrage opportunities when having a latency of 250, and thus 500 milliseconds.

                                                        28
Still, as can be seen in Figure 2, potential loss  is implied to increase with latency. As it is
graphically illustrated in Figure 2, there is a convexity in the relationship between latency and
potential loss with each dot in the diagram representing one trading day worth of accumulated
potential loss. This implies an increasing marginal cost of latency. The potential loss due to
arbitrage, during a trading day, with a latency of 50 milliseconds, is implied by Figure 2 to be
between 5 000 and 28 000 USD. With a latency of 1 second, the indicated potential loss has a
larger spread ranging from 25 000 to 105 000 USD.

24 This means that with a arbitrage opportunity size of 1 basis point (.0001) results in a the per 1 million dollar profit
of 100 USD for the arbitrageur.
25 Assuming that our variables representing cost of latency is a good measure of cost of latency.
26The test performed is H : μ      μ    μ      > 0
                           0   number,  ratio,  avg_size
27 The performed test is: H : avg_size100ms > avg_size250ms > avg_size500ms
                                  0
28 Potential loss is based on the above assumption about 1 million traded each time an arbitrage opportunity occurs.
Realistically top of book supplied volume may be as low as 100.000 USD and can also be larger than 1 million. Thus
it is only an assumption that the arbitrageur will be able to trade 1 million, having in mind that sometimes it may be
able to trade less and sometimes more.

                                                                               17
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

In Table 2 Panel A-C, the cross-sectional descriptive for the second and third measure of cost of
latency; Number and Ratio is presented. The table also includes the descriptive for total number of
observations per hour, that is number of price updates per hour. The variable is called Total in the
table. The average number of price updates per hour, during the observed time period, was

              29
around 2100  (Table 2 Panel C) with a low of 926 updates per hour, up to 4952 representing a
very active hour. The results show that there is quite a large dispersion in the number of price
updates per hour.

In Table 2 Panel A, the variable Ratio, represents the number of price updates resulting in
arbitrage opportunities compared to the total number of price updates per hour. It is shown in
the table that on average only .40 percent of the observations results in arbitrage opportunities
(for a latency level of 100 ms). This may seem low but it still results in costs that could be
significant. Furthermore, the ratio part of the cross-sectional descriptive implies that this ratio
increases with latency.

Table 4, Panel A-C, shows the results from further investigating if the cost increases with latency

                                                30
by doing more hypothesis testing . With low significance levels (p-value of .000) we fail to reject
the null hypothesis that both the number of arbitrage opportunities and the ratio variable
increases with latency. Once again implying that cost increases with latency.

Concluding, the results show that arbitrage opportunities would exist under the assumptions
made in the model, resulting in a potential loss for the provider in question. The results also
show that cost is an increasing function of latency.

4.2 Regression Results
The regression results are presented in Table 5. In the first regression where Average Size acts as a
dependent variable, the regression result points out a predicted average size of arbitrage
opportunities of 222 USD if assuming the volatility on the market and the bid-ask spread equals

                                                             31
zero, i.e. the interpretation of the constant . However, the interpretation of only the constant is
not meaningful since in reality it is normally not the case that market volatility and bid-ask spread
equals zero. Looking at the slope coefficients are more interesting; observable is that there is a
positive relationship between the average size of the arbitrage opportunities and the volatility on
the market and a negative relationship between the average size of the arbitrage opportunities and

29
  Based on the same data set, the number of total observations per hour should not differ, however the simulations
creates a small difference. This does not affect the results.
30
  H0: number100ms < number250ms < number500ms
  H0: ratio100ms < ratio250ms < ratio500ms
31
  The estimated arbitrage profit of 222 USD assumes that the arbitrageur trades a volume of 1 million in the market
simultaneously as trading with the provider in the same volume.

                                                                               18
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

the bid-ask spread. However the latter is statistically insignificant meaning we cannot for sure say
that there is a negative relationship between the average size of the arbitrage opportunities and
the bid-ask market spread. Due to the fact that the regression, with average size as the dependent

                             2
variable, has a very low R  one can conclude that there are other factors, than volatility and bid-
ask spread that affects the average size of arbitrage opportunities. According to the regression
results, the two independent variables only explain 4.5 percent of the total variation in the

                                                                                                   2
average size of arbitrage opportunities. Generally, a low value of R , indicate that it is hard to
predict the individual effect of the independent variables on the dependent one. Therefore it is
hard to conclude for sure that the volatility is a variable that has an impact on the arbitrage size
although the regression results shows a strong positive relationship that also is statistically

                                                               2
significant. It is also important to have in mind that R  has some drawbacks; it increases when
more independent variables are added to the regression. Thus, in this particular regression with

                                                                     2
only two independent variables, it is not surprising that the R  is low and since it never decreases
when more variables are added it makes it a poor tool when deciding how many variables should
be added to the model.

Worth noticing is that the average size of arbitrage opportunities decreases when latency
increases, when looking at the constants ( ). With a latency of 100 milliseconds the average size
of arbitrage opportunities is 222 USD compared to only 151 USD when the latency is 250
milliseconds. This conclusion is not intuitive; the logical intuition is that with a higher latency
level, the average size of the arbitrage profit increases. However it is important to distinguish
between the size of the arbitrage opportunities and the number of arbitrage opportunities. As the
results show, the number of arbitrage opportunities increases with higher latency level, but this
does not necessarily means that the size of the arbitrage opportunities increases as well.

In the second regression where the dependent variable is a binary variable taking on the value 1 if
there exist arbitrage opportunities and 0 otherwise, the interpretation becomes different from
regression 1. Still assuming the assumption made in the first regression holds, this regression with
a binary dependent variable is called the linear probability model (LPM) meaning the slope
coefficients measures the predicted change in the binary variable when the independent variables
increase by one unit. As can be seen from the regression results, if volatility marginally changes

                32
with one unit  the probability of an arbitrage opportunity existing increases with .103 with a
latency level of 100 milliseconds. This is not surprising since when the volatility increases, there is
more activity on the market and thus the probability of arbitrage opportunities existing increases.

32
  In the case of volatility for EUR/USD a change in one unit translates to change in the seventh decimal, that is
.000001

                                                                               19
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

                                                                                                                     33
The same reasoning goes for the spread; a change in spread of one basis point , that is .0001,
results in a decrease of the probability of an existing arbitrage opportunity of 1.225. Intuitively, it
makes sense that if the spread becomes wider, the probability of arbitrage opportunities existing
decreases. However, the size of the coefficient for spread (-1.225) does not make sense. This is
due to the fact that the model used, the LPM do not limit the probability to be between 0 and 1,
it can be less than 0 or greater than 1. If only looking at the constant, assuming both volatility and
spread equals zero, the probability of an arbitrage opportunity occurring equals more than 200 %
when having a latency level of 100 milliseconds. This conclusion is statistically significant and
means that when having a low latency the probability of exploring an arbitrage opportunity

             34
increases . Again, this result does not make intuitively sense, however even though probability of
arbitrage opportunities seem to decreases as latency increases cost has still been proven to
increase with latency.

Moving on to the third regression with Ratio as dependent variable the only variable worth
commenting on, that is statistically significant is the volatility. There exists a clear positive

                                            35
relationship between the variable Ratio  and the market volatility. If the volatility of the market
increases by .1 (volatility mean is 1.2043 and thus it is reasonable to think that the volatility

                                                                            36
increases by .01 and not 1) the ratio would increase by .0003  for a latency level of 100
milliseconds. With a mean for ratio of .004, a change of .0003 is relatively large. The variable
spread is only significant when having a latency level of 500 and 100 milliseconds but
unfortunately not for a sufficiently high significant level and since the change is also very small it
is not of interest to interpret this specific result further.

In the last regression with Number as dependent variable the same conclusions as above
considering the relationship between the volatility and latency respectively the spread and latency
can be drawn. That there is positive relationship to the volatility and a negative relationship to the
spread for all investigated latency levels. The change in number of arbitrage opportunities when

                                                                                    37
volatility increases with .1 is in the fourth regression implied to be 1.276  for 100 milliseconds
(corresponding number for 500 milliseconds is 2.601). It is also shown that volatility’s effect on
number of arbitrage opportunities occurring increases with latency. In comparison to the other

                                                                     2
three regressions, this regression is the only one that has a R  higher than 50 percent (looking at

                                                                    2
latency levels of 250 and 500 milliseconds an even higher R is obtained) meaning in this context

33                                                   th
  In EUR/USD this means that 1 basis point is a 100  of a cent

35
   Which is, in this regression, the measure of potential loss due to latency
36 .1*.003=.1* β   With a mean for volatility of around 1.0 a change of 0.1 is feasible.
                 vol.
37 .1*12.759

                                                                               20
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

that the chosen explanatory variables are suitable measures for explaining the number of arbitrage
occurrences. Implied by the regression result for regression four is that when volatility and spread
are zero, then the average number of arbitrage opportunities during an hour equal to 37.8 (for a
latency level of 100 milliseconds). However, the constants are not statistically significant, thus any
real conclusions cannot be drawn.

Since our sample is very small, the assumption that there is no perfect collinearity among the
independent variables may not hold. Also since the volatility can be expressed as an exact linear
function of bid-ask spread, the assumption about perfect collinearity will be violated and thus the
assumption of zero conditional mean, that is the error term has an expected value of zero given
any values of the independent variables is also violated. This is probably the reason to why the
bid-ask spread is statistically insignificant.

4.3 Cross-sectional descriptive of the independent variables
Looking at the cross sectional descriptive for the volatility, generally there is no observable
difference between the weekdays. The mean for an average weekday of each hour, referring to

                                                                       38
Table 6 is approximately the same and around 1.0 . On Friday and Monday on the other hand
the volatility is more dispersed, as the value of the kurtosis is high for those days. A high value of
kurtosis implies the tails in the distribution are fat resulting in more dispersion. A possible
interpretation of the high kurtosis value for Friday, i.e. an explanation to why the volatility is

                                                                    39
more spread on Friday can be due to the Non-Farm payrolls  statistics being released in the US
first Friday of the month, resulting in more activity on the market and thus increasing market
volatility. Regarding Monday, it is hard to conclude anything but it could potentially be due to
events that may have happened during the weekend, resulting in change expectations of the
future thus resulting in active trading.

Going on analyzing the spread which results can be found in Table 6 the estimated cross
sectional descriptive are roughly the same for all weekdays. The spread seems to not have an
impact on what weekday there is when looking at the means and variance. The only parameter

                                                                         40
that has a little difference in weekdays is skewness.  An average Thursday in March has a positive
skewness of .3094 compared to the negative ones in the other weekdays. The reason to why this
is the case is very hard to say because there is no observable trend that are shown in the results.

38 Note that the volatility has been multiplied by 1 000 000 to be easier to observe and analyze, meaning the volatility
is as small as .0000001.
39 The nonfarm payrolls is seen as a good indicator for the US economy, because the number presented tells us how
many jobs have been created or lost in the economy for the last month (excluding jobs from the farming industry)
40 Skewness is a measure of the symmetry of a distribution. When the skewness is zero, the distribution is followed
by a standard normal distribution.

                                                                               21
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Although the other weekdays have a negative skewness, the difference of the skewness is quite
large when comparing the different weekdays. Monday for example has a negative skewness of -
.8816 while Wednesday has a negative skewness of -.0542. The spread of the skewness is quite
large within weekdays meaning the dispersion to the mean is relatively day specific. The value of

                                                                 41
kurtosis is roughly the same for all weekdays.

As can be seen from the graph of the distribution of the spread in Figure 5, the distribution of
the spread in basis points has the same shape as a normalized curve. The mean is roughly 1.25
basis points meaning the spread is on average 1.25. As the kurtosis for a standard normal
distribution is three, one can conclude that the spread is near a normally distribution, which is
also supported by the histogram in the Appendix (Figure 5).

The cross-sectional descriptive of spread for EUR/USD for march 2012 in Table 6 supports the
notion that the FX market is characterized by a tight spread (i.e. high liquidity).

5. Implications and conclusions

The results show that the model did simulate the occurrence of arbitrage opportunities and that
the variables representing cost increases with latency. It is argued in this thesis that the model
applied could reflect real potential situations, meaning also the results can reflect real state of
affairs. The fact that the cost variables are statistically significantly larger than zero supports the
notion that arbitrage opportunities exist in our model world.

The regression results primarily showed that there is a positive relationship between volatility and
the occurrence of arbitrage opportunities, implying that the level of volatility in the market
matters. Not only was there a positive relationship between volatility and arbitrage opportunities,
this relationship increases with latency. Due to statistically insignificant results for the bid-ask
spread coefficients in the regressions, no conclusions could be drawn regarding the relationship
between the occurrence of arbitrage opportunities and the size of the bid-ask spread.

                                    2
Furthermore, the low R -value of the regressions means that factors other than volatility and
spread affect the occurrence of arbitrage opportunities.

As shown, there is a convexity in the relationship between potential loss per day and latency,
which implies an increasing marginal cost of latency. This would mean that the benefits of
reducing latency have a decreasing marginal return. Moving from 500 milliseconds to 250

41 Kurtosis is a measure of peakness. It shows the heaviness of the tails relative to a normal distribution. A high
kurtosis indicates that the distribution is peaked near the mean resulting in heavy tails and vice versa. For a standard
normal distribution, the kurtosis is three.

                                                                               22
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

milliseconds saves more than moving from 250 milliseconds to only microseconds. It can always
be questioned if the small sample in this thesis reflects the population. However the small sample
functions as an indicator that further research should be done to verify this. If the increasing
marginal cost of latency (or decreasing marginal return of reducing latency) can be proven, this
will have implications on how trading entities should make IT investments decisions. This could
also serve as a reason for choosing an algorithmic trading strategy.

In conclusion, this study has found that latency is a financial risk factor, as it affects the
occurrence of arbitrage opportunities. This conclusion coincides with the fact that some trading
entities spend substantial resources to get a few tenths of a millisecond lower latency.

6. Further research

It is apparent from the results of this thesis that latency can affect the profitability of a
bank/provider and that there is much reason to future investigate this, fairly new, risk factor in
modern trading. This thesis was limited to testing a simple model to see if latency can be a
financial risk factor in trading. Latency is thus far a relatively unexplored subject in academia and
there is still much research to be done. We have demonstrated that speed arbitrage opportunities
can occur when banks/providers have a certain latency level. However, the sample was relatively
small and even though it gave statistically significant result; there are benefits of further
expanding the time window.

The study shows that latency can be seen as a financial risk factor, adversely affecting the
profitability. It is important to note that this study was made on only one currency pair and even
though it is the most traded currency pair in the world, adding more currency pairs in the model
would probably increase the potential loss due to arbitrage. An increase in the potential loss, due
to taking more currency pairs into consideration, would therefore also increase the severity of
latency as a risk factor. Thus, expanding the model in this thesis would increase latency impact on
profitability.

                                                                                                                              42
Furthermore, it is of interest to investigate the occurrence of triangle arbitrage , where
mispricing is taken advantage of by trading three currencies simultaneously. The potential loss
would possibly increase when taking this type of speed arbitrage into account.

It would also be valuable to explore additional latency levels as well as exploring the difference

                                                     2
between different currency pairs. The low R also implies that other factors than spread and

42
  An example of triangle arbitrage: Suppose you trade EUR/CHF and then trade EUR/USD and USD/CHF. Even
though you are trading between the same currency pair, EUR/CHF, there can be mispricing involving USD that a
speed arbitrageur can take advantage of. See Appendix, Figure 4 for illustration.

                                                                               23
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

volatility affect the occurrence of speed arbitrage opportunities, which can be added to potential
sources for further research.

                                                                               24
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

7. References

O'Hara, M. (1995). Market Microstructure Theory. Blackwell Publishers: Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Sarno Lucio, Taylor Mark P. (2001) The Microstructure of the Foreign-Exchange Market. Publishers:
Princeton University New Jersey
Lyons, Richard K. (2001) The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. Publishers: The MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. Galli Giampaolo, Gioannini Alberto. (1996) The Microstructure of Foreign
Exchange Markets. Publisher: University of Chicago Press
Hasbrouck Joel, Saar Gideon, Low Latency Trading. (2010). Publisher: Stern School of Business
and Cornell University
Ciamac C. Moallemi, Mehmet Sa˘glam, The Cost of Latency. (2009), Colombia University
Riordan Joseph Ryan. The Economics of Algorithmic Trading (2009), Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology.
Aldridge, I.,(2008) High Frequency Trading–A Practical Guide to Algorithmic Strategies and Trading
System. Publisher: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Jersey
Barndorff-Nielsen, Ole E., Shephard Neil. Power and Bipower Variation with Stochastic Volatility and
Jumps (2003)

Arnuk Sal, Saluzzi Joseph. Latency Arbitrage: The Real Power Behind Predatory High Frequency Trading
(2009)
Andersen, T, Bollerslev, T, Diebold, F, Ebens, H. The Distribution of Stock Return Volatility (2000)
Bank for International Settlements. High-frequency trading in the foreign exchange market. (September
2011)
Bank for International Settlements, Triennial Central Bank Survey, Report on the global foreign
exchange market activity in 2010
Bank of International Settlements, BIS Quarterly Review December 2010, The $4 trillion question:
what explains FX growth since the 2007 survey?
Wooldrige, J.M., (2009). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach (4th edition). Publisher: South
Western
Newbold, P., Carlson L.W., & Thorne B (2010). Statistics for Business and Economic (7th edition).
Publisher: Pearson Education

                                                                               25
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

8. Appendix

Table 1. Cross-Sectional Descriptive for the Average Size of Arbitrage Opportunities

The variable Average Size measures the average size of the arbitrage opportunities explored and is
expressed in per million traded. The variable properties are divided into week days in order to
see potential differences between different days of the week. The descriptive also shows the week
as a whole. The average size of arbitrage opportunities and its properties differ between the
latency levels and are therefore divided into 3 panels. The natural logarithm of the dependent
variables was not used although the dependent variables reflect prices (or more correct profits).
This is due to the fact that the variables seem to already look like a standard normalized curve,
without having taken the logarithm of the variables (see Figure 3).
                              Panel A: Latency of 100 ms

  Weekday N Min Max Mean Variance Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis

 Monday 596 10 400 148.305 4 308 65.639 1.358 5.712
 Tuesday 347 10 400 116.397 2 399 48.984 2.756 13.500
 Wednesday 254 10 900 115.748 6 815 82.553 7.149 65.750
 Thursday 538 10 900 122.955 9 961 99.808 6.068 43.810
 Friday 621 30 800 115.024 3 426 58.540 7.015 69.786
 Total 1788 10 900 120.727 6 426 80.167 6.018 50.323

                              Panel B: Latency of 250 ms

  Weekday N Min Max Mean Variance Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis

Monday 482 10 500 125.021 4 869 69.785 3.0424 12.651
Tuesday 423 10 400 115.887 2 667 51.647 3.144 15.622
Wednesday 382 10 900 109.215 3 179 56.391 8.081 104.833
Thursday 774 10 900 116.111 4 718 68.691 7.083 71.895
Friday 895 10 900 117.575 3 455 58.779 5.980 62.744
Total 2965 10 900 117.032 3 871 62.218 5.756 56.151

                              Panel C: Latency of 500 ms

  Weekday N Min Max Mean Variance Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis

Monday 699 10 600 121.059 4 689 68.479 3.311 15.506
Tuesday 632 10 500 120.221 3 947 62.830 2.806 12.079
Wednesday 560 10 900 108.054 2 399 48.985 8.585 126.465
Thursday 947 10 400 115.079 2 468 49.682 2.888 13.822
Friday 1148 10 900 117.491 3 653 60.445 5.148 48.383
Total 4196 10 900 116.513 3 539 59.491 4.594 38.475

                                                                               26
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table 2. Cross Sectional Descriptive for Variables Ratio, Number and Total

The variable Ratio is calculated by dividing the number of observations that resulted in arbitrage
opportunities with the total number of observations including those observations that did not
result in an arbitrage profit. Number is measuring the number of observations resulting in an
arbitrage profit (the numerator in the Ratio variable). Total is a variable measuring the number of
price updates per hour (the total number of observations in an hour). All measures are on per
hour basis. Note that the total number of observations in each table does not vary between
latency levels, because the total number of observations reflects the number of price updates per
hour, independent of latency. The only difference observable for the variable Total is a small
difference in the mean comparing different latency levels. This is due to simulations in the model.
However this does not affect any conclusions. Remember that the variable Ratio is a ratio
measured in decimal form and Number counts the number of arbitrage opportunities existing.

       Panel A: Descriptive for the variable Ratio for 100, 250 and 500 milliseconds

                                    100 ms 250 ms 500 ms
                      N 198 198 198
                        Min 0 0 0
                         Mean 0.004 0.006 0.009
                         Max 0.022 0.026 0.038
                           Variance43 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
                           Std. Dev. 0.0041 0.0051 0.006
                          Skewness 1.327 1.280 1.328
                           Kurtosis 4.937 4.937 5.705

43                                                                   th
  Note that the variance is very small, it may be a variance on the 7  decimal but since it is very small it
approximates to zero

                                                                               27
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Panel B: Descriptive for the variable Number for 100, 250 and 500 milliseconds

                                     100 ms 250 ms 500 ms
                       N 198 198 198
                         Min 0 0 0
                          Mean 10.924 14.661 22.252
                         Max 106 128 189
                           Variance 188.2 319.7 575.0
                           Std. Dev. 13.718 17.881 23.979
                           Skewness 3.157 3.222 3.422
                           Kurtosis 18.228 18.223 20.676

       Panel C: Descriptive for the variable Total for 100, 250 and 500 milliseconds

                                    100 ms 250 ms 500 ms
                      N 198 198 198
                        Min 926 926 926
                         Mean 2164.7 2118.1 2135.7
                       Max 4952 4952 4952
                         Variance 798550 508018 497395
                          Std. Dev. 893.6 712.8 705.3
                         Skewness 3.839 1.128 1.064
                          Kurtosis 31.362 4.629 4.579

                                                                               28
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table 3. Hypothesis Testing That There Exist Arbitrage Opportunities

The t-tests are testing whether or not there exist arbitrage opportunities for three variables.
Average Size which measures the average size of the arbitrage profit if the arbitrageur is able to
explore all the available arbitrage opportunities. It is expressed in per million traded. Number is
measuring the number of observations resulting in an arbitrage profit (for the arbitrageur, loss for
the provider) and Ratio is calculated by dividing the number of observations that resulted in
arbitrage opportunities with the total number of observations including those observations that
did not result in an arbitrage profit. Remember that the variable Average Size is measured in USD,
while the Ratio is a ratio measured in decimal form and Number counts the number of arbitrage
opportunities existing.

                                     Panel A: H0: μAverage Size > 0

                                         100 ms 250 ms 500 ms
               N 198 198 198
                 Degrees of Freedom 197 197 197
                 Mean 97.1974 99.9611 106.3463
                  Std. Dev. 0.0178 0.0133 0.0082
                   t-stat 24.1978 33.3076 57.3663
                  p-value 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000

                                     Panel B: H0: μNumber > 0

                                          100 ms 250 ms 500 ms
               N 198 198 198
                 Degrees of Freedom 197 197 197
                 Mean 10.9242 14.6616 22.2525
                  Std. Dev. 13.7176 0.0056 0.0076
                   t-stat 11.2059 11.5375 13.0578
                  p-value 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000

                                                                               29
                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

                      Panel C: H0: μRatio > 0

                           100 ms 250 ms 500 ms
N 198 198 198
Degrees of Freedom 197 197 197
Mean 0.0043 0.0058 0.0091
Std. Dev. 0.0041 0.0051 0.0065
t-stat 15.0260 16.3081 19.7776
p-value 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000

                                                                 30
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table 4. Hypothesis Testing Showing That Results from Different Latency Levels For
Variables Are Different From One Another

The t-tests are testing whether or not the variables Average Size, Number and Ratio for a specific
latency level is greater than one another. In Panel A, the null hypothesis suggests that the average
size of arbitrage opportunities decreases as latency increases. However, in panel B and C the null
hypothesis is that the number of arbitrage opportunities and the ratio of arbitrage opportunities
compared to total number of observations increases as latency increases. Remember that the
variable Average Size is measured in USD, while the Ratio is a ratio measured in decimal form and
Number counts the number of arbitrage opportunities existing

              Panel A: H0: Average Size100 > Average_Size250 > Average_Size500

                          Average Size100<           Average Size100<           Average Size250<
                                 Average Size250                Average Size500                Average Size500
N 1788 1788 1788
Degrees of
Freedom 1787 1787 1787
t-stat 12.408 13.498 17.708
p-value 0.000 0.000 0.000

                    Panel B: Ho: Number100 < Number250 < Number500

                        Number100<Number250 Number100<Number500 Number250<Number500
N 198 198 198
Degrees of Freedom 197 197 197
t-stat -7.810 -12.681 -13.284
p-value 0.000 0.000 0.000

                           Panel C: H0: Ratio100 < Ratio250 < Ratio500

                                  Ratio100<Ratio250 Ratio100<Ratio500 Ratio250<Ratio500
     N 198 198 198
     Degrees of Freedom 197 197 197
      t-stat -9.187 -17.378 -16.066
      p-value 0.000 0.000 0.000

                                                                               31
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table 5. Main regressions

The dependent variable (a) is a measure of the average size of the arbitrage opportunities an
arbitrageur can obtain if he is able to explore all the available arbitrage opportunities. This
variable is given in absolute numbers. The variable (b) is a binary variable taking on the value 1 if
there exists an arbitrage opportunity and 0 otherwise. The variable (c) is a calculated ratio where
the numerator is the number of observation resulted in an arbitrage opportunity and the
denominator is the total number of observations. The variable (d) represents the number of
arbitrage opportunities occurring (the numerator in the (c) variable). Volatility and spread are the
independent variables that aim to explain the dependent variable in each regression. Note that the
volatility has been multiplied by 1 000 000 to easier observe the dispersion or the spread that the

                                                                                       th
volatility measures, (the volatility is so small that it is often only one the 7  decimal .0000001) and
the spread by 10 000 to get it in basis points. Everything is on a per hour basis.

                                 Panel A. Latency level of 100 ms.

        Coefficients Average Size Exist Ratio Number
                             (a) (b) (c ) (d)

       Volatility 12.669*** 0.103** 0.003*** 12.759***
       Average
        Spread -111.564 -1.225* -0.011* -33.518**
       Constant 222.236** 2.284*** 0.015** 37.808*

       R2 0.045 0.106 0.313 0.503
      N 198 197 198 198
        *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

                                 Panel B. Latency level of 250 ms.

      Coefficients Avgerage Size Exist Ratio Number
                              (a) (b) (c ) (d)

       Volatility 14.047*** 0.066* 0.004*** 19.292***
      Average
       Spread -54.211 -0.478 -0.007 -16.439
      Constant 151.315* 1.445* 0.009 12.311

      R2 0.070 0.051 0.393 0.616
      N 198 198 198 198
       *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

                                                                               32
                                                                    Tas Ternby (2012)_

                        Panel C. Latency level of 500 ms.

 Coefficients Average Size Exist Ratio Number
                     (a) (b) (c ) (d)

Volatility 8.805*** 0.010 0.005*** 26.014***
Average
Spread -19.766 -0.099 -0.019** -46.075*
Constant 120.680*** 1.103*** 0.026** 49.117

R2 0.065 0.010 0.434 0.654
N 198 198 198 198
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

                                                                       33
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table 6. Cross-Sectional Descriptive over Volatility for March 2012

The volatility is expressed in average volatility per hour. The descriptive is divided into which day
of the week as well as the week as a whole. By separating the days, differences in volatility
depending on the day are illustrated. Each day in the data set consists of 9 trading hours. Note
that for March there were five Thursdays and Fridays and only four Mondays, Tuesdays and
Wednesdays. Also note that the volatility has been multiplied by 1 000 000 to easier observe the
dispersion or the spread that the volatility measures, (the volatility is so small that it is often only

           th
one the 7  decimal .0000001).

  Volatility N Min Mean Max Variance Std. Dev. Skewness Kurtosis

 Monday 36 0.3055 1.1867 6.2010 1.0356 1.0176 3.5782 17.6716
 Tuesday 36 0.3649 0.9976 2.2403 0.1920 0.4382 0.7640 3.1346
 Wednesday 36 0.3665 1.1155 4.2764 0.4283 0.6545 3.1704 16.206
 Thursday 45 0.3822 1.3318 2.9732 0.2931 0.5414 1.1340 4.8261
 Friday 45 0.4324 1.2746 5.0769 0.6064 0.77872 2.7903 13.8661

 Total 189 0.3055 1.2043 6.2010 0.5182 0.7199 3.2659 19.6724

                                                                               34
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Table 7. Cross-Sectional Descriptive over Spread in Basis Points per hour for March 2012

The cross-sectional descriptive below shows the properties of average spread per hour expressed

                    44
in basis points . Exactly like the cross-sectional descriptive on volatility the table consists of each
day separate from each other as well as the week as a whole. Each day in the data set consists of 9
trading hours. Note that for March there were five Thursdays and Fridays and only four
Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays. Note the spread has been multiplied by 10 000 to get it in
basis points.

                                                                      Std.
  Spread N Min Mean Max Variance   Dev. Skewness Kurtosis

 Monday 36 1.1443 1.2549 1.3102 0.0018 0.0430 -0.8816 3.0096
 Tuesday 36 1.1207 1.2528 1.3886 0.0046 0.0683 -0.1288 2.2380
 Wednesday 36 1.1360 1.2448 1.3567 0.0026 0.0512 -0.0542 2.8392
 Thursday 45 1.1712 1.2689 1.3806 0.0024 0.0490 0.3094 2.5665
 Friday 45 1.1155 1.2565 1.3589 0.0025 0.0506 -0.5079 3.1912

 Total 189 1.1155 1.2563 1.3886 0.0028 0.0533 -0.2234 2.9489

44 For EUR/USD a basis point is a 100th of a cent.

                                                                               35
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Graphs and illustrations

Figure 1. Numerical example of Figure 4 in Section 3.1

Currency prices move in discrete steps. As a result, a snapshot of a few hundred milliseconds
would like the figure above. At t0 the market streams an offer for the client to buy at 1.3002 and a
bid to sell at 1.3001. This price is streamed out by the provider in t1. However by that time the
market quote has moved to an offer of 1.3004 and a bid of 1.3003. Thus an arbitrage opportunity
of 0.0001 (1.3003-1.3002) occurs due to the fact that the arbitrageur can buy at 1.3002 from the
provider and sell at the higher price of 1.3003 in the market.

From the millisecond when the market moves to 1.3003/1.3004 it takes the provider the internal
latency of the provider to start streaming out this price, during this time they expose themselves
to arbitrageurs. When market and provider stream out the same price no arbitrage opportunities
exist, illustrated by the purple line in the figure.

The second arbitrage opportunity in the figure illustrates when the market depreciates. In t2 the
market offer is lower than the providers bid. Thus the arbitrageur can buy low from the market
and sell high to the provider. In t3 the provider has adjusted its price to reflect the price from t2.
Thus eliminating any arbitrage opportunity.

                                                                               36
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Figure 2. Graph over the relationship between latency level and cost of latency

Plotted in the graph below where potential loss is in thousands of dollars on the y-axis and
different latency levels on the x-axis, one can notice that the potential loss is implied to increase
with latency. Potential loss is based on the above assumption about 1 million traded each time an
arbitrage opportunity occurs. The figure shows a convexity in relationship between latency and
potential loss with each dot in the diagram representing one trading day worth of accumulated
potential loss. The potential loss due to arbitrage during a trading day, with a latency of 50
milliseconds, is implied by the figure to be between 5 000 and 28 000 USD. With a latency of 1
second, the potential loss seem to have much larger spread ranging from 25 000 to 105 000

       45
USD .

45 Again, based on the assumption that the arbitrageur manages to trade 1 million with the provider and on the
market simultaneously every time an arbitrage opportunity occurs. However, it should be noted that the supplied
volume in top of book for Currenex can be as low as 100.000 and can be higher than 1 million. Therefore it is an
assumption of a trading volume of 1 million, having in mind that the traded volume may sometime be smaller and
sometimes higher.

                                                                               37
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Figure 3. Histogram of the Average Size of Arbitrage Opportunities per Average Hour in
March

The graphs show the distribution per hour of the average size of the arbitrage opportunities
given by the variable Average Size. The variable is measured in absolute terms, that is in USD. As
can be seen from the three following graph, latency level do not have a great impact on the
distribution. In near 70 percent of the cases, the potential arbitrage profit (loss for the provider)
lays around 100 USD.

                              Panel A: Latency of 100 ms

          80


          60


          40
   Percent


          20

            0
                0 200 400 600
                                          Average_size

                                               Percent/Density
                                             normal average_size

                              Panel B: Latency of 250 ms

          80


          60


          40
   Percent


          20


            0
                0 100 200 300 400
                                          Average_size

                                               Percent/Density
                                             normal average_size
                                                                               38
                                                                                Tas Ternby (2012)_

                                 Panel C: Latency of 500 ms

        80


        60


        40
Percent


        20


         0
              0 50 100 150 200 250
                                        Average_size

                                            Percent/Density
                                          normal average_size

                                                                                  39
                                                                             Tas Ternby (2012)_

Figure 4. Distribution of Spread Given in Basis Points

The graph shows the distribution of the spread in basis points. For EUR/USD a basis point is a
100th of a cent.

        20


        15


        10
Percent


         5


         0
            1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
                                     spread_in_basis_points

                                       Percent/Density
                                      normal spread_in_basis_points

                                                                               40
                                                                            Tas Ternby (2012)_

Figure 5.

Illustration of triangle arbitrage

In the example below the triangle arbitrage consists of three currencies; CHF, EUR and USD. By
trading all three currency pairs simultaneously mispricing across the three currencies are taken
advantage of.

                                                                               41