         How Do Individual Investors Take Risk? – A Study
           on Risk in Contribution-Defined Pension Plans

                                               ∗                 ∗∗
                           Alexander Asklöv  and Ylva Ersvik

                                     May 25, 2012

                                   B.Sc. Thesis in Finance
                              Stockholm School of Economics

                               Abstract

Studying individual investors’ behavior is challenging because the context in which individuals
invest is difficult to model and actual behavior is difficult to measure. Individual investors present
several features which give their investment situation a special character: They have long but
finite planning horizons, important non-traded assets such as the human capital and important
illiquid assets such as housing. This study investigates the effect of socioeconomic variables
on individual investor risk behavior using data on Swedish unit linked insurance plans within
contribution-defined occupational pensions. To infer risk, we measure total risk, systematic risk
and the proportion of idiosyncratic risk in the investment portfolio. We find strong evidence of a
parabolically shaped relationship between risk and age where total risk increases up to the age of
43 from where it decreases at a growing rate until retirement. We also find that investors with
a high willingness to take financial risk take higher total risk and systematic risk as well as a
greater proportion of idiosyncratic risk. This could be the result of a well informed individual
investor or a well working advisory system.

   ∗
    21998@student.hhs.se
  ∗∗
    21996@student.hhs.se
Contents

1 Introduction 3

2 Swedish Occupational Pension 5

3 Literature Review 6
   3.1 Theoretical Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.2 Empirical Evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

4 Data 8

5 Methodology 10

6 Results 13
   6.1 Descriptive Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.2 Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.3 Robustness Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

7 Conclusions and Implications 15

References 17

Appendix A Sample Characteristics 18

Appendix B Results 23

                                      2
1 Introduction

Individual investors and households present several features which give their investment
situation a special character. They have long but finite planning horizons; an important
part of their assets are non-traded, particularly the human capital, or illiquid, particularly
their housing; finally, individuals and households face constraints on their abilities to bor-
row and on complexities in the tax code. Investment behavior of individual investors is
hence a challenging topic to study; the context in which an individual makes investment
decisions is difficult to accommodate in a model and actual behavior is difficult to measure
                                      1
and capture in good-quality data.

Intimately related to how individuals invest is how they save for the long term, for example
for a retirement pension, and how they approach financial risk. Due to the long investment
horizons of retirement pension portfolios, small differences in annual returns can have a
large impact on an individual’s future financial wealth. The increasing responsibility for
the individual to secure a decent income upon retirement and the growing number of in-
vestment possibilities available make it important to ask whether individuals understand
how their willingness to take financial risk relate to the expected return of their savings.

With this study we aim to shed new light on how individuals invest for the long term
and why. More specifically, we examine the effect of demographic, socioeconomic and
attitudinal characteristics on financial risk observed in portfolios of Swedish unit linked
insurance plans. We use three measures to infer risk in a portfolio: (i) the standard devia-
tion of the portfolio’s historical returns, depicting total risk; (ii) the absolute value of the
portfolio beta times the standard deviation of the market portfolio’s historical returns,
depicting systematic risk; and (iii) the ratio of systematic risk over total risk, that is,
the proportion of idiosyncratic risk in the portfolio. The data set used in the study is
proprietary, of high quality and detail, and has not previously been used in research of
this kind. The data include detailed demographic information on the insurance holder
as well as precise information on the insurance provider, the units invested in and the
market value of capital held in each unit. A subset of individuals has provided addi-
tional information in a survey regarding their willingness to take financial risk. For this
subset of individuals, we include the stated risk tolerance as an additional control variable.

We investigate the impact of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics and stated
risk tolerance on the three measures (i)-(iii) primarily using multiple regression analy-
sis. We pay particular attention to the conventional wisdom recommending individuals
to move from riskier assets like stocks to more conservative fixed-income securities as the
individual ages. This conventional wisdom agrees with the advice often given to individu-
als and households by investment professionals. It also agrees with the strategies of most
modern life cycle funds. We examine whether these ideas are analogue with evidence in
the data.

Previous studies on individual investors’ risk behavior provide widely different and con-
tradictory results, indicating that risk behavior indeed is difficult to model and measure.

   1
    See for example Campbell (2006) who addresses these challenges in greater depth. Campbell performs
a recent and thorough investigation into why households often make inefficient investment decisions by
comparing what households actually do (positive household finance) with what they should do (normative
household finance).

                                      3
While the notion of risky and risk-free assets is important in modern theory of capital
asset pricing, risky assets need to have a clear definition in order for the results to be of
any use. In this study we use a more delicate measure of risk than seen in most other
studies in the field, and so we hope to get a more accurate picture of the explanatory
factors behind individual investors’ risk behavior. Instead of using a binary classification
of risky and risk-free assets, we quantify risk by modeling a market portfolio and studying
the historical returns of the market portfolio and the individual asset portfolios. This
gives us the possibility to weigh the risk and quantify the magnitude of the risk, which
as we know differ remarkably for different types of assets. Furthermore, it gives us the
opportunity to dig deeper into the concept of risk and study not only total risk but also
systematic and idiosyncratic risks. As a consequence, any obtained results should have a
more sound theoretical and empirical foundation than those of studies which use binary
measures of risk.

This study is distinguished from others also in that we study risk behavior in an isolated
investment situation. This gives us a well defined market. Our model is valid only within
the framework of unit linked insurances held as a part of an occupational retirement pen-
sion plan. The trade-off between the credibility and the generality of potential results
becomes evident in studies of this kind. We believe removing some of the generality in
the modeling will facilitate both the problem of modeling and measurement, the two main
difficulties elaborated by Campbell (2006) and introduced in the beginning of this section.
Although potential results are valid only in this specific framework, any results should
provide a reliable picture of individual investors’ risk behavior within it.

Other distinguished features are that we have the opportunity to control for not only
actual portfolio risk, but also for the individual’s attitude to financial risk, provided by a
subset of the data. Lastly, as studies using US data are overrepresented in the field, we
hope to shed new light on the ambiguous question of how individuals approach financial
risk in their portfolio choice using a large, proprietary data set of Swedish investors.

We find strong evidence of a parabolically shaped relationship between portfolio risk and
age. The total risk observed in the investigated portfolios increase up to a turning point
at the age of 43 from where total risk begins to decrease. Total risk then decreases at a
growing rate until retirement. A high salary seems to speed up the transition to the phase
of taking decreasing risk, arriving at this phase at a younger age than do individuals of
middle and low salary. Results further indicate that married individuals take less total risk
and systematic risk but more idiosyncratic risk than their unmarried peers. Females take
less total risk and systematic risk than men whilst the gender effect on idiosyncratic risk
is insignificant. The direct effect of salary prove no significance and is hence less clear.
The market value of portfolio capital has a significant effect only on the proportion of
idiosyncratic risk in the portfolio, suggesting that individuals with a higher market value
of savings diversify their risk less than do individuals with lower market value of savings.
For the subset of individuals having provided their risk tolerance, we find that a high
willingness to take risk has a statistically significant effect on the risk measures and hence
should be included in any model explaining portfolio risk.

Our findings do not violate theoretical human capital models, previous empirical work or
recommendations commonly made by investment professionals. However, they show that
portfolio risk does not decrease over the complete life cycle but increases for a number

                                      4
of years before they commence to decrease. This observation could possibly be explained
by a need to build up a capital base before any investment risks can be taken. Such an
idea finds some support in the data which suggest that the threshold to decreasing risk
tendencies is much higher for individuals with a low salary than for individuals with a
high salary. Additional studies aiming to explain this behavior are needed, particularly
since we suffer from an omitted-variable bias in that we have failed to control for aggregate
wealth in our model.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides background infor-
mation on the Swedish occupational pension system and Section 3 presents the theoretical
framework and reviews previous research in the field. Section 4 discusses the data set.
Section 5 describes our methodology. Section 6 presents the results of the empirical inves-
tigations and Section 7 concludes.

2 Swedish Occupational Pension

We here aim to provide a short introduction to the Swedish pension system and the in-
vestment situation an individual faces as a holder of a unit linked insurance part of an
occupational pension plan.

A first form of public pension was introduced in Sweden in 1914, payable from the age
of 67 and consisting of an old age pension and disability insurance. Although the pub-
lic pension plan was compulsory and applied to essentially the entire population, actual
allowances were small and people had difficulties surviving on this revenue alone. As a
consequence, additional saving plans financed by a reduction in salary were negotiated by
labor unions for certain professions resulting in a complementary occupational pension.
Other labor groups who lacked these agreements experienced an critical loss of income
upon retirement. In 1960 a national supplementary pension scheme called ATP came into
effect. This supplementary pension created a direct link between previous earnings and
old-age pension; the retirement pension was no longer regarded as an allowance, but as a
deferred salary. The ATP system has evolved and been subject to much debate over the
years and was eventually removed as a reformed pension system came into effect in 2001
(Government Offices of Sweden, 2000).

Today, a person living in Sweden has three sources of pension: A national retirement pen-
sion based on the income, an occupational pension provided by the employer and finally
any private pension savings. Occupational pension is generally regulated by collective
agreements or can be arranged by the employer where no collective agreements exist. The
historical heritage of a compulsory occupational pension system has likely contributed to
the fact that a majority of Swedish employees are being covered by an occupational pen-
sion plan provided by their employer. The occupational pension does therefore represent
                                                        2
an important factor of the total Swedish pensions.

Since occupational pensions tend to be regulated by collective agreements, the occupa-
                                                                                      3
tional pension plans seen today are relatively homogeneous across the population  and

   2
    See the Orange Report 2010 (Swedish Pensions Agency, 2010). According to this report, occupational
pensions represent roughly a fifth of all pensions paid in Sweden.
   3
    The most important occupational pension agreements include ITP, KAP-KL, PA-KFS, SAF-LO, KTP
and PA03.

                                      5
                                                       4
are either benefit-defined or contribution-defined . A defined benefit plan guarantees a
monthly income upon retirement as a function of the employee’s final salary. The defined
contribution plan requires the employer to contribute a fixed amount to the employee’s
pension savings but the final amount is not fixed; the cash value of the contribution-
based pension varies according to the market value of the underlying assets. Capital in
a defined-contribution plan is typically invested in a so called traditional insurance or a
unit linked insurance. A traditional insurance necessitates little effort on the behalf of
the policy holder, who cannot impact portfolio management and investment risk. In re-
turn, the policyholder is guaranteed a fixed rate of return on his pension savings. A unit
linked insurance plan on the other hand allows for more flexibility. The units purchased
are mutual funds chosen by the policy holder from the insurance provider’s selection of
products. The policy holder hence also bears the risk of a potential loss. Although the
investment possibilities in a unit linked insurance are limited and often biased in favor
of the provider’s own products, most providers offer exposure to different asset classes,
regions and sectors. One can note a specific segment of around 15 main actors in the
insurance industry offering occupational pension insurances, the choice depending on the
collective agreement as well as the employer’s and the individual’s choices.

The nature of the contribution-based occupational pension creates a rather particular and
interesting investment situation. First, the amount invested is not defined by the investor
himself but is a strict function of his current salary and the employer’s pension plan.
Secondly, the investment possibilities are restricted in that investments are made via an
                                                                                                  5
insurance provider offering an often limited selection of assets available for investment .
These circumstances give us a well defined market and an opportunity to study risk be-
havior in an isolated investment situation, namely, unit-linked insurances within Swedish
occupational pension.

3 Literature Review

3.1 Theoretical Framework
Recent theory suggests that there should be age effects on portfolio choice, assuming older
investors have shorter investment horizons than younger investors and older investors have
less human capital relative to financial wealth than younger investors (Bodie et al., 1992,
Campbell and Viceira, 2002). If the human capital corresponds to a risk level other than
that of the investor’s financial capital, the relative change of human versus financial cap-
ital over an investor’s lifetime creates the need to change the risk level of the financial
capital in order to maintain the same total risk level of the investor’s total portfolio. The
assumption that human capital in general is less risky than financial capital supports
conventional wisdom advising a movement from riskier assets, like stocks, to more con-
servative fixed-income securities as an individual gets older. Models such as Bodie et al.
(1992) show that human capital must be included in any model explaining investment,

   4
    The prevalence and relative distribution of defined-benefit and defined-contribution plans vary between
collective agreements and individuals’ choices.
   5
    Modern insurance plans with more generous investment possibilities have entered the market however.
Together with legislative efforts to facilitate transfers between insurers this has opened up for a more
flexible investment environment. In some insurance-based pension plans individuals can invest directly
in stocks, structured products and other types of financial instruments. This appears to be a growingly
attractive option but as individuals with such solutions still constitute a minor proportion of the raw data
they are excluded from the scope of this study.

                                      6
labor and consumption behavior of a rational economic agent. An investor’s possibility
to rebalance his financial investments decreases with age since the future earning power,
the main asset of young investors, is expended over the life cycle; by retirement, the in-
dividual’s financial wealth has grown but his human capital has decreased. Bodie et al.
further emphasize that labor supply flexibility can play an important role in household
asset allocation and incorporate the fact that individuals may have considerable flexibility
in varying their work effort, including the choice of when to retire. They argue that it
is reasonable to hypothesize that the degree of labor flexibility diminishes over the life
cycle and that this is an additional explanation to a decline in an individual’s effective
human capital. The presence of non-risky human capital will therefore tend to raise young
                          6
investors’ risk tolerance . With this, Bodie et al. suggest a rational basis for the common
                                                                 7
wisdom often accepted for a variety of, sometimes wrong , reasons. The theories of the
effect of human capital on portfolio choice put forth by Bode et al. have been investigated
theoretically by for instance Williams (1978) who analyzes the uncertainty of human capi-
tal in a life-cycle model where education is regarded as an opportunity for risky investment.

The development of modern portfolio theory set forth with Markowitz (1952) who for-
malized a model of portfolio selection using the impact of diversification on investment
risk. He showed that a portfolio could have a standard deviation smaller than that of
either of the individual component assets; prior to these findings, portfolio management
mainly consisted of assessing the risks and rewards of individual securities. Markowitz
introduced the minimum-variance frontier of risky assets, where, for any risk level, the
investor chooses the portfolio with the highest expected return (Bodie et al., 2011).

A few years after Markowitz (1952), Tobin (1958) noted the so called separation property
which separates the portfolio choice problem into two tasks: The first task is the com-
putation of an optimal risky portfolio which is the same for all clients regardless of risk
aversion. The second task is the allocation of a complete portfolio which entails a trade-off
between risk and return. Hence this choice depends on the investor’s risk aversion. In the
1960’s Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965) and Mossin (1966) developed the Capital Asset Pric-
ing Model (CAPM) in its original form and coincidentally, the concepts of absolute and
relative risk aversion were developed by Pratt (1964) and Arrow (1965). Pratt and Arrow
thus gave name to the commonly used Arrow-Pratt coefficient of relative risk aversion
depicting the proportion of wealth placed in a risky asset when the investment universe
consists of one risky asset and one risk-free asset. Whilst these theories laid the founda-
tion of portfolio selection, less was known on the explanatory factors behind risk aversion.
Empirical studies on this matter (see below) became increasingly popular in the 1970’s.

In the 1980’s the above theoretical concepts where widely accepted and the interest of
using them in real investments grew. Concepts in the field of applied portfolio management
were worked out by people such as Zvi Bodie and Robert C. Merton. They developed a
link between theoretical investment concepts and practical investment policies; with their
work, life cycle models, human capital and age cohort effects were translated into financial

   6
    Bodie et al. (1992) extend the discussion and consider also circumstances where human capital is
treated as risky. For instance, if an individual’s wage is very risky or if his wages become less risky as he
moves through his working life, the individual should exhibit greater risk-taking with age.
   7
    See Samuelson (1989) for a discussion of the conventional yet debated wisdom that we should be risk
tolerant when young and exhibit more conservative risk behavior as we near retirement.

                                      7
                                                 8
products, services and investment decisions.

3.2 Empirical Evidence
A number of attempts to explain how socioeconomic variables affect individual investor
risk behavior have been made. Empirical studies on risk aversion using data on house-
holds’ aggregate wealth and debts became popular in the 1970’s.

Although empirical studies confirm that demographic characteristics do affect risk aver-
sion, evidence on how these factors affect risk aversion is mixed. Contributions such as
Cohn et al. (1975) and Friend and Blume (1975) are still used as references in the domain.
More recent studies include Riley and Chow (1992) and Schooley and Worden (1996).
Cohn et al. find that relative risk aversion decreases with age. In the same year, Friend
and Blume argue that the best approximation of the market place is that of constant rel-
ative risk aversion for households. Also Riley and Chow estimate relative risk aversion in
a sample of U.S. households. They find evidence that relative risk aversion decreases with
wealth, education, income, and age until 65, from where risk aversion increases. Schooley
and Worden were one of the first to compare U.S. households’ reported willingness to
take financial risk with the riskiness of their asset holdings. They find that households do
allocate assets in their portfolios consistently with their reported attitudes. Controlling
for risk attitudes does otherwise not seem to be commonplace in the literature, probably
caused by the difficulty to secure such information. Cohn et al. did however have access
to risk attitudes for their sample but did not control for them in the econometric tests.

One potential explanation to the different range of results obtained in this field of research
is that the matter of classifying risky assets has been addressed somewhat differently.
Friend and Blume (1975) and Riley and Chow (1992) operationalize as a risk measure
the individual’s relative risk aversion, that is the proportional wealth invested in risky
assets. Friend and Blume include as risk-free assets checking accounts, cash balances,
savings bonds, the cash value of life insurances as well as treasury bills, notes, certificates,
retirement plans and credit balances in brokerage accounts. These classifications are made
without any further explanation. Riley and Chow use as risky assets all assets other than
personal property, real estate, bonds and checking accounts. Cohn et al. (1975) take the
classification issue further and argue that the important question is not whether an asset is
risk-free, but whether the individual perceives the future benefits from holding the asset as
free of uncertainty. Largely on an intuitive basis, they arrive at two different classifications
of risky assets where each asset category binarily is classified as risky or risk-free. Cohn et
al. also try different measures of aggregate wealth, one regarding total assets as wealth,
the other only regarding financial assets as wealth. The results prove to be similar across
the four measures, which Cohn et al. take as an indication that they may be comparable.

4 Data

The analyses made in this report are based on proprietary data obtained from a leading
independent advisor of insurance products in Sweden. Data is a cross-section of client held
unit linked insurance plans within contribution-defined occupational pensions. Individuals

   8
    See for instance Bodie et al. (1992) for a discussion of labor supply flexibility and portfolio choice and
Bodie et al. (1988) for a discussion of defined benefit versus defined contribution pension plans in the U.S.
economy.

                                      8
are included in the data as a result of their employer being a client of the advisor. Any
handling of data is carried out with strict respect to confidentiality and the individuals’
integrity.

The data contain detailed demographic information such as date of birth, gender, marital
status, home postal code and employer as well as information on the investments made
within the unit linked insurance. Data on unit linked insurances include the insurance
provider, precise information on the units invested in and the market value of capital in-
vested in each unit. These data are automatically imported from the insurance provider
and can thus be considered exact and credible. We also have access to the range of mutual
funds offered by each insurance provider as well as the mutual fund categories and man-
agement fees. The number of funds available to investors vary from 22 to 103 depending
on the provider. Table A.1 presents the these different numbers of funds made available to
investors. We lastly have access to data on daily, weekly, monthly or quarterly Net Asset
Values (NAVs) for each mutual fund going back to the fund’s start date as well as mutual
          9
fund sizes  as reported by Morningstar in Sweden.

For a subset of individuals, data include an explicit statement of the individual’s risk
tolerance level reported in a customer survey in terms of his willingness to take financial
    10
risk.    The question is (free translation from Swedish): "Which of the following risk
profiles describes you best?" and has the following alternatives:

   • "Very low risk - I want very low risk and small fluctuations in portfolio value and
      therefore I accept low returns."

   • "Low risk - I want low risk and minor fluctuations in portfolio value and therefore I
      accept relatively low returns."

   • "Moderate risk - I want relatively high returns and therefore I accept a certain risk
      of losses."

   • "High risk - I want high returns and therefore I accept a risk of big losses."

   • "Very high risk - I want the highest returns possible and therefore I accept a risk of
      very high losses."

The survey is either filled out before or at the first meeting with the advisor. It is rec-
ommended that the survey is filled out before the meeting, so that the individual can fill
it out online in any desired location. We note that the risk tolerance as it is indicated
by the individual may have been chosen with respect to the occupational pension plan
exclusively, or may have been indicated as a more general measure of the individual’s risk
preference.

From the raw data set described above, we exclude individuals who possess unit linked
insurances with underlying units having time series of monthly historical NAVs shorter
than 18 months. We also exclude individuals who have not provided information on their
annual salary and individuals who possess assets for which Morningstar does not store
information on the NAV or the fund size. This comes down to a sample (hereafter re-
ferred to as the Sample) of 57,002 individuals in the possession of 104,163 unit linked

   9
    The total value of cash and securities less any liabilities.
  10
    In fact, all individuals in the data set have provided such information as a part of the advisory process.
We include only those individuals who have replied to the survey online, as opposed to on paper.

                                      9
insurances and a subsample (hereafter referred to as the Subsample) of 352 individuals
                                                                                                 11
having provided their risk tolerance level and possess a total of 692 unit linked insurances  .

Table A.2 and Table A.3 illustrate the demographic characteristics of the Sample and the
Subsample respectively. These data indicate that the Subsample may be representative of
the Sample. Table A.4 provides an overview of the distribution of insurance providers in
which the Sample individuals hold unit linked insurances. Table A.5 reports salary sum-
mary statistics. Table A.6 presents asset portfolio composition data. Note the importance
of balanced mutual funds in the asset portfolio. Table A.7 provides the distribution of the
stated risk profile answers for the Subsample.

The nature of the data and the sampling brings about a few important biases. First, the
data set may not include the entire portfolio of a person’s unit linked insurances since
permission to import data from the insurance provider is granted only for accounts which
are directly tied to a client agreement. Secondly, there is an important bias in the fact
that all individuals are clients of the advisor. As such they have the possibility to use
the advisor’s services for their investment decisions although the design of the agreements
                                               12
and the extent to which this happens vary  . Furthermore, data may not depict the indi-
vidual’s full income situation in cases where the individual is employed part-time. Lastly,
there is a bias where observations are removed as a consequence of missing data on salary
or holdings. Holdings where no data is registered by Morningstar in Sweden often include
fund portfolios for which data on the underlying assets are not reported.

The strength of the data set is its size, recency and level of detail. It includes people
                                                13
mainly on the basis of them being employed   and each individual provides the data
in the context of planning his future retirement pension. We believe this opens up for
                                                                              14
higher accuracy in the data than would be obtained by means of a survey   where the
individual’s self-interest is insubstantial. An additional advantage is that surveys tend to
imply self-selection biases.

5 Methodology

We examine the impact of demographic and socioeconomic characteristics and attitude to
risk-taking on actual risk taken primarily using linear multiple regression analysis. Re-
gardless of the number of unit linked plans possessed per person, we aggregate any hold-
ings to arrive at one portfolio per person. We use three measures of risk to capture the
effect on total risk, systematic risk and the proportion of idiosyncratic risk in the portfolio.

In a first stage we estimate the following regression model:

            Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + β3X3 + β4D1 + β5D2 + β6X4 +  (1)
where Y is some measure of risk in the portfolio. On the right hand side of the equation,
we include

  11
    Observe that these may not be all insurances possessed by the included individuals.
  12
    Unfortunately, actual advice is difficult to quantify and use as a control variable.
  13
    Cohn et al. (1975) for instance use data obtained by means of a mail questionnaire. They arrive at a
sample of 972 accounts.
  14
    Studies based on survey data is dominant in the field. This is natural because making use of a survey
is the easiest way to obtain data on household aggregate wealth.

                                      10
   (i) a constant β0;

  (ii) age X1;

 (iii) age squared X2;

 (iv) annual salary X3;

  (v) a dummy variable D1 for gender, taking on the value of unity if the individual is a
      female and zero if the individual is a man;

 (vi) a dummy variable D2 for marital status, taking on the value of unity if the individual
                 15
      is married   and zero if he or she is single;

 (vii) the total market value of capital in the portfolio X4.

With this specification, we aim to examine the direct effects of our variables on Y . Fol-
lowing Wang and Hanna (1997) and Campbell (2006) we include age squared to capture
a possible non-linear direct effect of age on observed investment behavior.

In a second stage, we use our cross-section of holdings in occupational unit linked insurance
plans to estimate a regression model of the interacted effects of age and salary on Y . Age
now takes the form of dummy variables representing age cohorts, resulting in a model
specified as

       Y = β0 + β1D1 + β2D2 + β3X4 + β4A1I1 + β5A1I2 + β6A1I3 + ... +
                                    +β15A5I1 + β16A5I2 + β17A5I3 +  (2)

where the following new variables are introduced:

  (i) A1 is a dummy variables representing the cohort of age between 0 and 30;

  (ii) A2 is dummy variable representing the cohort of age between 31 and 40;

 (iii) A3 is a dummy variable representing the cohort of age between 41 and 50;

 (iv) A4 is a dummy variable representing the cohort of age between 51 and 60;

  (v) A5 is a dummy variable representing the cohort of age of 61 and above;

 (vi) I1 is a dummy variable for high salary, taking on the value of unity if annual salary
      is greater than or equal to 720,000 SEK and zero otherwise;

 (vii) I2 is a dummy variable for middle salary, taking on the value of unity if annual
      salary is greater than or equal to 360,000 SEK but less than 720,000 SEK and zero
      otherwise;

(viii) I3 is a dummy variable for low salary, taking on the value of unity if annual salary
      is less than 360,000 SEK and zero otherwise.

   15
    A person for which information on marital status is missing is considered unmarried.

                                      11
Explanatory variables no longer include age squared since potential nonlinear effects are
captured by the dummy variables representing age cohorts. The base salary segment
against which other segments are assessed consists of individuals with an annual salary of
at least 360,000 SEK and less than 720,000 SEK. This choice of segments for the salary is
made largely on an intuitive basis.

We use three different risk measures as left-hand side variables Y based on the portfolio
variance relationship
                                       2      2  2      2
                             σP = βP σM + σ (eP ). (3)
First, we include the standard deviation σP of historical portfolio returns to depict total
                                                                              2     T
risk. To get a value for σP , we take the square root of the variance obtained as σP = w Cw
                                           16
where w is a vector containing the weights  of each underlying portfolio asset and C is the
covariance matrix of the individual covariances Cov(ri, rj ) between the returns of assets
i and j of the portfolio. Secondly, we include as a measure the absolute value of the
portfolio beta times the standard deviation of historical market portfolio returns |βP |σM
to capture systematic risk. We compute βP by taking the weighted sum of the underlying
asset betas βi defined as
                                        Cov(ri, rM )
                                 βi =      2                                   (4)
                              σM
for each asset i and where ri is the net return of the asset and rM is the net return of the
market portfolio. Lastly, we include as a risk measure the proportion of idiosyncratic risk
in the portfolio
                               σ(eP )       |βP |σM
                                    = 1 −                                   (5)
                             σP          σP
to depict how much an investor is under diversified and where σ(eP ) depicts a standard
deviation attributable to idiosyncratic risk. We model the market portfolio as the selec-
tion of mutual funds in which at least one individual in the sample has invested. Each
                                                               17
mutual fund’s weight in the market portfolio is the fund size   divided by the sum of all
fund sizes. Table B.1 presents the market portfolio weights per mutal fund category. We
compute the covariances of historical fund returns pairwise for all pairs of non-missing
                                                                                  18
historical returns at each time point. Each time series of historical fund returns   include
at least 18 and up to 144 previous monthly observations.

We run the regressions (1) and (2) first for the Sample and thereafter for the Subsample to
infer the effect of reducing the sample size. All regressions are run with heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors. The indicated attitude to risk is then added to the regression
specifications (1) and (2) for the Subsample, in the form of dummy variables representing
low and high risk tolerance, setting the base risk tolerance to the middle level. Due to
the lack of observations in these segments, very high and very low risk tolerance levels are
substituted for high and low risk tolerance levels respectively.

Finally, we estimate the models (1) and (2) on the stated willingness to take risk, hence
using stated risk tolerance as the measure Y . This additional specification examines the
correlation between the demographic and socioeconomic variables and the stated attitude

  16
    Each weight is the market value of capital invested in an asset divided by the total market value of
the portfolio. Thus, the weight vector sum to unity for each individual.
  17
    The total value of cash and securities less any liabilities.
  18
   Fund return is based on closing monthly NAVs in SEK and expressed in seven decimal digits. The
standard deviation of portfolio returns is expressed in ten decimal digits.

                                      12
to risk. For this estimation, we use a Poisson regression where we assign the dependent
variable to take on a value of 2 for a stated high risk tolerance, a value of 1 for medium risk
tolerance and a value of 0 for low risk tolerance. A shown dependence would contribute
to our assertion that stated risk tolerance needs to be included as an endogenous vari-
able in the models (1) and (2). Additionally, this specification itself provides interesting
insights on the explanatory factors behind the risk attitudes of today’s individual investors.

The main concern with our model is the endogeneity problem related to the omission of
some variables that have been found to be important in other studies and that intuitively
should be explanatory factors behind risk behavior, such as the individual’s aggregate
wealth, debts, education, household size, home ownership, type of employment, etcetera.
Moreover, the individual’s risk tolerance is an omitted variable in both of our regression
models. By studying the Subsample for which we have access to stated risk tolerance, we
hope to get an idea of a more accurate size of the explanatory factor effects in (2) and use
this insight when studying the results for the Sample.

6 Results

In this section we present descriptive statistics for our risk measures Y and the main
regression results. We conclude with robustness tests.

6.1 Descriptive Results
Table B.2 reports summary statistics on the risk measures Y for the Sample and the
Subsample. These statistics show a mean total risk of 0.0360 for the Sample, which as
expected lies slightly above the mean systematic risk of 0.0305. The mean proportion
of idiosyncratic risk is 0.191. Notice the slightly negative minimum value of -0.0373 for
the proportion of idiosyncratic risk. A negative proportion obviously has no support
in theory and entirely stems from a modeling error of the market portfolio. Being an
approximation where missing mutual fund returns are ignored in the calculation of the
market historical returns, the market portfolio is biased in favor of non-missing mutual
fund returns. The exact effect of this error is unknown, however, but tentatively accepted.
If we in our calculations include data points which are non-missing for all underlying
      19
assets   the minimum and maximum values of the proportion of idiosyncratic risk in the
portfolio become 0.0330 and 1.000, supporting this hypothesis. Since such time series are
undesirably short however, we place confidence in our risk measures despite the minor
error.

6.2 Main Results
Table B.3 presents the regression results of model (1) for the Sample using both total
risk, systematic risk and the proportion of idiosyncratic risk as dependent variables. All
coefficient estimates, using total risk and systematic risk as measures, are negative except
those for age and portfolio capital. The different signs of the estimates for age and age
squared suggest that the relationship between risk and age is parabolically shaped with a
                 20
peak at 43 years   for total portfolio risk, at 44 years for systematic portfolio risk and at
46 years for the proportion of idiosyncratic risk in the portfolio. Results further indicate

  19
    These are the data points between today and 18 months’ return history.
  20                                     2                                                     βˆ
                  ˆ   ˆ    ˆ      ˆ                                                     1
   Differentiating Y = β0 + β1X + β2X  with respect to X yields a turning point at X = − ˆ .
                                                                                                                   2 β2

                                      13
that married individuals take less total risk and systematic risk but a greater proportion
of idiosyncratic risk than their unmarried peers. Females take less total risk and system-
atic risk than men whilst the gender effect on idiosyncratic risk is insignificant. Worth
noticing is that the coefficient estimates for salary are insignificant regardless of which
measure of risk is used. The market value of portfolio capital has a significant effect only
on the proportion of idiosyncratic risk in the portfolio, suggesting that individuals with
a higher market value of savings diversify their risk less than do individuals with lower
market value of savings.

In an effort to understand the combined effects of age and salary on risk we now turn
to model (2) where age and salary are represented as dummy variables. In Table B.4 we
report the coefficient estimates for this regression specification using both total risk, sys-
tematic risk and proportion of idiosyncratic risk as dependent variables. The coefficient
estimates are visualized in Figure B.1. We see in Panel A and B of Figure B.1 that total
risk and systematic risk increase at young ages and then start decreasing as the individual
arrives at the turning age point. A high salary seems to speed up the transition to the
phase of taking decreasing risk, arriving at this phase at a younger age than do individuals
with middle and low salary. Panel C shows that investors with low salary take higher id-
iosyncratic risk. The tendency to diversify risk is hence more prevalent among individuals
with high salary than those with middle or low.

In order to evaluate the effect of excluding stated risk tolerance from our regression spec-
ifications (1) and (2), we turn to the Subsample for which we add the previously omitted
variable to the model. Table B.5 shows the regression results with and without including
stated risk tolerance as an control variable. Comparing Table B.5 with Table B.3 where
we deduce the direct effects of our variables on risk, we see that reducing the sample size
results in a large fall in significance, indicating that our Subsample unfortunately is too
small to be used in a trustworthy analysis. Yet we choose to present the interacted effects
of age cohort and salary segment dummy variables in Table B.6 and Table B.7. Figure B.2
visualizes these results graphically. Despite the inadequate size of the Subsample which
makes further interpretations dangerous, we observe by comparing Figure B.2 with those
of Figure B.1 that the inclusion of stated risk tolerance in the model causes no consider-
able change in the other coefficient estimates. This strengthens our confidence that the
omitted variable bias in (1) and (2) may be quite small. Table B.5 through Table B.7 do
however suggest that the coefficient estimates for the dummy variable representing high
risk tolerance are significant. We note a positive correlation between a stated high risk
tolerance and total and systematic risks and a negative correlation between a stated high
risk tolerance and the proportion of idiosyncratic risk. This finding implies that individ-
uals who have indicated a high risk tolerance level also take higher total and systematic
risks. An additional important result is that these risk-willing individuals diversify risk
better, indicating that they do not only take higher risks, they also manage them better.
Finally, our results for the Subsample confirm our previous observation that women take
lower total and systematic risks. Women also indicate a preference to take lower risk at
the five percent significance level. An additional insight obtained for the Subsample is that
salary has turned out to be a significant variable in explaining total risk and systematic
risk, which it did not for the Sample. A downturn for our Subsample however, is the in-
significant coefficient estimates for age, which showed extreme significance for the Sample.
This fact reaffirms our previous conclusion that the Subsample indeed is too small and
that any results should be used with caution.

                                      14
Using as dependent variable the individuals’ stated risk tolerance, we obtain results shown
in Table B.8 and Table B.9 as well as Figure B.3. It is apparent that an investor’s will-
ingness to take risk varies significantly with age and gender. Whereas the relationship
between total or systematic risk and age is parabolic, Table B.3 suggests almost linear
tendencies for the relationship between stated risk tolerance and age. Women clearly have
lower willingness to take financial risk than men. Finally we note that neither annual
salary, marital status nor the portfolio market value has a significant effect on the in-
vestor’s willingness to take risk. Due to the inadequate size of the Subsample, we are
hesitant to make any other interpretations.

Our findings in the multiple regression analysis show that, if both the Sample and the
Subsample are representative of the population, the usage of an underspecified model for
the Sample will cause a positive bias in the estimates for the age coefficient, a negative
bias for the age squared coefficient and a negative bias for the female coefficient. These
biases need to be recalled before any effort is made to analyze or use these results with
the Sample.

6.3 Robustness Tests
In an attempt to test the robustness of our findings we include regression results for two
modified analyses, where we have changed the time period used to calculate the covari-
ance matrix C. In our main analysis we used time series of historical returns of at least
18 and up to 144 monthly observations to calculate C. In the first robustness test we
shorten the time series to consist of at least 18 and up to 36 monthly time points, thus
reducing the number of missing values in the series. In the second robustness test we
change the requirement of minimum individual investment history available; instead of a
return history of at least 18 months, we now require at least 24 months. Hence, time series
here consist of at least 24 and up to 144 time points. This alteration reduces the sample
size and produces a more biased sample in that individuals who are active investors and
invest in newly established mutual funds are dropped to a higher extent. In return, any
covariances should be computed with higher accuracy. The result of such a trade-off will
be seen next.

Table B.10 reports the characteristics of the risk measures Y after the above mentioned
modifications have been made to the analysis. The first robustness test where the number
of missing values has been reduced gives, as expected, a more realistic value for the min-
imum proportion of idiosyncratic risk. The second robustness test does not change the
sign of the minimum. Tables B.11 through B.14 present the regression results. Figure B.4
show plots of these findings, to be compared with Figure B.1. We will not comment on
these results in detail but do observe that all main findings of this Section are valid even
after they have been tested for robustness.

7 Conclusions and Implications

Data suggest a strong pattern of a parabolically shaped relationship between total or sys-
tematic risk and age. Total risk taken by the Sample increases up to a turning point at
the age of 43 from where it decreases at a growing rate until retirement. These findings
do not violate theoretical human capital models, previous empirical work or recommenda-

                                      15
tions commonly made by investment professionals. However, they show that portfolio risk
does not decrease over the complete life cycle but increases for a number of years before
they commence to decrease. This observation could possibly be explained by a need to
build up a capital base before any investment risks can be taken. Such an idea finds some
support in the data which suggest that the threshold to decreasing risk tendencies is much
higher for individuals with a low salary than for individuals with a high salary. Addi-
tional studies aiming to explain this behavior are needed, particularly since we suffer from
an omitted-variable bias in that we have failed to control for aggregate wealth in our model.

The correlation between total or systematic risk and salary is less clear in that the direct
effect of salary on risk is statistically insignificant. Nonetheless, the interacted terms of
age and salary dummy variables demonstrate high statistical significance. In particular,
our findings indicate that high salary individuals tend to diversify their investment risk
much better than do individuals with middle and low salary levels. Similarly, individuals
with high market value of savings diversify better. Whether these results derive from low
salary individuals being less informed, less likely to diversify due to inadequate contribu-
tions to the pension, the advisory system working less well for these individuals or has
other explanatory factors, these findings are intriguing. Additional studies on this subject
are welcome.

The observation that the stated willingness to take high risk corresponds to actual invest-
ment risks taken must be considered good news for the individual investors independently
of the reason behind this fact. An additional important result is that risk willing individ-
uals diversify their risks better, indicating that they do not only take higher risks, they
also manage them better. Whether this correlation is a result of either a well informed
individual investor or a well working investment advisory system is not discernable in this
study. More disappointing is perhaps the result that individuals with a particularly low
willingness to take risk do not take significantly less risk than those in the middle segment.
However, since we can conclude that stated risk tolerance is an explanatory factor behind
actual risk behavior one should strive to include it in any model aiming to explain such
behavior. We regret that this has not been possible for a sample of adequate size. Further
studies should try to use a larger sample with stated risk willingness data in order to
better assess the effect of omitting this variable.

It is obvious that this study is limited by an incomplete vision of the complete set of all
components affecting an individual’s investment risk behavior. It suffers from an omitted
variable bias particularly from omitting total wealth and stated willingness to take risk
for a sufficiently large sample. There is also a considerable bias in the data caused by
sample individuals being clients of a financial advisor. We still hope and believe that
the results presented in this report are a valuable source for understanding risk behavior
within the Swedish pension system and to some extent also in other investment situations.

                                      16
References

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Risk-Bearing. Helsinki, Finland: Yrjö
   Jahnsson Lectures.
Bodie, Zvi et al. (1988). “Defined Benefit versus Defined Contribution Pension Plans:
   What are the Real Trade-offs?” In: Pensions in the U.S. Economy. Ed. by Zvi Bodie
    et al. University of Chicago Press. Chap. 5, pp. 139–162.
Bodie, Zvi et al. (1992). “Labor supply flexibility and portfolio choice in a life cycle model”.
   In: Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16.3-4, pp. 427–449.
Bodie, Zvi et al. (2011). Investments and Portfolio Management. 9th ed. McGraw-Hill
   Companies, Inc.
Campbell, John Y. (2006). “Household Finance”. In: The Journal of Finance 61.4,
   pp. 1553–1604.
Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira (2002). Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice
    for Long-term Investors. Oxford University Press.
Cohn, Richard A. et al. (1975). “Individual Investor Risk Aversion and Investment Portfolio
   Composition”. In: The Journal of Finance 30.2, pp. 605–620.
Friend, Irwin and Marshall E. Blume (1975). “The Demand for Risky Assets”. In: The
   American Economic Review 65.5, pp. 900–922.
Government Offices of Sweden (2000). Old age pensions in Sweden. Available online: http:
   //www.globalaging.org/pension/world/sweden.pdf [2012-05-08].
Lintner, John (1965). “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments
    in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets”. In: Review of Economics and Statistics 47.1,
   pp. 13–37.
Markowitz, Harry (1952). “Portfolio Selection”. In: The Journal of Finance 7.1, pp. 77–91.
Mossin, Jan (1966). “Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market”. In: Econometrica 34.4,
   pp. 768–783.
Pratt, John W. (1964). “Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large”. In: Econometrica
    32.1/2, pp. 122–136.
Riley, William B. Jr. and K. Victor Chow (1992). “Risk Aversion Measures: Comparing
   Attitudes and Asset Allocation”. In: Financial Analysts Journal 48.6, pp. 32–37.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1989). “A case at last for age-phased reduction in equity”. In: Pro-
   ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 86, pp. 9048–9051.
Schooley, Diane K. and Debra Drecnik Worden (1996). “Risk Aversion Measures: Com-
   paring Attitudes and Asset Allocation”. In: Financial Services Review 5.2, pp. 87–
    99.
Sharpe, William F. (1964). “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under
   Conditions of Risk”. In: The Journal of Finance 19.3, pp. 425–442.
Swedish Pensions Agency (2010). Orange Report – Annual Report of the Swedish Pension
   System 2010. Available online: http://secure.pensionsmyndigheten.se/download/18.
   2c8f793e1335aaf986a8000282786/OR+engelsk+2010.pdfl [2012-05-08].
Tobin, James (1958). “Liquidity Preference as Behavior toward Risk”. In: Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies 25.2, pp. 65–86.
Wang, Hui and Sherman Hanna (1997). “Does Risk Tolerance Decrease With Age?” In:
   Financial Counseling and Planning 8.2, pp. 27–32.
Williams, Joseph T. (1978). “Risk, Human Capital, and the Investor’s Portfolio”. In: The
   Journal of Business 51.1, pp. 65–89.

                                      17
Appendix A Sample Characteristics

            Table A.1: Number of Mutual Funds in the Unit Linked Insurances.

 This table reports the number of mutual funds available to investors in each of the unit linked
 insurances held by the individuals of the Sample.

                 Insurance Provider Number of Funds Offered
                  AMF Pension 22
                   Danica Fondförsäkring 64
                  Folksam 63
                   Handelsbanken Liv 74
                   Länsförsäkringar 72
                   Movestic Livförsäkring 57
                   SEB Trygg Liv 103
                  SPP Liv 74
                   Skandia 103

                  Table A.2: Demographic Characteristics of the Sample.

 This table reports the Sample’s demographic characteristics. Regions refer to the 21 counties
 ("län") of Sweden. The number of observations is N = 57, 002.

                                                  a
 Region Frequency Percentage      Age Frequency Percentage
 Blekinge 248 0.4           -30 4,329 7.6
 Dalarna 299 0.5          31-40 17,833 31.3
 Gotland 46 0.1          41-50 19,226 33.7
 Gävleborg 498 0.9          51-60 10,493 18.4
 Halland 1,024 1.8           61- 5,121 9.0
 Jämtland 146 0.3
 Jönköping 1,425 2.5
                                            Gender Frequency Percentage
 Kalmar 541 1.0
 Kronoberg 553 1.0          Woman 18,829 33.0
 Norrbotten 363 0.6          Man 38,173 67.0
 Skåne 3,901 6.8
 Stockholm 18,566 32.6          Marital
 Södermanland 555 1.0          Status Frequency Percentage
 Uppsala 1,896 3.3
 Värmland 440 0.8          Married 18,965 33.3
 Västerbotten 618 1.1           Single 7,047 12.4
 Västernorrland 1,353 2.4           Cohabitant 9,147 16.1
 Västmanland 695 1.2          (Missing) 21,843 38.3
 Västra Götaland 6,294 11.0
 Örebro 1,040 1.8
 Östergötland 1,206 2.1
 (Missing) 15,295 26.8

   a
    Percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding.

                                      18
               Table A.3: Demographic Characteristics of the Subsample.

This table reports the Subsample’s demographic characteristics. Regions refer to the 21 counties
("län") of Sweden. The number of observations is M = 352.

Region Frequency Percentage      Age Frequency Percentage
Blekinge 1 0.3           -30 38 10.8
Dalarna 0 0.0           31-40 113 32.1
Gotland 0 0.0           41-50 108 30.7
Gävleborg 5 1.4           51-60 65 18.5
Halland 4 1.1           61- 28 8.0
Jämtland 3 0.9
Jönköping 10 2.8
                                           Gender Frequency Percentage
Kalmar 1 0.3
Kronoberg 2 0.6          Woman 114 32.4
Norrbotten 1 0.3          Man 238 67.6
Skåne 34 9.7
Stockholm 81 23.0          Marital
Södermanland 4 1.1          Status Frequency Percentage
Uppsala 32 9.1
Värmland 3 0.9           Married 172 48.9
Västerbotten 1 0.3           Single 63 17.9
Västernorrland 4 1.1           Cohabitant 89 25.3
Västmanland 0 0.0           (Missing) 28 8.0
Västra Götaland 118 33.5
Örebro 1 0.3
Östergötland 1 0.3
(Missing) 46 13.1

                                     19
                           Table A.4: Insurance Providers.

This table reports the distribution of Sample individuals’ unit linked insurances across the
insurance providers. The number of observations refer to the insurance products. Note that
the number of insurance products 77,828 exceed the number of individuals in the Sample N =
57, 002.

              Insurance Provider Frequency Percentage
                 Sample (77,828 observations)
                  AMF Pension 2,498 3.2
                  Danica Fondförsäkring 1,670 2.2
                  Folksam 1,958 2.5
                  Handelsbanken Liv 1,860 2.4
                  Länsförsäkringar 19,532 25.1
                   Movestic Livförsäkring 3,395 4.4
                  SEB Trygg Liv 18,469 23.7
                  SPP Liv 13,473 17.3
                  Skandia 14,966 19.2
                  Other 7 0.0
                 Subsample (502 observations)
                  AMF Pension 30 6.0
                  Danica Fondförsäkring 8 1.6
                  Folksam 15 3.0
                  Handelsbanken Liv 20 4.0
                  Länsförsäkringar 134 26.7
                  Movestic Livförsäkring 26 5.2
                  SEB Trygg Liv 86 17.1
                  SPP Liv 122 24.3
                  Skandia 61 12.2

                            Table A.5: Salary Distribution.

The distribution of annual salary for the Sample and the Subsample. The Sample mean salary
is 506, 670 SEK and the Sample median salary is 450, 000 SEK. Number of observations N =
57, 002. The Subsample mean salary is 505, 250 SEK and the Subsample median salary is
441, 600 SEK. Number of observations M = 352.

              Annual Salary (SEK) Frequency Percentage
                 Sample (57,002 observations)
                  -359,999 16,936 29.7
                  360,000-719,999 32,402 56.8
                   720,000- 7,664 13.4
                 Subsample (352 observations)
                  -359,999 98 27.8
                  360,000-719,999 205 58.2
                  720,000- 49 13.9

                                     20
                       Table A.6: Asset Portfolio Composition.

This table presents the asset portfolio composition of the Sample per mutual fund category.
Percentages in the table refer to the proportion of market value of capital invested in each
category.

Category Percentage      Category Percentage
Specialty Funds 2.5            Fixed-Income Funds 14.8
  Biotechnology 0.0              Corporate Bond 0.0
  Commodities 0.4             High Yield Bond 0.7
  Energy 0.1              Inflation Indexed Bond, SEK 2.5
  Environmental 0.0              Investment Grade Bond 0.6
  Financial 0.0              Long-Term Bond, SEK 2.3
  Health 0.8              Short-Term Bond, SEK 8.5
  Precious Metals 0.0              Other 0.2
  Real Estate 0.4
  Technology 0.7           Balanced Funds 37.4
  Other 0.1              Aggressive Allocation, SEK 19.2
                                               Conservative Allocation, SEK 1.2
Single-Country Funds 18.3             Other 17.0
  Asia (single countries) 0.5
  Brazil 0.1            Hedge Funds 1.5
  China 1.5              Market Neutral 0.2
  Europe (single                               Multi-Strategy 1.2
  countries) 0.1              Other 0.1
  India 1.0
  Japan 0.4
  Russia 2.7
  Sweden 12.0

Regional Funds 25.4
  Africa & Middle East 0.1
  Asia 2.3
  Eastern Europe 1.4
  Emerging Markets 5.1
  Euroland 0.0
  Europe 2.7
  Global 8.9
  Latin America 1.3
  Nordic Countries 0.9
  North America 2.7

                                     21
                Table A.7: Attitudinal Characteristics of the Subsample.

This table reports the distribution of attitudes of the individuals of the Subsample. Number
of observations N = 352. In any analysis performed and presented in Appendix B, individuals
with a very low or a very high risk tolerance have been given a substitute value of low and high
risk tolerance respectively, due to the lack of observations in these categories.

                Stated Risk Tolerance Frequency Percentage
                  Very Low 1 0.3
                 Low 123 34.9
                 Medium 172 48.9
                  High 49 13.9
                  Very High 7 2.0

                                     22
Appendix B Results

                          Table B.1: Market Portfolio Weights.

   This table presents the market portfolio weights per mutual fund category. The mutual funds
   of the market portfolio are those in which at least one individual in the Sample has invested.
                                                                  a
   Each mutual fund’s weight in the market portfolio is the fund size  divided by the sum of all
   fund sizes. Percentages in the table are based on the weights according to this model, that is
   the sum of the fund sizes per category divided by the sum of the market portfolio’s total fund
   sizes. The total number of mutual funds in the market portfolio is 602.

                                                 b
  Category Percentage      Category Percentage
  Specialty Funds 10.1          Fixed-Income Funds 16.7
     Biotechnology 0.0             Corporate Bond 0.1
     Commodities 4.1            High Yield Bond 3.1
     Energy 1.6             Inflation Indexed Bond, SEK 0.7
     Environmental 0.1             Investment Grade Bond 3.3
     Financial 0.1             Long-Term Bond, SEK 2.2
     Health 0.4            Short-Term Bond, SEK 3.8
     Precious Metals 1.8             Other 3.5
     Real Estate 0.3
     Technology 0.5          Balanced Funds 9.8
     Other 1.2             Aggressive Allocation, SEK 3.5
                                                 Conservative Allocation, SEK 0.4
  Single-Country Funds 17.7            Other 5.9
     Asia (single countries) 0.5
     Brazil 0.7           Hedge Funds 1.0
     China 4.1            Market Neutral 0.3
     Europe (single                               Multi-Strategy 0.5
     countries) 0.7             Other 0.2
     India 2.3
     Japan 1.3          Others 0.4
     Russia 1.4
    Sweden 6.7

  Regional Funds 44.4
     Africa & Middle East 0.2
     Asia 8.9
     Eastern Europe 1.4
     Emerging Markets 9.3
     Euroland 0.1
    Europe 3.9
     Global 9.0
     Latin America 4.6
     Nordic Countries 1.7
     North America 5.3

    a
      The total value of cash and securities less any liabilities of the fund.
     b
     Percentages may not sum to 100 due to rounding.

                                      23
                           Table B.2: Summary Statistics.

This table reports summary statistics on our dependent variables Y . Total risk σP is the
standard deviation of the historical portfolio returns; systematic risk |βP |σM is the absolute
value of the portfolio beta times the standard deviation of the market portfolio historical returns;
                                                                                |βP |σM
the proportion of idiosyncratic risk is derived from the former measures as 1 −   σP . The risk
measures are computed using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 18 and up
to 144 monthly time points.

   Risk Measure N Mean Std. dev. Min Max
    Sample
      Total risk 57,002 0.0360 0.0141 3.00e-06 0.114
                     a
      Systematic risk                 57,002 0.0305 0.0141 1.57e-06 0.0971
                                                                               b
      Proportion of idiosyncratic risk 57,002 0.191 0.182 -0.0373    0.998
    Subsample
      Total risk 352 0.0346 0.0133 0.00573 0.114
      Systematic risk 352 0.0277 0.0141 0.000296 0.0828
      Proportion of idiosyncratic risk 352 0.249 0.197 0.0115 0.956

   a
    Systematic and relative systematic risk are computed with respect to the standard deviation of the
monthly historical market portfolio returns which is 0.0322.
   b
    The negative min value of the proportion of idiosyncratic risk is a modeling error. See Section 5
and Section 6 for details.

                                     24
                           Table B.3: Direct Effects on Risk.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent
variables. The regression is specified by model (1) and is run on observations for the Sample.

                               (1) (2) (3)
                                                               Proportion of
                           Total Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Risk

                                       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Age 0.00118              0.00130              -0.0175
                                (25.35) (27.83) (-25.71)

                                        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Age squared -0.0000136            -0.0000147            0.000191
                                (-26.62) (-28.84) (25.84)
Annual salary -2.11e-10 -1.79e-11 -2.93e-09
                                 (-0.89) (-0.07) (-0.86)

                                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Female -0.00224              -0.00191               0.00142
                                (-18.39) (-15.58) (0.88)

                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Married -0.000626             -0.000704             0.00628
                                 (-4.77) (-5.37) (3.78)

                                                                                            ∗∗
Portfolio market value 1.05e-10 2.61e-10 6.62e-09
                                 (0.69) (1.75) (3.03)

                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0128               0.00406               0.567
                                (12.63) (3.95) (37.66)
Observations 57,002 57,002 57,002
 t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                     25
                         Table B.4: Interacted Effects on Risk.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent
variables. The regression is specified by model (2) and is run on observations for the Sample.
The base level to which the interacted age cohort and salary segments are compared is the
cohort of age between 41 to 50 with middle salary.

                               (1) (2) (3)
                                                               Proportion of
                           Total Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Risk

                                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Female -0.00213              -0.00179              0.000218
                                (-17.17) (-14.27) (0.13)

                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Married -0.000645             -0.000713             0.00561
                                 (-4.90) (-5.43) (3.37)

                                                                                            ∗∗
Portfolio market value 6.51e-11 2.42e-10 6.86e-09
                                 (0.45) (1.70) (3.26)
High salary
   Age up to 30 -0.0000949 -0.00122 0.0338
                                 (-0.05) (-0.72) (1.72)
                                         ∗                              ∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 0.000906              0.000617 0.0130
                                 (2.42) (1.59) (2.65)
   Age 41 to 50 -0.000112 0.0000420 -0.00431
                                 (-0.39) (0.15) (-1.21)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00197              -0.00191               0.0137
                                 (-5.08) (-5.00) (2.80)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00660              -0.00656              0.0759
                                (-10.78) (-10.79) (8.45)
Middle salary

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age up to 30 -0.00182              -0.00255              0.0483
                                 (-4.91) (-6.40) (9.00)
                                        ∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 -0.000608             -0.000988              0.0224
                                 (-3.27) (-5.27) (9.76)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00168              -0.00160              0.00852
                                 (-7.48) (-7.30) (3.20)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00640              -0.00647              0.0748
                                (-18.96) (-19.67) (15.97)
Low salary

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age up to 30 -0.00441              -0.00512              0.0642
                                (-16.22) (-18.36) (14.61)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 -0.00130              -0.00175              0.0254
                                 (-6.04) (-8.04) (9.09)
                                                                 ∗        ∗∗
   Age 41 to 50 -0.000305 -0.000499            0.00810
                                 (-1.28) (-2.13) (2.87)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00146              -0.00165              0.0172
                                 (-4.57) (-5.42) (4.45)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00587              -0.00596              0.0747
                                (-12.80) (-13.64) (12.07)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0383                0.0329               0.167
                               (259.27) (226.91) (94.48)
Observations 57,002 57,002 57,002
 t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                                     26
                      Figure B.1: Plots of the Interacted Effects on Risk.

  This figure shows the plotted coefficient estimates reported in Table B.4, obtained by running the
  regression specified by model (2) for the Sample (N = 57, 002).

                −3                                                                                              −3
         x 10                                                                         x 10
         1                                                                                             1
                                                  High salary                                                                     High salary
       0                                     Middle salary                      0                                     Middle salary
                                                Low salary                                                                  Low salary
     −1                                                              −1

     −2                                                              −2

     −3                                                              −3

     −4                                                              −4
     Coefficient estimate                                                               Coefficient estimate
     −5                                                              −5

     −6                                                              −6

     −7                                                              −7
     −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−              −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                           Age                                                          Age

Panel A: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel B: Interaction terms of age cohort and
salary segment dummy variables on total risk.       salary segment dummy variables on systematic
                                                               risk.

                                         0.08
                                                                                         High salary
                                          0.07                                        Middle salary
                                                                                    Low salary
                                         0.06

                                         0.05

                                         0.04

                                         0.03

                                         0.02
                                           Coefficient estimate
                                         0.01

                                      0

                                      −0.01
                                −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                                                         Age

                       Panel C: Interaction terms of age cohort and
                        salary segment dummy variables on the propor-
                            tion of idiosyncratic risk.

                                        27
                     Table B.5: Subsample Direct Effects on Risk.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent
variables. The regression is specified by model (1) and is run on observations for the Subsample.

                                                               ∗      ∗∗
                                                                             ∗∗
         (6)                                                           352
                       (-1.20)(1.00) (-0.52)0.0331(1.31) (-0.28)(1.19)0.0891(2.24) (-3.16)0.484(2.89)
                   -0.009550.0000888-2.60e-08    -0.006362.98e-08     -0.0762
           Proportion of
             Idiosyncratic Risk




                                                 ∗∗
         (5)                                                           352
                    -0.0129(-1.55)(1.55) (-0.32)0.0499(1.90) (-0.15)(0.85)            0.509(2.95)
                         0.000143-1.75e-08    -0.003402.35e-08
           Proportion of
             Idiosyncratic Risk



                      ∗     ∗∗
                                            ∗∗∗
         (4)                                                           352
                       (0.07) (0.03) (2.23) (-1.13)(0.43) (-3.09)(-0.88)(4.43)0.0221(1.75)
                   0.0000416    7.59e-09-0.001900.000673     -0.00241
                         0.000000230              -5.35e-09    0.00895
             Systematic Risk


                         ∗


         (3)                                                           352
                       (0.04) (-0.10)(1.96) (-1.86)(0.40) (-2.48)           0.0264(1.97)
                   0.0000248    7.02e-09-0.003200.000655-4.74e-09
                         -0.000000710
             Systematic Risk


                           ∗
                            ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
                                                      ∗∗
         (2)                                                           352
                       (0.09) (-0.09)(2.54) (-1.59)(-0.16)(-3.78)(-0.60)(4.38) (2.67)
                   0.0000515    7.76e-09-0.00245-0.000230    -0.00152     0.0311
              Total Risk                        -6.40e-09    0.00763
                         -0.000000548



                       ∗   ∗    ∗∗
                                                         ∗∗
                                                                                                         001.
         (1)                                                            352  0
                       (0.02) (-0.14)(2.30) (-2.25)(-0.15)(-3.29)              (2.78)
                                7.30e-09-0.00351-0.000223                 0.0352
              Total Risk0.00000999-0.000000985             -5.89e-09                      p <

                                                                              ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                                               01.
                                                                              0
                                                             p <

                                                                                                 ∗∗
                                                                              ,
                                                         05
                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                              0

                                                                                statistics in parentheses p <
                  Age   Age squaredAnnual salaryFemaleMarriedPortfolio market valueLow risk toleranceHigh risk toleranceConstantObservations t ∗
                                     28
                 Table B.6: Subsample Interacted Effects on Total Risk.

This table reports the linear regression results using total risk as the dependent variable. The
regression is specified by model (2) and is run on observations for the Subsample. The base
level to which the interacted age cohort and salary segments are compared is the cohort of age
between 41 to 50 with middle salary.

                                               (1) (2)
                                         Total Risk Total Risk

                                                      ∗
                      Female -0.00402      -0.00295
                                                  (-2.36) (-1.74)
                     Married -0.000507 -0.000437
                                                  (-0.33) (-0.28)

                                                         ∗          ∗∗
                       Portfolio market value -4.73e-09     -5.08e-09
                                                  (-2.56) (-2.65)
                       High salary

                                                       ∗∗∗        ∗
                        Age up to 30 0.00955        0.00772
                                                  (4.34) (2.04)
                        Age 31 to 40 0.00242 0.00165
                                                  (0.59) (0.45)
                                                        ∗        ∗
                        Age 41 to 50 0.00673       0.00635
                                                  (2.25) (2.11)
                                                       ∗∗       ∗∗∗
                        Age 51 to 60 0.0126       0.0129
                                                  (3.27) (3.44)
                        Age above 60 -0.00390 -0.00251
                                                  (-0.53) (-0.35)
                       Middle salary
                       Age up to 30 0.00235 0.000160
                                                  (0.47) (0.03)
                                                      ∗
                        Age 31 to 40 0.00448       0.00325
                                                  (2.37) (1.74)
                        Age 51 to 60 0.00218 0.00281
                                                  (0.87) (1.16)
                        Age above 60 -0.00404 -0.00241
                                                  (-0.97) (-0.58)
                       Low salary
                       Age up to 30 0.000649 -0.000574
                                                  (0.23) (-0.21)
                       Age 31 to 40 0.00186 0.000952
                                                  (0.67) (0.34)
                        Age 41 to 50 0.00154 0.00134
                                                  (0.45) (0.40)
                       Age 51 to 60 0.00120 0.000658
                                                  (0.40) (0.23)
                       Age above 60 -0.00137 0.0000470
                                                  (-0.14) (0.01)
                      Low risk tolerance -0.00144
                                                                       (-0.57)

                                                                             ∗∗∗
                      High risk tolerance 0.00704
                                                                      (3.97)

                                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
                      Constant 0.0352        0.0344
                                                (22.12) (22.43)
                     Observations 352 352
                         t statistics in parentheses
                      ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
                         p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                                     29
      Table B.7: Subsample Interacted Effects on Systematic and Idiosyncratic Risks.

This table reports the linear regression results using systematic risk and the proportion of
idiosyncratic risk as dependent variables. The regression is specified by model (2) and is run on
observations for the Subsample. The base level to which the interacted age cohort and salary
segments are compared is the cohort of age between 41 to 50 with middle salary.

                            (1) (2) (3) (4)
                                                        Proportion of Proportion of
                     Systematic Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Idiosyncratic
                                                          Risk Risk

                                   ∗                          ∗
Female -0.00383            -0.00252 0.0577           0.0402
                             (-2.10) (-1.41) (2.12) (1.54)
Married 0.000299 0.000397 -0.00440 -0.00742
                             (0.18) (0.25) (-0.19) (-0.34)

                                                       ∗
Portfolio market value -3.42e-09 -3.84e-09           1.36e-08 1.83e-08
                             (-1.91) (-2.11) (0.57) (0.80)
High salary

                                  ∗∗
  Age up to 30 0.0117              0.00954 -0.124 -0.0997
                             (2.91) (1.57) (-1.90) (-1.22)
  Age 31 to 40 0.000108 -0.000738 0.116 0.114
                             (0.02) (-0.18) (1.36) (1.41)
  Age 41 to 50 0.00681 0.00633 -0.0500 -0.0420
                             (1.93) (1.78) (-1.31) (-1.10)
                                  ∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗       ∗∗∗
  Age 51 to 60 0.0141              0.0145             -0.109           -0.133
                             (3.25) (3.45) (-2.87) (-3.35)
  Age above 60 -0.00270 -0.000917 0.0572 0.0201
                             (-0.39) (-0.14) (0.44) (0.16)
Middle salary
  Age up to 30 0.00255 -0.0000802 0.00826 0.0366
                             (0.49) (-0.01) (0.10) (0.40)
                                  ∗∗        ∗
  Age 31 to 40 0.00574             0.00426            -0.0558 -0.0403
                             (2.63) (2.00) (-1.88) (-1.34)
  Age 51 to 60 0.00358 0.00442 -0.0240 -0.0432
                             (1.34) (1.69) (-0.59) (-1.10)
  Age above 60 -0.00119 0.000965 -0.00497 -0.0550
                             (-0.26) (0.21) (-0.07) (-0.83)
Low salary
  Age up to 30 0.000326 -0.00111 0.0131 0.0235
                             (0.10) (-0.36) (0.37) (0.66)
  Age 31 to 40 0.00145 0.000347 0.00469 0.0171
                             (0.49) (0.11) (0.11) (0.40)
  Age 41 to 50 0.00269 0.00240 -0.0513 -0.0410
                             (0.69) (0.64) (-1.15) (-0.95)
  Age 51 to 60 0.00298 0.00239 -0.0564 -0.0586
                             (0.89) (0.73) (-0.97) (-1.06)
  Age above 60 -0.00186 0.0000966 0.101 0.0444
                             (-0.25) (0.01) (1.10) (0.50)

                                                                                                       ∗
Low risk tolerance -0.00218 0.0860
                                                  (-0.81) (2.14)

                                                        ∗∗∗        ∗∗
High risk tolerance 0.00832                             -0.0712
                                                  (4.04) (-2.90)

                                  ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0270              0.0260             0.244            0.249
                            (16.00) (16.21) (11.34) (11.71)
Observations 352 352 352 352
t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗                    30
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                Figure B.2: Subsample Plots of the Interacted Effects on Risk.

  This figure shows the plotted coefficient estimates reported in Table B.6 and Table B.7, obtained
  by running the regression specified by model (2) for the Subsample (N = 352).

                     −3                                                                                                        −3
             x 10                                                                                 x 10
           15                                                                                         14
                                                      High salary                                                                              High salary
                                                  Middle salary                              12                                      Middle salary
                                                   Low salary                                                                          Low salary
                                                                                 10
         10
                                                                                  8

                                                                                  6
          5
                                                                                  4

                                                                                  2
         Coefficient estimate                                                                        Coefficient estimate
          0
                                                                                  0

                                                                               −2

        −5                                                                     −4
       −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−                   −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                              Age                                                                 Age

Panel A: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel B: Interaction terms of age cohort and
salary segment dummy variables on total risk.     salary segment dummy variables on total risk.
Stated risk tolerance is not included as an ad-      Stated risk tolerance is included as an additional
ditional control variable.                               control variable.

                     −3                                                                                                        −3
             x 10                                                                                 x 10
           15                                                                                         16
                                                      High salary                                                                              High salary
                                                  Middle salary                              14                                      Middle salary
                                                   Low salary                                                                          Low salary
                                                                                 12
         10
                                                                                 10

                                                                                  8
          5
                                                                                  6

                                                                                  4
         Coefficient estimate                                                                        Coefficient estimate
          0
                                                                                  2

                                                                                  0

        −5                                                                     −2
       −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−                   −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                              Age                                                                 Age

Panel C: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel D: Interaction terms of age cohort and
salary segment dummy variables on systematic     salary segment dummy variables on systematic
risk. Stated risk tolerance is not included as an      risk. Stated risk tolerance is included as an ad-
additional control variable.                             ditional control variable.

        0.15                                                                               0.15
                                                      High salary                                                                              High salary
                                                      Middle salary                                                                            Middle salary
          0.1                                                                                    0.1
                                                   Low salary                                                                          Low salary

        0.05                                                                               0.05

          0                                                                        0

       −0.05                                                                           −0.05

      Coefficient estimate−0.1                                                                                Coefficient estimate−0.1

       −0.15                                                                           −0.15

        −0.2                                                                              −0.2
       −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−                   −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                              Age                                                                 Age

Panel E: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel F: Interaction terms of age cohort and
salary segment dummy variables on the propor-     salary segment dummy variables on the propor-
tion of idiosyncratic risk. Stated risk tolerance is      tion of idiosyncratic risk. Stated risk tolerance is
not included as an additional control variable.        included as an additional control variable.

                                        31
              Table B.8: Subsample Direct Effects on Stated Risk Tolerance.

 This table reports the Poisson regression results using the stated risk tolerance as the dependent
 variable. The dependent variable takes on a value of 2 for a stated high risk tolerance, a value of
 1 for medium risk tolerance and a value of 0 for low risk tolerance. The regression is otherwise
 specified by model (1) and is run on observations for the Subsample. The base level to which
 the interacted age cohort and salary segments are compared is the cohort of age between 41 to
 50 with middle salary.

                                        Stated Risk Tolerance

                                                                    ∗
                    Age 0.0820
                                                            (2.01)

                                                                    ∗∗
                     Age squared -0.00127
                                                             (-2.76)
                      Annual salary -6.88e-08
                                                             (-0.41)

                                                                    ∗
                     Female -0.241
                                                             (-2.44)
                     Married 0.000976
                                                            (0.01)
                     Portfolio market value 0.000000181
                                                            (1.62)
                     Constant -1.216
                                                             (-1.40)
                     Observations 352
                        z statistics in parentheses
                       ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
                          p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                          1
                                                                                              High salary
                                                                                              Middle salary
                                                0.5                                        Low salary

                                          0

                                             −0.5

                                                 Coefficient estimate
                                        −1

                                             −1.5
                                 −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                                                            Age

              Figure B.3: Subsample Direct Effects on Stated Risk Tolerance.

This figure shows the plotted coefficient estimates reported in Table B.9 with stated risk tolerance
as the dependent variable, obtained by running the regression specified by model (2) for the
Subsample (N = 532).

                                      32
           Table B.9: Subsample Interacted Effects on Stated Risk Tolerance.

This table reports the Poisson regression results using the stated risk tolerance as the dependent
variable. The dependent variable takes on a value of 2 for a stated high risk tolerance, a value of
1 for medium risk tolerance and a value of 0 for low risk tolerance. The regression is otherwise
specified by model (2) and is run on observations for the Subsample. The base level to which
the interacted age cohort and salary segments are compared is the cohort of age between 41 to
50 with middle salary.

                                       Stated Risk Tolerance

                                                                  ∗
                    Female -0.240
                                                            (-2.45)
                    Married -0.00587
                                                            (-0.06)
                    Portfolio market value 0.000000153
                                                          (1.58)
                     High salary

                                                                 ∗∗
                      Age up to 30 0.551
                                                          (2.62)
                      Age 31 to 40 0.165
                                                          (0.80)
                      Age 41 to 50 0.161
                                                          (0.94)
                       Age 51 to 60 -0.351
                                                            (-0.99)
                      Age above 60 -1.457
                                                            (-1.59)
                     Middle salary

                                                                  ∗
                      Age up to 30 0.506
                                                          (2.28)
                                                                  ∗
                      Age 31 to 40 0.276
                                                          (2.27)
                                                                  ∗
                       Age 51 to 60 -0.425
                                                            (-2.11)
                                                                  ∗
                      Age above 60 -0.795
                                                            (-2.21)
                    Low salary
                      Age up to 30 0.170
                                                          (0.84)
                      Age 31 to 40 0.187
                                                          (1.07)
                      Age 41 to 50 0.253
                                                          (1.71)
                       Age 51 to 60 -0.320
                                                            (-0.88)
                                                                  ∗
                      Age above 60 -1.362
                                                            (-2.09)
                    Constant -0.207
                                                            (-1.92)
                   Observations 352
                       z statistics in parentheses
                      ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
                        p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                                     33
               Table B.10: Summary Statistics for the Robustness Tests.

This table reports summary statistics on our dependent variables Y , explicitly computed to
perform the robustness tests. Total risk σP is the standard deviation of the historical portfolio
returns; systematic risk |βP |σM is the absolute value of the portfolio beta times the standard
deviation of the market portfolio historical returns; the proportion of idiosyncratic risk is derived
                                  |βP |σM
from the former measures as 1 −   σP . The risk measures presented here are computed using
shorter time series of historical fund returns than those of Table B.2. For the first robustness
test, we compute the risk measures using time series of historical returns consisting of at least
18 and up to 36 monthly time points. For the second robustness test, we compute the risk
measures using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 24 and up to 144 monthly
time points.

   Risk Measure N Mean Std. dev. Min Max
     First robustness test
      Total risk 57,002 0.0284 0.0113 2.56e-06 0.0978
      Systematic risk 57,002 0.0231 0.0109 7.11e-07 0.0729
      Proportion of idiosyncratic risk 57,002 0.219 0.163 0.0140 1.000
     Second robustness test
      Total risk 44,262 0.0379 0.0146 5.51e-06 0.114
      Systematic risk 44,262 0.0328 0.0141 1.54e-06 0.0970
                                                                           a
      Proportion of idiosyncratic risk 44,262 0.172 0.188 -0.035     0.998

   a
    The negative min value of the proportion of idiosyncratic risk is a modeling error. See Section 5
and Section 6 for details.

                                     34
              Table B.11: Direct Effects on Risk in First Robustness Test.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent
variables, explicitly computed for the first robustness test where we compute the risk measures
using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 18 and up to 36 monthly time points.
The regression is specified by model (1).

                               (1) (2) (3)
                                                               Proportion of
                           Total Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Risk

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Age 0.000768             0.000742             -0.0112
                                (20.46) (20.42) (-18.92)

                                         ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Age squared -0.00000918           -0.00000918           0.000144
                                (-22.41) (-23.21) (21.97)

                                                                ∗∗          ∗∗
Annual salary 2.55e-10 5.17e-10             -9.01e-09
                                 (1.33) (2.64) (-2.67)

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Female -0.00205              -0.00188             0.00606
                                (-21.16) (-20.13) (4.25)

                                                               ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Married 0.000102 0.000422             -0.0124
                                 (0.98) (4.21) (-8.32)

                                       ∗         ∗∗∗
Portfolio market value 3.05e-10              5.40e-10               2.06e-10
                                 (2.50) (4.43) (0.10)

                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0138               0.00932               0.425
                                (16.83) (11.70) (32.86)
Observations 57,002 57,002 57,002
 t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                     35
             Table B.12: Interacted Effects on Risk in First Robustness Test.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent
variables, explicitly computed for the first robustness test where we compute the risk measures
using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 18 and up to 36 monthly time points.
The regression is specified by model (2).

                               (1) (2) (3)
                                                               Proportion of
                           Total Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Risk

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗        ∗
Female -0.00188              -0.00168              0.00354
                                (-19.17) (-17.69) (2.45)

                                                               ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Married 0.0000347 0.000330             -0.0115
                                 (0.33) (3.30) (-7.78)

                                       ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Portfolio market value 3.31e-10              5.61e-10               8.07e-10
                                 (2.81) (4.83) (0.42)
High salary
   Age up to 30 0.00147 0.00177 -0.0171
                                 (1.03) (1.31) (-1.01)
                                       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 0.00167               0.00207              -0.0193
                                 (5.66) (7.09) (-4.48)
                                                                                            ∗∗
   Age 41 to 50 -0.0000244 0.000223 -0.00862
                                 (-0.11) (1.00) (-2.69)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00156              -0.00164              0.0204
                                 (-5.06) (-5.48) (4.46)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00507              -0.00558              0.0992
                                (-10.55) (-11.80) (11.71)
Middle salary
   Age up to 30 -0.000201 0.000387 -0.00872
                                 (-0.68) (1.30) (-1.95)
                                                               ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 0.000249 0.000552             -0.00775
                                 (1.69) (3.87) (-3.84)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00145              -0.00160              0.0194
                                 (-8.04) (-9.35) (7.94)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00477              -0.00543              0.0997
                                (-17.92) (-21.26) (22.52)
Low salary

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age up to 30 -0.00324              -0.00283              0.0198
                                (-14.52) (-13.19) (5.67)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 -0.00114              -0.00125              0.0149
                                 (-6.55) (-7.45) (6.05)
                                        ∗∗          ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 41 to 50 -0.000616             -0.000887              0.0134
                                 (-3.24) (-4.92) (5.39)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00146              -0.00186              0.0290
                                 (-5.70) (-7.80) (8.36)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00448              -0.00497              0.0883
                                (-12.31) (-14.81) (15.52)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0299                0.0243               0.208
                               (251.95) (215.53) (130.12)
Observations 57,002 57,002 57,002
 t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                                     36
             Table B.13: Direct Effects on Risk in Second Robustness Test.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent vari-
ables, explicitly computed for the second robustness test where we compute the risk measures
using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 24 and up to 144 monthly time
points. The regression is specified by model (1).

                               (1) (2) (3)
                                                               Proportion of
                           Total Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Risk

                                       ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
Age 0.00118              0.00118              -0.0146
                                (21.47) (21.84) (-18.09)

                                        ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Age squared -0.0000138            -0.0000139            0.000170
                                (-23.18) (-23.91) (19.57)
Annual salary 1.27e-10 4.24e-10 -5.04e-09
                                 (0.45) (1.49) (-1.24)

                                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Female -0.00242              -0.00199              -0.00154
                                (-16.95) (-14.28) (-0.81)
Married -0.0000679 0.000152 -0.00370
                                 (-0.43) (1.01) (-1.87)

                                                                                            ∗∗∗
Portfolio market value -9.63e-11 -5.95e-11 1.28e-08
                                 (-0.56) (-0.36) (5.13)

                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0149               0.00996               0.465
                                (12.25) (8.34) (25.87)
Observations 44,262 44,262 44,262
 t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                     37
            Table B.14: Interacted Effects on Risk in Second Robustness Test.

This table reports the linear regression results using our three risk measures as dependent vari-
ables, explicitly computed for the second robustness test where we compute the risk measures
using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 24 and up to 144 monthly time
points. The regression is specified by model (2).

                               (1) (2) (3)
                                                               Proportion of
                           Total Risk Systematic Risk Idiosyncratic Risk

                                      ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Female -0.00223              -0.00177              -0.00316
                                (-15.30) (-12.50) (-1.65)
Married -0.000132 0.0000846 -0.00370
                                 (-0.84) (0.56) (-1.87)

                                                                                            ∗∗∗
Portfolio market value -9.44e-11 -4.37e-11 1.33e-08
                                 (-0.57) (-0.28) (5.37)
High salary
  Age up to 30 0.000639 0.000347 0.00484
                                 (0.29) (0.18) (0.21)
                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 0.00164               0.00173               -0.00195
                                 (3.58) (3.81) (-0.33)
   Age 41 to 50 -0.0000106 0.000196 -0.00617
                                 (-0.03) (0.60) (-1.47)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00213              -0.00211               0.0160
                                 (-4.74) (-4.89) (2.76)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00746              -0.00762              0.0850
                                (-11.03) (-11.44) (8.36)
Middle salary
   Age up to 30 -0.000838 -0.000341 0.0129
                                 (-1.71) (-0.69) (1.84)
                                                                                            ∗
   Age 31 to 40 -0.000168 -0.0000499 0.00623
                                 (-0.76) (-0.23) (2.31)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00197              -0.00200              0.0107
                                 (-7.72) (-8.27) (3.53)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00696              -0.00736              0.0871
                                (-18.39) (-20.12) (16.25)
Low salary

                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age up to 30 -0.00479              -0.00460              0.0438
                                (-14.25) (-13.90) (8.05)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 31 to 40 -0.00174              -0.00181              0.0150
                                 (-6.97) (-7.50) (4.75)
                                         ∗          ∗∗∗        ∗
   Age 41 to 50 -0.000692            -0.000848              0.00697
                                 (-2.57) (-3.30) (2.20)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age 51 to 60 -0.00194              -0.00230              0.0225
                                 (-5.38) (-6.84) (5.13)
                                       ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
   Age above 60 -0.00612              -0.00654              0.0822
                                (-12.15) (-13.80) (11.75)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Constant 0.0402                0.0349               0.154
                               (237.98) (217.15) (75.93)
Observations 44,262 44,262 44,262
 t statistics in parentheses
∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
  p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                                     38
            Figure B.4: Plots of the Interacted Effects on Risk in Robustness Tests.

  This figure shows the plotted coefficient estimates reported in Table B.12 and Table B.14, obtained
  by running the regression specified by model (2). For the first robustness test, we compute the
  risk measures using time series of historical returns consisting of at least 18 and up to 36 monthly
  time points. For the second robustness test, we compute the risk measures using time series of
  historical returns consisting of at least 24 and up to 144 monthly time points.

                     −3                                                                                                        −3
             x 10                                                                                 x 10
              2                                                                                                       2
                                                      High salary                                                                              High salary
           1                                      Middle salary                                                                       Middle salary
                                                 Low salary                                0                                     Low salary
          0

        −1
                                                                               −2

        −2

                                                                               −4
        −3
         Coefficient estimate                                                                        Coefficient estimate
        −4
                                                                               −6
        −5

        −6                                                                     −8
       −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−                   −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                              Age                                                                 Age

Panel A: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel B: Interaction terms of age cohort and
salary segment dummy variables on total risk, in      salary segment dummy variables on total risk, in
the first robustness test.                               the second robustness test.

                     −3                                                                                                        −3
             x 10                                                                                 x 10
              3                                                                                                       2
                                                      High salary                                                                              High salary
           2                                      Middle salary                                                                       Middle salary
                                                 Low salary                                0                                     Low salary
          1

          0
                                                                               −2
        −1

        −2
                                                                               −4
        −3
         Coefficient estimate                                                                        Coefficient estimate
        −4                                                                     −6

        −5

        −6                                                                     −8
       −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−                   −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                              Age                                                                 Age

Panel C: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel D: Interaction terms of age cohort and
salary segment dummy variables on systematic     salary segment dummy variables on systematic
risk, in the first robustness test.                        risk, in the second robustness test.

             0.1                                                                                    0.1
                                                         High salary                                                                              High salary
                                                          Middle salary                                                                            Middle salary
           0.08                                       Low salary                               0.08                                       Low salary

           0.06                                                                               0.06

           0.04                                                                               0.04

           0.02                                                                               0.02
          Coefficient estimate                                                                        Coefficient estimate

            0                                                                        0

          −0.02                                                                           −0.02
         −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−                   −30 31−40 41−50 51−60 61−
                                 Age                                                                 Age

  Panel E: Interaction terms of age cohort and     Panel F: Interaction terms of age cohort and
  salary segment dummy variables on the propor-     salary segment dummy variables on the propor-
  tion of idiosyncratic risk, in the first robustness      tion of idiosyncratic risk, in the second robustness
  test.                                                          test.

                                        39