  THE SWEDISH HOUSING MORTGAGE REFORM’S IMPACT
               ON HOUSE PRICES:

       A STUDY OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF SCANDINAVIAN HOUSE PRICES
          FOLLOWING THE 85 PERCENT MORTGAGE CAP IN SWEDEN

                                                         a                        b
                             Sofia Albertsson and Josefin Åsberg

                                  Bachelor Thesis in Finance
                            Stockholm School of Economics

                                Abstract

The Swedish house prices have grown steadily for years, even throughout the recent financial
crisis. During 2011, house prices started to decline. An extensive body of research has identified
a connection between deregulations of credit markets and increasing house prices. In this study
we examine if the opposite holds, that is, if the mortgage cap implemented by the Swedish
                                                                                                st
Financial Supervisory Authority on October 1 , 2010 has triggered the decline in house prices.
We carry out our study by implementing two quasi-experiment methods on the Scandinavian
countries; one difference-in-difference estimation and one regression discontinuity design. We
use two sets of panel data covering regions in the treatment group (Sweden) and control groups
(Norway and Denmark). Our regression and graphical results provide some evidence that the
mortgage cap has contributed to the decline in Swedish house prices. Due to the complexity of
the housing market, it is difficult to credibly ascribe the house price decline entirely to the
mortgage cap per se.

Tutor: Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal
Discussants: Simon Gunnarsson and Harry Hedman
Presentation: May 21, 2012

a                                  b
 21965@student.hhs.se  21939@student.hhs.se

Keywords: Mortgage cap, Regression discontinuity design, Difference-in-difference,
Scandinavian house prices, Household indebtedness

Acknowledgements: We thank our tutor Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal for valuable inputs
throughout the process and his enthusiasm for the topic.
CONTENTS

1 INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................ 3
2 MORTGAGE CAPS IN SCANDINAVIA ..................................................................................... 7
   2.1 SWEDEN ............................................................................................................................................... 7
   2.2 NORWAY............................................................................................................................................... 8
   2.3 DENMARK ........................................................................................................................................... 8
3 DATA ........................................................................................................................................................ 9
4 EMPIRICAL STRATEGY ................................................................................................................. 11
  4.1 DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE........................................................................................ 11
  4.2 DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE REGRESSION SPECIFICATION .................... 12
   4.3 REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN .................................................................... 12
5 EMPIRICAL RESULTS ..................................................................................................................... 13
   5.1 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ................................................................................................... 13
  5.2 DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE........................................................................................ 14
     5.2.1 SWEDEN/NORWAY ....................................................................................................... 14
     5.2.2 SWEDEN/DENMARK .................................................................................................... 15
  5.3 GRAPHICAL ILLUSTRATIONS IN RD SETTING ....................................................... 16
     5.3.1 SWEDEN/NORWAY ....................................................................................................... 16
     5.3.2 SWEDEN/DENMARK .................................................................................................... 17
     5.3.3 SENSITIVITY TEST OF GRAPHICAL RD DESIGN ........................................... 18
   5.4 DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS ........................................................................................ 18
     5.4.1 DISCUSSION SPECIFIC TO THE RD DESIGN .................................................... 19
6 CONCLUSION..................................................................................................................................... 20
7 REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................................... 22
8 APPENDIX ........................................................................................................................................... 25

                                           2
   1 INTRODUCTION
The last century’s dynamic and vividly fluctuating economy has raised an interest to investigate
what factors ensure financial stability. Changing housing markets have proven to greatly impact a
nation’s economy, all the way down to individual households. Maintaining healthy levels of
house price developments and household indebtedness has historically been a major concern in
the struggle to sustain a nation’s economic stability, both in Sweden and internationally.
An important part of financial institutions’ responsibilities today is to closely monitor the
development of the residential market, in particular the factors affecting house prices. Individual
households have become more dependent on the market price for their house since property
represents both the vast majority of the households’ debt as well as the majority of the
households’ accumulated wealth.
Household’s access to credit is one factor affecting how the housing market develops. In the
past 20 years, Sweden has experienced a rapid and aggressive increase of household debt.
Households’ total indebtedness in relation to income has grown from 90 percent in the mid
1990’s to 170 percent in 2010 (Johansson et al., (2011)). Meanwhile, the most critical fact is that
the fraction house mortgage-to-total household debt is the fastest growing in Sweden out of
                                                         1
several Western countries (BKN, (2011) . The ratio has increased by 18 percentage points during
the last decade and today, household mortgages constitute 90 percent of total debt (FI, (2012)).
Adelino et al. (2012) as well as Glick and Lansing (2010) suggest that an increase in households’
access to credit leads to an increase in house prices. To the best of our knowledge, research
covering the effect on house prices from a restriction in access to credit is limited. Figure 1 in the
          2
appendix illustrates long-term trends in house price indices and household indebtedness for the
Scandinavian countries.

Our interest in this topic is further enhanced by the peculiar reaction of Swedish house prices to
the recent financial crisis. A distinguishing aspect of the Swedish housing market is that house
prices were relatively unaffected by the crisis and prices continued to grow steadily during 2008
and onward. The relatively calm reaction by the Swedish housing market was also one of the
most important reasons to why Sweden did not suffer to the same extent as other countries in
the crisis (Jansson and Persson, (2011)). During 1995 through 2010, Swedish house prices
increased by 144 percent in real terms (Englund, (2011)), but in 2011 house prices began to drop.
Figure 2 illustrates a change in trend, and the house price index and the consumer price index are
converging. This is far from the long-term trend, where the house price index lies far above the
consumer price index. The indications that house prices now have turned downward is
supported by quarterly reports from Statistics Sweden and various broker agencies
(Mäklarstatistik, (2012)).
With the recent financial crisis leaving Sweden’s housing market relatively unaffected, and
despite the growing household leverage, why are we experiencing a downward sloping trend in
house prices right now? Should not this trend has started earlier and what is triggering the price

1 BKN includes Denmark, Finland, France, Ireland, Netherlands, Spain, Great Britain, Sweden, Germany and the
US in their analysis.
2 All figures and tables are enclosed in the appendix.

                                           3
decline? In the same way as mortgage deregulations have coincided with increasing house prices,
policy interventions by governments have been the latest fashion in order to establish stable
markets (Andrews, (2010)).
In this paper we examine whether the 2010 Swedish mortgage cap reform has contributed to the
negative house price growth during 2011. The mortgage cap is a limit on new loans undertaken
                                                                                           3                          st
and was introduced by the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority  (FI) on October 1 , 2010.
The public recommendation regarding a mortgage cap regulates that new mortgages cannot
exceed 85 percent of the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of the market value of the property when
buying a new home. The aim of the regulation was to ensure an effective consumer protection
and to make sure that high mortgage was not used as a competitive advantage when fighting for
customers in the banking sector. FI stated that the limit on the LTV ratio would not impact the
price of houses. However, key concerns of public policy implementations are the extent to which
the policies actually fulfil their anticipated objectives and whether the policies cause any
unintended spill-over effects.
The effect on new mortgage following the policy is clear and consistent; new loans undertaken
have dropped for the first time since 2002, and 14 percent of new loans have been taken at
precisely 85 percent of the market value of the property, indicating that the mortgage cap has
had desired effect (FI, (2012)). Nevertheless, the authority has not presented a follow up on the
effects on house prices.
Our investigation relies on an understanding of how factors affecting household indebtedness
influence house price growth. Firstly, the country specific mortgage interest rate and the planned
rate path will greatly affect households’ decisions regarding house mortgage. Secondly, the
development of house prices has been most rapid in countries with the greatest accessibility of
choosing a variable interest rate over a fixed rate (BKN, (2011)). Further, the access to credit is
also impacted by the required amortization of the loan, the size of the down payment, the
availability to housing equity withdrawals, as well as tax advantages on interest rate payments
(BKN, (2011)). Mortgage regulations will greatly impact a household’s access to credit, and a
more deregulated market makes it easier to buy your own house without risking your own equity.

The impact of deregulated mortgage markets on house prices becomes more apparent during
financial crises. Glick and Lansing (2010) explain that the width and depth of economic
downturns are largely connected to growing household indebtedness and rising house prices.
Further, Geanakopolos (2010) argues that two leverage cycles enhanced each other in the US
during the recent financial crisis; the financial market and the house market. Accordingly, the
upsurge in house prices was a consequence of the credit market expansion, and new, more
leveraged borrowers entered the housing market, which drove prices up even further. Mian and
Sufi (2009a) showed that the American counties that experienced the largest increase in
household indebtedness were the same ones that also experienced the largest increase in house
prices before the housing bubble burst. Further, Glick and Lansing (2010) showed that countries
that were hit most severely during the last recession were those which had experienced the
largest increase in household indebtedness before the crisis.

3 Swedish: Finansinspektionen. Hereinafter referred to as FI.

                                           4
During the financial crisis, the decline in value for American properties caused turmoil in the
financial sector, which quickly developed into a full-scale global economic crisis. This makes it
even more obvious that a crucial part of the financial institutions’ responsibilities are to monitor
household’s leverage. There exist big incentives to control household indebtedness levels in
order to maintain the stability of an economy, a reason to why governmental regulations in the
area have become more common.
We aim to investigate whether a more restricted mortgage policy will reduce households’ ability
to pay for residential property, thus causing a decline in house price growth. We hypothesize that
the mortgage cap has caused a negative effect on Swedish house prices. This follows from
previous research claiming that easier access to credit will increase house prices, and we expect
that the opposite would hold for a restriction in access to credit.
Our strategy to estimate the effect on house prices that arises from the more restricted mortgage
regulation relies on two quasi-experiment approaches in which an exogenous event (the change
in the Swedish government regulation) changes the environment for Swedish individuals,
households, cities, and regions. In the meantime, the Swedish policy implementation leaves the
other Scandinavian countries unaffected. We apply our strategy using a difference-in-difference
method and test whether regions affected by the treatment (policy implementation) have
experienced larger declines in house prices than regions that are unaffected by the treatment. For
graphical illustrations we apply a regression discontinuity design on borders. We show how
house price growth and the supply of new listings of houses to the market have developed over
time and investigate whether there seem to be different trends after the policy implementation
compared to before.
A quasi-experiment should not be seen as a true randomized experiment, but rather will the
treatment group and the control group occur as a result of the change in policy. Therefore, we use
Sweden as a treatment group (affected by the Swedish mortgage cap), and other Nordic
                                                                                                       4
countries – more specifically Norway and Denmark – as control groups . Norway and Denmark
constitute suitable control groups since they apply similar mortgage legislations as Sweden, which
is important since the level of regulation will have a substantial impact on the developments of
house prices. Table 1 displays the variations of the mortgage legislations in the Scandinavian
countries. Further, these countries are alike in several micro- and macroeconomic aspects. We
find it reasonable to assume that the Scandinavian countries react more similarly to other
exogenous factors than other European countries. Since different reactions between the
countries could disrupt the validity of the investigation, it is of importance that the control and
treatment groups differ as little as possible.
For our results to be in line with our hypothesis, we expect to see a decrease in Swedish house
prices after the policy has been implemented. Meanwhile, in a perfectly theoretical scenario, the
Norwegian and Danish house prices remain unchanged from the previous trend. The housing

4 We have investigated the alternative to include Finland as a control group. For the chosen empirical strategy,
Finland does not serve as an equally good control group as Norway and Denmark. The Swedish-Finish border is
short and price index is available for few regions, hence it is not suitable for the purpose of RD design.

                                           5
market is dynamic, and due to other exogenous events there could be changes in Norwegian and
Danish house prices during the time period of our study.
We measure house prices using regional house price indices covering owner-occupied one-family
houses from the national statistics bureaus, available on a quarterly basis. The indices are based
on actual transactions and are constructed using a hedonic approach with a purchase price
coefficient controlling for variations in house characteristics.
Our results present us with negative coefficients for the treatment variable in both the
Norwegian and the Danish samples. For the Norwegian sample, we find that the policy caused
house prices on the Swedish side of the border to devalue 1.6 percentage points more than in the
Norwegian regions. The Danish sample results also indicates that Swedish house prices seemed
to devalue between 1.2 and 1.5 percentage points due to the policy implementation. The Danish
results are somewhat robust for the applied macroeconomic controls, which could enhance that
the policy impacted Swedish house prices negatively.
The graphical results from the regression discontinuity design present us with some indications
that the implementation of the Swedish policy has caused the Swedish housing market to decline.
The Norwegian sample indicates that the activity on the Swedish market has decreased
compared to the Norwegian. The Danish sample fluctuates throughout the whole sample period
and it is hard to address the variations in house price growth to the implementation of the
Swedish policy. However, the results indicate that there exists a greater difference in the growth
after the policy implementation than before, which would enhance our results.
Our findings are not as evident as previous research on how changes in leverage legislation and
restraints in households’ access to credit can impact house prices. Mian and Sufi (2009b) have
successfully explained how credit supply shocks can cause an increase in house prices. Further
Lilienfeld-Toal and Mookherjee (2011) show that the 2005 BAPCA reform (Bankruptcy Abuse
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act) in the US played an important role in triggering the
reversals of the house price growth. In opposite to the above research, Mäklarstatistik (2011) has
reported that the policy in itself is not an explanatory factor of the recent downturn in house
prices.

From the results we cannot explicitly state that more restricted leverage legislations will impact
house prices negatively. However, in line with our results, Mian and Sufi (2009a) also argue that
it is hard to relate their results as a consequence of one most important single factor, or even
factors, because of the highly joint interaction across markets in the economy, and especially in
the dynamic housing market.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a short background to
mortgage caps implemented in the Scandinavian countries. Section 3 presents the variables of
interest and descriptions of the data in our Norwegian and Danish samples. Section 4 describes
the empirical strategy implemented; the difference-in-difference method and the regression
discontinuity design. In section 5 we present regression and graphical results and analyze
whether the mortgage cap had an impact on Swedish house prices. Finally, section 6 concludes
our findings, discusses possible weaknesses and provides suggestions for further research.

                                           6
  2 MORTGAGE CAPS IN SCANDINAVIA
The widespread mortgage market deregulations during the 1980’s increased households’ capacity
to pay for housing. Ellis (2008) argues that an initially high LTV ratio on new mortgages was one
of the explanations to why the US mortgage market collapsed in August 2007, and to why the
house prices dropped so drastically. In the aftermaths of the crisis, governments have become
increasingly more aware of the negative effects of deregulated credit markets. Public policy
interventions in housing markets are now widespread, though these differ considerably across
countries.

Due to different legal systems, there exist no minimum requirements for the mortgage markets
among the European Union member states. FI introduced the 85 percent limit on mortgage cap
                             st
on October 1 , 2010, which only holds for the Swedish financial market and households. The
equivalent directive was issued in March 2010 in Norway, and the 2003 Mortgage-Credit Loans
and Mortgage-Credit Bonds Act regulated the Danish market. This implies that all Scandinavian
countries now have implemented regulations for the initial down-payment of a house, and they
only differ in terms of the time of implementation and the required LTV ratio of the market
value of the property. Sweden was the last country to implement the regulations in October
2010.

Table 1 presents a comparison between the countries in aspects that will affect household
indebtedness to a great extent. Combined, we can conclude that after Sweden’s implementation
of the mortgage cap, the Scandinavian countries resemble in most variables that affects
household’s indebtedness and willingness to undertake a loan, and thus in mortgage factors that
affect housing prices.

   2.1 SWEDEN
In 2009, more than 50 percent of the Swedish households had a house mortgage that exceeded
the disposable income by five times (FI, (2010)). One year after the implementation of the
mortgage cap, the fraction had decreased to 30 percent (FI, (2012)). In 2009, 18 percent of the
households had a LTV ratio above 85 percent. This fraction has decreased to 9 percent after the
implementation of the mortgage cap (FI, (2012)).

Before FI introduced the mortgage cap, the banks and lending institutes had no
recommendations on how to decide upon new loans (Karlsson, (2012)). However, most
companies applied internal recommendations that were similar among them, and the rules
spanned from 75 percent to 95 percent of the market value of the property. Many companies
also applied two different parts of the loan; 75 percent to 85 percent of the value of the property
                                                 5
was considered the bottom part of the loan and the amount that exceeded the bottom loan was
                                                      6
considered the top part of the loan . The top-loan was considered more risky and required
regulated repayments and had a higher interest rate (FI, (2010)). Typically, companies assigned
the same loan terms to households regardless of the characteristics and the geographical
settlement of the house.

5 Swedish: Bottenlån
6 Swedish: Topplån

                                           7
The new mortgage cap did not postulate a direct regulation, but a public recommendation gives
the companies the freedom to use other methods than the one suggested in order to fulfil the
mandatory, common aim. However, it is important to stress that there are actually loans being
undertaken above 85 percent of the value of the property. This would indicate that the response
on the market is somewhat ambiguous.

  2.2 NORWAY
In Norway, growth in house prices has followed the same path as the increase in household
indebtedness (Finanstilsynet, (2012)). Finanstilsynet (equivalent to the Swedish FI) is responsible
for supervising the financial market. Following the mortgage market during recent years they
have concluded that the “unhealthy” lending environment has swelled. Households’ debt
amounted to two times the disposable income at the end of 2011, and debt has been increasing
the last years (SSB, (2012a)). From 2004 to 2009, the number of households with an outstanding
debt three times as large as disposable income increased from around 20 percent to 30 percent
(Finanstilsynet, (2012)).

Finanstilsynet issued guidelines for restriction on residential mortgage lending in March 2010 in
order to restrain household debt growth. The new regulation imposed that new loans undertaken
should not exceed 90 percent of the market value of the house. In contrast to the Swedish FI,
the Norwegian central bank actually stated that a restriction in households’ access to mortgage
credit could prove to curb house price growth (NB, (2010)). However, little evidence has shown
that the Norwegian mortgage cap has had the desired effects on lending. A study carried out by
Finanstilsynet during 2011 showed that 26 percent of the households had a LTV ratio that
exceeded 90 percent, compared to 21 percent in 2010. In December 2011, Finanstilsynet issued
new guidelines for prudent lending, this time lowering the ceiling to 85 percent. It is important to
stress that we have restricted our research period from the second quarter of 2010 to the fourth
quarter of 2011 in order to include only the period in which the 90 percent mortgage cap was
applicable.

  2.3 DENMARK
Denmark has the highest household indebtedness among the Scandinavian countries, and also in
relation to other European countries (BKN, (2011)). Denmark has experienced a rapid increase
in households’ debt-to-income ratio during the last years. In 2011, house mortgage as a
percentage of disposable income exceeded 250 percent, and the total debt as a percentage of
disposable income exceeded 300 percent. Further, house mortgage as a percentage of GDP was
around 120 percent (BKN, (2011)). The rapid increase in indebtedness could in part be explained
by the easy access to credit.
The mortgage banks are supervised by the Danish Financial Supervisory Authority,
Finanstilsynet, (equivalent to the Swedish FI). The Mortgage-Credit Loans And Mortgage-Credit
Bonds Act regulates the Danish mortgage market and provides favorable agreements once a
household becomes eligible to undertake a mortgage. However, a large segment of the
population will not be granted a loan since the regulations for credit worthiness are strict. You

                                           8
cannot obtain a loan if you for example have a poor credit record or if you are not able make a
20 percent down payment of the value of the property.

  3 DATA
Our investigation is based on two sets of panel data where we follow the same geographical
regions over time. Hence, the observations are not randomly drawn; instead the main idea is that
we want to examine the regions along the Swedish border. The Norwegian sample investigates
rural areas, whereas the Danish sample investigates urban areas. The data covering the border
between Sweden and Norway consists of 11 Swedish regions and 16 Norwegian regions. Since
the Swedish regions altogether cover a greater area, the fewer number of regions does not affect
comparability. The Sweden-Denmark comparison includes 11 Danish regions and 9 Swedish
regions. Figure 3 presents maps which illustrate the included regions. A corresponding list of
regions is presented in Table 2.

It is of great importance for our methods that our control groups are unaffected by the Swedish
treatment (the change in regulation) and is not subject to other changes during the investigation’s
time horizon. The Danish sample covers a longer time horizon since, to the best of our
knowledge, there are no other exogenous events related to the housing market to take into
consideration. The Norwegian sample’s time horizon had to be reduced to adjust it for changes
in Norwegian mortgage legislations. Hence, the Danish dataset contains more observations and
gains some greater validity. The Danish sample covers 18 quarters; 2007 quarter 3 through 2011
quarter 4. The Norwegian sample covers 6 quarters; 2010 quarter 2 through 2011 quarter 3. The
Danish sample consists of 360 observations and the Norwegian sample consists of 162
observations.

House price indices on a regional and quarterly basis, covering owner-occupied one-family
          7
houses , are collected from Statistics Sweden (SCB), Statistics Denmark (DST) and Statistics
Norway (SSB). These are governmental organizations, which certify the high validity of the
            8
statistics . Our dependent variable is structured as the growth in house price index of each
                                                                                                                               9
region. The Norwegian index is constructed using the widely accepted hedonic method , which
controls for geographical location and individual characteristic of the houses. The Swedish and
Danish indices are constructed according to a closely related framework to the hedonic method
and represent unweighted mean values of the ratio between the actual selling price over the taxed
                10
assessed value  of the house. This method also controls for individual characteristic of a house.
The differences in how the indices are constructed are not expected to affect comparability.

7 The price index used in this thesis does not cover the condominium market, which does not allow us to comment
nor discuss the implications on this market.
8 The house price indices are based on the best possible coverage of sales and they are systematically developed over
time.
9 The hedonic method is used in many countries when constructing house price indices (Englund, (2011)). However,
indices can still be subject to biases. As discussed by Lilienfeld-Toal and Mookherjee (2011), an index can be subject
to bias if certain houses with low quality were sold more often after the reform than before the reform.
10 Swedish: Taxeringsvärde

                                           9
The main restriction in our datasets is the limited availability of house price indices, which
restraints us from carrying out our investigation on more narrow geographical regions. For all
countries, the most detailed house price index is available at a regional level at the national
statistics bureaus. For municipality or zip-code level one can only obtain actual selling prices, and
in rural areas the sample would be too small and varying in order to qualify for a representative
median house price.

The number of new listings of houses has been collected on a regional basis from Hemnet
Statistics for the Swedish data, from finn.no for the Norwegian data and from Realkreditrådet
for the Danish data. We compute the number on new listings per capita to control for
populations size and we use the variable as an approximation for the relative supply in the
       11
region  (Mian, A., Sufi, A. and Trebbi, F., (2011)). An obvious drawback with the Swedish and
Norwegian statistics is that these sources do not cover all the transactions in the market.
Furthermore, data on new listings can be biased, given that the same house can be listed more
than once if the house is not sold on the first try. The Danish new listings do not suffer from
these drawbacks since the data is collected from an official database where all publicly registered
sales are included.

We supplement our data with macroeconomic control variables which are firmly established to
                                                                                12
influence house price developments (BKN, (2009)) . It is important to clarify that our
explanatory variables do not directly control for differences in house characteristics; this is
instead already controlled for by using a house price index based on a purchase price coefficient.
The GDP growth and unemployment rates are collected from SCB, SSB, and DST. For all three
countries, the GDP growth rates are calculated according to the EU-standard National Accounts
(Eurostat, (2011), SCB, (2012b), SSB, (2012c), DST, (2012b)). This ensures that the variables are
perfectly comparable across the countries. Further, we control for mortgage interest rates since
they will greatly affect a household’s willingness to undertake a loan in order to buy a house. For
example, low interest rates will decrease interest payments, making households less reluctant to
undertake a loan. Lending institutes do not seem to account for differences in geographical area
nor individual characteristics of the house when deciding upon loans to credit takers (FI, (2010)).
Therefore, we have applied the same mortgage interest rate on all regions in each country. The
mortgage interest rates are collected from SSB, DST, and Swedbank Hypotek for Sweden. Figure
4 presents the development in mortgage interest rates for the Scandinavian countries during the
past decade.

11 Other factors than new listings, for example the total stock of houses for sale, could serve as an approximation of
supply. Our choice to use new listings is in line with the method of Mian, Sufi and Trebbi (2011) and is also guided
by the availability of data.
12 According to BKN (2009), the correlation between house price growth and unemployment rate developments as
well as correlation with the interest rate is proven to be negative and high. These variables are critical factors to
explain the short term house price developments. Since we cover a short time span, these are important factors to
include as explanatory variables. One variable often considered to have an impact is disposable income. According
to BKN (2009), the correlation between the growth in real disposable income and house price growth is low; a
correlation coefficient of only 0.25. Hence, we do not include disposable income as an explanatory variable.

                                           10
  4 EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
The investigation of this thesis is carried out by applying two methods commonly applied to
quasi-experiments – a difference-in-difference estimation and a regression discontinuity (RD)
design. The difference-in-difference method is known to be successful in addressing the
effectiveness of the implementation of a certain policy and we implement it to investigate
whether the mortgage cap could have had an effect on Swedish house prices. The RD design has
gained momentum and is complementing regular natural experiment evaluation strategies, for
example difference-in-difference and instrumental variables (Ashenfelter O., Card, D., (2011)).
We use the RD design approach to produce graphical illustrations of a boundary discontinuity
design, where we compare a variable’s development on either side of a national border over
      13
time . In this section, we will explain the rationale behind our applications and the technicalities
of the methods.

  4.1 DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE
The difference-in-difference method originates from Ashenfelter and Card (1985) and is
established as one of the most common methods when investigating program effects. In a
difference-in-difference setting you have two groups; the treatment group and the control group,
and two time periods; before and after the policy. The difference-in-difference design aims to
estimate the effect from the policy by investigating whether the difference between the control
and the treatment group is changed before, compared to after, the implementation of the policy.
The total effect of the policy on the house prices is called the treatment effect. The following
formula presents the underlying reasoning of the size of the treatment effect:

                                 𝛿𝑇 = 𝑦2,𝑇 − 𝑦2,𝐶 − 𝑦1,𝑇 − 𝑦1,𝐶

                 Difference between the treatment  _ Difference between the treatment
                  and control groups after the policy     and control groups before the policy

The method is carried out twice, once for the Sweden-Norway comparison and once for the
Sweden-Denmark comparison. The method is directly applicable to both sets of data; the
procedure, definitions, and assumptions do not differ. Sweden is the treatment group in each run
and the control group is either Norway or Denmark. The choice of control group is one of the
problematic aspects of this method since the control group must be unaffected by the treatment
as well as constant in respect to other exogenous factors. Multiple ordinary least squares (OLS)
regressions are carried out and the results, which then are to be interpreted and analyzed, are
reported both quantitatively and graphically.

13 It is important to clarify that we do not implement a full RD design approach. According to Nichols (2007), there
are five key assumptions and tests to carry out in order to verify casual inference, which validate the applicability of
an RD design. These assumptions have not been tested. Instead, this thesis implements the RD design for the
purpose of the favorable graphical presentations.

                                           11
   4.2 DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE REGRESSION SPECIFICATION
The following difference-in-difference regression set-up is applied in our investigation:

                                             𝛿 𝑦 𝛿 𝛿 𝑦

The regression is defined by the following variables. House price index growtht,i is the growth in
house price index at time t in region i. Policy is a time dummy with a value of one if time is after
the policy and zero otherwise. Swe is a dummy with a value of one for Sweden and zero
otherwise. This variable’s coefficient captures any differences between the treatment and control
group prior to the policy implementation. PolicySwe is an interaction term with a value of one if it
corresponds to the treatment group after the policy and zero otherwise. The estimated
coefficient of this variable, 𝛿 ̂   , is the difference-in-difference estimator and explains the effect of
the policy on the dependent variable. We chose macroeconomic control variables with the aim to
eliminate the effect these factor have on house price developments. X1,t,i is the unemployment rate
at time t in region i. X2,t,i is the growth in GDP at time t in region i. X3,t,i is the mortgage interest rate at
time t in region i. We include time dummies for each cross-section in order to control for time
fixed effects (FE). Lastly, we have the idiosyncratic error term, . It represents unobserved,
time-varying factors which affect the dependent variable. As explained in the data section, the
time horizon t is longer for the Danish sample compared to the Norwegian sample.

                               14
It is likely that endogeneity  is a major issue with our regression specification. FE aim to exploit
within-group variations over time and hence account for unobservable factors which have an
impact on the dependent variable. Including FE decreases the risk of endogeneity and thereby
increases the possibility to accurately assess the independent variables’ impact on the dependent
variable (Wooldridge, (2009)). We control for time FE with the intention to eliminate time trends
and how the demand and supply of houses fluctuate between quarters. We also control for
region FE in order to eliminate the impact from region specific factors, such as the existence of
major cities and the location. Further, we correct for heteroskedasticity in all regressions by using
robust standard errors.

  4.3 REGRESSION DISCONTINUITY DESIGN
Already in 1960, Thistlethwaite and Campbell introduced the RD design, a casual inference
evaluation approach. Only in the late 1990’s did the design and its favorable way of displaying
results graphically catch researchers’ attention. There are several major advantages which are
boosting the RD design’s momentum. It provides vastly credible and transparent estimations of
program effects and can be used in a wide range of economically important contexts. Further,
the design requires milder assumptions compared to other non-experimental approaches (Hahn
et al., (2001)). Our RD design extracts the casual effect of the policy by utilizing a given
exogenous threshold. The threshold determines when the assignment variable (growth in house
price index and new listings per capita) becomes subject to treatment. By comparing

14 Regression results become biased due to endogeneity when one or several of the explanatory variables are
correlated with the error term, often due to an omitted variable.

                                           12
observations that lie closely on each side of the threshold, the local treatment effect can be
estimated in settings where randomization would be unfeasible.

We have carried out the RD design through a graphical presentation of discontinuities in
geography. This is in line with Black (1999) and Bayer et al. (2007), who applied the geographical
RD design to study house prices on both sides of school attendance boundaries in order to
investigate the value of attending different schools. We implement the RD design on national
borders in order to examine the growth in house prices, as well as the development in number of
new listings per capita. Our forcing variable is the border classification and the threshold is
defined by the national borders. The basis of our strategy to identify the effect of the policy on
the dependent variables relies on different regions being appointed different values depending on
the proximity to the border. This provides the advantage that we can investigate the local impact
by the policy on different regions, both close to the border and as one goes further into the
country. Table 3 illustrates the regions applied in the RD design approach.

In order to examine the effect of the mortgage cap we compare discontinuity in the treatment
                                          15
and control groups over time . We aim to investigate whether there exists continuity between
the countries at the threshold in the time periods before the event, and discontinuity after, which
would imply that the trends change after the policy implementation.

  5 EMPIRICAL RESULTS
In this section we will present the results from our difference-in-difference and RD design
investigations. We start by presenting descriptive statistics for both of our datasets, followed by
the results from the difference-in-difference study and the graphical interpretation from our RD
design. Finally, a discussion regarding our results concludes. We continually refer to the
Norwegian dataset as Panel A, and the Danish dataset as Panel B.

   5.1 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Table 3 reports summary statistics for our two datasets. Panel A presents data for Sweden and
Norway separately in order to compare price growth mean and other variables before and after
the policy implementation. For Sweden, the average quarterly growth in house prices before the
policy was 1 percent, which decreased to 0.4 percent after the policy. The corresponding average
growth for Norway was 1 percent before, which increased to 2 percent after.

Table 3, Panel B presents equivalent data for the Danish dataset. Here, the Swedish average
quarterly house price growth before the policy was 1.15 percent, which decreased to -0.71
percent after the policy. The corresponding Danish average growth was -1.05 percent before,
which decreased to -1.76 percent after. Note that we investigate different Swedish regions in the
datasets, and hence the two Swedish means are not identical.

15 To ease interpretation, we call the two sides of the threshold in a RD graph “treatment group” and “control
group”, similarly as in a difference-in-difference estimation. Normally, in an RD design, one refers to the two sides
as the treated and untreated observations of the assignment variable (y-axis variable) (Lee and Lemieux, (2009)).
Hence, the “treatment group” corresponds to the treated segment of the assignment variable (Sweden), and the
“control group” corresponds to the untreated segment (Norway and Denmark).

                                           13
Our additional dependent variable in the RD design, new listings per capita, shows opposite
trends in the two dataset. In the Norwegian sample, the relative number of new houses put on
the market dropped by 5 percent in Sweden after the reform, while it decreased by a smaller
percentage, 4 percent, in Norway after the reform. The outcome is different in the Sweden-
Denmark comparison. The relative number of new Swedish houses increased by 5 percent after
the policy, whereas the Danish corresponding numbers show a decrease of 9 percent.

  5.2 DIFFERENCE-IN-DIFFERENCE

   5.2.1 SWEDEN/NORWAY
Table 4 reports the results from the difference-in-difference regressions, where the growth in
house price index is regressed on our explanatory variables. The first column illustrates the naive
difference-in-difference set up, where the coefficient of interest, SwePolicy, explains the treatment
effect. It confirms that house prices on the Swedish side of the border appeared to devalue 1.6
percentage points due to the implementation of the policy. This is statistically significant at a 5
percent level. When controlling for time FE on a quarterly basis (column 2), the treatment effect
is still statistically significant, but now at a 1 percent level, and the explanatory power of the
model has increased from 0.077 to 0.372. This implies that different time trends capture a major
part of the model. When controlling for regional FE in column 5 and 6, the variable explaining
                                                                             16
Sweden before is dropped due to perfect collinearity . Region FE does not seem to contribute
to the model as much as time FE since the explanatory power of the models including region FE
is sizably smaller.

When using a full set of macro controls in columns 3 through 6 the treatment effect is positive,
but since the effect is not statistically different from zero, it cannot be argued that it explains the
effect of the policy. The levels on which the control variables help to explain the model varies
between column 3 through 6. The mortgage interest rate has a negative coefficient and is
statistically significant in the majority of the models. This is intuitive since a high interest rate
would cause a decrease in house price growth. Growth in GPD does not seem to explain the
price development in any of the models. The fact that the GDP is insignificant in all models is
surprising. One possible explanation to why GDP does not seem to explain the house price
growth, despite the regional proximity, may be that there exist great differences in country
specific aspects. For example, Norwegian GDP relies heavily on exports and production of
petroleum, which is not present in the Swedish context. Hence, GDP may not impact house
prices in the same way in the countries. Further, the unemployment rates help explain the model
in column 3 and 4, but the coefficients are positive, which is highly remarkable. Intuitively, if
unemployment goes up, both demand and supply could be affected; purchasing power decreases
(demand) and people may be forced to sell their homes (supply), which would lead to a decline
in house price growth. The results are not in line with this reasoning, which also could be
detected back to differences in country specific aspects. This will be further developed in the
discussion section.

16 Perfect collinearity is not surprising since all Swedish regions sum to 1, i.e. the intercept of all Swedish before
dummy variables will equal one.

                                           14
Continuing to the graphical illustrations of our difference-in-difference method, Figure 5, Panel
A, illustrates both the quarterly growth rates in absolute values as well as the means of Sweden
and Norway before and after the policy. The average quarterly growth is positive and almost
                                                                                      17
identical for Sweden and Norway before the policy change . The results clearly show that after
the policy implementation, Sweden had a lower growth rate than Norway. Sweden had on
average experienced a growth of 0.4 percent per quarter after the policy, which corresponds to a
decrease of 0.6 percentage points. Norway, on the other hand, experienced an increase of 1
percentage point, up to almost 2 percent average quarterly growth rate. The difference between
Norway and Sweden after the policy is apparent and sizable. Before the event the difference
between the countries’ average growth rates was negligible, while the results after show a
substantial difference of 1.53 percentage points. Thus, the graphical illustration of our
difference-in-difference shows that Swedish house price growth has declined to a greater extent
than Norwegian prices after the policy. This is an indication that the policy impacted Swedish
house prices negatively.

   5.2.2 SWEDEN/DENMARK
Table 4, Panel B, reports the regression results for the Danish dataset. Column 1 reports a
negative treatment effect which is almost significant at the five percent level (P-value 0.055). The
results suggest that the drop in growth was 1.2 percentage points larger in Sweden than in
Denmark. However, we cannot infer the results to the policy because of the low statistical
significance. When adding controls for time FE (column 2) on a quarterly basis the treatment
effect remains negative and becomes significant at the five percent level. One important aspect is
                                           2
that the explanatory power, R , increases from 0.134 to 0.568. As in the Norwegian dataset, time
trends seem to absorb a large part of the model and enhance the result that the Swedish growth
has declined to a larger extent than the Danish growth.

When adding controls for time and regional FE in column 4 through 6, the results vary in several
aspects. The treatment effect is negative and significant at the 0.1 percent level when controlling
for regional FE, suggesting that regional heterogeneity exists to a great extent. However, the
explanatory power of the model is not as high as when controlling for time FE. Similarly to the
Norwegian sample, the variable representing Sweden before is dropped due to perfect
collinearity. In the columns 4 through 6, the explanatory power varies between 0.272 and 0.569.
Time FE seem to explain a vast part of the variations in explanatory power compared to the
regional differences.

Column 3 through 6 add control variables on a macro level. In column 3 and 5, the treatment
effect is negative to a larger extent than in the naïve models. The results suggest that Swedish
house prices devalued 1.5 percentages points due to the implementation of the policy. These
results are statistically significant at the five percent level (column 3), and at the 0.1 percent level
(column 5). The levels on which our control variables help explain the models vary. The only
significant control variable is the development of GDP. The coefficient is positive for two of the
regressions, which is expected since an increase in GDP would imply that the economy is doing

17 The mean growth rates presented in the difference-in-difference graphs correspond to the mean values in the
summary statistics, Table 2.

                                           15
well, thus impacting the house prices positively. Regarding our other control variables, the
negative coefficients for mortgage interest rate suggests that a higher interest rate causes a
decrease in house price growth. Even though this follows our intuition, we cannot draw any
conclusions since the coefficients are insignificant. A distinguishing feature in recent years has
been the distinct conditions of interest rates. Our data set covers a time period where the
mortgage interest rates have been historically low (see Figure 3), and the atypical financial
environment may explain why the control variable does not seem to impact house price growth.
Nor does the control variable for unemployment rate seem to impact our model; the results are
insignificant for all regressions and indicate both negative and positive impacts on the house
price growth.

Figure 5, Panel B, shows the graphical illustration of the difference-in-difference method.
Denmark had a negative average quarterly growth rate of 1.05 percent during the period 2007-
2010, while Sweden had a positive average growth rate of 1.15 percent per quarter in the same
period. Both countries experienced a drop in the average quarterly house price growth after the
fourth quarter of 2010, but the decrease in Sweden was larger; 1.86 percentage points for Sweden
compared to 0.72 percentage points for Denmark. Worth noting is that Denmark experienced an
average decline in house prices throughout the whole study and Sweden experienced a positive
growth in house prices before the policy was implemented, and a negative growth afterward. The
graphical results enhances our regression results that the policy has impacted Swedish house
prices negatively.

There exists a seasonal trend in house prices, which is expected since the indices are based on
actual transactions. The graph’s absolute values indicate that house prices drop in the last
months of the year and during the summer. This strengthens the above discussion regarding the
models’ explanatory powers, where we argue that time FE seem to absorb a major part of the
model.

   5.3 GRAPHICAL ILLUSTRATIONS IN RD SETTING

   5.3.1 SWEDEN/NORWAY
In Figure 6, Panel A, the left-hand side column shows RD graphs illustrating the average house
price index growth and the right-hand column shows new listings per capita. The plots before
the policy represent the average, quarterly growth during 2010 quarter 2 and 3, and the plots
after the policy represent the average, quarterly growth for the quarters following the reform.

The top-left graph indicates continuity since the countries have approximately the same average
house price growth at the threshold. In the bottom-left graph, the distance between the lines has
increased considerably, showing a discontinuity. Thus, there is some evidence that the
implementation of the policy has had negative effects on the Swedish house price growth. Also,
the Swedish growth rate decreases as one goes further away from the border, indicating a
disproportional effect on regions.

The top-right graph shows that Norway had a higher number of new listings per capita before
the policy compared to Sweden. The same holds for the bottom-right graph, where Norway still

                                           16
had a higher number of new listings after the policy. However, the difference between the
countries is larger after the policy. We do not see a clear shift from continuity before to
discontinuity after. Hence, we only find weak indications that the policy would have impacted
supply negatively. The graphs of new listings both before and after the policy illustrate horizontal
trends as one moves further from the border, indicating that there is no evidence that the policy
would affect the housing market disproportionally within a country.

   5.3.2 SWEDEN/DENMARK
The RD design results are presented in Figure 6, Panel B. Graphs are presented on a yearly basis
from 2008 to 2011. In contrast to the Norwegian structure, this set-up allows for a more
thorough comparison over time.

The results regarding both the house price growth and new listings show that the Swedish values
are continually rather stable, whereas the Danish values fluctuate vividly during the period. In the
house price growth column, we see discontinuity at the threshold in all years except for 2010. In
2010, which mainly consists of quarters before the policy implementation, we find continuity.
After the policy was implemented, we once again see discontinuity. We also see that Sweden has
dropped from a positive house price growth to a negative development. However, this is not
convincing enough to allow us to draw any conclusions regarding a possible treatment effect.

The Danish RD results do not illustrate a clear discontinuity effect as a result of the policy
implementation, but rather, there appears to be co-movement between the Danish house price
growth and new listings per capita. The co-movement could be referred back to a standard
supply and demand reasoning of housing; when supply of new listings increases, the house prices
should decrease. When studying the Danish developments in both variables between the years,
one can see that as supply goes down, the house price growth tend to increase, and the opposite
also holds. This is true for all years but 2010. Continuing this reasoning of standard supply and
demand on the Swedish results, we would expect to see a stable price growth in 2008 through
2010 since the supply of new houses on the market is stable. The basic supply-demand
application seems to hold for the years prior to the policy implementation, but for 2011 the
number of new listings on the market decreases slightly, implying that the house price should
increase somewhat. On the contrary, we see a significant drop in Swedish house prices. This is
an indication that market conditions in Sweden after the policy implementation respond in other
ways than expected, while the results for Denmark is in line with expectations. Thus, this could
be a sign that the policy implementation had an effect on Swedish house price growth.

However, to the above, we have to add one remark. We cannot exclude that the change in new
listings originated from the policy implementation. The results clearly show that market factors
do not react in the way they should after the policy was implemented, but whether this behavior
could be assigned to the policy would require an investigation of drivers of supply. This falls
outside the scope of this thesis.

                                           17
   5.3.3 SENSITIVITY TEST OF GRAPHICAL RD DESIGN
                                                                                                                                        18
To explore the robustness of our RD graphs, we have investigated three various bandwidths  .
We have studied the results from one default bandwidth, one half of the default and twice the
default as recommended by Nichols (2007). Since the trends in all graphs coincide, we can
conclude that the default bandwidth give the accurate results. Our graphs also ensure that the
bandwidth satisfies the following condition; the width should be wide enough to minimize noise
while also being narrow enough to ensure that the observations are comparable close enough on
each side of the cut-off point (Lee and Lemieux, (2009)). Further, it would have been possible to
confirm the strength of the chosen width even more if our datasets consisted of a larger number
of data points.

  5.4 DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS
The results presented above indicate some ambiguous findings. The varying levels of significance
of the coefficients as well as the impact from control variables raise some issues, which are
further developed in this section.

Two important aspects regarding the setting come to mind when analyzing our results. Firstly,
our datasets differ in some important aspects. The data covers different time periods, where the
Danish dataset covers a longer period. Hence, we are able to more thoroughly follow the effect
over time and the difference-in-difference estimation may be more valid due to the larger
number of observations. The reason for not covering a longer time period for the Norwegian
dataset is that a comparable mortgage cap was implemented in the first quarter of 2010, and
revised it in the fourth quarter of 2011. Because of the chosen method, our control group needs
to be unaffected by the Swedish treatment and by other exogenous factors during the
investigation’s time period. However, this raises a second critical point, namely that Sweden was
the last country to implement a ceiling on new mortgage undertaken. Hence, the countries do
not differ considerably in legislation, but rather in the timing of the implementation. Thus, no
control group is entirely neutral to a mortgage cap, and especially the Norwegian sample results
could be influenced by the fact that their mortgage cap was introduced in such close connection
to the Swedish counterpart. We have considered other control groups when applying the
difference-in-difference method, but for the RD design implementation we are dependent on the
border proximity as a forcing variable, thus cutting us out of options of other control groups.

When applying a quasi-experiment approach, exogenous factors which are difficult to control for
always exist. Individual characteristics and locations of regions, cities and households of the
treatments or control groups could interact with the treatment effect and give biased results. The
complexity of the housing market makes it difficult to control for all factors that determine the
behavior of the market. Our results give ambiguous answers to what macro variables actually
contribute to the models applied in this thesis. One of the reasons for this could be found by
exploring the differences among the Scandinavian countries. Firstly, Norway is not part of the

18 A bandwidth is a smoothing parameter (the width of a bin) for the regression discontinuity estimator. The optimal
bandwidth depends on unknown functionals of the distribution of the data. (Imbens, G., and Kalyanaraman, K.,
(2010)). The optimal bandwidth is used to minimize mean squared errors (MSE). Often, smaller bandwidths
produce lower bias and higher variance. A larger bandwidth can cause the linear regression to be a less accurate
approximation (Nichols, (2007)).

                                           18
European Union, thus experiencing greater independence. Secondly, the size of the countries,
the demographic settings, and the utilization of natural resources differ a lot and give rise to
different reactions to changes in the surrounding environment. Differences in legislation and
welfare care can for example explain why the unemployment rate is statistically significant and
positive for Norway, while negative and insignificant for Denmark. Thirdly, the financial turmoil
affected house prices in the Scandinavian countries in different ways.

   5.4.1 DISCUSSION SPECIFIC TO THE RD DESIGN
One important feature to discuss regarding the RD results is whether the border classification
can serve as a suitable forcing variable. One benefit with the regional boundaries is that they are
unchanging, meaning that we can follow the effect over time. This does, however, make it
reasonable to question the randomization of the boundaries. It is highly likely that, on an
individual basis, households are not indifferent whether to live in Norway or Sweden. Nor is it
reasonable to think that the national borders have been defined randomly or that it is determined
by chance what side of the border a house ends up on, implying that borders are endogenous.
This limitation regarding the effectiveness of applying an RD design to boundaries has been
discussed in great detail by Black (1999). This is one of the reasons to why we have chosen to
complement our RD design with the difference-in-difference method.

By comparing the development of regions close to the border we would prefer the data points to
share similar characteristics in terms of physical and sociographic attributes. This is, however,
unlikely to be satisfied in our analysis since the regions cover big geographical areas and since
some regions are located far from the border. One of the reasons to why the graphical
illustrations do not show the expected outcome for the Danish sample can be that the regions do
not share the same neighborhood attributes in the sense of socioeconomic, political and
geographical characteristics. Black (1999) argues that it is possible to overestimate the value of a
treatment if one does not control for neighborhood characteristics. A more detailed sample at
zip-code levels would have given us the possibility to more closely control for neighborhood
characteristics, as well as the opportunity to more thoroughly study the development of house
prices as one goes further from the border. Researchers applying the RD design have often
chosen houses that are situated within 0.15-0.35 miles of the threshold (Black, (1999)), which is
far from our chosen border classification. By choosing houses close to the border, one would be
able to eliminate the majority of other variables that could affect house price growth, thus any
discontinuity found could be assigned to which side of the border a house is located on.
However, due to the unavailability of data, we have used house price indices on a regional basis,
and hence we cannot infer that our results depend solely on the policy in itself or other
characteristics of the regions.

It is also important to stress that all things differing between the countries, other than the
treatment effect, could impact the results, why the discussion above regarding the different
macro variables between the groups will also prove to be important in the RD setting.

                                           19
  6 CONCLUSION
This thesis investigates the impact on Swedish house prices by the mortgage cap introduced by
                                   st
FI on October 1 , 2010. Based on our difference-in-difference and RD design analyses, we find
some evidence that the mortgage cap has contributed to the decline in Swedish house prices.
However, the ambiguous results make it difficult to credibly ascribe the detected house price
decline to the policy per se.

Our results are in line with our expectations that Sweden has experienced a larger drop in house
prices after the policy implementation compared to Norway and Denmark. The treatment effects
are similar in the Sweden-Norway and Sweden-Denmark difference-in-difference comparisons.
The coefficients measuring the treatment effect indicate that the policy has had a negative impact
on house price growth and it is statistically significant. The regression results are, however, not
completely robust for additional macroeconomic control variables. The Danish results are the
most successful in verifying our hypothesis since the treatment effect is negative, more
coefficients are significant, the explanatory power is larger and the time horizon of the
comparison is longer.

Since our results show that the policy only had a small effect on house prices, the mortgage cap
may be successful in decreasing the size of household’s mortgage loans while having small spill-
over effect on the housing market. These indications could prove to be valuable for policy
makers’ future interventions on the mortgage market.

We add one valuable dimension to our study by investigating the treatment effect from a RD
design perspective. In the Sweden-Norway comparison, we find a clear discontinuity at the
threshold in house price growth after the policy. Based on the Sweden-Norway investigation, this
is some evidence in line with our hypothesis that Swedish house prices were negatively impacted
by the policy. The discontinuity developments are not as evident in the Sweden-Denmark
comparisons, but there are some indications that the policy could have impacted the Swedish
house market to act differently. Although the graphical results do not present us with strong
evidence that the policy has had an impact, the RD design is a powerful tool for the purpose of
this thesis.

Perhaps the most intuitive explanation of the ambiguous results is that the policy change
                                                                      st
implemented by FI on October 1 , 2010 was not introduced strongly and convincingly enough.
If the policy was not able to convince banks and households that the access to credit had been
restricted, the market would not respond in an efficient way, hence leaving the effect of the
policy out. This is in line with FI’s conclusions about the mortgage cap, as well as
Mäklarstatistik’s report during 2011.

Even though difference-in-difference investigations and RD designs are reputable methods to
analyze policy effects, they may contain weaknesses which can help explain why we cannot
convincingly conclude that the policy contributed to the decline in house prices. The
endogeneity problem of boundaries in a geographical RD design could be overcome by
excluding regions that appear to have borders defined under the influence of for example

                                           20
neighbourhoods or rivers. Further, one needs to ask; what characteristics differ between Sweden,
Norway, and Denmark beside the defined treatment effect? Macro- and microeconomic
differences may vary widely between regions or exogenous factors outside our scope may have
affected our control groups during the investigation’s time horizon.

The somewhat ambivalent results from our different methods open up for further studies to
focus on the effects by leverage-restricting policy implementations on house prices in Sweden.
The housing market is an intricate market wherein different factors interacts and affects the
prices. A key success factor for future analyses would be to carry out the investigation on more
detailed geographical levels, such as zip-codes. This would also provide the advantage of an
increase in the size of the dataset. For example, the real estate price index is only available on
regional data, where a more detailed level would enhance the understanding on the Swedish
housing market. Furthermore, a new register for residential condominiums is under development
and will become a valuable resource in the future in order to follow the development for
individual homes over a longer period.

Future investigations applying a RD design on the Swedish housing market could prove to be
highly successful. Both the Swedish housing market as such, and the effects of policy
implementations, are interesting fields of study and the opportunities to explore the Swedish
housing market in the light of applied RD designs are immense.

                                           21
  7 REFERENCES

Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino, (2012) “Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from
Mortgage Market Segmentation”, working paper, <http://www.nber.org/papers/w17832>

Andrews, D., (2010) “Real House Prices in OECD Countries: The Role of Demand Shocks and
Structural and Policy Factors”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 831, OECD
Publishing. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5km33bqzhbzr-en>

Ashenfelter O., and D. Card, (1985) “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to Estimate the
Effect of Training Programs”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(4) 648-60.

Ashenfelter O., and D. Card, (2011) “Handbook of Labor Economics”, Volume 4A, North Holland.

Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan, (2007) “A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences for
Schools and Neighborhoods”, Journal of Political Economy, 115 (4), 588–638.

Black, S., (1999) “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114 (2), 577–599.

BKN, (2009) “Vad bestämmer priset på bostäder?”, Marknadsrapport, Svensk Bostadskreditnämnd,
October 2009.

BKN, (2011) “Hushållens skuldsättning i spåren av finanskrisen – En internationell jämförelse”,
Marknadsrapport, Svensk Bostadskreditnämnd, February 2011.

DST, (2012a) ”Statistikbanken”, Statistics Denmark,
<http://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=1280>, (2012-05-04).

DST, (2012b) “National accounts, balance of payments and international investment position - Quarterly
national accounts – main accounts - NATK01: Main accounts (DKK mio) by account, seasonal
adjustment and price unit – B.1*g Gross Domestic Product”, Statistics Denmark DST,
<http://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=1280>, (2012-05-04).

Englund, P., (2011) “Swedish house prices in an international perspective”, The Swedish Riksbank’s
inquiry into the risks of the housing market, 2011, Sveriges Riksbank.

Ellis, L., (2008) "The Housing Meltdown: Why Did it Happen in the United States?”, BIS Working
Papers, No. 259, <http://www.bis.org/publ/work259.htm>

Eurostat, (2011), “Introduction - National accounts (including GDP)“, European Commission
<http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/national_accounts/introduction> (2012-05-07).

FI, (2010) “Den svenska bolånemarknaden och bankernas kreditgivning”, Finansinspektionen, 2010-02-
16. < http://www.fi.se/Utredningar/Rapporter/Listan/Den-svenska-bolanemarknaden-och-bankernas-
kreditgivning/>

FI, (2012) “Den svenska bolånemarknaden”, Finansinspektionen, 2012-03-13.
<http://www.fi.se/Utredningar/Rapporter/Listan/Den-svenska-bolanemarknaden/>

Finanstilsynet, (2012) “Finansielt Utsyn 2012”, Report March 2012, 2012-03-07.

                                           22
Finn, (2012), “Nye boliger til salgs”, Finn eiendom,
<http://www.finn.no/finn/realestate/newbuildings/browse1> (2012-04-27).

Geanakoplos, J., (2010), “Solving The Present Crisis and Managing The Leverage Cycle”, FRBNY
Economic Policy Review 16 (1) 101-131.

Glick, R., and J. Lansing, (2010) “Global Household Leverage, House Prices, and Consumption”,
FRBSF Economic Letter, 11/1-2010.
<http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2010/el2010-01.html>

Hahn, J., P. Todd, and W. Van der Klaauw, (2001) “Identification and Estimation of Treatment
Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design”, Econometrica, 69 (1), 201–209.

Hemnet, (2012) ”Antal villor till salu”, hemnet.se, <http://www.hemnet.se/tjanster/statistik>, (2012-
05-04).

Imbens, G., and K. Kalyanaraman, (2010) “Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity
estimator”, working paper, Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
<http://ideas.repec.org/p/ifs/cemmap/05-10.html>

Jansson, P., and M. Persson, (2011) “The Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks in the Swedish housing
market”, Sveriges Riksbank.

Johansson, J., B. Lagerwall, and H. Lundvall, (2011) ”Large Share of Varaible Mortgages – How
Does This Affect The Impact Of Monetary Policy?”, The Swedish Riksbank’s inquiry into the risks of the
housing market, 2011, Sveriges Riksbank.

Karlsson, M., Finansinspektionen (2012-04-26) Interview via e-mail.

Lee, D.S., and T. Lemieux, (2009) “Regression Discontinuity Design in Economics”, Working Paper,
National Bureau of Economic Research. <http://www.nber.org/papers/w14723>

Lilienfeld-Toal, U. von, and D. Mookherjee, (2011) “How did the US Housing Slump Begin? Role of
the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform”, working paper, Stockholm School of Economics.

Mian, A., and A. Sufi, (2009a) “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007 to 2009”, working
paper, University of Chicago.

Mian, A., and A. Sufi, (2009b) “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the
U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449-1496.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F., Trebbi, (2011) “Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy”,
working paper, University of California Berkley.

Mäklarstatistik, (2012) ”Trendbrott under 2011”, 2012-1-17.
<http://www.maklarstatistik.se/pressmeddelande/pm-2012-01-17-trendbrott-under-2011.aspx>

Mäklarstatistik, (2011), "Bolånetaket har inte påverkat bostadspriserna", Mäklarstatistik.se, 2011-09-14.
<http://www.maklarstatistik.se/pressmeddelande/pm-bolaanetak-2011-09-14.aspx>

NB, (2010) “Financial Stability 1/10”, Reports from the Central Bank of Norway No 2/2010, May 2010
< http://www.norges-bank.no/en/about/published/publications/financial-stability-report/110-
financial-stability/>

                                           23
Nichols, A., (2007) ”The Casual Inference with Observational Data”, The STATA Journal, 2007(4) 507-
541.

Realkreditrådet, (2012), Association of Danish Mortgage Banks. <http://www.realkreditraadet.dk>,
(2012-05-04).

Realkreditrådet, (2012) “Datagrundlaget for statistikken”, Association of Danish Mortgage Banks
<http://www.realkreditraadet.dk/Statistikker/Boligmarkedsstatistik/Metode.aspx>, (2012-05-07).

SCB, (2012a) ”Statistikdatabasen”, Statistics Sweden,
<http://www.ssd.scb.se/databaser/makro/start.asp> , (2012-05-04).

SCB, (2012b) ”Nationalräkenskaper, fjärde kvartalet 2011: BNP ökade 1,1 procent”, Statistics Sweden
SCB, <http://www.scb.se/Pages/PressRelease____329870.aspx>, (2012-05-04).

SSB, (2012a) ”04471: Registrerte ledige ved utgangen av måneden, etter kjønn (prosent) (K), Statistics
Norway SSB,
<http://statbank.ssb.no/statistikkbanken/Default_FR.asp?PXSid=0&nvl=true&PLanguage=0&tilside=s
electtable/MenuSelS.asp&SubjectCode=06>, (2012-04-27).

SSB, (2012b), Statistics Norway, < http://www.ssb.no/>, (2012-04-27).

SSB, (2012c) ”09171: Produksjon og inntekt, etter næring. Ujustert og sesongjustert (1978K1-2011K4) -
09.01 Nasjonalregneskap – Tabell: 09171: Produksjon og inntekt, etter næring. Ujustert og sesongjustert”,
Statistics Norway SSB,
<http://statbank.ssb.no/statistikkbanken/Default_FR.asp?Productid=09.01&PXSid=0&nvl=true&PLan
guage=0&tilside=selecttable/MenuSelP.asp&SubjectCode=09>, (2012-04-27).

Swedbank Hypotek, “Historiska räntor”, <http://hypotek.swedbank.se/rantor/historiska-
rantor/index.htm>, (2012-04-27).

Thistlethwaite, D. L., and D. T. Campbell, (1960) “Regression-Discontinuity Analysis: An Alternative
to the Ex-Post Facto Experiment”, Journal of Educational Psychology, 51, 309–317.

Wooldridge, J., (2009) “Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach”, South-Western Cengage
Learning, Ohio.

                                           24
8 APPENDIX

  Figure 1: House Price Index and Household Indebtedness Developments Over Time

    The top graph shows the house price index development for the Scandinavian countries, and the
    bottom graph shows the corresponding development over time in household indebtedness. All
     data has been collected from the national statistics bureaus.

                                       25
         Figure 2: Consumer Price Index in Relation to House Price Index

The figures show the relation between consumer price index and house price index for the three
countries, where the top graph illustrates the long term trend of the two indices. The bottom graph
illustrates the short term trend between 2008 and 2011. Compared to the long term trend, HPI and
CPI are now converging. All data is collected from the national statistics bureaus.

                                     26
                       Figure 3: Maps Presenting the Analyzed Regions

                           Panel A: Sweden / Norway

                          Panel B: Sweden / Denmark

The shaded areas in the two panels illustrate the regions which have been included in our datasets. The two datasets
have different characteristics. For the Norwegian dataset displayed in Panel A, rural regions are used to test whether
the policy have had any effect on house price growth. The Danish dataset instead focus on urban areas, displayed in
Panel B. Observe that the total area of Denmark is 43 094 km2 and the total area of Sweden is 449 964 km2.

                                           27
                Figure 4: Mortgage Interest Rate Development

The graph presents the quarterly developments of the Scandinavian countries’ mortgage interest
rates between 2001 and 2011. The development of the interest mortgage rate depends on the repo-
rate set by the central banks. For Norway, data for mortgage interest rate has been collected from
Statistics Norway with banks as lending institutions, household as sector, and mortgage with
property as collateral as mortgage type. For Denmark, data have been collected on mortgage-credit
institutes on outstanding lending from Statistics Denmark with housing as item and household as
sector. For Sweden, the mortgage interest rate has been calculated as a mortgage basket of data
from Swedbank Hypotek, where the mortgage interest basket consists of equally big parts of the
average 5-year interest rate, 3-year average interest, and 3-months average interest rate. Swedbank
does not explicitly present the ratio for loans with flexible or fixed interest rate. Hence, the
Swedish mortgage interest rate basket has been constructed manually.

                                    28
          Figure 5: Graphical Illustrations of Difference-In-Difference Results

                  Panel A: Sweden/NorwayPanel A: Sweden / Norway
                Panel A: Sweden/Norway

                       Panel B: Sweden / Denmark
              Panel B: Sweden/DenmarkPanel B: Sweden/Denmark

These panels display the graphical illustrations of the applied difference-in-difference method.

                                       29
            Figure 6: Graphical Illustrations of Regression Discontinuity Design Results

                             Panel A: Sweden / Norway

         House Price Index Growth New Listings Per Capita

                                Pre Policy                                                    Pre Policy
                                       (2010Q2-2010Q3)                                                              (2010Q2-2010Q3)

   House Price Index
                                                                                   New Listings Per Capita

                                             Border Classification                                                                        Border Classification

                                         Post Policy                                                                  Post Policy
                                          (2010Q4-2011Q3)                                                                   (2010Q4-2011Q3)

   House Price Index
                                                                                    New Listings Per Capita

    House Price Index                  Border Classification                                                               Border Classification                                  House Price Index

These panels include the graphical results from the RD implementation. Growth in house price index is displayed in the left-hand
column, while the graphs for new listings per capita are presented in the right-hand column. We analyze the impact of the change in
policy by comparing the development over time; each graph presents different time periods. We generate the graphs by implementing
a RD design approach that estimates a kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothing on both sides of the threshold. The border
classification is positive for the Swedish regions and negative for the control groups. The border is defined as 0. Note that the new
listing per capita is displayed in hundredths (1/100). For Panel A, we collapse the mean of the assignment variable before and after
the policy implementation due to a short time-span. Panel B displays the average values during 2008 through 2011 in order to follow
the development over time.

                                            30
         Figure 6: Graphical Illustrations of Regression Discontinuity Design Results

                         Panel B: Sweden / Denmark

      House Price Index Growth New Listings Per Capita

                            2008 2008

 House Price Index
                                                                               New Listings Per Capita

                            Border Classification Border Classification
                              2009 2009

House Price Index
                                                                               New Listings Per Capita

                              Border Classification Border Classification

                              2010 2010

 House Price Index
                                                                               New Listings Per Capita

                                         Border Classification                                                                    Border Classification

                              2011 2011

House Price Index                                                  Listings Per Capita

                                                     New

House Price Index               Border Classification House Price Index          Border Classification                             House Price Index

                                         31
                        Table 1: Mortgage Regulation in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark

                                     Sweden Norway Denmark
                                                                                       *
Mortgage cap (loan-to-value) 85% 90%                     80%
Type of interest (majority) Variable Variable Variable
Withdraw of equity Yes Yes Yes
Tax advantages Yes (33 %) Yes Yes (30%)
Amortization-free loans Allowed, and very common Allowed for a restricted period Allowed, and very common

 *Norway introduced the 90 percent ceiling on the loan-to-value ratio in March, 2010. However, new recommendations which limit the ratio to 85 percent were introduced in
 December 2011. Our sample period only includes the 90 percent mortgage cap.

 This table presents the mortgage regulation situations in Sweden, Norway and Denmark during our sample periods. The time horizons of
 our samples are adjusted to ensure that these levels of mortgage caps are consistent throughout the whole period. The table shows that the
 countries are similar in all mortgage legislative aspects but the level of the mortgage cap, which strengthens the argument that these are
 suitable treatment and control groups.

                                                    32
                        Table 2: Region List and Border Classification

                          Panel A: Sweden / Norway

          SWEDEN                         NORWAY

Region Border classification Region Border classification
Västra Götaland 1 Ostfold -1
Värmland 1 Akershus -1
Västmanland 1 Hedmark -1
Dalarna 1 Sor-Trondelag -1
Jämtland 1 Nord-Trondelag -1
Västerbotten 1 Nordland -1
Norrbotten 1 Troms -1
Örebro län 2 Oppland -2
Västernorrland 2 Lillehammer -2
Östergötland 3 Buskerud -2
Gävleborg 3 Vestfold -2
                                               Telemark -3
                                               Hordaland -3
                                               Sogn -3
                                               Romsdal -3
                                               Trondheim -3
               11 regions 16 regions

                         Panel B: Sweden / Denmark

           SWEDEN DENMARK

Region Border classification Region Border classification
Blenkinge 1 København by -1
Skåne 1 Københavns omegn -1
Jönköping 2 Nordsjælland -1
Kronoberg 2 Bornholm -1
Kalmar 2 Østsjælland -1
Halland 2 Vest- og Sydsjælland -2
Östergötland 3 Fyn -2
Gotland 3 Østjylland -2
Västra Götaland 3 Sydjylland -3
                                                  Vestjylland -3
                                                 Nordjylland -3
                9 regions 11 regions

This table presents a list of the analyzed geographical regions and each region’s appointed border classification
value. Swedish regions (treatment group) are appointed positive values between 1 and 3 depending on their
geographical location. Regions along the border have a value of 1. Regions one step further into the country
have a value of 2. Regions furthest from the border are appointed a value of 3. The Norwegian and Danish
regions (control groups) are appointed values according to the same methodology, but are given negative
values.

                                         33
                                                       Table 3: Summary Statistics

                                             Panel A: Sweden / Norway

                                        All Pre policy Post policy

Sweden Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max
House price index growth 0.0062 0.0157 -0.0217 0.0428 0.0099 0.0181 -0.0205 0.0428 0.0043 0.0142 -0.0217 0.0297
New listing (#) 774 816 108 4487 806 803 149 3694 758 831 108 4487
New listing per capita 0.0020 0.0007 0.0009 0.0037 0.0021 0.0005 0.0012 0.0032 0.0020 0.0008 0.0009 0.0037
Mortgage interest rate 0.0374 0.0068 0.0280 0.0452 0.0290 0.0010 0.0280 0.0299 0.0417 0.0038 0.0354 0.0452
GDP growth 0.0128 0.0058 0.0040 0.0200 0.0165 0.0036 0.0130 0.0200 0.0110 0.0059 0.0040 0.0200
Unemployment rate 0.0867 0.0145 0.0510 0.1310 0.0951 0.0156 0.0730 0.1310 0.0825 0.0121 0.0510 0.1090
Population (#) 386,166 386,697 126,259 1,589,016 385,598 391,338 126,584 1,578,516 386,450 388,906 126,259 1,589,016
Year/quarter 2011/1 n/a 2010/2 2011/3 2010/3 n/a 2010/2 2010/3 2011/2 n/a 2010/4 2011/3
Observations 66 22 44

Norway Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max
House price index growth 0.0163 0.0263 -0.0280 0.0670 0.0097 0.0248 -0.0201 0.0533 0.0196 0.0266 -0.0280 0.0670
New listing (#) 1281 1306 96 8325 1234 891 145 4120 1304 1476 96 8325
New listing per capita 0.0050 0.0023 0.0012 0.0153 0.0051 0.0017 0.0016 0.0094 0.0049 0.0025 0.0012 0.0153
Mortgage interest rate 0.0410 0.0007 0.0404 0.0424 0.0409 0.0004 0.0405 0.0412 0.0410 0.0008 0.0404 0.0424
GDP growth 0.0033 0.0161 -0.0250 0.0280 -0.0105 0.0147 -0.0250 0.0040 0.0103 0.0118 -0.0040 0.0280
Unemployment rate 0.0270 0.0041 0.0190 0.0380 0.0276 0.0036 0.0220 0.0350 0.0267 0.0043 0.0190 0.0380
Population (#) 231,817 125,348 26,381 545,653 230,561 125,521 26,381 536,499 232,445 126,250 26,381 545,653
Year/quarter 2011/1 n/a 2010/2 2011/3 2010/3 n/a 2010/2 2010/3 2011/2 n/a 2010/4 2011/3
Observations 96 32 64

 These tables present summary statistics for our two datasets, stating mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum values. Each panel presents each country’s statistics for three
 groups; the full sample as well as two groups sorted by the observations before and after the policy implementation on October 1st, 2010. All data is collected on a quarterly basis. The
 number of observations in each sample is indicated.
 House price index growth is the house price development per region including one-family homes, excluding condominiums. It is collected from Statistics Sweden (SCB), Statistics
 Norway (SSB), and Statistics Denmark (DST). The number of new listings per region is divided by population per region to calculate new listings per capita. New listings are collected
 from hemnet.se, finn.se, and realkreditraadet.dk. The population per region is collected from SCB, SSB, and DST. All regions of a country are appointed the same, national mortgage
 interest rate, collected from Swedbank Hypotek, SSB and DST. All regions in each country are appointed the same GDP growth, collected from SCB, SSB and DST. The
 unemployment rate is collected on a regional basis from SCB, SSB and DST. The Swedish unemployment rates are conducted according the EU-standard Labor Force Survey (LFS) and
 all countries’ GDP rates according to the EU-standard National Accounts. Each sample’s time period is presented in year/quarter format. The mean of the time period is rounded
 upward when two quarters represent the median. Standard deviation is redundant for the time variable.

                                                              34
                                                       Table 3: Summary Statistics

                                           Panel B: Sweden / Denmark

                                        All Pre policy Post policy

Sweden Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max
House price index growth 0.0064 0.0232 -0.0422 0.0554 0.0115 0.0235 -0.0375 0.0554 -0.0071 0.0162 -0.0422 0.0258
New listing (#) 1024 1083 53 4781 1002 1037 73 3832 1073 1189 53 4781
New listing per capita 0.0021 0.0007 0.0009 0.0044 0.0021 0.0006 0.0013 0.0034 0.0022 0.0009 0.0009 0.0044
Mortgage interest rate 0.0413 0.0107 0.0276 0.0605 0.0409 0.0125 0.0276 0.0605 0.0421 0.0035 0.0354 0.0452
GDP growth 0.0025 0.0156 -0.0390 0.0230 0.0009 0.0170 -0.0390 0.0230 0.0066 0.0103 -0.0110 0.0200
Unemployment rate 0.0724 0.0182 0.0360 0.1310 0.0719 0.0198 0.0360 0.1310 0.0737 0.0132 0.0390 0.1040
Population (#) 497,608 499,447 56,955 1,590,604 495,427 497,228 56,955 1,578,516 503,281 510,785 57,203 1,590,604
Year/quarter 2009/4 n/a 2007/3 2011/4 2009/1 n/a 2007/3 2010/3 2011/2 n/a 2010/4 2011/4
Observations 162 117 45

Denmark Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max Mean SD Min Max
House price index growth -0.0125 0.0332 -0.1384 0.0765 -0.0105 0.0338 -0.1111 0.0747 -0.0176 0.0312 -0.1384 0.0765
New listing (#) 1544 1080 49 4957 1590 1092 49 4574 1416 1045 97 4957
New listing per capita 0.0033 0.0020 -0.0001 0.0113 0.0034 0.0020 -0.0001 0.0096 0.0031 0.0020 0.0004 0.0113
Mortgage interest rate 0.0527 0.0084 0.0398 0.0679 0.0558 0.0077 0.0410 0.0679 0.0447 0.0037 0.0398 0.0503
GDP growth 0.0039 0.0158 -0.0310 0.0220 0.0049 0.0182 -0.0310 0.0220 0.0014 0.0053 -0.0050 0.0080
Unemployment rate 0.0488 0.0192 0.0153 0.1053 0.0440 0.0189 0.0153 0.1053 0.0624 0.0122 0.0430 0.1023
Population (#) 502,335 210,616 41,406 839,710 500,887 209,611 41,949 833,122 506,390 215,301 41,406 839,710
Year/quarter 2009/4 n/a 2007/3 2011/4 2009/1 n/a 2007/3 2010/3 2011/2 n/a 2010/4 2011/4
Observations 198 143 55

                                                             35
       Table 4: Regression Results: Policy Effect on House Price Growth

                     Panel A: Sweden / Norway

                         (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
                     growth growth growth growth growth growth
Swe 0.0002 0.0002 -0.0422** -0.0309
                         (0.97) (0.96) (0.00) (0.33)
Policy 0.0099 0.0156*** 0.0087 0.0064 0.0087 0.0083
                         (0.07) (0.00) (0.21) (0.65) (0.07) (0.55)
SwePolicy -0.0155* -0.0156** 0.0095 0.0321 0.0116 0.0262
                         (0.03) (0.01) (0.31) (0.24) (0.33) (0.20)
Unemployment rate 0.3274* -0.2631 0.4596* -0.3707
                                              (0.03) (0.15) (0.05) (0.10)
GDPgrowth 0.0861 0.4098 0.0911 0.3354
                                              (0.69) (0.34) (0.72) (0.46)
Mortgage interest rate -1.5102* -3.1829* -1.5381 -2.9718*
                                              (0.01) (0.01) (0.07) (0.01)
Constant 0.0097* -0.0068* 0.0633* 0.1396* 0.0398 0.1240*
                         (0.03) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.16) (0.01)
FE no no no no region region
Time FE no quarter no quarter no quarter
  2
R                     0.077 0.372 0.113 0.417 0.079 0.403
N 162 162 162 162 162 162
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001, meaning coefficient statistically different from zero at the 5%,
1% and 0.1% confidence level, respectively.

These tables present coefficient estimates for six specifications of regressions on growth in house
price index. P-value in parentheses. Inclusion of unit fixed effects and/or time fixed effects are
indicated for each regression. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and clustered at region
level. The regression specification of column (1) and (2) is y = β0+δ1Policy + δ2Swe +
δ3SwePolicy + ε. Column (3) through (6) includes additional control variables. The regression
specification follows: y = β0+δ1Policy + δ2Swe + δ3SwePolicy + unemployment rate + GDP
growth + mortgage interest rate + ε. Policy is a time dummy which equals one before the policy
and zero otherwise. Swe is a dummy which equals one if the index corresponds to Sweden before
the policy and zero otherwise. SwePolicy is an interaction term which equals one if the index
corresponds to Sweden after the policy. The SwePolicy coefficient represents the difference-in-
difference estimator and measures the policy’s total effect on Sweden. Swe is dropped due to
collinearity whenever unit fixed effects are controlled for.

                            36
       Table 4: Regression Results: Policy Effect on House Price Growth

                    Panel B: Sweden / Denmark

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
                     growth growth growth growth growth growth
Swe 0.0220*** 0.0220*** 0.0193*** 0.0186**
                         (0.00) (0.00) (0.00) (0.01)
Policy -0.0071 -0.0098 -0.0084 -0.0152 -0.0090** -0.0353**
                         (0.16) (0.16) (0.12) (0.19) (0.00) (0.00)
SwePolicy -0.0116 -0.0116* -0.0146* -0.0087 -0.0144*** -0.0084
                         (0.06) (0.02) (0.02) (0.27) (0.00) (0.28)
Unemployment rate 0.0934 -0.0116 0.2168 0.0088
                                              (0.44) (0.92) (0.09) (0.96)
GDPgrowth 0.7899*** 0.0148 0.7959*** 0.0134
                                              (0.00) (0.94) (0.00) (0.95)
Mortgage Interest rate -0.2191 -0.2611 -0.0673 -0.2545
                                              (0.30) (0.51) (0.58) (0.43)
Constant -0.0105*** 0.0061 -0.0063 0.0227 -0.0121 0.0128
                         (0.00) (0.07) (0.70) (0.41) (0.28) (0.51)
FE no no no no region region
Time FE no quarter no quarter no quarter
  2
R                     0.134 0.568 0.333 0.569 0.272 0.533
N 360 360 360 360 360 360
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001, meaning coefficient statistically different from zero at the 5%,
1% and 0.1% confidence level, respectively.

                            37