                      Age is just a number, isn’t it?
        - A study on the influences of executive age on corporate policy, the
                 selection of CEOs and CEO employee tenure

                         Cecilia Kores* and Fredrik Paulsson**

                                 21 May 2012

                              Bachelor’s Thesis in Finance
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                                      Abstract
Sometimes people can be heard saying that 'age is just a number', however common sense tells us that
several things change with age. Some of the things that come with age are clearly visible and relates to our
physical development, but perhaps more importantly, age may bring characteristics that possibly affect
individual’s actions and decision making. In this study, we investigate, on a large sample of Swedish firms,
the potential influences of executive age (CEO age and board member age) on corporate policy, the
selection of CEOs and CEO employee tenure. We find partial evidence for conservatism from old CEOs
when examining firm leverage levels, i.e. that older CEOs run their firms with less leverage, however our
results are not clear cut. When examining the relationship between return on operating assets (OROA)
and CEO age, our results suggests that OROA is decreasing with CEO age. In the selection of new
CEOs, our results suggest a positive correlation between average age of the board and the age of the new
CEO, however it’s not statistically significant. When examining the relationship between CEO tenure and
CEO age, we are unable to draw any stable conclusions as our results are not one-directional.

*21543@student.hhs.se **21622@student.hhs.se
1. Introduction

Sometimes people can be heard saying that 'age is just a number'. Of course, the phrase is what
one can perhaps call a cliché. Thinking about the expression strictly technically and formally one
realizes that it’s probably not true (at least not in its entirely). Reversely, common sense tells us
that aging probably has many effects on us as human beings. Some of the things that come with
age are clearly visible and relates to our physical development. From experience we recognize
that aging usually brings gray hair and wrinkles. Apart from the pure observable signs relating to
looks, aging may have many others, in our case more relevant possessions that possibly impact
the way we act, think and take decisions.

For the sake of behavior and decision making, we recognize that what’s relevant is not age in
itself, but rather the effects of aging or the personal characteristics attributed with aging. Thus,
what’s interesting to us is whether there exist any systematic effects attributed with age that tend
to get individuals to act in a specific way in a given situation.

Interpretations from past research suggest that multiple age related characteristics may be
relevant for human behavior. Age can act as a proxy for experience (Yim (2010)) but potentially
also for other personnel characteristics such as risk aversion (MacCrimmon and Wehrung
(1990)), incentives structure (Jensen and Meckling (1979)) and confidence levels (Malmendier
and Tate (2008)).

In this piece, we study age as a managerial characteristic, and focus on the age of CEOs and
board of director’s and its potential influences on firm policy, CEO recruitment and CEO
employee tenure. We empirically examine, on a large sample of Swedish firms, three separate
questions, all of them related to executive (CEO and board) age.

First, we look into whether the age of CEOs affect the way their firm chooses to operate in
terms of corporate policy. Certainly, companies can be run in many different ways, both
financially and operationally. There are several features from where firms can differ, but to
mention some; firms can choose to have different level of leverage, dispense an unlike share of
firm equity to its share holders and have different investment intensity. We recognize that
companies demonstrate having dissimilar characteristics and that this should come naturally as
many of the decisions facing companies are free for themselves to decide (of course within some

                                                                                1
defined frames). The freedom in terms of decision making provides with a sovereignty to follow
a proprietary approach and implement strategies that are somewhat unique in its flavor. When
examining CEO age and corporate policy, we look at the CEO’s age and compare it to the
characteristics of the firm that the CEO works on. We find partial evidence for that older CEOs
(above mean age) run their firms with less leverage. However, the coefficient of the linear CEO
age variable is positive, suggesting that leverage, in contrary, increases with age, although the
coefficient is not significant. Hence, our results are not clear cut. When examining the
relationship between return on operating assets (OROA) and CEO age, our results suggest that
OROA is decreasing with CEO age. However, as the relevance of OROA as a key performance
indicator differs across industries, we must be careful when interpreting this result.

Secondly, we investigate if the average age of board members affects the selection of new CEOs
in terms of their age. A company´s board of directors is responsible for the selection of the
firm’s main principal, the CEO (Boggs and Magnusson (2006)). Thus, the board should have the
power to, based on their own preferences, choose the CEO that they find most suitable for the
job. Hence, when studying how CEOs are selected and what types of CEOs that are picked to
the job, it’s reasonable to devote much of one’s interest towards the board and the board
members characteristics. We do this by identifying individuals taking on new jobs as CEOs,
together with their age at start, while simultaneously observing the average board age that same
year. Hence, we are able to empirically examine the relationship between the average board age
and the age of the new CEO. We find indication of that there exists a correlation between board
average age and the age of the newly appointed CEO. However, we are cautious about the
conclusions on this as our results are statistically insignificant.

Thirdly, we examine the relationship between CEO age and tenure, i.e. the length of service as
CEO. When examining the relationship between CEO tenure and age, we find no consistent
results, and hence we are unable to draw any stable conclusions. We recognize that our sample
only stretches between 1997 and 2008, hence we are unable to take into account the tenure of
CEOs that stayed at their firms beyond that point. Thus, some of the most engaged CEOs
(longest tenure) are not included in our sample making the interpretation of our results
somewhat restricted.

                                                                                2
2. Theoretical and empirical background

2.1. Age as a proxy for personal characteristics
Yim (2010) suggests, among others, age as a proxy for experience. Per definition, experience (in
all of its forms) should be a function of age, and hence it’s reasonable to believe that age is
related to experience. Experience in terms of number of year previously at a job may contain
important information on how much knowledge and skills an individual has acquired throughout
his career. Accordingly, Joos, Leone and Zimmerman (2003) see experience as an indication of
“management skills” (among others).

Li, Low, and Makhija (2011) highlights age and its relevance for career concerns. Career
concerns demonstrate employees concerns about how their abilities and competences are viewed
by others, and in turn what implication that may have for future attractiveness on the job market.
They study this on a sample of CEOs and find that younger ones invest “bolder […] to signal
confidence and superior abilities”, and based on their empirical examination they conclude that
career concerns is indeed relevant for determining behavior. Some other research on this matter
(see e.g. Gibbons and Murphy (1992)) appears to harmonize with the above arguments. Of
course, it could be the other way around, i.e. that career concerns instead make individuals want
to take on less risk to not danger their jobs. This has been documented by Chevalier and Ellison
(1999) although not on corporate executives but on fund managers. Derived theoretical
framework argues for this to be the case as well (see e.g. Holmstrom and Ricart i Costa (1986)).

Some research indicates that age should be related to risk aversion. For example, MacCrimmon
and Wehrung (1990) studied over 500 executives and found that the “the most mature
executives were the most risk averse”. However, matureness was based not only on age but also
on other factors which makes us interpret their results with caution. Eaton and Rosen (1983),
when studying compensation of executives, argues that older executives should be expected to
more intensively shy away from risk compared to younger ones. This can for example, according
to them, be reflected in how older manager’s percept receiving stock options as compensation
compared to other alternatives (as stock options is viewed as more risky).

Risk aversion may be related to the incentives provided by the time horizon possessed by
executives, and executives’ time horizon may be interconnected to executives’ age. Jensen and
Smith (1985), as cited in Antia, Pantzalis and Park (2010), highlight the inconsistency between

                                                                                3
executives’ time horizon and the time horizon companies and its shareholders. They assert
executives’ time horizon as “limited” whilst they describe the corporations’ time horizon as
“indefinite”. The time inconsistency could lead to executives trying to maximize the cash flows
that occur within their tenure at the company, hence not caring to much about cash flows
transpiring beyond their tenure. This behavior could lead to executives avoiding investing in
projects that are net present value positive but with cash flows taking place (too) faraway into the
future (Jensen and Meckling (1979)).

Hambrick and Fukutomi (1991) argues, using a theoretical model, that CEOs behave differently
depending on how long they have stayed at the same firm. In the last phases of employment,
they see CEOs becoming less active and less inclined to act on changes in the business
environment. Other research appears to confirm the above arguments (see e.g. Hambrick,
Geletkanycz and Fredrickson (1993) and Baeten, Barker, and Musteen (2006)). As age and tenure
are measured in the same unit, i.e. time, the two should be interrelated. Of course, an old CEO
may take on a job as CEO in another company, and hence his age might not be of relevance for
anticipating his tenure. Potentially related to this, Davidson and Wang (2009) see younger
individuals as more “energetic”, and Yim (2010) mentions age as representative for “energy
levels”. Possibly, older CEOs may tend to become tired, affecting their ambition which may
contribute to a less active way of running their firms.

Malmendier and Tate (2008) studied the subject of overconfident CEOs, where overconfidence
is defined as the tendency to overstate one’s own ability and act thereafter. However, it’s not
apparent if overconfidence varies with age, and in the case it does, how the two are related (Yim
(2010)). Although, there are some researchers that appears to perceive age and overconfidence
being inversely related (see e.g. Taylor (1975) and Forbes (2005)).

Several of the above studies have been conducted on CEOs or other high executives, although
we believe that the age-related characteristics acknowledged may also apply to board members.
Based on the presented previous research, we argue for age as a proxy for several attributes, all
of which may be relevant for decision making. We recognize that the above mentioned age-
related characteristics may be interconnected. Also, in line with Yim (2010) we are unable to
identify what of the above factors that matters the most. Certainly, it could be a combination of
some of the above mentioned factors as well as others not brought up here.

                                                                                4
2.2. The relevance of age in the selection of CEOs
Davidson, Nemec and Worrell (2006) argue that “boards will hire CEOs with similar
characteristics as the board”. Their thoughts about CEO selection are based on the so called
similarity–attraction theory (e.g. Schneider (1987) and O’Reilly and Tsui (1989)), which sees
organizations tending to converge towards homogeneity, as individuals chooses to join
organizations that represent values shared by themselves, as well as that organizations select
individuals whose beliefs goes in line with the organizations’.

Research by Westphal and Zajac (1995) supports the theory of similarity–attraction, as they find
that CEOs prefer board members with similar characteristics as themselves. Moreover, Westphal
and Zajac (1996) found that “more powerful boards are more likely to change CEO
characteristics in the direction of their own demographic profile”. They argue that demographic
differences between the board (including the retiring CEO) and the CEO candidate may
generate a “perception” of contrary values and beliefs. Hence, according to them, while the
board together with the retiring CEO actually might share the same attitudes and beliefs as the
potential new CEO, the fact that they are demographically different may overshadow this.

Possibly, in recruitment process, the initial sorting of candidates may to some extent be
conducted based upon demographic information. Also, in the procedure of choosing a CEO, it
might be hard to develop an in depth, detailed and completely accurate image of the CEO
candidates’ true behavioral characteristics. Hence, the individuals involved in picking the new
CEO (e.g. the board) might partially lean against the candidates demographic characteristics. Of
course, the above reasoning should be less relevant in the consideration of internal CEO
candidates. Also, not every CEO selection process involves picking CEOs from a pool of
candidates (Boggs and Magnusson (2006)). Irrespective, we see age as an important demographic
characteristic, and as such, age might be important to the board in the perception of CEO
candidates as similar to themselves.

Joos, Leone and Zimmerman (2003) hypothesize that “boards match the incoming CEO’s risk
tolerance to the firm’s risk profile”. If it’s the case that organizations tend to become similar and
homogenous in profile, as it’s the people within the organization that shape it (e.g. Schneider
(1987) and O’Reilly and Tsui (1989)), then it should follow that the style, strategy and profile of
the company should be similar to its employees (including the board). As such, the hypotheses

                                                                                5
set out by Joos, Leone and Zimmerman (2003) appears to be in line with the similarity–attraction
theory.

Davidson, Nemec and Worrell (2006) identify, in the process of hiring CEOs, age as “an
important criterion in the board’s decision” and furthermore hypothesize that “boards will want
to hire CEOs that are similar in age to that of their own”. They base their view on the similarity–
attraction theory and argue for age as representative of mutuality. In their empirical examination,
they also find a strong relationship between the age of new CEOs and the age of the board.

As presented by us, previous research shows that several attributes can be related to aging, and
hence, age might indeed be a good proxy for several personal characteristics. For example, age is
an indication of experience but possible also of other factors such as confidence intensity, energy
levels, risk aversion etc. Thus, age can act as a proxy for the degree to which people are similar to
each other, and hence, age might be an important factor for explaining why corporate boards
select CEOs the way they do.

For example, based on the similarity–attraction theory, a risk averse company board might be
inclined towards selecting a CEO that are risk averse (or at least they percept as being risk
averse). If age indeed is a good proxy for risk aversion, then the average age of the board would
tend to be similar to the age of the newly selected CEO. Analogically, this reasoning applies to
the other relevant age related characteristics.

2.3. Managerial characteristics influences on corporate policy and the effect of executive
age on firm behavior
Academia has in the past several times studied firm behavior and the choice of corporate policy
but has until recent years usually not been taking into account the potentially influences of
managerial characteristics (Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). Using different model set-ups,
researches have tried to understand and explain why firms behave the way they do, but as
Bertrand and Schoar (2003) points out tended to be unable to fully explain firm behavior and its
attributed firm characteristics. As an example they bring up studies made on the determinants of
capital structure (Bradley, Jarrell and Kim (1984), Titman and Wessels (1988) and Smith and
Watts (1992) as cited in Bertrand and Schoar (2003)). In their paper, they conclude that such
research, when controlling for company attributes and industry belongings, has been incapable
of entirely explaining firm characteristics.

                                                                                6
Furthermore, they note that researchers in the past often have omitted controlling for firm
managerial characteristics in their models. Based on their recognition of this, they examine
whether the characteristics or attributes of top managers have any significant explanatory power
in terms of explaining firm behavior, such as the choice of capital structure and investment
intensity. On a panel of some of the largest US companies, including 600 firms and 500
principals (both CEOs and other top-executives), they build a dataset where executives are
coupled with the firms they are employed at. To be able to judge whether there exist any fixed
effect related to top executive’s attributes they thin their sample down to the group of companies
where at least one member of top-management can be witnessed taking on a principal role in
another company in another period of time.

Hence, they are able to, across time, follow managers that have been in leading positions in at
least two firms. When incorporating top executives fixed effects into their models trying to
explain firm characteristics, while also controlling for other relevant factors, they find that, on

                                          2
average, it increases the adjusted R  by more than four percentage points. From this they
conclude that, in contrary to some viewing managers as a homogenous group taking similar
decisions in a given situation, based on their findings, corporate behavior seems to vary with the
managers that are running the firms.

Barker and Muller (2002) studied the interaction between CEO attributes and firms investment
in R&D. They find that relatively younger CEOs, while also controlling for other factors such as
how intensively the CEO is invested in its own company and past experience, are inclined to
spend more on R&D than the older ones. In relation to the above, Dechow and Sloan (1991)
find that CEOs, when close to leaving the job, invests less in R&D. We are aware of that tenure
may be interconnected with age, but that the relationship probably not is perfect as CEOs can
leave their job and join other companies. Hence, Dechow and Sloans (1991) study might not be
directly transferable to reflect the impact of age.

Based on our literature screening, we recognize that the studies on the interaction between CEO
age and firm policy are somewhat limited in number. However, the studies made indicate that
age indeed could matter for the sake of corporate policy.

                                                                                7
3. Data

The data used in our study consists of several different data sets from the same source; PAR AB.
Each data set contains information on all limited companies (public and private) in Sweden
during the years 1997-2008, including financial statements, legal data and data on board members
and CEOs.

3.1 Board and CEO data
The board file included in the dataset provides us with information (as reported to Bolagsverket)
on board members and CEOs in all Swedish limited companies, including board function, start
date and end date of their position, personal identity number, and the corresponding corporate
identity number of the company. In this paper, we perform our analysis on companies having
hired at least one CEO during the years between 1997-2008.

3.2 Accounting data
The data set contains income statement and balance sheet for each of the fiscal years between
1997-2008, in accordance with the Annual Accounts Act (ÅRL 97). In addition, some key ratios
such as debt-equity ratio and change in sales are included in the file.

3.3 Legal information and industry classification
The legal information and industry classification codes are delivered in several different data files
and includes corporate identity number, company registration- and deregistration date, industry
classification according to the Standard Industrial Classification (SNI) and status regarding
business activity. The largest file, stretching over the time interval 1997-2008, consists of
company legal information as it was registered to Bolagsverket the first time for each of the
companies. If any of this information has changed since the first registration date, all new
information is included in a separate file. There is one separate file for each of the years 1997-
2008, containing such changes. For example, if a company has changed industry classification
since its first registration, the new SNI code is not noted in the original (largest) file. Instead, the
new SNI can be found in the updated file for that specific year.

                                                                                8
4. Methodology

In order to create a complete data set containing all relevant information needed to pursue our
study, we have merged all data sets into one large file using corporate identity number as the
identification variable. For this purpose, and for the further data treatment and statistical
analysis, we have used the statistical software package Stata. Upon request, any interested party
may use the script to replicate our study.

4.1 Merging the data sets
By merging the board and CEO data with the legal information, we are able to construct a
manager-firm matched panel data set based on corporate identity number for the years 1997-
2008, containing information including board functions, industry classification, start date and
end dates for all board members and CEOs, together with their social security number. We base
our industry classification on the SNI code specifications from 2002, as this proved to be the
most complete data set (there were SNI codes reported according to both the 1997 and 2007
specifications, as well). Naturally, we end up with an unbalanced panel as some of the firms have
been active during all 12 years and some only a few. We try to keep the file as “clean” as
possible, and did not restrict our sample to fulfill certain criteria. That is, we did not engage in
any major dropping activities at this stage. The last step was to add to this the financial
statements for all CEO years in each of the companies. Merging the manager-firm panel data set
with the accounting data file based on corporate identity number, we receive a complete data set
containing all information needed to analyze the impact of CEO age and board average age on
decisions that might impact the performance as well as the corporate policies of a firms.

4.2 Processing the data
As stated above, our aim has been to keep the data files as unchanged as possible. However
some manipulation has been needed, and below we describe what steps we have taken.

4.2.1 Member of the board and CEO
We defined a CEO as a person being registered as “CEO” during one or several years in a
company. A CEO who is also reported as member of the board, either as a board member or
chairman, is excluded from the board when creating the variable on average board age.
Following this activity, one should be aware of that those firms where the CEO is the only
member of the board are dropped automatically, as their board size will be zero after excluding

                                                                                9
the CEO. Due to our regression set up we cannot handle observations with duplicates of CEO
years. If more than one person (identified by social security number) was registered as CEO of a
company during the same year, we kept the one with the longest tenure.

Some CEOs have several start dates while in the same company. Off course, this may be no
strange as a CEO can quit his job at one firm, to return to that same firm in a later time period.
However, we identify situations where the two start dates, at the same firm, are very close to
each other in terms of time. This is the case if, for example, a CEO is reported as new chairman.
Then, the CEO will be registered as having quit the CEO position at day t, and from day t+1 the
individual is registered as having started a new position as CEO (while also chairman). For these
cases, we have ignored the new CEO registration date and used the first CEO start date for all
years until the day the CEO quits her position. This makes sense when calculating CEO tenure,
for example. We performed our analysis only on CEOs who stayed as CEO for at least three
years. This is in order to be sure that the CEO made a significant impact on the company.

4.2.2. Industry classification
For some industries, board decision power as well as company financial statements appear less
relevant due to regulations, large balance sheets etc. For this reason, we decided to exclude the
following industries from our study: financials, real estate, culture, non-profit/associations,
utilities, health care, government, embassies and national defense. As the sample with companies
having an SNI according to the 2002 standard was the most complete, we chose to use this
classification. Due to potential omitting variable biases in our further regressions all companies
not having an SNI from 2002 were dropped (7 985 observations).

Some companies had changed industry classification (SNI) since the first registration date. Since
it could be problematic to use different industry specifications for the same company for
different years, we decided to keep the oldest known specification for all years, as this proved to
be the most complete data set. For example, a company reporting a complete set of legal data to
Bolagsverket (when first registered 1999-01-01) might have changed industry classification in
2005. Thus, the company would be found in the update file from 2005, however we would still
use the industry classification from 1999 for all years studied.

                                                                              10
4.2.3 Missing variables
Due to the extensiveness of the data (all limited companies in Sweden 1997-2008, regardless of
size or life length), many observations has at least one missing variable. We try to keep the data
as clean and unbiased as possible, and thus we do not drop observations just because a variable
is missing. However, this “non-dropping” activity should be kept in mind when analyzing the
results, as the observations with missing variables are not included in the regressions using that
specific variable. If CEO start date is missing, we have made an exception to this rule, due to
non-usability in our regressions, these observations are dropped from the study. For example, if
CEO start date is missing, we are unable to calculate CEO tenure and CEO age at start.

4.3 Statistical methods
When examining the affect of executive age, we us robust firm fixed effects regressions. When
analyzing the cross-sectional effect of CEO age on corporate policy, as described in equation [1],
we regress either firm leverage or firm profitability on CEO age and CEO age squared, while
also controlling for other factors (some also related to age). Firm leverage is defined as total
liabilities divided by total assets and the profitability measure we use is operating return on assets
(OROA), defined as EBIT/Total Assetsn-1.

y = β + β CEOage + β CEOage2 + control variables + time dummies + u [1]
 it     0     1              2

In the case of the potential effect of board age on the selection of new CEOs in terms of their
age, we employ the model described in equation [2]. We use CEO age at start as dependent
variable and include the mean age of the board (in vanilla form as well as squared) as explanatory
variable together with a set of other controls.

y = β + β boardage + β boardage2 + control variables + time dummies + u [2]
 it     0     1               2

Furthermore, when examining the relationship between CEO tenure and CEO age, we apply a
similar approach (as described in equation [3]). As dependent variable, we use the tenure of the
CEO, and as independent variables we use the CEOs age at start of the employment (in vanilla
form as well as squared).

y = β + β CEOagestart + β CEOagestart2 + control variables + time dummies + u [3]
 it     0     1                   2

                                                                              11
As control variables for each of the regressions, we include assets and/or sales (expressed in logs)
to take account of firm size. Among others, we also control for whether the CEO is male or
female (see below for definition of other control variables).

4.4 Definition of regression variables

Dependent variables

Firm leverage
Defined as total liabilities divided by total assets.

Operating return on assets (OROA)
Defined as EBIT divided by total assetsn-1

CEO age at start
Defined as the start year of the CEOs employment as CEO minus the birth year of the CEO.

CEO tenure in years
Defined as the total number of years the CEO holds the position as CEO within the same
company. If the CEO is still CEO at the end of 2008, this variable is denoted as missing.

Main independent variables

CEO age
Defined as current financial year minus the birthyear of the CEO.

Average age of the board
Defined as the average board member age during the CEO start year, calculated as financial year
minus the birth year of the respective board members

CEO age at start
See definition above.

Other independent variables

Firm leverage the previous year
Defined as total liabilitiesn-1 divided by total assetsn-1

OROA the previous year
Defined as EBITn-1 divided by total assetsn-2

CEO younger than the average CEO
A dummy variable denoting if the CEOs current age is below the sample mean age (takes on a
value of 1 if the CEO is younger than the average and 0 if older than average)

Female
A dummy variable denoting if the CEO is female or male (takes on a value of 1 if female and 0 if
male)

                                                                              12
CEO younger than average while also female
An interaction dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the CEO is younger than the sample
average while also female (if not, the variable takes on a value of 0)

Sales of company
Sales of a company (expressed in log)

Assets of company
Total assets of a company (expressed in log)

Average tenure of the board
Defined as the average tenure of the board and calculated on the board as defined in the variable
Average age of the board

Age of prior CEO
The age of the previous CEO

5. Results

5.1 Descriptive statistics
The data processing resulted in a sample of 211 729 observations, 41 964 unique companies and
38 203 unique CEOs. This provides an average of 5 years of data for each firm, and 1.1 CEOs
per company. Figure 1 show the age of the CEOs in the sample. The mean age is 46.7 years,
while the minimum is 18 years and the maximum is 106 years. In an attempt to refine the
sample, we made use of some statistical tools, mainly winsorizing the 5th and 95th percentile to
control for outliers. When winsorizing CEO age at 90 per cent we received a sample of 194 443
observations with a mean age of 46.6 years, in the range of 31 to 63 years old.

Figure 2 shows the average start age of the CEOs in the sample. The mean age is equal to 44.0
years, while the maximum age is 104 years and the minimum is 18 years. Figure 3 shows the
average number of years CEOs stayed at their position. The distribution is slightly positively
skewed with an average tenure of 4.6 years. When excluding those with tenure of less than 3
years, we receive an average tenure of 5.7 years. Figure 4 shows the sample distribution of years
of accounting data. The distribution is slightly negatively skewed, which we (for example)
hypothesize could be due to deregistration and bankruptcies.

                                                                              13
Figure 1: The sample distribution of CEO age, with age on the x-axis and density
on the y-axis

 Figure 2: The sample distribution of CEO age at start, with age on the x-axis and
 density on the y-axis

                                                                     14
 Figure 3: The sample distribution of numbers of years as CEO (tenure), with
 tenure (in years) on the x-axis and density on the y-axis

Figure 4: The sample distribution of years of accounting data, with year on the
x-axis and density on the y-axis

                                                                    15
5.2 Statistical results

Table 1 shows the effect of CEO age on firm leverage, defined as total liabilities divided by
equity. The regression is defined for all CEOs being the CEO of the company for at least three
years, which leaves us with a sample of 80 313 observations. Interestingly, we see that for the
younger half of the CEOs in the sample (<44.0 years old), leverage is significantly higher with a
coefficient of 2.745. This variable is significant at the 5% level. However, the coefficient of CEO
age is positive, suggesting that leverage increases with age, however the effect of CEO age is not
significant. The coefficient attached to the variable average age of the board is not significant
either.

       Table 1: Regression results showing the effect of CEO age on firm leverage

        Dependent variable: Firm leverage

         Firm leverage the previous year -0.019
                                                                                                       (-0.78)
       CEO age 0.364
                                                                                                      (0.63)
        CEO age, squared -0.008*
                                                                                                       (-2.19)
        Average age of the board 1.523
                                                                                                      (0.67)
        Average age of the board, squared -0.021
                                                                                                       (-0.82)
        CEO younger than the average CEO (dummy) 2.745*
                                                                                                      (1.98)
       Female (dummy) 55.140
                                                                                                      (0.98)
        CEO younger than average while also female (interaction dummy) -2.875
                                                                                                       (-0.24)
        Sales of company (expressed in log) 0.970*
                                                                                                      (4.28)

       Time dummies Yes
          Note: T-statistics in brackets
          *Significant at 5% level

                                                                              16
Table 2 show the effect of CEO age on firms operating return on assets (OROA). The regression
is defined for all CEOs being the CEO of the company for at least three years, which leaves us
with a sample of 39 224 observations. The results suggest OROA to be a decreasing function of
CEO age, while the trend is increasing in age. This result also holds when winsorizing the 5th
and the 95th percentile of all CEO ages. Potentially, this indicates that a CEO will perform
better during the first years at office, the younger the CEO is. We find no clear breaking point
relating to this, i.e. there appears not to be a significant difference in OROA if the CEO is above
or below mean age.

      Table 2: Regression results showing the effect of CEO age on operating return on
       assets

       Dependent variable: Operating return on assets (OROA)

       OROA the previous year -0.621*
                                                                                                      (-2.36)
       CEO age -0.124*
                                                                                                      (-1.97)
       CEO age, squared 0.001*
                                                                                                     (2.00)
       Average age of the board 0.247
                                                                                                     (1.35)
        Average age of the board, squared -0.003
                                                                                                      (-1.40)
       CEO younger than average CEO age (dummy) -0.142
                                                                                                      (-0.68)
       Female, dummy 0.416
                                                                                                     (0.88)
        CEO younger than average while also female (interaction dummy) -0.802
                                                                                                      (-1.56)
       Assets of company (expressed in log) 0.379
                                                                                                     (1.90)

      Time dummies Yes
          Note: T-statistics in brackets
          *Significant at 5% level

                                                                              17
Table 3 shows how the average age of the members of the board, together with the age of the
prior CEO, affects the age of the new CEO. The regression is defined for a winsorized sample
of CEO age (at start), leaving us with 25 290 observations. The result suggest that there is a
positive correlation between average age of the board and the age of the new CEO, however the
coefficient is not statistically significant. Also, the coefficient of the variable denoting the prior
CEOs age is positive, suggesting that there could be a positive relationship between the old CEO
and the new CEOs age. We note however that the variable is insignificant.

       Table 3: Regression results showing how the average age of the board and the age of the
       prior CEO affects the age of the new CEO

        Dependent variable: CEO age at start

        Age of prior CEO 0.305
                                                                                           (0.82)
        Age of prior CEO, squared -0.006
                                                                                             (-1.66)
        Average age of the board 0.681
                                                                                           (1.91)
        Average age of the board, squared -0.006
                                                                                             (-1.60)
        Average tenure of the board 0.441
                                                                                           (0.93)
        Average tenure of the board, squared -0.051
                                                                                             (-0.90)
       Female, dummy -0.953
                                                                                             (-1.36)
        Sales of company (expressed in log) -0.033
                                                                                             (-1.21)
        Assets of company (expressed in log) 0.045
                                                                                           (0.77)

       Time dummies Yes
          Note: T-statistics in brackets
          *Significant at 5% level

                                                                              18
Table 4 shows how the age of newly appointed CEOs affects their tenure at the position.
Estimation (i) is defined for a winsorized (at 5th and 95th percentile) sample of all CEOs in the
data set. As tenure is our dependent variable, per definition, only CEOs which have ended their
position at their specific company within the sample time period is included, which, in estimation
(i) leaves us with a smaller sample of 8 131 observations. The results from estimation (i) suggest
that the tenure increases with CEO age at start, however not on a fully significant basis. In
estimation (ii), we scale down the sample so that it only contains CEOs with an age between 30-
42 years when starting their employment as CEO. This leaves us with a sample of 2 866
observations. The results suggest the opposite from estimation (i), i.e. that CEO tenure decreases
with CEO age at start and that this trend is exponentially increasing.

    Table 4: Regression results showing how the age of the CEO at start affects the tenure at the
…...position

     Dependent variable: CEO tenure in years Estimation (i) Estimation (ii)

     CEO age at start, squared -0.004* 0.017*
                                                                              (-2.06) (2.59)
     CEO age at start 0.350 -1.137*
                                                                              (1.76) (-2.40)
     Age of prior CEO -0.054 0.078
                                                                              (-0.41) (1.62)
     Age of prior CEO, squared 0.000 -0.001
                                                                              (0.16) (-1.50)
     Average age of the board -0.236 -0.129
                                                                               (-1.60) (-1.71)
     Average age of the board, squared 0.003 0.001
                                                                             (1.66) (1.74)
     Average tenure of the board 0.292 0.266*
                                                                             (1.91) (3.68)
     Average tenure of the board, squared -0.033 -0.019*
                                                                               (-1.58) (-3.59)
     Female, dummy -0.603 -0.002
                                                                               (-1.79) (-0.01)
     Sales of company (expressed in log) 0.005 -0.002
                                                                              (0.84) (-2.01)
     Assets of company (expressed in log) 0.009 0.004
                                                                             (1.27) (2.14)

    Time dummies Yes Yes

     Note: T-statistics in brackets. Estimation (i) is defined for a winsorized (at 5th and 95th percentile) sample of all CEOs
……in the data set, while estimation (ii) is defined for all CEOs between 30-42 years when starting their employment as CEOs.
     *Significant at 5% level

                                                                              19
6. Conclusions

We find partial evidence for that older CEOs (above mean age) run their firms with less leverage.
However, the coefficient of the linear CEO age variable is positive, suggesting that leverage, in
contrary, increases with age, although the coefficient is not significant. Hence, at least parts of
our results can be interpreted as being in the direction of Bertrand and Schoars (2003) findings
of CEO conservatism. However, we take a cautious stance, recognizing that our results are not
one-directional. We are aware of that our examination might suffer from causality issues, as
younger CEOs might be inclined to work in younger firms, which in turn may affect the
relationship between CEO age and firm leverage.

Our results show that OROA is decreasing with CEO age. We ask ourselves if this means that
elder CEOs are less successful in running companies. Possibly, CEOs might get less engaged in
their work when nearing retirement age, (see e.g. Hambrick and Fukutomi (1991)). Moreover,
this might be connected to old CEOs getting tired (Davidson and Wang (2009)). However, age
brings experience (Yim (2010)) and “management skills” (Joos, Leone and Zimmerman (2003)),
which perhaps can offset the potential effect of CEOs getting “worn-out”.

Possibly, the higher OROA for younger CEOs might be explained by younger CEOs desire of
showing good key performance in the beginning of their careers, a phenomenon labeled as
career concerns (Li, Low, and Makhija (2011)). Hence, young CEOs may run firms in a way that
maximizes OROA. We recognize that our results might be affected by reverse correlation, for
example that the result is a sign of that younger CEOs take on worse companies, and then
perform really well (compared to the previous CEO). However, as the relevance of OROA as a
key performance indicator differs across industries, we must be careful when interpreting this
result.

The “OROA effect” could possibly be explained by the nature of the CEO turnover situation: a
CEO can leave the job as CEO is several ways; e.g. getting fired, retire, leave voluntarily to chase
new challenges etc. Naturally, the successor might be a younger person. Following the theory
that an old CEO is less active in the end of the employment tenure (Hambrick and Fukutomi
(1991)), and reversely interpreted; that young CEOs might be more active, we will receive a
correlation between CEO age and OROA in the firm fixed effects regression.

                                                                              20
We find indication of that there exists a correlation between board average age and the age of the
newly appointed CEO, which is supported by past empirical work (Davidson, Nemec and
Worrell (2006)). However, we are cautious about the conclusions on this as our results are
statistically insignificant.

Moreover, in the case of CEO tenure, when applying regressions on the whole sample, we find a
correlation between CEO tenure and age at start of employment, indicating that tenure is
increasing in CEO age at start. Looking at the younger group of CEOs in our sample, we find
evidence for the opposite, i.e. that if a CEO is older when recruited, the individual will have a
shorter tenure. One potential explanation for this could be that a large part of the young CEOs
own their companies, and therefore prefer to stay at their companies longer. We recognize that
our sample only stretches until 2008, hence we are unable to take into account the tenure of
CEOs that stayed at their firms longer than that. Thus, some of the most engaged CEOs
(longest tenure) are not included making the interpretation of our results somewhat restricted.

7. Caveats and suggestions for further research

First of all, CEO age could be a proxy for a lot of factors; experience, high salary, engagement,
length of service, industry age, personal reputation as you build up your reputation during years
of service, firm age etc (see e.g. Hambrick and Fukutomi (1991), (Yim (2010) and (Li, Low, and
Makhija (2011)). We recognize that age even can be inversely correlated with firm profitability as
a profitable company can afford to hire an older, more experienced CEO. These factors could all
be hidden in the regression error terms, causing problems for inference.

The regressions carried out are based completely on quantitative data, and we recognize that we
are unable to control for a range of factors, which makes it difficult to draw strong conclusions
from our results. Using a smaller sample and include information on ownership structure, the
CEO’s professional background, education etc could be a suggestion for further research. This
might add more weight to the analysis. Also, it would help to overcome the proxy problem for
the age variable.

The above discussion leads us to the problem of drawing ceteris paribus conclusions from our
regression variables. The existence of omitted variables in the standard errors cause regression

                                                                              21
biases, and interpretation could therefore be misleading. This makes our analysis somewhat
restricted. We have tried to be careful in the conclusion section when interpreting our results.
We might be experiencing biases, due to our methods when merging and processing the data,
and this, in turn, could cause regression results to be biased.

With that said, the goal of our study has been to examine how the demographic variable age
(might) affect the governance of a firms in terms of financial structure, profitability, the selction
of CEOs and the tenure of the newly recruited CEOs. Using our thesis as inspiration, and
including more control factors as suggested above, we hope this inspirers for further research on
the subject.

                                                                              22
References

Antia, M., Pantzalis, C. and Park, J.C., (2010). CEO Decision Horizon and Firm Performance:
An Empirical Investigation. Journal of Corporate Finance, 16 (3), pp. 288-301.

Baeten, V.L., Barker, V.L. III. and Musteen, M. (2006). CEO Attributes Associated with Attitude
toward Change: The Direct and Moderating Effects of CEO Tenure, Journal of Business Research,
59 (5), pp. 604-612.

Barker, V.L. III. and Mueller, G.C., (2002). CEO Characteristics and Firm R&D Spending.
Management Science, 48 (6), pp. 782-801.

Bertrand, M. and Schoar, A., (2003). Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
Policies. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (4), pp. 1169-1208.

Boggs, D.J. and Magnusson, P., (2006). International Experience and CEO Selection: An
Empirical Study, Journal of International Management, 12 (1), pp. 107-125.

Bradley, M., Jarrell, G.A. and Kim, E.H., (1984). On the Existence of an Optimal Capital
Structure: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Finance, 39 (3) pp. 857-878.

Chevalier, J.A. and Ellison, G., (1999). Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114 (2), pp. 389-432.

Davidson, W.N. III., Nemec, C. and Worrell, D.L., (2006). Determinants of CEO Age at
Succession, Journal of Management and Governance, 10 (1), pp. 35-57.

Davidson, W.N. III. and Wang, H., (2009). CEO age and managerial discretion: evidence from
CEO succession, Journal of Academy of Business and Economics, 9 (4), pp. 149-165.

Dechow, P.M. and Sloan. R.G., (1991). Executive incentives and the horizon problem. Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 14 (1), pp. 51-89.

Eaton, J. and Rosen, H. S., (1983). Agency, Delayed Compensation, and the Structure of
Executive Remuneration. Journal of Finance, 38 (5), pp. 1489-1505.

Forbes, D., (2005), Are Some Entrepreneurs More Overconfident Than Others?, Journal of
Business Venturing, 20 (5), pp. 623-640.

Gibbons, R. and Murphy, K..J., (1992). Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of Career
Concerns: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Political Economy, 100 (3), pp. 468-505.

Hambrick, D.C. and Fukutomi, G.D., (1991). The seasons of CEO’s tenure. Academy of
Management Review, 16(4), pp. 719-742.

Hambrick, D.C., Geletkanycz, M.A. and Fredrickson, J.W., (1993). Top Executive Commitment
to the Status Quo: Some Tests of its Determinants, Strategic Management Journal, 14 (6), pp. 401-
418.

Holmstrom, B. and Ricart i Costa, J., (1986). Managerial Incentives and Capital Management,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101 (4), pp. 835-860.

                                                                              23
Jensen, M.C. and Meckling, W.H., (1979). Rights and Production Functions: An Application to
Labor-managed Firms and Codetermination, Journal of Business, 52 (4), pp. 469-506.

Jensen, M.C. and Smith, C.W., (edited by Altman, E. and Subrahmanyam, M.), (1985),
Stockholder, Manager, and Creditor Interests: Applications of Agency Theory, Recent Advances in
Corporate Finance, 93, pp. 91-131.

Joos, P., Leone, A.J. and Zimmerman, J.L., (2003). Selecting CEOs: Matching the Person to the Job,
Working paper, University of Rochester and University of Michigan.

Li, X., Low, A. and Makhija A.K., (2011). Career Concerns and the Busy Life of the Young CEO.
Working paper, Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business, Nanyang Technological University
and Ohio State University.

MacCrimmon, K.R. and Wehrung D. A., (1990). Characteristics of Risk Taking Executives,
Management Science, 36 (4), pp. 422-435.

Malmendier, U. and Tate, G., (2008). Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconfidence and the
Market's Reaction, Journal of Financial Economics, 89 (1), pp. 20-43.

O’Reilly, C.A. and Tsui, A.S., (1989). Beyond Simple Demographic Effects: The Importance of
Relational Demography in Superior-Subordinate Dyads, Academy of Management Journal, 32 (2), pp.
402–423.

Schneider, B., (1987). The People Make the Place, Personnel Psychology, 40 (3), pp. 437–453.

Smith, C.W. and Watts, R.L., (1992). The Investment Opportunity Set and Corporate Financing,
Dividend, and Compensation Policies, Journal of Financial Economics, 32(3), pp. 263-292.

Taylor, R.N., (1975). Age and Experience as Determinants of Managerial Information
Processing and Decision Making Performance, Academy of Management Journal, 18 (1), 74-81.

Titman, S. and Wessels, R., (1988). The Determinants of Capital Structure Choice, Journal of
Finance, 43 (1), pp. 1-19.

Westphal, J.D. and Zajac, E.J., (1995). Who Shall Govern? CEO/Board Power, Demographic
Similarity, and New Director Selection, Administrative Science Quarterly, 40 (1), pp. 60–83.

Westphal, J.D. and Zajac, E.J., (1996). Who Shall Succeed? How CEO/Board Preferences and
Power Affect the Choice of New CEOs, Academy of Management Journal, 39 (1), pp. 64–90.

Yim, S., (2010), The Acquisitiveness of Youth: CEO Age and Acquisition Behavior. Working Paper,
Goizueta Business School, Emory University.

                                                                              24
Appendix

 Table 1A: Regression output from STATA showing the effect of CEO age on firm leverage

                                                                              25
Table 2A: Regression output from STATA showing the effect of CEO age on operating return on assets

                                                                              26
Table 3A: Regression output from STATA showing how the average age of the board and the age of the
prior CEO affects the age of the new CEO

                                                                              27
Table 4A: Regression output from STATA showing how the age of the CEO at start affects the tenure at
the.position (regression run on the full sample)

                                                                              28
Table 5A: Regression output from STATA showing how the age of the CEO at start affects the tenure at
the.position (regression run on the sample of CEOs with an age between 30-42 years when starting their
employment as CEO)

                                                                              29