                         Stockholm School of Economics - Bachelor Thesis in Finance - Spring 2012

Private Equity and Value Creation: Evidence from Swedish PE
                         transactions
                                        -
  Investigating the impact of restructuring measures targeting company
                      operations and employees

                                 a                         b
      Johanna Andersson                   Johanna Strömsten

           a                                                           b
          21830@student.hhs.se  22003@student.hhs.se

     Abstract

     This thesis investigates the impact of restructuring measures targeting company
     operations and employees on the abnormal financial performance when a Swedish PE
     house acquires a portfolio company. Evidence based on OLS regression analysis is
     complemented with qualitative data from a unique survey of PE managers. The results
     show that the deals in our sample underperformed their sector peers prior to PE
     ownership but outperformed them during PE ownership when comparing operational
     measures. Positive abnormal financial performance of the PE portfolio companies is
     associated with improvements in the EBITDA margin and measures targeting
     employees. Furthermore, personal characteristics of the Investment managers and their
     specific responsibilities within the PE houses explain deal performance. Our thesis
     supports the results of earlier studies that PE houses have a positive impact on the
     financial performance of their portfolio companies.

  Tutor: Ramin Baghai
  Keywords: Private Equity, Value Creation, Operating improvements, Employment rate, Human capital

  We would like to thank Ramin Baghai for his guidance and insightful comments.
Table of Contents
1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 2
2. Related literature ................................................................................................................................. 6
3. Data collection .................................................................................................................................... 9
   3.1 The Theoretical framework........................................................................................................... 9
   3.2 Data Collection ............................................................................................................................. 9
4. Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 11
   4.1 The objective ............................................................................................................................... 11
   4.2 The measure of abnormal financial performance........................................................................ 11
     4.2.1 Operational performance in the portfolio companies........................................................... 12
     4.3.2 Employment related issues and financial performance ........................................................ 13
     4.3.3 Human capital - Investment managers´ background ............................................................ 13
5. Analysis ............................................................................................................................................ 14
   5.1. PE houses’ impact on operating performance ............................................................................ 14
     5.1.2 Abnormal financial performance and operating performance ............................................. 18
   5.2 Abnormal financial performance and employment related questions ......................................... 19
   5.3 Abnormal financial performance and Investment managers’ background ................................. 24
   5.4 Robustness test ............................................................................................................................ 29
6. Conclusion and Discussion ............................................................................................................... 30
8. References ......................................................................................................................................... 32
   8.1 Other sources .............................................................................................................................. 33
9. Appendices........................................................................................................................................ 43

                                                                                1
1. Introduction

The practice of buying and controlling equity stakes in companies for a short to a medium-term
holding period, called Private Equity (PE), first emerged in the United States during the 1980’s.
Already in 1989 Jensen predicted that takeovers, leveraged buyouts (LBOs), and going-private
transactions would be the most visible manifestations of a substantial, organizational change in the
economy. He also argued that LBOs create value through high leverage and management incentive
programs. Jensen’s arguments later became supported by for example Kaplan (1989) and Lichtenberg
and Siegal (1990), who both found evidences that LBOs creates value by both improving operational
performance and by changing the capital structure of the acquired firm.

The spread of PE over the coming decades was fast across the world with a huge boom during 2005-
2007 where respectively €71.8billion, €112.3billion, €79.9billion in different funds were raised every
year. In 2010, €20billion in funds was raised in Europe (€18billion in 2009), €41billion invested into
4 816 European business (€23billion into 4 696 business 2009) and there were 1 696 active Private
Equity and Venture Capital firms managing €523 billion of European capital. In 2010, Sweden was
number one in Europe in terms of PE-investments as percentage of GDP with a number of almost
0.8% (number two in 2009 with 0.43%), reporting an all-time high level. The other Nordic countries

                                                                             1
except from Island were not far behind with top six rankings in Europe.  (EVCA Research Statistics
2011)

In line with the broad spread and increasing importance of the PE industry, the debate around the
subject has also evolved during the last decades. The debate has often concerned the real operational
impact of the portfolio company. Critics accuse PE houses for buying considered unattractive
companies, restructuring them to generate large profits by laying off employees, selling properties and
changing capital structure to include a large and potentially dangerous amount of debt (Kaletsky,
2007). In line with this criticism, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) studied internal rates of return (IRRs) net
of management fees for 746 funds during 1985-2001. They found that the median PE fund
underperformed the S&P500 Index with 20% while the mean was slightly better with 10% below the
same benchmark.

PE industry supporters, on the other hand, argue that many aspects of the critique are unjustified and
that PE houses contribute with much more than the critics claim. Several academic studies, for
example Bergström et al. (2007) and Guo et al. (2009), show that PE-owned companies outperform
the industry average based on well-used metrics such as IRR and EBITDA-margin. Whether the

1
 All information regarding PE funds worldwide is based on the annual report constructed by EVCA.

                                                                                2
improvements made by the PE house are a sustainable long-term improvement is, on the other hand,
still not clear. In addition, Dr. Holger Frommann, a Managing Director of the German Venture Capital
Association, argues that PE-owned companies grow faster, increase firm value, create more jobs and
also invest more thanks to the expertise, advice and support they receive from their PE owners
(German Private Equity and Venture Capital Association 2005).

Operational improvements, market timing and change in capital structure are the three main reasons
for value creation in portfolio companies according to Liechtenstein et al. (2008). Modigliani–Miller
(1958) argues that changes in capital structure do not change the firm value but gives the possible
benefit from an increase tax shield. Hence, leverage cannot be seen as a value creator but instead as a
value redistributor. However, the market timing ability depends on the distribution of the value
between investments with different market momentum. Based on these above mentioned arguments
the authors believe, in line with Bergström et al. (2007) that operational improvement is the only true
value creator together with inorganic growth through Mergers & Acquisitions (M&A’s). Our first
research question is based on this assumption:

        (1) What is the effect of ownership by Swedish PE houses on the operating performance
        of portfolio companies relative to quoted peers, and how does this operating performance
        relate to the financial value (if any) created by these houses?

                                                th
In a recent number of The Economist (28  January 2012) the article “Bain or Blessing” cover the on-
going PE debate, where the preamble raises the debate whether the PE houses decrease the
employment rate by cutting jobs or not. In the article they discussed a recent NBER working paper
that analyzed employment of 3,200 LBOs in the US and their results showed that PE ownership
resulted in both more rapid job destruction and faster job creation than other forms of ownership
structures. Based on this continuing debate our second research question is:

        (2) In the Swedish PE houses portfolio companies, how do changes in Employment rate,
        resources allocated to employment related questions and changes in Board of director and/or
        Executive management relate to the financial value created (if any) by these houses?

The last research question is selected due to the gap in existing research in the Nordic region regarding
Investment managers’ background, education level and professional experience. We aim to study how
the human capital of the Investment managers affects the selected strategy for their portfolio
companies and how the managers' characteristics correlate with deal performance. A similar study is
written by Acharya, Gottschalg, Hahn and Kehoe (2011) where they, through data from Western
Europe PE houses, investigate the human capital factors. To extend the current research the same

                                                                                3
methodology is used but applied on Swedish PE houses and their Nordic deals. This leads us to our
third and last research question:

        (3) Are there any distinguishing characteristics of Swedish PE houses Investment
        managers such as background, education or experience level that are better associated with
        deal value creation than others and also, what strategy, organic or inorganic, do they prefer?

To answer the first question, we collected accounting data from two years before PE ownership (t-2),
the last pre-acquisition year (t) and the last year of ownership (T). A methodology is developed to
calculate the abnormal financial performance by unlevering the compounded annual change in deal
value and in the next step deduct the unlevered Total Return to Shareholders (TRS). TRS is a proxy
for the average sector performance during the same period as the PE house held the portfolio
company. OLS regressions are the method used to determine the potential impact from operational
performance on abnormal financial performance.

What can be concluded is that the deals in our sample underperformed their sector peers prior to the
PE ownership, which can emphasize the hypothesis that PE houses tend to acquire companies exposed
to a potential negative idiosyncratic shock or financial distress. The deals underperformed the sector
peers with 3.79% when comparing the median log sales and the absolute margin with 0.15%. After the
PE houses had entered as owners the numbers changed to the opposite. Now the deals in the sample
outperform the sector peers both comparing to the log sales and the margin with 2.00% and 0.79%
respectively. We further analyze the impact of operational measures on abnormal financial
performance and can conclude that the EBITDA-margin has the biggest impact on changes in
abnormal financial performance. A 1% improvement in margin increases the abnormal performance
with 0.94%, a regression where we controlled for size (Log EV), duration, industry- and time-fixed
effects. The results are significant for both the entire sample and after dividing the sample into organic
and inorganic deals.

To answer the second research question, we use the same dependent variable as for the first question:
the abnormal financial performance but varies the independent variables. These are now based on
answers regarding employment from the survey. To analyze and answer the second research question -
What impact changes in employment rate from entry to exit, the time and resource spend on
employment related issues and if a change in the board of directors or executive management – affects
the financial performance, we ran regressions. Additionally, a case study based on the other
employment related questions answered in the survey, further analyzed the PE houses' view and focus
on employment related issues.

                                                                                4
The results here show that the Investment managers working at the Swedish PE houses rank
employment related question at position six out of nine, (Appendix E). On the other hand, the
regressions results show that both change in employment rate and time spend on employment related
issues have a statistically significant and positive impact on the abnormal financial performance with
0.41% and 6.13% respectively. Another interesting result is that replacing a position in the Executive
management has a large and significant impact of 14.7%. In contrast, changing a position in the Board
of directors has a negative impact (-11.6%).

To answer the third and last research question, we once again use responses from the survey. This time
information regarding the Investment managers’ background (finance or operational), education level,
years within the PE industry and experience from working abroad (international) are used as
independent variables. Based on each Investment manager’s answers, we generated nine dummies to
separate and investigate what impact, if any, different characteristics have on abnormal financial
performance.

When analyzing the results we could conclude that Investment managers with a background in finance
report a higher average abnormal financial performance than managers with an operational
background, 3.66% against 1.65%. This effect is robust even after dividing the sample into organic-
and inorganic deals. Furthermore, the average abnormal financial performance is almost the same for
deals where the Investment manager has worked within the PE industry more than 7 years with the
deals where the mangers has less than 7 years of experience, 5.02% and 4.55% respectively.

We further analyze what impact the Investment managers background has on changes in abnormal
financial performance A total of nine regressions were run with different independent variables and
they all reported that an operational background has a negative impact on the abnormal financial
performance. The results show that if a manger wants to apply an organic strategy, the experience is
crucial since the interaction term in Regression (9) reports 11.7% but the single term Organic has a
negative number of -1.66% (however, without any statistical significance). The results are the same
for an international career (-8.35% Regression (6)), which implies that if you want to be a successful
PE manger you should stay in Sweden and learn how to manage operational improvements. Education
has a positive and significant impact on the abnormal financial performance for deals with organic
characteristics, (Regression (7) shows 4.60%). One explanation for this trend could be that an MBA
focus on real case studies and educate the students in this, giving an advantage for organic deals.
Finally, a background in finance has compared to a operational background, a positive impact on
abnormal financial performance. This indicates that Investment managers with a finance background
outperform those with an operational background, but without any statistical significance.

                                                                                5
There are some potential limitations of our thesis. One can argue that the size of the sample (n=53) is
a potential limitation, especially when we divide the sample into organic (n=31) and inorganic deals
(n=22). Yet, we find statistically significant results for regressions including all independent variables
and likewise separated for organic and inorganic deals. Another potential limitation of our method is
the possibility that respondents have not accurately reported their situation in the survey. To overcome
this possible problem, the survey was answered anonymously. A third potential limitation is the lack of
transparency within the PE industry. This is especially essential when dealing with possible follow-on
M&A’s and the impact of those on abnormal financial performance. To overcome this problem the
sample is separated into organic and inorganic deals to compare deals with the same characteristics.

Based on an intensive academic screening we can conclude that there are no other papers examining
the exact same topic as we are. A plethora of studies have been made worldwide regarding value
creation but this paper is the first to analyze Nordic deal data from Swedish PE houses combined with
an unique survey answered by 122 Investment managers from the selected houses. This novel
approach, combined with our hand-collected dataset gives our study an opportunity to bring
something new to the world of research.

This paper proceeds as follows: In Section 2, a literature review will be presented. In Section 3, the
data collection process is described and Section 4 explains how we developed our methodology. In
Section 5 we report an analysis of the results regarding the impact of operating performance, changes
in employment related questions and human capital factors on abnormal financial performance.
Results from the robustness test are also presented. Finally in Section 6, conclusions and further
research question is discussed as well as limitations of the study.

2. Related literature

The amount of research on the subject of Private Equity performance is very extensive, partly due to
the heated debate surrounding PE. Another reason is probably the huge spread of the Private Equity
industry during the last couple of decades with the financial crisis in 2009 as the all-time high when it
comes to amount invested in Private Equity funds. Even though the research can be seen as quite
extensive there is still a lot of questions and doubts whether or not the PE houses creates value for
their portfolio companies. The reason might be the fact that existing research regarding value creation
within the PE industry are not in line with each other.

In the early years of the Private Equity industry, studies were both focused on operational performance
but also on whether the potential financial gain was at the expense of the workers who had to resign.
The studies took off by discussing cost cutting and changes in employment rate but switched later on
towards the impact from operational measure. The first studies showed that the positive abnormal
financial performance were not due to either laying off employees or lowering their wages (Kaplan,

                                                                                6
1989; Smith, 1990; Lichtenberg and Siegel, 1990). These papers were followed up by Jensen (1989),
where he argues that PE ownership is superior for public corporations since it can reduce the agency
problem between the dispersed owners and the managers of the firm. He continues to argue that this
dispersed ownership makes it easier for the mangers to avoid tough decisions such as firing employees
or reducing wages. With PE ownership this problems can be reduced thanks to their concentrated
ownership, implementation of incentive programs and increased leverage (Lesile and Oyer, 2009).
Increasing leverage can in contrast also create cost problems and increase the bankruptcy risk
(Andrade and Kaplan, 1997; Strömberg, Hotchkiss and Smith, 2012) and in the next step force the
owners to slim down the organization and as a result fire employees. Even if reduced wages and
laying of employees are difficult to implement due to governmental regulations and/or collective
agreements, a bankruptcy risk from for example a dangerously high amount of debt can be seen as an
increased unemployment risk.

However, not all studies show that PE ownership has a negative effect on the employment rate. Newer
studies instead showed that PE houses focus much more on operational improvements than just
cutting costs as argued in the beginning of the PE era (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2008; Boucly, Sraer and
Thesmar 2011). The last mentioned authors argue that PE ownership is just another source of capital
that can be used to accelerate the firm growth and therefore also the employment rate. This is true if
the firm was financially constrained before the buyout and there is a great deal of reasons to believe
that PE ownership can relax firm financial constraints. They discussed further that the PE houses
probably have better internal connections and more experience dealing with larger banks and therefore
have better access to lend money as capital to invest with, an access which may provide a better and
lower interest rate. In addition they are more likely to reinvest their money instead of paying dividend
due to tax reasons and their short-term focus and exit planning. Thanks to this, the portfolio company
can be more resilient to a negative profitability shocks and therefore reduce unemployment risk.

Operational improvements as a valuation metric play a central part in the PE industry when time for
exit often is expressed in ratios of EV (Enterprise value) to EBITDA (Earnings before interest, tax,
depreciation and amortization) or EV/EBIT. Hence, if the PE houses manage to increase their
operating profitability measures their portfolio company is more likely to be sold at a higher value and
in the next step generate higher return to the fund investors. Operational improvements during the
holding period are thus very central for the PE houses (Acharya, Gottschlag, Hahn and Kehoe, 2011;
Guo, Hotchkiss and Song, 2009). Bergström (2007) took the argumentation one step further when
saying that operational improvements are the only true way of value creation.

The results between those studying operational improvements in buyouts differ as well but most of
them have found improvements during the holding period (Kaplan, 1989) and based on Swedish data
by Bergström, Grubb and Jonsson (2007). Lerner, Sorensen, and Strömberg (2008) provide evidence

                                                                                7
with a sample of 495 buyouts that PE ownership actually increase even long-term innovation and not
only have the short-term incentives which opponents accuse them for.

What should be mentioned is that not all evidence points in the same direction. Guo, Hotchkiss and
Song (2009) showed when analyzing 94 US buyouts between 1990 and 2006 that the operational
performance is not statistically different from the observed benchmark. Similar results were found
over the same period in the UK (Weir, Jones and Wright 2007). Also, when comparing portfolio
companies to public companies, Leslie and Oyer (2009) only found weak or non-existent evidence for
increased operational profitability.

When screening the related literature on human capital factors and its impact on the strategy applied in
each of the PE houses portfolio companies, there are gaps especially for the Nordic region. Kaplan,
Klebanov, Mark and Sorensen (2008) analyzed the relationship between the CEO’s skills and the
success of the buyout. They provided evidence that there is a relation between the execution skills and
the success of the buyout but not between the interpersonal skills and the success of the buyout.

There has been written one, for our thesis particular important study. The fact that PE Investment
managers seem to add value to portfolio companies by applying skills they have learned over time is
something Acharya, Gottschlag, Hahn and Kehoe (2011) provided evidence for. They examined deal-
level data from 395 PE deals in Western Europe during 1991-2007 and showed that partners from the
PE house with an operational background (ex-consultants or ex-industry-managers) involved in a deal
generally generated a higher abnormal financial return when they applied an organic strategy
(focusing only on internal value creation). They also showed that the opposite goes for deal partners
with a finance background (ex-bankers or ex-accountants) since they seemed to outperform financially
when applying an inorganic strategy (M&A activity).

To our knowledge, no similar study is done in the Nordic region, which is the reason why we chose to
analyze the link between financial performance of the buyout and human capital factor. This can be
essential to understand as quoted below:

 “…there is a need to understand the human capital expertise that successful PE firms require. There
appears to be a need to broaden the traditional financial skills base of private equity executives to
include more product and operations expertise.”
                                                          Cumming, Siegel and Wright (2007)

                                                                                8
3. Data collection

This section begins by describing the chosen theoretical framework, continuing with data collection of
the dependent variable abnormal financial performance and the selected accounting metrics in order
to measure operating performance. The section further continues with describing the survey and
finally the quoted sector peer groups.

3.1 The Theoretical framework

The chosen theoretical framework is based on previous studies found at the online databases Google
Scholar, Science direct and Social Science Research Network Financial covering full scholarly
journals and previous papers written by reputable authors. The research started by screening relevant
academic thesis and articles to form an overall understanding of the industry and topical discussions.
From the screening process a reference lists and relevant sources was gathered. Based on careful
screening of information we found empirical studies focusing on the operating performance impact on
abnormal financial performance. Other studies focusing on potential explaining variables affecting
abnormal financial performance such as employment related questions and human capital was also
found and is nearby what we aim to examine.

3.2 Data Collection

Our data sample is constructed from Swedish PE houses, which have exit Nordic buyouts between the
years 2001-2011 (Appendix A). This period made it possible to study the portfolio company
performance two years before PE ownership to compare both prior and during PE ownership relative
to selected peers.

The deal data was collected by screening all PE houses connected to Swedish Private Equity &

                                                       2
Venture capital Association (SVCA), (Appendix B). To make the sample as homogenous as possible
the dataset was constraint to deals exited in the Nordic countries. Differences within country laws,
taxes and employment rights are all variables affecting homogeneity. Due to the lack of reported deal
values only 76 realized deals from 20 out of 32 PE houses were collected. To control for the effect that
industries perform differently, the deals were divided in to five sectors: Retail/Consumer goods, IT,
Medical, Manufacturing, and Service (Appendix A).

The deal value (price at entry and exit) and what strategy the PE house used for each portfolio
company (organic vs. inorganic) was collected from the databases Zephyr and Mergermarket. The
dataset was restricted to deals where the PE houses acquired and owned at least a 50% stake during
the full investment period. This is to minimize the risk for using data where a PE house acquired a
smaller amount of shares with little or no impact on performance and strategy. The collected deal

2
 Counted for 32 different Swedish PE houses

                                                                                9
value data was complemented manual with information from the PE houses websites. Only 53 deals
were left when further constraining for deals including both entry and exit value. The PE houses are
not obligated to display the deal value as long as they go private to private (which they tend to do),
making the data much harder to find. As for the corresponding peer group the variable Total Return to
Shareholders (TRS) is used as a proxy for performance between industries with data collected from

                                  3
DataStream, one for each sector. TRS is used as a proxy in a great deal of PE performance studies, for
example Acharya, Gottschalg, Hahn and Kehoe (2011).

To continue, the accounting data for each selected deal was collected from a number of databases:
Orbis, Zephyr and Mint global, complemented with Retriever and Affärsdata for deals situated solely
in Sweden. The accounting data were doubled checked with annual reports from the portfolio
companies’ own websites and the library basement on Saltmätargatan, a very important but time

                       4
consuming procedure.  The accounting data ranged between two years before entry (t-2), to exit day
(T), the years 1995-2011. After finishing the data collection the reported variables are: Sales,
EBITDA, Cash flow and Enterprise value for the periods (t-2), (t) and (T) and finally Employment
rate between entry (t) and exit (T) (Table 3, Panel B).

For the second and third research question we created a survey, which was sent out to Investment
managers working at the selected Swedish PE houses. We used Qualtrics to create a survey containing

                                              5
24 questions divided into two parts , (Appendix F). To study the characteristics affecting abnormal
financial performance the last question ending the survey answered what company they worked for
and what deal/deals they had been involved in. This extension made it possible to receive answers not
available in any Swedish database or website. 334 e-mail addresses was collected manually and after 3
weeks when closing the survey, 122 (36.53%) Investment managers had answered.

Furthermore, to hedge against the effect that certain industries perform better than others during
different time period, Peer groups were constructed. The same breakdown as for our deals were used:
Retail/Consumer goods, IT, Medical, Manufacturing and Service. The accounting data for each sector
was downloaded manually from DataStream to further perform as homogenous peer groups as
possible. As for the accounting data used for our deals, three areas of data were collected: Sales,

3
 For each deal, one average TRS is calculated based on the same years as the PE house held the corresponding portfolio
company.
4
 By studying the annual reports as a double check we could establish a better picture of what happened with the portfolio
companies during the holding period: If the PE house for instance changed the amount owned in the company, completed
any merger or acquisitions or just changed the company´s name. It also worked as an extra check if the collected numbers
were correct.
5
 The first part focused on questions answering the second thesis question regarding Employment related issues. The second
part focused on the third thesis questions regarding the Human capital and questions related to investment style (inorganic or
organic).

                                                                               10
                                 6
EBITDA and Enterprise Value.  For further description of our search criteria’s for the corresponding
sectors peers, see Appendix D.

4. Methodology

In this section the objective with the thesis is described and continues with reporting the selected
methodology.

4.1 The objective

The objective with this thesis is to study what measures impact the abnormal financial performance
when PE houses realize their investment in a certain portfolio company.

                                                                   7
As stated in the Introduction, three different research questions  will be answered, where each focus
on how much, if any, different independent variables affect abnormal financial performance. The two
main statistical methods used in this study are OLS regressions and a case study. The regression
analysis, analyzing variables relationship between a dependent variable and one or more independent
variables, is used to answer all three research questions. With these regressions we aim to draw
conclusion of what type of operational measures that have the biggest impact on abnormal financial
performance in our sample. We also want to examine what kind of characteristics of the Investment
managers and employment related questions that leads to an increase in abnormal financial
performance and which do not. Four control variables are used: Duration, Log EV, Industry, and Entry
period and performed fixed effect for industry and time. Fixed effects methods completely ignore the
between-industry variation and focus only on the within-industry variation. This is useful in our data
sample where there is great variety in the characteristics between the industries. The time fixed effects
used, further exclude correlations between years.

The case study is used to, in a more qualitative way to understand what the Swedish PE houses believe
is important when trying to improve their performance and how they allocate their internal resources.
These answers can hopefully later be matched with the results from the regressions and answer both
part one and two in research questions two.

4.2 The measure of abnormal financial performance

After gathering the data as described in Section 3 the dependent variable – abnormal financial
performance based on deal value - was generated. Internal rate of return (IRR) is another common

6
 After downloading the data we calculated average change/growth in percentage for each peer group and year. We matched
the sector peer result with the corresponding deal by calculating the average value for the sector during the years the PE
house held the corresponding portfolio company.
7
 The three research questions are: Operational performance, Employment related issues and Human capital factors effect on
abnormal financial performance.

                                                                               11
measure of PE houses calculated return. Lately, IRR has been questioned whether or not it is the best
way to compare PE houses since two firms rarely calculate IRR in the same way (Peter Morris 2010).
Some authors also mean that IRR can overstate the return the investors actually realizes (Ludovic
Phalippou 2011). Based on these arguments and the limited access to available data to calculated IRR,
the measure used when comparing the abnormal financial performance is based purely on the change
in deal value from entry to exit.

To disentangle the effect of the financial performance that comes from pure financial leverage and that
comes from genuine operational improvements the deal value is unlevered. This will further exclude
the effect that some industries, for instance a company that operates in the machine tool industry will
have a higher debt capacity than a company in the software industry and could as follows have a
higher leverage. The formula below was used to unlever the main component for abnormal financial
performance; ∆Unleveraged CAGR and ∆Unleveraged TRS from (T-t)

                                                           ( ) ( )
                                   =
                                                       ( ( ))

  𝐿 is the leverage return for each deal in our sample. The ratio D/E and average tax rate are proxies

                                            8
from People Stern NYU Education . One proxy for each industry is calculated due to limited access of
this information for our selected deals in the sample. Furthermore, since the Swedish PE houses do not
report their average cost of debt, 𝐷 , the intra-bank rate collected from each country´s Central bank is

      9
used .

The dependent variable is calculated with the formula:

∆𝑇 Abnormal financial performance = ∆𝑇 Unleveraged CAGR - ∆𝑇 Unleveraged TRS

The final step is to separate organic and inorganic deals with a dummy variable. This is to distinguish
the different effects on the performance measures between the two strategies and as mentioned above,
avoid comparing groups of different characteristics.

4.2.1 Operational performance in the portfolio companies

After generating the dependent variable we continued with our first thesis question. “How much of
abnormal financial performance (deal value) could be explained from operating performance?”, an

8
 Our calculated proxies for D/E ratio, based on the information from People Stern NYU Education is also double-checked
with the table in the financial textbook “Corporate Finance” from Berk & DeMarzo, 2007, pp. 476.
9
 The average cost of debt 𝐷 was calculated from the average intra-bank rate (1Y) between each deal´s holding period. We
separated for countries and downloaded, Euribor, Stibor, Nibor and Cibor from respectively country’s central bank between
the years 1997-2012, (except from Finland (Euribor) which was N/A until 1999 when EU was introduced).

                                                                               12
issue that can be shown in two ways. Either you compare the operating performance during PE
ownership with the performance of the firm pre-acquisition or one analyzes the operating performance
during PE ownership compared to sector peers. Both this approaches will be analyzed in this thesis.

The method used to analyze the impact of PE ownership during PE ownership is to compare the three
different operational measures with the corresponding sector peer to see if they outperform the
industry, (ΔxDuring T-t =Δxi -Δxs).

                                                     10
The three measures analyzed in detail are:

         Log sales, is equal to the growth in operating revenues or turnover. Two variables are used,
         pre sales and during sales. Pre sales are the log annual growth in sales between two years
         before entry (t-2) to the last pre-acquisition year (t). The second variable during sales shows
          annual growth during the holding period (T-t).

         EBITDA-Margin, is equal to (Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and
         Amortization)/sales. Annual growth in EBITDA-margin is created by diving with the
         number of years of PE ownership (duration) for both pre and during.

         EV-multiple, is the Enterprise value divided by EBITDA and subsequently calculate the
          average annual differences between years (T-t) by diving by the duration.

The same procedure was made for each sector peer group on each variable with data from
DataStream. For further descriptions of the variables, see Appendix C.

4.3.2 Employment related issues and financial performance

The second focus in this thesis is to study changes in Employment rate and additional employment
related questions (the independent variables) on the same dependent variable as used in research

                                                                                 11
questions one. From the survey, five independent dummy variables is created  and an OLS regression
method is used to study the strength and direction of the possible effect a certain independent variable
has on the abnormal financial performance.

4.3.3 Human capital - Investment managers´ background

To answer the last research question the survey sent out to Investment managers working at the
selected PE houses was used. The purpose of the survey was to receive more information about the
Investment managers’ background, education and experience level to further study correlations

10                                                                                                       st
  Since the currency differs for all deals we convert them all to € with the exchange rate from the 1  of January the entry year
and exit year.
11
  Changes in employment rate, time spend on employment related questions, if they offer some kind of training/education
and lastly if they change Executive management and/or Board of directors in the portfolio companies.

                                                                               13
between Investment managers’ characteristics and abnormal financial performance. We still analyze
explaining factors for abnormal financial performance (the same dependent variable) and therefore
again vary the independent variables.

                                                         12
From the survey nine different variables were created  and further described in Appendix C. These
variables are dummies (binary) with potential effect on abnormal financial performance.

5. Analysis

In this section we aim to analyze abnormal financial performance to answer our three research
questions. This through the two common statistical methods: a case study and an OLS regression
analysis. We will start by analyzing the operational measures on abnormal financial performance,
continuing with changes in employment rate and finally end with Investment managers’ background
on abnormal financial performance. To examine whether our results are robust or not a test will end
this section.

5.1. PE houses’ impact on operating performance

In this section sales growth, EBITDA-margin and EV-multiple and their effect on abnormal financial
performance prior to and during PE ownership are analyzed. These variables show how the portfolio
company has performed during the holding period but can also be seen as an indication of the
company’s attractiveness. Sales growth for instance, could give us a picture of what situation the
company is situated in and also what the PE house seems to focus on improving. Is the portfolio
company generating business or just cutting cost? Some might argue that cost cutting is not a long-
term sustainable solution. The EBITDA-margin, a measurement for a company's operating
profitability, could further explain the company´s attractiveness. The EBITDA measure excludes
interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, resulting in a margin that could give investor a clearer
view of a company's core operational profitability. The EBITDA-margin is a useful measure to
evaluate the PE industry, as for many others, because it excludes the effect from taxes that could vary
between industries, funds and countries. It is a pure operational profitability measure. An increase in
EBITDA-margin is a good indicator for a successful work and a more profitable operation. Running
regressions will clarify, if statistical significance is present, both how much and if the abnormal
financial performance could be explained from operating improvements.

The final variable with a potential explaining effect on abnormal financial performance is the EV-
multiple, a multiple commonly used to determine the value of a portfolio company. The EV-multiple
takes debt into account compared to measures like Price/Earnings, which is the reason why it is used

12
  The nine different variables created: Background Operational, Background Finance, Background Operational*Organic,
Education, Experience PE, Background Finance*Inorganic, Background Finance*Organic, Experience PE*Organic, and
International (further described in Appendix C).

                                                                               14
from a potential acquirer perspective. In this thesis the EV-multiple can be useful to show a potential
acquirer the changes in attractiveness for the portfolio company during the holding period and
hopefully increase the value of the company looking from the PE house perspective. The multiple
could also be useful for transnational comparisons since it ignores the distorting effect of individual
countries' taxation policies (Investopedia 2012). This is useful since the dataset have deals from
Finland, Sweden, Norway and Denmark.

The reason why changes in EV-multiple ∆𝑥 (𝑇 ) = 𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 divided by the number of holding years
(T-t) is used in the regressions instead of log EV-multiple has to do with multicollinearity. Using the
Farrar-Glauber test we found multicollinearity between the log EV-multiple and both the size variable

           13                                    14                                              15
(Log EV)  and change in EBITDA-margin . Multicollinearity was found for Log EV  but not for

                               16
changes in EBITDA-margin   when testing the EV-multiple calculated as changes in absolute
numbers. Log sales report no multicollinearity neither with change in EV-multiple in absolute

          17                       18
numbers  nor log EV-multiple  . Based on these tests, the change in EV-multiple in absolute numbers
is used as the independent variable in the regression analysis.

Our hypothesis here is that there will be a positive impact from the operating performance in the
portfolio companies on abnormal financial performance, relative to the sector peers. We hope to
provide evidence that higher abnormal financial performance is associated with a stronger operating
improvement in all operating measures; log sales, EBITDA-margin and EV-multiple. By performing
regression studies both how the variables affect abnormal financial performance and if so, in what
direction and magnitude will be observed.

Table 5, Panel A provides information regarding the operating performance for our sample deals prior
to PE entry as well as for the selected sector peers during the same period. The two reported operating
performance measures, sales and margin (x), are calculated as (Δxi, pre = xit - xit-2), from two years prior
to PE ownership to the last year prior to the acquisition. The annual change is calculated by dividing
with the number of years (duration). The exact same method is used for the corresponding sector
peers, (Δxs,pre = xst - xst-2), where (t) and (t-2) are based on the average performance for all different
sector peer groups during year (t) and (t-2) respectively. Median is used since the sample in the study

13
  The , that there is no multicollinearity could be rejected at a P-value 0.0014 (margin), indicating multicollinearity for
the two tested variables.
14
  The , that there is no multicollinearity could be rejected at a P-value 0.0499 (margin), indicating multicollinearity for
the two tested variables.
15
  The , that there is no multicollinearity could be rejected at a P-value 0.0118 (margin), indicating multicollinearity for
the two tested variables.
16
  The , that there is no multicollinearity could not be rejected at a P-value 0.8735 (margin), indicating no multicollinearity
for the two tested variables.
17
  The , that there is no multicollinearity could not be rejected at a P-value 0.3266 (margin), indicating no multicollinearity
for the two tested variables.
18
  The , that there is no multicollinearity could not be rejected at a P-value 0.6957 (margin), indicating no multicollinearity
for the two tested variables

                                                                               15
                                    19
is not perfect homogenous , which is often the case when using samples with fewer than 100
companies. The median change in deal log sales pre acquisition is 5.23% while the mean is 10.8%,
compared to the sector median of 9.02% and mean 9.05%. The change in deal EBITDA-margin pre
acquisition has a positive median, 0.34%, but a negative mean, -0.55%. The sector peer shows the
same pattern with a median of 0.49% and mean -0.57%. From these numbers, one can see that the
sector peers outperform the portfolio companies prior to the PE ownership, which is in line with the
general perception that PE houses search for undervalued companies struggling with their
performance. This gives the PE houses a better chance to actually improve the company’s
performance and hence try to increase the valuation of the company when it is time for an exit rather
than if they acquire an already blooming and efficient company.

Table 5, Panel B reports the changes in all three operating performance measure during PE-ownership
but in different approaches. Log is used to analyze the annual growth sales and annual growth in EV-
multiple and changes in absolute number for EBITDA-margin and EV-multiple. To capture the change
in EBITDA-margin and EV-multiple the difference is calculated between the last PE-ownership year
(T) to the last year prior to the acquisition (t) (Δxi = xiT - xit). The annual change is calculated by
dividing the differences with the number of holding years (T-t). In columns (i) results for the entire
sample of 53 observations are reported, in column (ii) for all organic deals (n=31) and in column (iii)
for all inorganic deals (n=22) hence, analyzing performance depending on strategy. Organic deals
focus only on internal value creation compared to inorganic deals, which have had some sort of
follow-on M&A activity during the holding period. This gives us the chance to control for either
internal value creation for sales, margin and multiple or the effects of M&A events, which increase
sales and could either increase or decrease margin and multiple depending on how the acquisition
targets initial performance stands in the respective measure.

The conclusions found from comparing Table 5 Panel A and Table 5 Panel B reports, first of all that
PE ownership in general tend to have a positive impact on operating performance. Secondly, PE
owned portfolio companies in our sample tend to outperform their sector peers. In column (i) in Table
5, Panel B the results shows that the PE houses seem to have outperformed their sector peers in all
four different operational measures. The median difference in log sales between the deals and the
peers is 2.0% (8.35% and 6.35% respectively) and comparing the differences in margin, it shows 0.79
percentage points. Our reported margin improvement is not in line with Kaplan’s (1989) reported
numbers, 1.4%-3.8% when comparing the median, but more in line when comparing the means,
1.96%, (2.14% and 0.18% respectively).

19
  There are some deals with extreme values that increases/decreases the mean even after the all values are winsorized. Due to
the circumstances, median is used to compare the results.

                                                                               16
An organic strategy tends to have a higher median growth in sales (9.20%) compared to an inorganic
strategy (7.67%) and the entire sample (8.35%) as showed in Table 5, Panel B, Row 1. The opposite is
the fact for the margin, where inorganic deals have the largest annual increase in margin, 1.38% and
organic has the lowest, 0.46%. Conclusions can be drawn that an organic strategy is preferable if the
PE house want to increase the portfolio company´s revenue and an inorganic strategy if margin
improvements are more desirable.

Both the entire sample and organic deals report positive median changes in the EV-multiple (0.25%
respectively 0.55%) compared to inorganic deals that reports a negative median changes in EV-
multiple of -0.22%. This is in line with the results in log EV-multiple where both the entire sample and
organic deals additionally reports positive numbers (2.38% respectively 10.9%), but in a higher
magnitude and inorganic deals as well reports a small negative growth with a median of -0.28% for
the log EV-multiple. These numbers shows that the portfolio companies (from a PE house perspective)
could possible generate a higher deal value when exit (for the entire sample and organic deals), since
the increase in EV-multiple could indicate a higher attractiveness for the companies.

Another interesting finding is that organic deals outperform their sector peers more than inorganic,
2.63% vs. 1.62%, for log sales and the opposite is the fact for EBITDA-margin. To note is that
inorganic deals outperform their sector peers with 1.59% and organic deals outperform their sector
peers with only 0.33% for EBITDA-margin. This is in line with the earlier reported results that the
best way of improving the margin is by using M&A activity, which is what we call an inorganic
strategy. Disregarding the effect if any M&A activity has been done (analyzing the entire sample), the
PE houses on average outperformed their sector peers. The most successful strategy for our sample
differs depending on what measure they value the most but as reported in Table 4, abnormal financial
performance when applying an organic strategy is significantly larger than the abnormal performance
for deals with an inorganic strategy.

When analyzing the differences between the portfolio companies operational performance pre PE
ownership and the performance during PE, reported in Table 5, Panel C, both sales growth and margin
have increased since the change in ownership structure. The median outperformance of growth in
sales is 2.91% but the results seem to vary among the deals. Also, the absolute margin has increased
with a median of 1.87% showing that the PE houses in our sample have on average managed to impact
the profitability in their portfolio companies in a positive way. When studying the differences between
the organic deals and the inorganic deals the results vary. The biggest impact on margin is related to

                                                  20
the inorganic deals (only nine available ) that reports a median increase of 4.35% compared to 1.11%

20
  Not all deals have accounting figures in year (t-2), which make it impossible to show the differences between pre and
during ownership for those.

                                                                               17
for organic deals. Even though the difference is not huge one might still be able to conclude that it is
easier for the PE houses to increase margin by practice M&A activity. The opposite is the fact for the
growth in sales where an organic strategy tends to increase the growth in sales significantly more. The
median increase in sales for organic deals is 6.37% but negative with -0.48% for inorganic deals.

5.1.2 Abnormal financial performance and operating performance

In this section the relationship between the operational performance and the abnormal financial
performance is identified and reported in Table 6. More specifically, we regress our unlevered
abnormal financial performance on log sales, increase in EBITDA-margin and changes in EV-
multiple.

                               ∆ − ∆ ∆ − ∆ ∆ − ∆

 All operating measures in the regression are calculated as the value above sector peers, (Δxi - Δxs). This
is done because we want to exclude the factor of luck that the PE house acquired the portfolio
company at the right time when margins and multiples in the sector were generally growing and not
because they actually improved the performance themselves. Column (i) present results for the entire
sample, while column (ii) reports for organic deals and (iii) for inorganic deals. For all three
categories, one regression result with Duration (2), (5) & (8) as an independent variable and one result
without are reported. To further test for significant results control for both duration and size (at entry)
is used in Regression (3), (6) & (9). In order to control for time and industry fixed effect we use time
and industry dummies for each regression.

All three operating performance measures show significant results and an impact on abnormal
financial performance in a positive and economically meaningful way. In Regression (3) a 1% change
in Δxi - Δxs margin increases the abnormal financial performance with roughly 0.94%. Both the
abnormal changes Δxi - Δxs in log sales and Δxi - Δxs multiple as well appear to be determinants of
abnormal performance but in a slightly lower magnitude, with only the last variable reporting a
significant value.

For organic deals, Table 6, Regression (4), all three operating measures reports a positive impact on
abnormal financial performance. However, only two out of three show significant results. The two
with significant result, improvement of EBITDA-margin and EV-multiple, shows that a 1% change in
the two measures impact the abnormal performance with 1.94% and 0.32% respectively. When
including Duration and size in our regressions lower significance level are reported. Studying log sales
in Regression (1) and (2) compared to Regression (3) we receive a P-value=1 for the third regression.
A situation that could be due to multicollinearity between log sales and Log EV. The Farrar-Glauber

                                                                               18
multicollinearity test is used to evaluate that assumption and the results showed that log sales and Log

                                                                                                           21
EV (size) correlates and therefore remove the significance and increase the P-value  . However, there
is an improvement in Regression (6) and (9) when including Log EV but the P-value is still too high
>0.35 and therefore insignificant. This leads to the conclusion that Log EV is not a good control
variable for log sales and results without are therefore also reported.

Furthermore, the deals with an inorganic strategy are analyzed. Regression (9) including both
Duration and Log EV reports a significant result showing a negative impact for the first time. Here, a
1% improvement in EBITDA margin above sector increases abnormal financial performance by
roughly 1.30%. A 1% change in the EV-multiple above sector peers decrease abnormal performance
by roughly -1.77%. The results regarding log sales above sector peers do not show any significant
results, which could be explained from the lower number of observations compared to the organic
deals and as discussed above, multicollinearity with Log EV. These results are supported by
Regression (7) and (8) including different control variables.

Based on the general result from the entire sample the most efficient way of increasing deal value is to
focus on improving the EBITDA-margin. The result is equivalent for both an organic strategy as for
an inorganic strategy. Growth in sales has also a positive impact on change in abnormal financial
performance but in a much smaller magnitude. Finally the changes in EV-multiple provides a positive
impact studying the entire sample. This is something not very surprising since a company’s value
often is expressed in different EV-multiples and the portfolio companies in our sample has on average
increased the value of their company, (median 16.3%, Table 3, Panel A). This in general implies an
increase in the EV-multiple.

5.2 Abnormal financial performance and employment related questions

The next step in our thesis is to analyze the effect on abnormal financial performance, if any, from
changes in employment related questions. Does PE houses increase or decrease the employment rate,
is it common with movements between important positions within the portfolio company and does PE
houses offer some kind of training portfolio company’s employees? These can be seen as interesting
questions since there are many prejudices and debates regarding PE houses way of working with cost
cutting and changes in employment rate.

Our hypothesis is based on Dr. Holger Frommann´s, a Managing Director of the German Venture
Capital Association, argumentation that PE houses rather create than destroy jobs in their portfolio
companies. We aim to prove that this is a correct assumption and by that refute the general perception

                                                                          th
in the society partly supported by The Economist article (28  January 2012) saying that the PE

21
  The , that there is no multicollinearity is rejected at a P-value of 0.0255, indicating that there is multicollinearity.

                                                                               19
industry destroys jobs. We assume that a change in employment rate has, in the next step, a positive
effect on the abnormal financial performance. A continuation of our hypothesis is that the time spend
on employment related questions from each PE house will have an positive impact on change in the
abnormal financial performance and the same goes for the amount of training given to the employees.
We finally assume that changing positions in Executive management and/or the Board of directors
within the portfolio company will have an impact on abnormal financial performance.

Necessary data on employment related questions are collected in two ways. First, changes in
employment rates are collected from the accounting data. The more qualitative information about for
example resources spent on employment questions and training offered is based on the survey
answers. The survey was sent to 334 Investment managers working at the selected Swedish PE houses
and three weeks later, 122 managers had answered. Since the Investment managers answering the
survey also answered which deals they have been involved in, a match between the answers regarding
employment and the specific deals were possible. When the matching was completed dummy

                                                                       22
variables based on the answers from these questions was created.   To analyze the potential effect,
regressions were performed with our dummies and ΔEmployment rate on abnormal financial
performance. When running these regressions both time dummies and industry dummies were
included in order to control for time- and industry fixed effects.

                                                 ∆
   ∆ ∆

Analyzing the results 38 out of the 53 deals increased the employment rate during the holding period
and only 14 decrease it. The average change in employment rate per year during the holding period
has a mean of 10.5% compared to the median of 7.41%. This is in line with our hypothesis that PE
houses create jobs but if it is really due to skills and knowledge from the PE houses or just an effect
from a booming industry is still not clear.

In Table 7 the results whether changes in employment rate actually has any significant effect on the
abnormal financial performance are reported. As reported in all regressions the changes in
employment rate only has a small but a positive and significant effect on the abnormal financial
performance. Time spend on employment related questions, on the other hand, has a large and
significant effect (when the control variable for size is not included). Based on this, we prove through
the Farrar-Glauber multicollinearity test that time spend on employment related questions and size

                                                                                                               23
correlates and therefore remove the significance and as a consequence increase P-value  . The dummy

22
  The questions answered were: “How much time do you spend on employment regarding questions in the portfolio
companies over the course of a month?”, “Have you offered the employees in the portfolio company some kind of
training/education during the holding period?”, “Did you do any changes in the board of directors in the portfolio company?”
and lastly “Did you do any changes in the executive management in the portfolio company?”
23
  The , that there is no multicollinearity is rejected at a P-value of 0.0040, indicating that there is multicollinearity.

                                                                               20
Time spend shows that if a PE house allocate at least two days a month they could higher their
abnormal financial performance with 7.61%, Regression (1). These results are supported by all the
other regressions reported in Table 7, for example Regression (8) where all variables except size are
included report a statistical significant result of 6.13%.

Table 7, Regression (3) & (4), reporting the same regressions but with one added independent
variable; if the PE house offers any training or education to the employees in the portfolio company.
This variable does not affect the values of the other two independent variables but shows that training
has a negative effect on the abnormal financial performance. Notable is that this result is not
statistically significant.

In Table 7, Regression (5)-(9), results including dummies whether the PE houses replaced anyone
sitting in the Board of directors or the Executive management are reported. The only statistically
significant result given from those two are the dummy representing changes in the Executive
management. What is interesting in our sample is that a replacement of a person sitting at an
Executive management position will have a large positive impact on the abnormal financial
performance. A change in the Executive management affects the abnormal performance with 10.8%,
Regression (9) including all control variables. A potential reason for the high reported numbers could
be due to the fact that almost every deal reported a change in the Executive management combined
with a majority of the deals had a positive abnormal financial performance. Another potential reason
for this big impact of changing a person in the Executive management could come from the PE house
managing to hire competent, professional and experienced people with the right skills set for that
specific task and company.

Generally, the length in years the PE house holds the portfolio company (the independent variable
Duration) has in these regressions a negative and significant effect on abnormal financial performance
with -1.10% for Regression (7). Another general conclusion is that spending time on employee related
questions seems to be a sufficient way of allocating resources if improving the financial performance
is the overall goal.

When creating our survey one predetermined usage was to perform the regressions but another was a
more qualitative case study of how Swedish PE houses essentially work with and values questions
concerning the employees in their portfolio companies. From this qualitative case study some
interesting results are found. Except from “Changes in cash holdings”, “Changes in capital structure”
and “Changes in amortization & depreciation”, “Questions regarding employee/ employment” is the
one where the least resources are allocated to, based on average numbers. Looking at that specific
question, 55 respondents out of 80 (≈69%) spend less than one day in the course of a month on

                                                                               21
employment related questions in the portfolio companies. This finding is of course very interesting
since the results in all regressions concerning employment shows that time spent on this function has a
large impact on the abnormal financial performance. What is also interesting to notice is that 63 out of
81 (≈78%) respondents believe that they should devote less or the same amount of resources to
employment related questions. This can be interpreted as if the PE houses is not aware of the
importance of this function when to increase their financial performance. On the other hand, 19.8% of
the respondent’s think they should allocate “more” or “much more” resources into employment
questions and the variety in the answers between the respondents is very small. The statistics reports a
variance of only 0.41, a level in line with the answers to most of the other questions. What can be
interpreted is that the Investment managers at the selected PE houses believe that the allocation of
resources they do is solid and in order. An average of 72.8% believe that they should continue to
allocate the same resource to each mentioned function for their portfolio companies.

When further asking them to rank how important questions regarding employment/employees in the
portfolio companies are in relation to eight other types of functions, (for example M&A activity,
capital structure and corporate governance issues) employment was ranked at position six out of nine
(Appendix E). The most important function when asking the Investment managers is operational
improvements and the least is changes in amortization and depreciation. Operational improvements
are ranked as top 3 at 80.5% of the answers and changes in amortization/depreciation is ranked at the
bottom 3 at 79.0% of the answers. Investment related decisions for the portfolio company (M&A
activity) is ranked at a top 3 position 59.3% of the answers. Notable is also that 55.0% of the
Investment managers think that the time spent on each function differs a lot depending on what
industry the portfolio company is operating in. 17.5% thinks it does not matter what industry they
work with and 27.5% neither agree or disagree regarding this question.

Interesting to conclude is also the fact that even though the Investment managers rank operational
improvements as number one out of nine and employment related questions at position six the results
from the regressions shows the opposite. Even if operational improvements have a positive impact on
the abnormal financial performance as well, especially from an increase in the EBITDA-margin, it is
not in the same range as if they increased the time spent on employment related matters.

Analyzing what kind of changes (related to the employment questions) the PE houses actually do
within their portfolio companies the answers received was very definite. Changes in the Board of
directors are done in 93% of the cases and in 97% when it comes to changes in the Executive
management if they done any changes at all. So, the PE houses more or less always replace positions
in the Executive management and board of directors. When replacing employees in the Board of
directors, it is the chairman of the board in 76% of the cases and representatives in 96% of the cases.
The reason why they change representatives more often than the chairman could be because it is easier

                                                                               22
to replace a representative than the chairman. When answering “Always” or “Often” on the question if
they replaced any position in the Executive management, a replacement of the CFO seems to be the
most common change, whereas 68% answered that they changed the CFO. The second most common
position to change is the CEO (64% of the cases when changing any position). Other common answers
are replacing the business developer, M&A manager and positions in the Project Management Office
(PMO). Changes in responsibilities for the employees (32% of the respondents) are also a quite
common way to improve the quality and performance within the portfolio company. Changes in
incentive programs, performance management, size of the management team and reorganization of the
company structure are changes mentioned in the answers as well. A further interesting observation is
that when the PE houses replace people in the Board of directors they replace them with either their
own employees or people within the professional network (92% answered always). When they
perform changes in the Executive management or at any operational position, it seems on the other
hand, to be very rare that their own employees or people from their professional network are hired.

When analyzing if the PE houses allocate any resources to training or education for the employees in
their portfolio companies the answers were more dispersed. 21% of the respondents said that they
always offer training/education and 58% answered either that they often or sometimes offered
training/education. The most common position to whom they offer training to is the Executive
management (95% of the cases). Only 17% of the respondents said that they offer training to people at
operational level.

A final interesting finding is the fact that only 8% of the respondents thought they lowered the
employment rate during their holding period, 53% believed they increased the employment rate and
40% thought it was hard to answer or that there was no change. When comparing those answers to the
real change in employment rate based on our sample, one can conclude the respondent included in the
53% were right. The mean change per year in employment rate during the PE ownership is 11.3% and
the median is a bit lower with 7.22%. This is even above what the Investment managers stated them
selves and the numbers must of course be seen as something positive and something that possibly
could still the on-going debate regarding whether or not they create or destroy jobs.

Overall, based on the reported results the best way to increase the abnormal financial performance for
the PE houses, when it comes to employment related issues, seems to be to focus on the actual time
spend on these types of questions. The responses from our survey shows that the Investment managers
only rank employment related questions as number six out of nine. They also think they devote as
much resources as need and that they neither should increase the resources allocated to employment or
decrease them, thoughts that do not match with the reality if increasing the abnormal financial
performance is the goal.

                                                                               23
5.3 Abnormal financial performance and Investment managers’ background

In this section a test performed to see whether there is a difference between Investment managers
background, their choice of strategy, if any, and how that correlates with the abnormal financial
performance. For instance, is it more profitable to have Investment managers with a financial
background or managers with an operational background that probably knows the industry better?
What strategy chosen, inorganic vs. organic, is also controlled for to see whether one of the strategies
are more profitable together with a certain background, financial or operational.

The survey (Appendix E) was used to collect information regarding professional background, finance
vs. operational and what strategy they applied, organic vs. inorganic. One again, each Investment
manager answers were matched with the corresponding deal to be able to study performance. We
assumed that mangers task-specific skills are relevant and correlated with the performance.

Both Gibbons and Waldman (2004) and Acharya and Gottschalg et.al (2011) applied a similar
approach that task-specific learning-by-doing leads to an accumulation of human capital. To clarify
this, they assume that Investment managers with a financial background have learned skills through
investment banking activities or similar, preferable within inorganic deals. Managers with operational
backgrounds on the other hand have learned revenue growth and efficiency improvement skills by
undertaking these actions at their previous positions, preferable within organic deals.

If this is true, our hypothesis is that we will find a correlation between Investments managers with a
financial background and deals with M&A activity (inorganic deals) and managers with an operational
background matched with organic deals. This hypothesis is based first on the assumptions that the
Investment managers apply the strategy he or she is most familiar with and have the best expertise in.
Secondly, we based the hypothesis on the assumption that the PE house matches the skills of their
employees with the planned strategy of the specific portfolio company.

We further chose to extend our study by looking at other factors describing Investment managers’
background that potentially could have an impact on abnormal financial performance. These factors
are education level, number of years within the PE industry and experience working abroad. Does it
matter if a manager has “only” a bachelor or master degree compared to a mangers with an MBA as
well and how much does experience from a longer career within PE, (some cases over 10 years) affect
abnormal financial performance compared to a graduate. International experience as a factor could be
more interesting to look at nowadays due to better opportunities to move and work abroad from less
severe EU regulations. An international career could potentially improve the Investment manager´s
competences but is this really true? Does working overseas have any visible effect on abnormal
financial performance and if so, in what way?

                                                                               24
Table 8 gives an overview of the Investment managers’ background and experience involved in our
selected deals. 36 managers have a background in finance, including both investment banking and
consulting since consulting could present both finance and operational background through for
example due diligences or strategy projects. In total 28 of the survey participants have worked at
operational positions meaning that there are a few managers who worked in both industries and has
therefore acquired experience within them both. We could therefore conclude that most Investment
managers in our sample are ex-bankers or managers with experience from both finance and
operational work and less with only an operational experience.

The results in Table 8 show that Investment managers with a financial background generate a higher
average abnormal financial performance (3.66%) compared to managers with operational background
(1.65%). For organic deals only, a background in finance compared to a background in operational
generates as well a higher abnormal performance, 7.36% compared to 3.36%. There is an even more
positive view for managers with a background in finance working in inorganic deals, (3.37%) is
reported compared to (-5.16%) if the managers has an operational background. This is in line with our
hypothesis that task-specific learning-by-doing leads to an accumulation of human capital. A
background in finance where you learn M&A activities and later on work with inorganic deals
improves average abnormal financial performance more than a manager with a background in
operational working with inorganic deals. What is surprising and went against our hypothesis was that
those with an operational background and chose to apply an organic strategy underperformed deals
against those with a background in finance who chose an organic strategy. However, we should not
forget that both present a positive abnormal performance (7.36% for finance) respectively (3.36% for
operational) saying that both backgrounds matched with corresponding strategy seem to perform well.
Our hypothesis that there will be a correlation between managers with finance background and an
inorganic strategy cannot be rejected or supported. Of the 36 managers with an finance background,
18 chose an inorganic strategy and 18 chose an organic strategy. Potentially because both reports a
positive average abnormal financial performance. Moreover, the results is almost the same for those
with operational background where 13 managers applied an inorganic strategy and 15 applied an
organic. A result weakly supporting our hypothesis.

In this study, there are 34 managers with a bachelor and/or master degree as their highest education
level and 12 managers with an MBA as their highest level, showing that Investment managers
emphasizes an education. Studying Table 8, higher education level only has a positive impact on
organic deals, 16.2% compared to -4.61% for inorganic deals. This could indicate that people studying
towards an MBA degree, were the focus in the education lies on live cases and practical assignments,
a potential advantage for organic deals (16.2% with an MBA, 7.65% without), benefit within organic
deals compared to managers with a bachelor/master degree were the program focus lies more on

                                                                               25
theory.. The results above could be compared to managers with a lower education level who generates
positive abnormal financial performance for all deals together and as well for both organic vs.
inorganic. When analyzing Education within only inorganic deals managers with less education
receives higher abnormal performance than higher educated managers do, 6.28% respectively -4.61%.
It is difficult to find reasons for this but a possible explanation could be that Investment managers with
only a bachelor/master degree often directly goes to investment banking related jobs where their
employers hire them in an early stage before they had the time to reach the level of an MBA degree.
As an investment banker you learn M&A activities, skills that could be an advantage you might miss
out if you choose to study for an MBA. This argument could be a potential explanation why managers
with an MBA who applies an inorganic strategy tend to perform worse than if they applied an organic
strategy. This leads us to a conclusion that a manager with an MBA does not have an advantage in
terms of knowledge for inorganic deals, as showed in Table 8, but the opposite is the case for organic
deals, reporting 16.2%.

To continue with the variable Experience PE, 28 persons have more than 7 years of experience within
the PE industry, the same number of managers has experience from working abroad. Studying the
results in Table 8 show a small difference in abnormal financial performance if the Investment
managers worked more or less than 7 years. The abnormal financial performance for experience over
7 years, gives an abnormal performance of 5.02% compared to 4.55% for less than 7 years.

Finally, studying International experience for all deals we could conclude that developing your career
in Sweden instead of working abroad generate an average abnormal financial performance of 8.42%
compared to 2.49% for the managers who worked abroad. Studying inorganic deals a slightly weaker
trend for manager who stayed in Sweden their whole career is found, generating 8.42% in average
abnormal financial performance compared to international experience generating a result of 1.15%
dittos. A reverse trend were found for the organic deals reporting 10.2% for the lack of international
experience, even though the difference to the result for international experience, 11.9% is quite small.

To continue and examine each variable´s impact on abnormal financial performance following
regression is used and represented in Table 9:

                                                                          𝒌 𝑶 𝒌
  𝑶 𝒌 𝑶 𝑶 𝟔 𝟕 𝒌
𝑶 𝟖 𝑶 𝟗 𝑰

Where unlevered abnormal financial performance represents our Y, x´ stands for our control variables:
Industry (control for differences in performance between industries) Log EV (control for size),
Duration (control for holding period) and Entry period (control for the year the PE house entered the
portfolio company). This is to control for time-based variations in financial returns. In the beginning,

                                                                               26
the purpose was to use fixed effects for PE houses to discern the effect between houses but due to too
few observations for each PE house that option was not doable and instead time- and industry fixed
effects were used.

We regress through cross-sectional variation with the estimated coefficients θ 9, in nine various
formations represented in Table 9, this since there is only one observation of Y per deal. Finally, is
the regression error. As described in Section 4, nine dummy variables were generated (Appendix C).

In Table 9 the regressed coefficients are reported and the results display an overall low significance for
Regression (1)-(5) and (8)-(9). However, some coefficients provide evidence and Regression (6)-(7)
show significant results for almost every coefficient included in the regression.

First, in Regressions (1) and (2) we regressed Background in operational, Organic and the interaction
term Background Operational*Organic, studying the effect of working with organic deals with an
operational background. Yet, it is unclear what effect working with organic strategies and the manager
has an operational background, actually has on abnormal financial performance due to statistical
insignificance (P-value >0.1). However, what statistically can be concluded is that an operational
background solely has a negative effect on abnormal financial performance since Regression (1)
reports -8,99% and Regression (2) -11,6% for the coefficient Background operational.

Regressions (3) and (4) observing finance background and inorganic deals have no statistical
significant variables. However, inorganic has as a strategy negative coefficients in both Regressions
when Duration is control for (3) and Duration and Log EV in (4). This can be seen as an indicator of
what direction (negative with -4.56% and -3.00%) the impact from that variable has on abnormal
financial performance, despite the lack of significance. Background in finance seems to be more
successful than background in operational and so is the case for Investment managers with a
background in finance working with inorganic deals as well. This could indicate that if you chose to
apply an inorganic strategy it is crucial that the people working with the portfolio company have a
financial background. Nevertheless, we shall not forget that we have no statistical significance (P-
value >0.68 in Regression (3)). To reconnect to the quote in Section 2 the regression and analysis
performed in this section is in line with Cumming, Siegel and Wright (2007) words: That it appears to
be a need to broaden the traditional financial skills base of Private Equity executives to include more
product and operational expertise. A statement that is beneficial for both the PE houses and the
portfolio companies.

In Regression (6) controlling for Duration and (7), controlling for both Duration and Log EV,
considerably more variables compared to Regression (1)-(4) is used. Here, the statistical significance
level is noticeably higher. We find that an operational background has a negative impact on abnormal

                                                                               27
financial performance (6) -7,33% and (7) -8,46%. This is supported by the same significant results
through Regressions (1), (2) and (6)-(8). However, an operational background together with applying
an organic strategy has a significant value in Regression (6) compared to other regression including
the same variables. The lack of explanatory factor could be explained from multicollinearity, since all
four regressions include the independent variable Organic and Background operational*Organic
together with Organic seem to have close linear relationship due to similar effects on abnormal
financial performance. However, to be absolutely sure we further test for multicollinearity with the
Farrar-Glauber test if Organic and Background operational*Organic correlates and after the test we

                                                                                                                      24
could conclude that it seemed to be the case and hence, lowering the significance level . As a
consequence, without the variable Organic as in Regression (6) the P-value for Background
operational*Organic increases tremendously.

Furthermore, the education level seems to have a positive effect on abnormal financial performance
through Regression (6)-(8). For instance Regression (7) presents a 4.60% positive impact on abnormal
financial performance, but in Regression (5) the impact seems to be the opposite and we receive a
negative value for Education. As studied in Table 8 we suggest that this has to do with Investment
managers having an MBA degree. As mentioned, they received a higher advantage in organic deals
(16.2%) compared to inorganic deals (-4.61%) and affected abnormal financial performance more
positive in comparison. The regressions in Table 9 provide further proofs for that statement. In
Regression (6)-(9) Education on Organic related characteristics receive a positive value on abnormal
financial performance compared to Regression 5 when regressing Education on Inorganic deal
characteristic variables and received a negative value.

Another interesting variable is the interaction term Experience*Organic, reporting a positive impact
on abnormal financial performance for Regression (6)-(9) where for example Regression (6) reports
11.9%. This could indicate that more experience the Investment manager has within PE, where he or
she has learned how the businesses work and how to handle certain industries, could provide an
advantage when later on working with organic deals. Regressing with Experience*Inorganic there is a
negative effect on abnormal financial performance, further proving this statement.

Finally, the last interesting finding regards international experience indicating a negative effect on
abnormal financial performance throughout Regression (6)-(9). In Regression (8) for example the
highest negative percentage impact on abnormal financial performance -11.9% is reported. As
mentioned above, our hypothesis was that international experience would accumulate an
understanding for diversity and improve the managers' working skills. Studying Regression (6)-(9)
does not prove any advantageous and instead tell us that experience from working abroad affect

24
  The , that there is no multicollinearity is rejected at a P-value of 0.0000, indicating that there is multicollinearity.

                                                                               28
abnormal financial performance negative. Therefore, Investment managers should stay and work in
Sweden to further learn how business in the Nordic region works if increasing the abnormal financial
performance is the manager´s main goal.

Conclusions for differences between Investment managers background, their choice of strategy, and if,
and how that correlates with the abnormal financial performance tells us that the “optimal” Investment
manager should have a finance background preferable working with organic strategy. However, a
manager with finance background working within inorganic deals generate as well a higher abnormal
performance compared to a manager with a background in operational. The education level seems to
be less important even though we see that a bachelor/master degree in general receives higher
abnormal financial performance compared to an MBA degree. To succeed within organic deals an
MBA is to prefer. Something surprising and quite unexpected was that Investment manager working
solely in Sweden for their entire career affect abnormal financial performance on average higher than
managers with experience from working abroad.

5.4 Robustness test

In order to test whether our results are robust we perform several regressions with alternative proxies
for both operational measures, employment related questions and Investment managers background.
First, we tested to change our dependent variable from Unlevered abnormal financial performance to
Levered ditto, reported in Table 10. This is to be able to determine if the results in our regressions
produce any significant differences with the difference dependent variable. When performing these
robustness tests we can conclude that our results seems to be stable and not vary greatly neither in the
independent variables direction (positive/negative) or the significance level. The only exception is for
the ∆EBITDA-margin where the P-value went from 0.11 to 0.095, now showing a significant value

                                                                                           2
when regressing for the leverage dependent variable. What can be concluded is that R keeps almost
the same level for the regressions with an even slightly higher value for the Unlevered variable
compared to the Levered in some regressions. This is something strengthening our results further.

In Table 10, results from the test were changing selected proxies used when unlevering our dependent
variable are also reported. The purpose was to prove that altering the tax level when unlevering CAGR
and TRS do not have any impact on the final variable abnormal financial performance, this since the
change, proportionally, for the values when unlevering both CAGR and TRS are the same. Once
again, the regressions results did not change to a greater extent compared to previous definition further
strengthening our results.

                                                                               29
6. Conclusion and Discussion

To adequately answer our research questions stated in the Section 1 an interesting result that confirms
most people’s prejudices about the PE industry can be verified. It is the fact that the PE houses seem
to acquire companies struggling with their performance compared to their sector peers, since one can
see that the sector peers outperform the portfolio companies prior to the PE ownership. The reason for
this is probably to have a fair chance to improve the turnover and margins, which the PE houses seem
to do since the deals in our sample outperformed their sector peers for all four different operational
measures when comparing the measures during the PE ownership period. The results also conclude
that if you as an Investment manager at a Swedish PE house want to improve the EBITDA margin
more sufficient an inorganic strategy was to prefer. If sales improvements are the priority on the other
hand, the strategy to apply is an organic. The operational measure that had the biggest impact on
changes in abnormal financial performance was improvements in the EBITDA-margin. This is another
indicator that the efficiency of the revenues (the margin) is more important than just a large-scale
business. Whether the improvement are sustainable or only a short-term fix to increase the valuation
multiple before the exit, is hard to draw any conclusions about.

The results answering the second research question showed that annual change in the employment
rate, spending more than two days a month on employment related questions and changing people in
the Executive management, all contributes to an increase in the abnormal financial performance. This
is not directly in line with the argument that operational improvements are the only true value creator
together with an inorganic growth through M&A activities (Bergström et al. 2007). However, one
should not forget that the above mentioned activities related to employment are all indirect actions
contribution to improving the operational performance. The reported findings could potentially be a
new insight for the PE industry but what must be noticed is once again the question whether or not this
is a sustainably way of creating value in the portfolio company.

From the last research question, the conclusions regarding what the most sufficient background is for
a PE manager if the main goal is to improve the abnormal financial performance, we found that
neither an operational or an international background are preferable. Instead, a background in finance
is the most value creating background, a result not fully in line with Acharya, Gottschalg, Hahn and
Kehoe (2011), who stated that both operational and finance create value depending on the strategy,
organic or inorganic. What is interesting with this finding is the fact that the career path nowadays for
a young ambitious student that in the future wants to work within the PE industry is to move and work
abroad, often in a big financial mecca like London, New York or Hong Kong. According to our study,
this is not the most fruitful and efficient career choice for a graduate who wants to be successful and
bring a great deal of value when he or she returns home. Instead, having an MBA degree is something
that, in our sample, brought value to the portfolio companies, but solely for organic deals. Maybe the

                                                                               30
experience both from practical teaching and within the PE industry is a bigger advantage when trying
to improve operational performance due to the fact that there are often large organizational challenges
and therefore problematic to accomplish. This extensive experience might not be as crucial when
applying an M&A strategy where only a couple of years of experience within the finance industry
seem to be enough.

Our findings are interesting in many ways but not complete. Suggestions to a further research question
is to investigate what kind of strategies the PE houses apply depending on what industry the portfolio
company is operating in or the shape of the company. A second interesting approach is to expand the
research whether the PE houses create even more value within some industries than others. As a final
suggestion based on the findings in our study, is to expand the research regarding the time spend on
employment related questions in the portfolio company. What is it that actually brings value and why?

There are some potential limitations with this thesis. First of all it is hard to measure the effect of
M&As. In this industry it is difficult to find information about both internal and external changes
during the holding period, especially regarding follow-on M&As. This could lead to an inconclusive
result since deals with a significant additional investment are subject to an error term due to the bias
by the acquired entity. Therefore, we separate the deals into organic and inorganic deals to overcome
the lack of transparency. Two other problems due to this matter is the usage of IRR and the PE houses
tax planning. As discussed before, IRR is not always a perfect way of evaluating the PE houses
performance. Based on this argument and lack of information to further calculate IRR, compounded
annual growth rate (CAGR) for the differences in deal value between entry and exit is used as a proxy
instead. Furthermore, it is impossible for us to have full information about PE funds being situated at
different offshore financial centers (for example Cayman Island) an issue that might affect PE houses
tax planning and in the next step their profit (Huffington Post, January 2012).

What can also be discussed regarding this thesis is the sample size. Only 53 observation is used and
when dividing the sample into organic and inorganic it narrows the sample down to n=31 and n=22
respectively. The theory says that at bigger sample provides a more truth telling result but in our study
some statistically significant results for both the entire sample and divided into strategy are reported.
The final limitation is the reliability of the responses from the survey. We cannot know how honestly
the Investment managers answered our survey but we tried to overcome this problem by letting the
respondents be anonymous. After trying to prevent the problem we assume that they answered as
truthfully as possible.

                                                                               31
8. References

Acharya, V. Gottschlag, O. Hahn, M. and Kehoe, C. 2011, Corporate governance and value creation
evidence from private equity, working paper, NYU

Andrade, K and Kaplan, S. 1997, How costly are financial (not economic) distress? Evidence from
highly leveraged transactions that became distressed, Journal of finance vol 53 no. 5, pp. 1443-1493

Bergström, C. Grubb, M. and Jonsson, S. 2007, The operating impact of buyouts in Sweden: A study
of value creation, Journal of Private Equity, vol. 11 no. 1 pp. 22-39

Boucly, Q. Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D. 2011, Growth LBOs, Journal of Financial Economics vol. 102,
pp. 432-453

Cumming, D.Siegel, D.S. and Wright, M. 2007, Private Equity, Leveraged Buyouts and
Governance, Journal of Corporate Finance vol. 13 pp. 439–460

Davis, S.J. Haltiwanger, J. Jarmin, R.S. Lerner, J. Miranda, J. 2011, Private Equity and Employment,
U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies

Guo, S. Hotchkiss, E.S. and Song, W. (2011) Do buyouts (still) create value?, Journal of Finance, vol.
66, no. 2, pp. 479-517

Jensen, M. 1989, Eclipse of the Public Corporation, Harvard Business Review, Sept.-Oct., pp. 61-74

Kaplan, S. 1989, The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operations and Value, Journal of Financial
Economics vol. 24 no. 2, pp. 217-254

Kaplan, S. and A. Schoar. 2005, Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence, and Capital Flows,
Journal of Finance, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1791–1823

Kaplan, S. Klebanov, N. Mark, N. and Sorensen, M. 2008, Which CEO Characteristics and
Abilities Matter? AFA 2008, New Orleans Meetings Paper, July 2008

Kaplan, S. N. and Strömberg, P. 2008, Leveraged buyouts and private equity, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 23 no. 1, pp. 121–46

Lerner, J. Sorensen, M. and Stromberg, P. 2008, Private Equity and Long-Run Investment: The Case
of Innovation, Working Paper, Stockholm School of Economics

Leslie, P. and P. Oyer, 2009, Managerial Incentives and Value Creation: Evidence form
Private Equity, Stanford-GSB

Lichtenberg, F. and Siegel, D.S. 1990, The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity and Related
Aspects of Firm Behavior, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27 no. 1, pp. 165-194

Liechtenstein, H. Prats, J. Herrera, A. Meerkatt, H. Rose, J. Brigl, M. 2008, The advantage of
persistence: How the best private-equity firms "beat the fade", IESE Business School and Boston
Consulting Group

Smith, A. 1990, Corporate ownership structure and performance: The case of management buyouts,
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27 no. 1, pp. 143-164

Strömberg, P. Hotchkiss, E.S and Smith D.S. 2011, Private equity and the resolution of financial
distress, Finance Working paper no. 331

                                                                               32
Phalippou, L. 2011, Why is the Evidence on Private Equity Performance So Confusing?, working
paper series, University of Oxford

Weir, C. Jones, P. and Wright, M. 2007, Public to private transactions, private equity and performance
in the UK: An empirical analysis of the impact of going private, working paper, Nottingham
University

8.1 Other sources

Berk, J and DeMarzo, P, 2007, Corporate Finance, publisher Pearson, edition 1, pp. 476

EVCA Research Statistics 2011, Private equity investment as a percentage of GDP, Available at:
http://www.evca.eu/uploadedfiles/Home/Knowledge_Center/EVCA_Research/Statistics/Yearbook/Ev
ca_Yearbook_2011.pdf, [Accessed 30 March 2012]

Fromman, H. 2005, Managing Director of the German Venture Capital Association -BVK presents
study on economic impact of private equity, 26. Available at:
http://www.bvkap.de/privateequity.php/cat/67/aid/110/start/30/title/German_Companies_Widely_Ben
efit_from_Private_Equity [Accessed 13 April 2012]

Investopedia, 2012, Available at: http://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/ev-ebitda.asp [Accessed 11
May 2012]

Kaletsky, A. 2007, The real reason why private equity is under fire, The Times, 21
June, Available at:
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/anatole_kaletsky/article1963946.ece,
[Accessed 13 April 2012]

Morris, P. “Private Equity, Public Loss?”, 2010, Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation, July
[Accessed 9 May 2012]

The Economist (2012), Bain or Blessing, 28 January 2012, Available at:
< http://www.economist.com/node/21543550>, [Accessed 2 February 2012]

Samuels, B. 2012, “Romney, Private Equity, and the Future of American Capitalism” Available at:
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bob-samuels/romney-private-equity_b_1225250.html [Accessed 2
April 2012]

SAS Institute Inc, Introduction to fixed effects methods: Available at:
http://support.sas.com/publishing/pubcat/chaps/58348.pdf [Accessed 14 May 2012]

                                                                               33
                                   Table 1 – Literature review

This table reports the related literature used in our study. The aim is to give a clear overview of the differences
between the existing studies and their reported results. Outperform/underperform chosen benchmark
Paper N Sample region Sample Year Results Benchmark Note
Kaplan (1989) 76 US 1980-1986 Outperform 4-digit SIC Code Operating changes are due to improved
                                                                                                              incentives rather than layoffs.
Jensen (1989) 1514 US 1979-1988 - Public         Publicly held corporation has outlived its
                                                                               companies       usefulness in many sectors of the economy
                                                                                                              --> increased PE activity
Smith (1990) 58 US 1977-1986 Outperform 4-digit SIC Code Operating returns increase significantly
                                                                                                              from the year before to the year after
                                                                                              buyouts.
Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990) 20 493 US 1981-1986 Outperform 4-digit SIC Code Plants involved in LBOs had higher rates of
                                                                                                           total-factor productivity growth than other
Andrade and Kaplan (1997) 124 US 1980-1989 Outperform Value Line's     plants in the same industryThe sample firms experience a marginally
                                                                                           classifications    positive change in (market- or
                                                                                     (survey)         industryadjusted) value.
Bergström, Grubb             73 Sweden 1998-2006 Outperform 4-NACE 1.1-    The LBOs have a positive impact on
 and Jonsson (2007)                                                                   digits of the      operating performance. No support that the
                                                                                buyout          increased value is created at the expense of
                                                                                                  the employees.
Weir, Jones                 122 UK 1998-2004 Underperfom 3 digit SIC group No performance deteriorates relative to the
 and Wright (2007)                                                                    and 2 digit SIC   pre-buyout situation but firms do not
                                                                                 group           perform worse than firms that remain public

Kaplan and Strömberg (2008) 17 171 Worldwide 1970-2007 Outperform S&P500 Index Strong evidence that PE activity creates
                                                                                                  economic value.
Lerner, Sorensen,             495 Worldwide 1980-2005 Outperform Public peers    Find no evidence that LBOs are associated
 and Strömberg (2008)                                                                 (IPO's)           with a decrease in investment innovations
                                                                                                          in the long-term perspective

Kaplan, Klebanov,            224 US 2000-2006 - - The subsequent performance in the firms is
 Mark and Sorensen(2008)                                                                              positively related to general ability and
                                                                                                           execution skills of the CEOs
Leslie and Oyer (2009) 144 US 1996-2005 Week/      2-digit SIC Code PE-owned companies provide higher
                                                                     No evidence                   managerial incentives to their top mgmt
                                                                                                      compared to public corporations. No proof
                                                                                                         for outperforming sector peers

Guo, Hotchkiss              192 US 1990-2006 No diff. 4-digit SIC Code Show that the deals in the sample are
 and Song (2009)                                                                                   somewhat more conservatively priced and
                                                                                                           less highly levered than their predecessors
                                                                                                        from the 1980s
Boucly, Sraer                839 France 1994-2004 Outperform Similar         3 yr following a LBO, targets become more
 and Thesmar (2011)                                                                companies not   profitable, grow faster compared to their
                                                                                    go through an    peers.
                                                          LBO
Acharya, Gottschlag,          395 Europé 1991-2007 Outperform 3-digit ICB Abnormal performance is positive for
 Hahn, Keohe (2011)                                                                                  operational measures relative to peers.
                                                                                                            Partners with an operational (finance)
Strömberg, Hotchkiss          2 156 Worldwide 1997-2010 - 4-digit SIC Code background outperforms in organicPE owned firms are no more likely to default
 and Smith (2012)                                                                                         than other firms with similar leverage
                                                                                                               characteristics

                         Table 2: Distribution of the deals by entry and exit years

The table below reports the year that the PE house acquired (Entry) and sold (Exit) their portfolio companies
based on the collected sample used in the paper. A total of 53 observations are used.
Years  1997  1998  1999  2000  2001  2002  2003  2004
Entry  1  0  5  4  12  3  4  8
Exit  0  0  0  0  1  1  0  3

          2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  SUM
Entry  5  6  2  2  1  0  0  53
Exit  11  11  7  3  2  4  10  53

                                                                               34
                       Table 3 - Panel A: Summary statistics on financial measures

This table reports summary statistics on the financial performance. The first part, (Row1-3) reports information
regarding changes in the deal value from entry to exit. Deal unlevered CAGR is the compounded annual growth
rate from entry date (t) to exit date (T) for the deals in our sample. The CAGR is unlevered by using industry
average D/E-ratio, industry average tax rate and the intra-bank rate from the country the portfolio company has
                             ( ) ( )
its headquarter. =
                            ( ( )
The Deal abnormal financial performance is the Deal unlevered CAGR minus calculated unlevered Total Return
to Shareholders (TRS). TRS are computed using DataStream and one TRS is calculated for each industry in the
sample varying for each portfolio company´s holding period. Duration is the number of years the PE house held
the specific portfolio company. Second part of the table, (Row 4-8) compares the deal size (Enterprise value)
and the deal EV multiple from entry to exit.

 Variables N mean median std. dev. min max

                                      a b
 Deal Unlevered CAGR                     53 21.8 16.3 20.4 -4.4 78.8

                                               a b
 Deal Abnormal Performance                49 7.02 4.55 15.8 -17.0 46.0
 Duration 53 4 4 2 1 11

                             a c
 Deal size (entry)                          53 222 89.4 311 1.42 1600

                           a c
 Deal Size (exit)                          53 364 250 350 3.52 1650

                           a d
 Deal EV (entry)                            53 21.6 10.1 32.1 -9.0 98.9

                         a d
 Deal EV (exit)                            53 11.6 11.1 32.2 -164 124
 a) The values are winsorized due to a few but large outliers. Winsorzied highest 5% and lowest 5% and replaced them with
the values at the predefined 95% and 5% limit.
b) Values in percent
c) Values in MEUR
d) Only deal where both EV and EBITDA is available

        Table 3 - Panel B: Summary statistics on the portfolio companies operational performance

This table reports five different summary statistics for the deals in our sample both at entry and exit date. Entry
is based on accounting data from the last pre-PE ownership year (t) and exit is based on the last PE ownership
year (T). The number of observation differs since accounting data is missing for a few deals. No deals are
excluded in these statistics and even the one with a negative cash flow or EBITDA are reported.
 Variable N mean median std. dev. min max

                      a b
 Sales (entry)                        53 231 78.3 415 0.28 2140
                    a b
 Sales (exit)                         53 300 110 533 0.54 3180

                             a b
 EBITDA (entry)                    52 19.4 7.8 40.2 -39.4 213
                          a b
 EBITDA (exit)                      53 41.0 16.5 80.4 -17.2 515

                               a b
 Cash flow (entry)                    49 10.2 4.3 20.7 -22.7 104
                            a b
 Cash flow (exit)                     52 18.8 7.7 40.5 -14.1 201
 Employment (entry) 53 1415 307 2513 2 11696
 Employment (exit) 53 1610 453 3053 2 16748
 Growth Employment rate 53 10.5 7.41 18.4 -20.5 75.3
a) The values are winsorized due to a few but large outliers. Winsorzied highest 5% and lowest 5% and replaced them with
the values at the predefined 95% and 5% limit.
b) Values in MEUR

                                                                               35
                         Table 4: Unlevered Abnormal financial performance

The table reports the Unlevered abnormal financial performance broken down in a couple of different angles.
We report for the entire sample and for organic and inorganic deals based on the entire period of entry. We also
report the same measure but decomposed into the four chosen entry time periods. The four time periods are:
1997-2000, 2001-2003, 2004-2006 and 2007-2009 by using dummy-variables for each year.
Standard deviation is reported to show the variation of the unlevered abnormal performance.
                      All deals Organic deals                 Inorganic deals
Variables N mean median std. dev. N mean median std. dev. N mean median std. dev.

All deals 49 7.02 4.55 15.8 28 11.4 7.65 17.2 21 1.18 4.55 11.8
Entry period 1 10 4.26 0.01 19.6 5 16.3 3.36 21.1 5 -7.80 -6.53 7.47
Entry period 2 18 9.63 5.02 17.4 10 15.6 8.73 20.5 8 2.18 5.02 9.23
Entry period 3 16 2.87 4.20 12.1 10 3.66 -0.07 12.9 6 1.55 6.24 11.6
Entry period 4 5 16.4 16.2 8.97 3 15.1 16.2 2.61 2 18.5 18.5 17.2
 Note: All numbers are in percent.
a) Due to a few but large outliers we winsorize by replacing the 5% highest and 5% lowest values and as well dropped 4
extreme values, making us left with 49 observations.
b) Proxies is used for D/E ratio collected from the People Stern NYU Education due to limited access and 𝐷 is an average
for each country's intra-bank rate. Since Euribor did not exist 1997 and 1998 we used 1999 as a proxy for those two years
regarding deals from Finland.

              Table 5 - Panel A: Change in operating performance before PE ownership

This table reports the changes in various operating measures (x) for pre PE ownership between entry year (t) and
two years before the acquisition (t-2) for both sales and EBITDA-margin (EBITDA/sales). The table presents
both each deal and the calculated, corresponding sector peers from DataStream. To be more specific the formula
for each deal is: 𝑥 = 𝑥 − 𝑥 where (t) represent the year the PE house acquired the portfolio company
and (t-2) the value two years before the PE house entered. The deal corresponding sector companies is
calculated the same way ( 𝑥 = 𝑥 − 𝑥 ) As reported below we had 31 observations for deal log sales, 53
for sector log sales, 29 for deal margin and finally 53 observations for sector margin. The difference in the
number of observations is due to missing accounting values for (t-2).

                                    All deals Organic deals Inorganic deals
 Variables N mean median N mean median N mean median

 ∆xipre deal log sales 31 10.8 5.23 22 14.0 5.27 9 3.12 4.15
 ∆xspre sector log sales 53 9.05 9.02 31 9.13 9.42 22 8.94 9.00
 ∆xipre deal margin 29 -0.55 0.34 20 -0.10 0.53 9 -1.56 -1.25
 ∆xspre sector margin 53 -0.57 0.49 31 -0.25 0.57 22 -1.02 -0.01
Note: All values in percent, median sector changes.
a) Only deals where all accounting data is available.
b) Extreme values within the sector peer groups are dropped, this to make the peer groups comparable.
c) Sales and EBITDA-margin are winsorized for both deal (portfolio) companies and corresponding sector companies with
the highest 5% and the lowest 5% values.

                                                                               36
              Table 5 - Panel B: Change in operating performance during PE ownership

This table reports the changes in various operating measures (x) for during PE ownership between exit year (T)
to the last year pre-acquisition (t), 𝑥 = 𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 . We report the same measures for corresponding sector,
 𝑥 = 𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 . The sector measures are an average of the values during the year the PE house own the
corresponding portfolio company, which leads to all deals in the sample to have a different and custom made
sector peer. We divide the difference in margin and multiple between (T) and (t) with the number of ownership
years (T-t) to obtain annual nominal growth. For log sales and log multiple we used instead the formula 𝑥 =
    (𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 ) (        ) to get annual figures. The first column (i) is all deals and in column (ii) and (iii) the
                  𝐷
deals are separated based on the strategy applied from the PE house.
                                  (i) All deals (ii) Organic deals (iii) Inorganic deals
 Variables N mean median N mean median N mean median

 ∆xi deal log sales 53 13.9 8.35 31 16.1 9.20 22 10.8 7.67
 ∆xi sector log sales 53 6.25 6.35 31 6.35 6.57 22 6.11 6.05
 ∆xi deal margin 49 2.14 0.80 28 1.87 0.46 21 2.51 1.38
 ∆xi sector margin 53 0.18 0.01 31 0.53 0.13 22 -0.31 -0.21
 ∆xi deal multiple 53 -2.44 0.25 31 -2.29 0.55 22 -2.64 -0.22
 ∆xi sector multiple 53 0.12 0.06 31 28.9 6.30 22 -11.2 8.15
 ∆xi deal log multiple 49 -3.46 2.38 28 2.19 10.9 21 -11.0 -0.28
 ∆xi sector log multiple 53 0.12 0.07 31 10.6 7.47 22 13.1 9.93
Note: All values in percent, median sector changes.
Note 2: The difference in the number of observations is due to missing accounting data for a few deals.

       Table 5 - Panel C: Change in operating performance between during and pre PE ownership

This table reports the average difference between the operational measure log sales and EBITDA-margin for
during (T-t) the PE ownership and before the PE ownership (t-(t-2)). Both the values during and before are
calculated with the formula; 𝑥 = 𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 and is annualized by the number of years (Duration) between (T-t)
and (t-(t-2)) respectively 𝑥𝐷 = 𝑥 𝐷 (𝑇 ) − 𝑥 ( ( )) The table reports both for the entire sample
and divided into the two separate strategies, organic and inorganic.
                              All deals Organic deals Inorganic deals
Variables N mean median std. dev. N mean median std. dev. N mean median std. dev.

∆xi during-predeal log sales 31 2.03 2.91 25.2 22 3.11 6.37 28.8 9 -0.63 -0.48 14.3
∆xi during-predeal margin 29 3.24 1.87 5.96 20 2.41 1.11 4.76 9 5.08 4.35 8.07
 Note: All values in percent, median sector changes.
Note 2: The difference in the number of observations is due to missing accounting data for a few deals.

                                                                               37
                Table 6: Abnormal financial performance by operational improvements

The table reports cross-sectional abnormal financial performances to changes in log sales, margin and multiple
(the operating measures) with OLS regressions for the realized deals in the collected data set.
To test operational changes on abnormal financial performance we obtained log sales, EBITDA-margin and EV-
multiple by calculating the difference between the last pre-PE-ownership year (t=0) to exit year (T), ( 𝑥 =
𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 ). We divide the difference in margin and multiple between (T) and (t) with the number of ownership
years (T-t) to obtain annual nominal growth. For log sales we instead used the formula 𝑥 = (𝑥 𝑇 −
𝑥 ) (        ) to get annual figures. In the same way we calculated median changes in deal corresponding
       𝐷
sector companies ( 𝑥 = 𝑥 𝑇 − 𝑥 ). As independent variables in the regression we then used the difference
between deal changes and sector changes ( 𝑥 − 𝑥 ).
We divided our regressions into three parts (i)-(iii) and varied our control variables Log EV and Duration
through the regressions. First part (i) represents all deals including both organic and inorganic deals (REG1-3),
Second part (ii) only organic deals (REG4-6) and last part (iii) only inorganic deals (REG7-9). All deals are
controlled for Entry Period (Time, 1997-2000, 2001-2003, 2004-2006 and 2007-2009) and industry fixed-effects
                                           Dependent variable: Abnormal Performance in %

                                    (i) All Deals            (ii) Organic Deals (iii) Inorganic deals
 Independent
Variables REG1 REG2 REG3 REG4 REG5 REG6 REG7 REG8 REG9

∆xi – ∆xs log sales 0.28 0.27 0.00 0.37 0.39 0.24 0.24** 0.20 -0.25
 P-value  0.12 0.14 1.00 0.40 0.27 0.44 0.04 0.10 0.37
∆xi – ∆xs margin 1.31* 1.04 0.94** 1.94*** 0.59 0.03 0.23 0.45*** 1.30*
 P-value  0.10 0.11 0.03 0.00 0.12 0.91 0.54 0.00 0.08
∆xi – ∆xs multiple 0.26* 0.24 -0.23 0.32* 0.11 -0.14 -0.51 -0.67 -1.77**
 P-value  0.10 0.11 0.39 0.10 0.59 0.43 0.44 0.16 0.04
LogEV  0.43*** 0.42*  0.62**
 P-value  0.00  0.06  0.05
Duration  -1.76 -0.96* -4.92*** -2.60 1.44** 0.32
 P-value  0.12 0.09 0.01 0.19 0.04 0.69
Industry  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Entry Period  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Intercept  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
N  43 43 43 23 23 23 20 20 20
 r2  0.23 0.30 0.59 0.40 0.71 0.80 0.35 0.44 0.68
 Note; * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

                                                                               38
                Table 7: Abnormal financial performance by Employment related issues

The table reports the relationship between cross-sectional abnormal financial performance from Employment
related issue with OLS regressions for all realized deals. We created five independent variables, where
∆Employment rate was taken from the collected data set and the four other variables from the survey. We started
by analyzing how ∆Employment rate affects abnormal financial performance. We continued with studying a
Time spend-dummy, indicating how much time spend on employment related questions affect performance and
as well an Education-dummy, showing whether the PE houses offering education to employees affect abnormal
performance. We ended our study by looking at the potential differences if PE houses changed positions in
Executive management and/or the Board of directors. We controlled our regressions for Duration and Log EV
(size effect). We also add Entry period (Time, 1997-2000, 2001-2003, 2004-2006 and 2007-2009) and industry
fixed effects.
                               Dependent Variable: Abnormal Performance in %

Independent Varibles REG1 REG2 REG3 REG4 REG5 REG6 REG7 REG8 REG9

∆ Employment 0.35** 0.23* 0.36** 0.24** 0.37** 0.25** 0.44** 0.41** 0.29**
 P-value  0.03 0.06 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03
Time Spend  7.61** 3.41 8.15** 4.23 6.92** 3.67 5.20* 6.13** 3.14
 P-value  0.04 0.29 0.02 0.26 0.04 0.32 0.06 0.03 0.34
 Training   -1.80 -3.47 -3.52 -4.48 -8.68 -6.65 -7.19
 P-value   0.81 0.42 0.65 0.39 0.25 0.35 0.25
∆ Executive mgmt   10.1 6.56 16.9** 14.7** 10.8**
 P-value    0.19 0.40 0.02 0.01 0.12
 ∆ Board of Directors    -15.0* -11.6 -10.2
 P-value     0.10 0.21 0.04
Duration  -2.22** -1.64** -2.10** -1.38* -1.95** -1.33*  -1.10* -0.61
 P-value  0.01 0.04 0.02 0.06 0.02 0.08  0.09 0.29
LogEV  0.30** 0.31**  0.29*  0.28**
 P-value  0.02  0.03  0.05  0.01
Industry  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Entry Period  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Intercept  Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
N  42 42 42 42 42 42 42 42 42
 r2  0.38 0.54 0.39 0.56 0.43 0.58 0.47 0.50 0.63
 Note; * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

                                                                               39
      Table 8: Performance overview by deal partner background (Human capital) and PE strategy

This table gives an overview of the background of the Investment managers involved in our selected deals. The
dummy describing Background Finance indicate 1 for manager with finance related jobs such as Investment
banking and consulting and as well those working in both finance and operational. Background Finance=0
indicates if they worked solely within operational businesses before. The Education dummy indicates whether
Investment Managers has an MBA or solely a Bachelor/Master degree. The PE Experience dummy shows how
much experience the Investment managers have within the PE industry in which 1 stand for more than 7 years
and 0 less than 7 years. Finally the International dummy describes whether the Investment manager has
experience of working abroad.
For each category we report median of our dependent variable, abnormal financial performance.
                                                 Dependent variable: Abnormal Performance in %
                                                 (i) All deals (ii) Organic Deals (iii) Inorganic deals

                                             Abnorm. Abnorm. Abnorm.
Investment Managers Background N Perfom. N Perfom. N Perfom.
Professional Background Finance=1 39 3.66 18 7.36 18 3.37
background Background Finance=0 10 8.45 7 12.1 3 5.49
                   N/A  3 -9.79 3 -9.79 0 0.00
Professional Background Operational=1 28 1.65 15 3.36 13 -5.16
background Background Operational=0 18 8.42 10 13.3 8 7.06
                   N/A  3 -9.79 3 -9.79 0 0.00
Education Education=1 12 -0.88 3 16.2 9 -4.61
                   Education=0 34 6.28 22 7.65 12 6.28
                   N/A  3 -9.79 3 -9.79 0 0.00
PE experience Experience_PE=1 28 5.02 15 3.36 13 5.49
                   Experience_PE=0 18 4.55 10 13.3 8 1.67
                   N/A  3 -9.79 3 -9.79 0 0.00
International International=1 28 2.49 13 11.9 15 1.15
experience International=0 18 8.42 12 10.2 6 8.42
                   N/A  3 -9.79 3 -9.79 0 0.00
 Note: For detailed descriptions of variables (Appendix C).
 Note 2: Values in median percent

                                                                               40
             Table 9: Abnormal performance by deal partner background and PE strategy

The table reports the relationship between cross-sectional abnormal financial performance and Investment
managers background with OLS regressions for all realized deals. We created 11 independent variables to
capture the background for each Investment manager. The background dummy, described in Table 8, indicates if
the managers have financial- or operational background. With financial background we mean investment
banking or consulting related jobs. Some managers who worked with consulting have also worked operational
and will therefore be represented in both the financial and operational background. We further studied PE
Experience (>7 years=1, 7<=0) and Educational (MBA=1, Bachelor/Master=0) impact on abnormal
performance. We extended our regression by including International experience. To study the hypothesis that
working with inorganic deals if a mangers has a finance background would provide an advantage, we created
interaction terms for Background finance*Inorganic. A corresponding interaction term was made for
Background Operational* Organic. The lower part of the table reports the control variables Duration and Log
EV (size effect).
We also add Entry period (Time, 1997-2000, 2001-2003, 2004-2006 and 2007-2009) and industry fixed effects.
                                                Dependent variable: Abnormal Performance in %

Independent Variables REG1 REG2 REG3 REG4 REG5 REG6 REG7 REG8 REG9

Background Operational -8.99** -11.6** -7.33*** -8.46*** -7.95* -7.54
P-value 0.03 0.03 0.00 0.01 0.06 0.20
Background Finance 1.13 1.68 6.13 4.39
P-value 0.88 0.79 0.2 0.18
Organic -1.64 -3.43 -2.15 -1.66
P-value 0.83 0.56 0.79 0.83
Inorganic -4.56 -3.00 -1.94
P-value 0.21 0.40 0.49
Background Operational*Organic 5.58 7.72 -10.8*** -7.61 -9.50 -8.40
P-value 0.55 0.37 0.01 0.14 0.21 0.50
Background Finance*Inorganic 2.37 0.87 2.23
P-value 0.68 0.85 0.47
Education -1.75 5.23* 4.60* 4.99* 4.84
P-value 0.63 0.10 0.06 0.07 0.16
Experience PE -3.72
P-value 0.42
Background Finance*Organic 1.97 2.53 2.91 0.72
P-value 0.74 0.46 0.68 0.87
Experience*Organic 11.9* 7.17 12.1* 11.7**
P-value 0.08 0.12 0.08 0.04
International -9.36 -8.35** -10.5** -8.27** -11.9**
P-value 0.13 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.02
Duration -1.89* -1.40 -1.56 -2.07* -2.03*
P-value 0.08 0.12 0.12 0.05 0.09
LogEV 0.39** 0.35*** 0.42*** 0.39*** 0.39*** 0.38** 0.33** 0.39** 0.36
P-value 0.01 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02
Industry Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Entry Period Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Intercept Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
N 46 46 46 46 46 46 46 46 46
r2 0.51 0.60 0.45 0.50 0.52 0.59 0.68 0.59 0.69
Note; * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

                                                                               41
                                   Table 10 – Robustness test

The table reports the results from our robustness test. First, we again report our Unlevered abnormal financial
performance but as well the Levered abnormal financial performance to be able to compare potential differences
in values. Finally, the abnormal financial performance with another tax rate is also reported, only to show that
the choice of proxies do not matter since they are used when calculting both the CAGR (deal) and the TRS
(sector peers) variables.
 Variables N mean median std. dev. min max

  Abnormal Performance (Unlevered) 49 7.02 4.55 15.8 -17.0 46.0
  Abnormal Performance (Levered) 53 13.1 7.55 26.0 -21.4 76.3
  Abnormal Performance (Tax 26,3%) 49 7.02 4.55 15.8 -17.0 46.0
Note: Values in percent

                                                                               42
9. Appendices

Appendix A – Overview of the sample
Portfolio Company PE House Entry Exit Sector M&A
Alfa Laval AB Industi Kapital 2000 2002 Manufactur JA
Arexis AB SEB Venture Capital 2003 2005 Medical NEJ
Artic Grycksbo Paper AB Accent Equity Partners 2006 2010 Manufactur NEJ
Atos Medical AB Nordic Capital 2005 2011 Medical JA
C More Group Nordic Capital 2003 2005 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Camfil AB Ratos 2000 2011 Manufactur JA
Com Hem AB EQT Partners AB 2003 2005 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Component Software Group AS Norvestor Equity AS 2006 2007 IT NEJ
Coromatic Group Litiorina Kapital 2008 2011 IT JA
Cory Environmental Ltd Montagu Private Equity 2005 2007 Service NEJ
Dahl International AB Ratos 1999 2004 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Dahl Sverige AB EQT Partners AB 1999 2004 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Dometic International AB EQT Partners AB 2001 2005 Manufactur NEJ
Dynal Biotech ASA Nordic Capital 2001 2005 Medical JA
Dynal Biotech ASA Ratos 2001 2005 Medical JA
Elfa AB Industi Kapital 2006 2008 Retail/consumer goods JA
Emotron AB Polaris Equity 2007 2011 IT NEJ
Expan AS Procuritas AB 2004 2007 Manufactur NEJ
Falck A/S Nordic Capital 2004 2011 Service NEJ
Ferrosan A/S Altor Equity partners 2005 2011 Medical JA
Findus AB EQT Partners AB 1999 2006 Retail/consumer goods JA
Flexlink System AB EQT Partners AB 1997 2005 Manufactur JA
Gant Company AB 3i Group PLC 2003 2006 Retail/consumer goods JA
Grammer AS Permira 2001 2005 Manufactur NEJ
Guide Konsult Nordic Capital 2001 2006 IT NEJ
Haglöfs Holding AB Ratos 2001 2010 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Handitek AB Medcap AB 2009 2011 Manufactur NEJ
Hemtex AB Priveq Partners AB 2004 2005 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Hägglunds Drives AB Ratos 2001 2009 Manufactur JA
Interpeak AB SEB Venture Capital 2002 2006 IT NEJ
KappAhl Sverige AB Nordic Capital 2004 2006 Retail/consumer goods NEJ
Kongsberg Automotive Holding ASA FSN Capital Partners 2001 2005 Manufactur JA
Kongsberg Automotive Holding ASA Industi Kapital 1999 2001 Manufactur NEJ
Kreatel Communications AB SEB Venture Capital 2000 2006 IT NEJ
Lehnkering GmBH Triton 2005 2011 Service NEJ
Lekolar AB Procuritas AB 2004 2007 Retail/consumer goods JA
Marioff Oy Nordic Capital 2001 2007 Manufactur NEJ
Medisize Oy Ratos 2008 2011 Medical NEJ
Myresjöhus AB Industi Kapital 2005 2007 Manufactur NEJ
MySQL AB Scope Capital Advisory AB 2001 2008 IT JA
NEA-gruppen AB Segulah 2006 2010 Service JA
NVS Installation AB Segulah 2002 2006 Service JA
Paroc Oy AB Accent Equity Partners 2002 2006 Manufactur NEJ
Perstorp Group/Sydsvenska Kemi AB Industi Kapital 2001 2005 Medical JA
Phadia AB Triton 2004 2006 Medical NEJ
Pronova Biopharma ASA Ferd Group PE 2004 2007 Medical NEJ
Securitas Direct EQT Partners AB 2007 2011 Service JA
Semantix Språkcentrum AB Accent Equity Partners 2006 2009 Service NEJ
Survitec Group Ltd Montagu Private Equity 2004 2010 Manufactur NEJ
Swedish Orphan Biovitrum AB/Biovitrum AB Nordic Capital 2001 2006 Medical JA
Thule AB EQT Partners AB 1999 2004 Manufactur JA
Tognum AS EQT Partners AB 2006 2008 Manufactur JA
Tradex Converting AB EQT Partners AB 2000 2006 Manufactur NEJ

                                                                               43
Appendix B – Private Equity houses connected to SVCA

The following Private Equity houses are connected to the Swedish Association for Private Equity and
Venture Capital (SVCA). This list was used to screen all deals made by Swedish PE houses in the
Nordic region.

- Accent Equity Partners
- Altor Equity Partners
- Anchor Capital Management
- Armada Mezzanine Capital
- Bridgepoint Capital
- CapMan
- Connecting Capital
- Credelity Capital
- EDP
- EQT Partners
- FSN Capital Partners
- Granitix NPE
- IK Investment Partners Norden
- K III Sweden
- Litorina
- Mannerheim Invest
- MedCap
- Naxs Nordic Access Buyout Fund
- Nordic Growth
- Norvestor Equity
- Permira Adviser
- Polaris Private Equity
- Priveq Investment
- Procuritas
- Ratos
- Riverside Europe Partners
- Scope Capital Advisory
- SEB Venture Capital
- Segulah Advisor
- Valedo Partners Fund 1
- Vinovo
- Volati

                                                                               44
Appendix C – Description of variables

  Topic Variable Unit Description Source

 Dependent     CAGR Percent   Divide unlevered deal value exit with   Zephyr and
 variable                                        unlevered Deal value entry and took     Megermarkets
                               MEUR  the power to (1/Duration)
                                                    (Value(T)/Value(t))^(1/Duration)
                TRS Percent   Average Total Return to Shareholders   DataStream
                                                    between exit and entry, matched with
                               MEUR  corresponding deal´s holding period.
                                                       (TRS(T)/TRS(t))^(1/Duration)
                 Abnormal            Percent   Abnormal financial
                Performance                  performance=Unleveraged CAGR -
                             MEUR  Unleveraged TRS
 Operational     Log sales Percent   Logarithm of annual sales collected      Orbis,
 measures                                         during three periods,Sales(t-2), Sales(t)  Retriver,
                                 MEUR   Sales(T)                         Annual reports
                EBITDA-margin Ratio Annual EBITDA per annual sales for
                                                            all three periods: (t-2), (t) and (T)
                 EV-multiple Ratio Enterprise value per EBITDA

                 Log EV-multiple Percent Logarithm of EV-multiple
               Operational          MEUR   Calculated the same way as the        DataStream
                    measures for selected   / Ratio    operational measures for the deals
                    sector peers
 Control        Duration Year The number of years a PE house holds   Zephyr,
 variables                                       the portfolio company                  Mergermarket,
                                                                                      PE website
               Log Value MEUR Log Enterprise value, controlling for
                                                        size on each deal.
                 Entry Period binary Dummy-variable, controlling for
                                                   recession and booms between periods.
                                                   Four periods: 1997-2000, 2001-2003,
                                               2004-2006 and 2007-2009
                  Strategy: Organic vs   binary Dummies was used to separate the       Zephyr,
                  Inorganic                       strategies. Organic=1, Inorganic=0      Mergermarket
 Survey Background          binary Dummies - Operational Background     122/334
                  Operational                     =1, No Operational Experience =0       survey answers

                 Background Finance binary Dummies - Finance background - if the
                                                 Investment Managers previous work
                                                   was within investment banking/
                                                        consulting or other finance related jobs
                                                      and for those working in both finance
                                               and operational – for instance
                                                     consultants working with strategy
                                                      projects and due diligence = 1
                                                  Managers with no finance background
                                                  = 0

                                                                               45
Survey         Background          binary Dummies - Investment Managers with
                 Operational                      operational background using an
continuing
                *Organic                       organic strategy = 1. Operational
                                                   background with Inorganic or finance
                                                  background 0rganic/inorganic = 0
              Education binary Dummies - Bachelor/Master and MBA
                                                degree = 1. Bachelor solely or both
                                                 Bachelor and Master Degree = 0
               Experience PE binary Dummies – Managers with “More than
                                                    10 years and “between 7-10 years of
                                                experience” = 1. Managers with “less
                                                      than 7 years” within the business = 0
              Background         binary Dummies - Manager with background
                 Finance*Organic                in Finance working with Organic
                                              Deals = .1 Other backgrounds and
                                                        strategies = 0
              Experience*Organic binary Dummies - Managers with more than
                                           7 years’ experience within PE and
                                              working with Organic deals =1. Other
                                                    backgrounds and strategies = 0
              International binary Dummies - Manager with
                                              international experience = 1. Managers
                                                   without = 0
Survey -        Delta Employment Percent Annual change in Employment rate     122/334
Employment                                  between entry and exit period.          survey answers
               Time Spend binary Dummies – Time spend on
                                              Employees/Employment over course
                                                      of a month if between 2-3 days, 4-5
                                                          days and more than 5 days = 1. If
                                                  between 1 hours and 1 day and 1 hour
                                                or less = 0
               Training binary Dummies – If PE house always or
                                                  often offer employees in the portfolio
                                                       company training/education = 1. If
                                                    they sometimes, never or hard to
                                             answer = 0
               Delta Executive binary Dummies – If the PE house have done
                                                  any changes regarding the employees
                                                    in the holding companies and this
                                              changes regards the Executive
                                              management = 1. If not = 0.
               Delta BOD binary Dummies – If the PE house have done
                                                  any changes regarding the employees
                                                    in the holding companies and this
                                                    changes regards the Board of Directors
                                                           = 1. If not = 0.

                                                                             46
Appendix D – Search criteria for Sector peers

The main search criteria’s valid from DataStream were:

    1. Chosen Countries: Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway
    2. Currency: Euro
    3. Net Sales Or Revenues

What type of industries included in each Sector peer were chosen manually, this to be sure that each
Peer group were as accurate to every deal in our sample as possible. The industries for our five
different sectors were:

     Retail/Consumer: Food and Drug retail, General retail and Leisure Goods
     IT: Software and Computer services
     Medical: Pharmaceuticals
     Manufacture: General Industries
     Service: Support Service, Health Care Equipment and services

                                                                               47
Appendix E – Results from the survey

Table 1: The functions below ranked from most important (1) to least important (9)

 # Answer 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Mean
 1 Operational improvements 24 27 22 3 1 0 1 0 0 2.15
       Improvements in sales and
 2                          23 26 12 11 4 1 0 1 0 2.42
      turnover
        Investment related
 3    decisions for the holding      19 11 19 10 12 4 2 1 0 3.13
      company (M&A’s)
       Corporate governance
 4                          7 8 6 13 8 18 15 2 1 4.76
       issues
       Working capital
 5                          0 3 9 20 19 22 3 2 0 4.83
      management
       Questions regarding
 6                          5 2 7 11 15 7 6 8 17 5.77
      employees/employment
 7 Capital structure changes 0 1 1 6 6 19 34 9 2 6.42
 8 Changes in cash holdings 0 0 2 3 4 4 6 40 19 7.63
       Changes in amortization
 9                          0 0 0 1 9 3 11 15 39 7.88
       and depreciation
               Total 78 78 78 78 78 78 78 78 78

Table 2 : How much time the investment managers spend on each function over the course of a
month

# Question 1h or   Between 1h   Between 2-    Between    More than 5    Responses Mean
                             less       - 1 day        3 days       4-5 days         days

     Investment related
     decisions for the
1                       4 28 34 9 6 81 2.81
    holding company
   (M&A’s)
    Corporate
2                     14 35 25 6 1 81 2.32
    governance issues
    Operational
3                      4 20 35 16 7 82 3.02
    improvements
    Improvements in
4                      9 22 30 11 7 79 2.81
    sales and turnover
    Changes in
5   amortization and        65 16 0 0 0 81 1.20
     depreciation
    Working capital
6                     15 46 17 2 1 81 2.11
    management
     Capital structure
7                     23 39 15 4 1 82 2.04
    changes
    Changes in cash
8                     52 21 5 1 1 80 1.48
    holdings
    Employment
9                     23 33 21 3 1 81 2.09
    regarding questions

                                                                               48
Table 3: Reporting whether the managers think they should devote more, less or the same
amount of resources to the following functions.

   # Question Much      Less The      More Much    Responses Mean
                                Less                Same               More
           Investment related
            decisions for the
   1                             1 2 69 10 0 82 3.07
          holding company
        (M&A’s)
         Corporate governance
   2                         1 5 69 6 1 82 3.01
         issues
          Operational
   3                         0 0 43 34 5 82 3.54
         improvements
           Improvements in sales
   4                         0 2 39 33 7 81 3.56
         and turnover
          Changes in
   5     amortization and           4 10 65 1 2 82 2.84
           depreciation
          Working capital
   6                         0 2 58 18 3 81 3.27
        management
            Capital structure
   7                         4 7 69 2 0 82 2.84
         changes
          Changes in cash
   8                         2 11 60 5 2 80 2.93
         holdings
           Questions regarding
   9                         2 2 61 14 3 82 3.17
         employees/employment

Table 4: What kind of changes regarding the employees in the portfolio company the PE houses
do.

 # Answer Response %
 1 Changes in the board of directors 72 94%
       Changes in the executive
 2                                                                         74 96%
      management
 3 Changes in employment rate 23 30%
       Changes in the employees
 4                                                                         24 31%
      responsibilities areas
       Other kind of changes. If chosen,
 5                                                                        7 9%
      what kind of changes?

Table 5: If the PE houses offer training/education to the employees in the portfolio company

    # Answer Response %
     1 Always 16 21%
     2 Often 20 27%
     3 Sometimes 24 32%
     4 Never 4 5%
     5 Hard to answer 11 15%
             Total 75 100%

                                                                               49
Table 6: If “Always” or “Often”, at what level the training/education are offered to.

     # Answer Response %
     1 Board of directors 18 43%
                Executives
     2                                                           40 95%
             management
               At middle
     3                                                           14 33%
              management level
                 At operational
     4                                                            7 17%
               level
     5 Other 0 0%

                                                                               50
Appendix F - Private Equity Survey

Below, the questions in the survey sent out to 334 investment managers working at the selected
Swedish PE houses is represented. Note that after question 22 they only answered one question more,
the one regarding what deals they been involved in.

Q1 For how long have you been working within Private Equity?

 Less than 1 year (1)
 1-3 years (2)
 3-7 years (3)
 7-10 years (4)
 More than 10 years (5)

Q2 For how long have you been working for other employees with task closely related to what you are
doing now before you started at your current Private Equity-firm?

 Not applicable (1)
 Less than 1 year (2)
 1-3 years (3)
 3-7 years (4)
 7-10 years (5)
 More than 10 years (6)

Q3 What is your highest level of education?

 Bachelor degree (1)
 Master degree (2)
 MBA degree (3)

Q4 Have you been working with finance before you started at your current PE-firm?

 Yes, Investment banking (1)
 Yes, Consulting (2)
 Yes, other (3)
 No (4)

Q5 Did you have any operational background before you started at your current PE-firm? (Check all that
apply)

 Yes, in the manufacturing/industrial industry (1)
 Yes, in the retail/consumer goods industry (2)
 Yes, in the service industry (3)
 Yes, in the biotech or medical industry (4)
 Yes, but within another industry (5)
 No, operational experience (6)

Q6 Do you have international work experience?

 Yes, more than 5 years abroad (1)
 Yes, between 1-5 years abroad (2)
 No (3)

                                                                               51
Q7 Concerning the portfolio companies you are responsible for, is operational growth (organic) a
common strategy during the holding period?

 Always (1)
 Often (2)
 Sometimes (3)
 Never (4)
 Hard to answer (5)

Q8 Concerning the portfolio company/companies you is/are responsible for, is growth through M&A
(inorganic) a common strategy during the holding period?

 Always (1)
 Often (2)
 Sometimes (3)
 Never (4)
 Hard to answer (5)

Q9 How much time do you spend on each of the following functions in the portfolio company/companies
over the course of a month?

                             1 hour or       Between 1      Between 2-3     Between 4-5    More than 5
                              less (1)      hours - 1 day       days (3)         days (4)         days (5)
                                                     (2)

    Investment related
decisions for the holding         
 company (M&A’s) (1)

  Corporate governance
                       
        issues (2)
       Operational
                       
   improvements (3)
  Improvements in sales
                       
    and turnover (4)

 Changes in amortization
                       
   and depreciation (5)

     Working capital
                       
    management (6)
Capital structure changes
                       
          (7)
Changes in cash holdings
                       
          (8)
   Questions regarding
 employees/employment         
            (9)

                                                                               52
Q10 Do you think your company should devote more, less or about the same resources to the following
functions in the portfolio company/companies?

                       Much Less (1) Less (2) The Same (3) More (4) Much More
                                                                                                          (5)
   Investment related
    decisions for the
                      
   holding company
     (M&A’s) (1)
 Corporate governance
                      
       issues (2)
      Operational
                      
   improvements (3)
 Improvements in sales
                      
   and turnover (4)
      Changes in
  amortization and           
    depreciation (5)
    Working capital
                      
   management (6)
    Capital structure
                      
     changes (7)
   Changes in cash
                      
     holdings (8)
  Questions regarding
employees/employment         
           (9)

Q11 Please try to rank the above mentioned functions from most important to least important.

______ Investment related decisions for the holding company (M&A’s) (1)
______ Corporate governance issues (2)
______ Operational improvements (3)
______ Improvements in sales and turnover (4)
______ Changes in amortization and depreciation (5)
______ Working capital management (6)
______ Capital structure changes (7)
______ Changes in cash holdings (8)
______ Questions regarding employees/employment (9)

Q12 Would you say that the time spend on each function differs a great deal between industries?

 Strongly Disagree (1)
 Disagree (2)
 Neither Agree nor Disagree (3)
 Agree (4)
 Strongly Agree (5)

                                                                               53
Q13 How much time do you spend on employment related questions in the portfolio company/companis
over the course of a month?

 Less than 1 day (1)
 Between 1 hour and 1 day (2)
 Between 1-3 days (3)
 Between 4-5 days (4)
 More than 1 week (5)

Q14 If your firm have done any changes regarding the employees in your holding companies, what kind
of changes could that be? (Check all that apply)

 Changes in the board of directors (1)
 Changes in the executive management (2)
 Changes in employment rate (3)
 Changes in the employees responsibilities areas (4)
 Other kind of changes. If chosen, what kind of changes? (5) ____________________

Q15 If ”Changes in the board of directors”, do you use either your own employees or people within your
firms professional network as representatives in the board of directors?

 Always (1)
 Often (2)
 Sometimes (3)
 Never (4)

Q16 If "Always" or "Often" at what positions? (Check all that apply)

 Chairman of the board (1)
 Representative (2)

Q17 How common is it that you have your own employees or people within your firms professional
network in the executive management?

 Always (1)
 Often (2)
 Sometimes (3)
 Never (4)

Q18 If “Always” or “Often”, at what positions? (Check all that apply)

 CEO (1)
 COO (2)
 CFO (3)
 Other. If so, at what positions? (4) ____________________

Q19 How common is it that you have your own employees or people within your firms professional
network in operational positions?

 Always (1)
 Often (2)
 Sometimes (3)
 Never (4)

                                                                               54
Q20 Have you offer the employees in the portfolio company some kind of training/education during your
holding period?

 Always (1)
 Often (2)
 Sometimes (3)
 Never (4)
 Hard to answer (5)

Q21 If “Always” or “Often” at what level do you offer the employees training/education? (Check all that
apply)

 Board of directors (1)
 Executive management (2)
 Middle management level (3)
 Operational level (4)
 Other (5)

Q22 Can you estimate the changes done in employment rate on the portfolio companies during your PE-
firms holding period?

 No change (1)
 Decrease more than 10% (2)
 Decrease between 5-10% (3)
 Decrease between 5-0% (4)
 Increase between 0-5% (5)
 Increase between 5-10% (6)
 Increase more than 10% (7)
 Hard to answer (8)

                                                                               55
Q23 Where do you work?

 Altor Equity Partners (1)
 3i Group PLC (2)
 Accent Equity Partners (3)
 CapMan (4)
 EQT Partners AB (5)
 Ferd Group PE (6)
 FSN Capital Partners (7)
 Industi Kapital (8)
 Litiorina Kapital (9)
 Medcap AB (10)
 Montagu Private Equity (11)
 Nordic Capital (12)
 Nordic Growht (13)
 Norvestor Equity AS (14)
 Permira (15)
 Pod Holding Ab (16)
 Polaris Equity (17)
 Priveq Partners AB (18)
 Procuritas AB (19)
 Ratos (20)
 Riverside Europé Partners (21)
 Scope Capital Advisory AB (22)
 Segulah (23)
 SEB Venture Capital (24)
 Triton (25)

Answer If Where do you work? - 3i Group PLC Is Selected

Q24 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with 3i Group PLC? (Check all that apply)

 Revus Energy AS (1)
 Gant Company (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Altor Equity Partners Is Selected

Q25 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Altor Equtiy Partners? (Check all that apply)

 Ferrosan (1)
 Palodex Group (2)
 Dynapac AB (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Accent Equity Partners Is Selected

Q26 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Accent Equity Partners? (Check all that apply)

 Grycksbo (1)
 Paroc (2)
 Semantix AB (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? CapMan Is Selected

                                                                               56
Q27 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with CapMan? (Check all that apply)

 Pretax Oy (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? EQT Partners AB Is Selected

Q28 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with EQT Partners AB? (Check all that apply)

 Tognum (1)
 Domestic International AB (2)
 Flexlinks System AB (3)
 Thule AB (4)
 Tradex AB (5)
 Symrise AG (6)
 Com hem AB (7)
 Dahl International AB (8)
 Findus AB (9)
 Securitas Direct (10)
 Do not want to answer (11)

Answer If Where do you work? Ferd Group PE Is Selected

Q29 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Ferd Group PE? (Check all that apply)

 Pronova Biopharma ASA (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? FSN Capital Partners Is Selected

Q30 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with FSN Capital Partners? (Check all that apply)

 Kongsberg Automotive (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

                                                                               57
Answer If Where do you work? Industi Kapital Is Selected

Q31 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with IndustriKapital? (Check all that apply)

 Alfa Laval (1)
 Myresjöhus AB (2)
 CPS Color Group (3)
 Dyno Nobel ASA (4)
 Enermet Oy (5)
 Paroc Group Oy (6)
 Kongsberg Automotive (7)
 Sydsvenska Kemi AB (8)
 Oriflame Cosmetic SA (9)
 Alfa AB (10)
 Do not want to answer (11)

Answer If Where do you work? Litiorina Kapital Is Selected

Q32 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Litiorina Kapital? (Check all that apply)

 Coromatic Group (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Medcap AB Is Selected

Q33 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Medcap? (Check all that apply)

 Handitek AB (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Montagu Private Equity Is Selected

Q34 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Montagu Private Equity? (Check all that apply)

 Survitec Group (1)
 Sebia AS (2)
 Cory Environmental (3)
 Click to write Choice 4 (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Nordic Capital Is Selected

                                                                               58
Q35 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Nordic Capital? (Check all that apply)

 Biovitrum AB (1)
 Dynal Biotech (2)
 Guide Konsult (3)
 Marioff (4)
 Atos Medical AB (5)
 Nycomed (6)
 KappAhl (7)
 C More Group (8)
 Falck (9)
 Do not want to answer (10)

Answer If Where do you work? Nordic Growth Is Selected

Q36 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Nordic Growth? (Check all that apply)

 Tpack AS (1)
 Zapera.com AS (2)
 Other (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Norvestor Equity AS Is Selected

Q37 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Norvestor Equity AS? (Check all that apply)

 Component Software (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Permira Is Selected

Q38 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Permia? (Check all that apply)

 Grammar AG (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Pod Holding AB Is Selected

Q39 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Pod Holding AB? (Check all that apply)

 Inion Oy (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

                                                                               59
Answer If Where do you work? Polaris Equity Is Selected

Q40 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Polaris Equity? (Check all that apply)

 Emotron AB (1)
 Louis Poulsen Lighting A/S (2)
 Other (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Priveq Partners AB Is Selected

Q41 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Priveq Partners AB? (Check all that apply)

 Hemtex AB (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Procuritas AB Is Selected

Q42 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Procuritas AB? (Check all that apply)

 Expan AS (1)
 Disa Holding A/S (2)
 Lekolar AB (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Ratos Is Selected

Q43 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Ratos? (Check all that apply)

 Dynal Biotech ASA (1)
 Martinsson Gruppen AB (2)
 Camfil AA (3)
 Hägglunds Drives AB (4)
 Alimak Hek Group AB (5)
 Medisize Medical (6)
 Haglöfs (7)
 Dahl (8)
 Blugarden AS (9)
 Do not want to answer (10)

Answer If Where do you work? Riverside Europé Partners Is Selected

Q44 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Riverside Europe Partners? (Check all that apply)

 Welltec A/S (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? Scope Capital Advisory AB Is Selected

Q45 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Scope Capital Advisory AB? (Check all that apply)

                                                                               60
 MySQL (1)
 Other (2)
 Do not want to answer (3)

Answer If Where do you work? SEB Venture Capital Is Selected

Q46 Have you been involved in this deal with SEB Venture Capital? (Check all that apply)

 Interpeak AB (1)
 Kreatel Communications AB (2)
 Arexis AB (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Segulah Is Selected

Q47 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Segulah? (Check all that apply)

 NEA-gruppen AB (1)
 NVS Installation AB (2)
 Other (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

Answer If Where do you work? Triton Is Selected

Q48 Have you been involved in this/these deal/s with Triton? (Check all that apply)

 Phadia (1)
 Tetra holding GmBH (2)
 Lehnkering GmBH (3)
 Do not want to answer (4)

                                                                               61