     Strategy Distinctiveness
   of U.S. Equity Mutual Funds

     Matilda Elfving*                                    Fredrik Helenius**
Stockholm School of Economics                           Stockholm School of Economics

                         Bachelor Thesis
                Stockholm School of Economics
                    Department of Finance
                        Tutor: Paolo Sodini
                         May 23, 2012

                               Abstract
   According to basic economic principle, as more people are chasing a given
return pattern, the profit from that pattern will eventually be mitigated. Using a
simple model to compare a particular fund’s return series with those of its peers,
this study investigates whether managers standing out from the crowd can be
said to possess more managerial skill, leading to subsequent superior perfor-
mance. We turn to a measure of strategy distinctiveness previously applied in
the world of hedge funds, called the Strategy Distinctiveness Index (SDI), which
specifically investigates the co-movement in fund returns. The higher the meas-
ure assigned to a certain fund, the more distinct the strategy of that fund. Over-
all, our findings show that few mutual fund managers are pursuing unique in-
vestment strategies. However, the measure does significantly predict managerial
skill and future fund performance. More specifically, looking at Carhart four-
factor adjusted returns, funds in the highest SDI decile outperform funds in the
lowest by 1.05% on average per annum.

Keywords: Mutual Funds, Strategy Distinctiveness, Active Management

 *                                **
 21954@student.hhs.se;  21951@student.hhs.se
1 Acknowledgements

First and foremost, we would like to thank our tutor, Paolo Sodini, Associate Professor at the

Department of Finance, Stockholm School of Economics, for valuable guidance and helpful as-

sistance throughout the writing of this thesis. Furthermore, we especially thank Stefan Nydahl

PhD, partner and CEO at the Archipel Fund, and Maria Strömqvist PhD, guest lecturer at the

Stockholm School of Economics and analyst at Brummer Multi Strategy, for providing us with

inspiring ideas and industry insight. We take full responsibility for any remaining inaccuracies.

                                        1
Contents

1 Acknowledgements 1

2 Introduction 3

3 Previous Literature 5

  3.1 Alphas in Active Management 6
  3.2 Managerial Skill 7
  3.3 Mutual Fund Characteristics and Their Impact on Performance 7
  3.4 Mutual Fund Strategies 9

4 Data and Methodology 10

  4.1 Data Sample 10
     4.1.1 Mutual Fund Sample 10
     4.1.2 Performance Measures 12
  4.2 Method 14
     4.2.1 Defining the SDI Measure and Hypotheses 14
     4.2.2 Data Treatment 17

5 Results 19

6 Robustness Tests 24

  6.1 SDI Based on Absolute Correlation 24
  6.2 Survivorship Bias 25

7 Conclusion 26

8 References 29

9 Appendix 33

                                        2
2 Introduction

Wealth-maximizing investors have lately been facing increasing management fees charged by fi-

nancial intermediaries, who, in turn, are increasingly rewarded in spite of the hardening competi-

tion in the mutual fund industry. Nevertheless, there is uncertainty about whether active man-

agement actually does contribute to investor utility. Since Jensen (1968), little research has been

able to provide evidence of mutual fund managers outperforming benchmarks.

Turning to basic economic principle, bearing in mind the increasingly fierce competition in the

industry, there should be decreasing returns to scale in mutual funds. The more actors there are

in a market, the more efficient that certain market will become. Thus, in the mutual fund industry

specifically, it will be harder for the individual manager to generate positive alpha. However,

managers might be attempting to overcome this crowding effect through applying innovative in-

vestment strategies in trying to avoid the situation described by Stein (2009): “Enough money

chasing a given pattern in returns will necessarily eliminate that pattern.” If investors wish to

evaluate active managers given these conditions, they would be seeking a way of measuring how

successful a manager is in differentiating his investment strategy from peer funds.

The rapid industry growth has resulted in an immense range of investment strategies and an even

larger number of funds, featuring managers with diverse backgrounds and qualifications. In this

study we try to estimate the distinctiveness of a fund’s investment strategy, and thus measure the

talent and innovation ability of the fund manager. Further, we examine whether a greater level of

distinctiveness implies superior future performance. Hereby, we try to provide an indicator of

managerial talent and a measure to distinguish the better performing funds in the mutual fund

industry. More specifically, we use data on over 8,000 U.S. equity mutual funds, retrieved from

the CRSP mutual fund database for a period from 2000 through 2011. We compute the Strategy

Distinctiveness Index (further referred to as the SDI measure), following Sun, Wang and Zheng

                                        3
(2012), as one minus the correlation between a fund’s return with the returns of its peers. Hence,

we interpret the ability of generating returns that differ from the peer group as managers applying

more distinct strategies. The lower the correlation in historical returns, the higher the SDI of the

particular fund. To control for the accuracy of the measure introduced, we set the SDI in relation

to mutual fund performance and other fund characteristics, such as size, age, volatility in returns

and actual management fees charged. We hypothesize that mutual fund managers with innovative

ideas and managerial talent pursue more distinct investment strategies while funds with less

skilled managers follow known strategies.

Previous research by Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993) and Goetzmann and Ibbotson

(1994) argue that past mutual fund returns predict future returns. In this study we examine a dif-

ferent aspect of historical returns, that is, to what extent a mutual fund correlates with its peers in

terms of return series. The direct predecessors to this study are papers considering the distinc-

tiveness of hedge fund strategies by Wang and Zheng (2008) and Sun, Wang and Zheng (2012),

the latter introducing the most updated version of a strategy distinctiveness measure. Further-

more, Amihud and Goyenko (2011) attempt to use R-square, obtained from regressing mutual

fund returns on multi-factor benchmarks, as a predictor of superior returns and find that the

measure significantly predicts subsequent performance. Using R-square is comparable to the pro-

cedure of Wang and Zheng (2008), who are looking at the R-square from the regression of hedge

fund returns against the average returns of peer funds. As they further develop their technique,

using the correlation, we find this a suitable next approach in evaluating mutual funds as well.

First, the findings of this study show that funds with more distinct strategies can charge higher

fees, while larger and older funds are less capable of introducing and pursuing innovative invest-

ment strategies. The negative relation between the measure and return volatility implies that the

SDI is not associated with managers taking excessive risk in maximizing performance. More like-

ly, the SDI measures talented managers adapting and implementing distinct strategies. Based on
                                        4
these results, we conclude that the SDI can be used as a proxy of managerial skill.

Second, we show that the SDI has predictive power for future mutual fund performance. This

implies the measure can be used by investors in approaching the vast supply of mutual funds in

the industry today. We further examine this relation, forming equally weighted portfolios of

funds based on their SDI level, and measure the subsequent performance. Considering a one year

holding and rebalancing period, funds in the highest decile outperform those in the lowest by

1.05%, in terms of Carhart four-factor adjusted returns.

Finally, we examine the robustness of our findings. We ensure that the SDI is a measure of man-

agerial skill rather than risk taking and gambling behavior through computing the measure based

on absolute correlation. The Heckman correction further confirms that our results are not driven

by survivorship bias. Overall, our findings suggest that the SDI is a valuable proxy for managerial

skill and a way for investors to evaluate and select the better performing mutual funds.

Henceforth, the paper is organized as follows. Section 3 discusses previous literature. Section 4

introduces the data, measure and methods used. Section 5 presents the empirical findings on the

relation between the SDI and future fund performance, followed by robustness tests in Section 6.

Section 7 concludes.

3 Previous Literature

After the original study by Jensen (1968), extensive research has been made on what impact ac-

tive management has on the performance of mutual funds. While the majority of recent studies

support Jensen’s conclusions, showing that active management does not provide excess returns

on average, the increased flows into actively managed mutual funds suggest investors believe in

active management. The question asked lately is whether managers do have superior stock pick-

ing abilities, and in that case, how to distinguish between skilled managers, providing persistence
                                        5
in returns, and lucky ones. As stated by Wermers (2003), an immense number of performance

measures have been proposed, attempting to capture managerial skill. These have further been

criticized in subsequent studies finding the explanations are undermining the sources of abnormal

performance due to luck, misspecification of models or statistical insignificance. Following this

section, we bring up the most relevant findings, concluding that there is no clear consensus

whether existing performance measures capture skill or not.

3.1 Alphas in Active Management

Fama and French (2009) present evidence of negative alphas provided by U.S. actively managed

equity mutual funds during 1984-2006. In more depth, they argue that active investment is a zero

sum game, before management fees and other costs. This would imply an average negative alpha

in actively managed equity mutual funds, net of fees. The average alpha for the whole period of

the Fama and French study, measured with their three-factor model, is -0.81% per annum. These

returns are compared to, and needless to say, found to be below, the returns of an equivalent

passive portfolio including the three benchmarks of the Fama French three-factor model. Fur-

thermore, Malkiel (1995) shows that the persistence in mutual fund returns seen in the 1970s did

not exist during the 1980s. Consistent with these results, a study by Harlow and Brown (2006)

show that, from 1979 to 2003, the average mutual fund failed to generate superior returns. On

the other hand, Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993) and Goetzmann and Ibbotson (1994),

argue that past mutual fund returns predict future returns.

Malkiel (1995) concludes that mutual funds tend to underperform the market, even gross of ex-

penses. However, since these results represent the mutual fund world in aggregate, there might

be positive-alpha funds, balanced by negative-alpha funds. For instance, Busse, Goyal and Wahal

(2006) find nearly insignificant evidence of abnormal returns but state that some active managers

might be able to deliver alpha over longer periods. Harlow and Brown (2006) provide evidence

                                        6
that there are superior active managers, and further suggest that these managers can possibly be

found by investors.

3.2 Managerial Skill

Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997) argue active managers are wasting resources when

failing to beat passive mechanical strategies. Their study shows, as opposed to Fama and French’s

study (2009) that the average mutual fund manager does succeed in beating a simple mechanical

portfolio strategy. Notwithstanding, the small amount of positive alpha generated is offset by the

management fees imposed on investors. In addition, Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers

(1997) reinforce the findings of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), showing that funds with the best

performance (typically growth and aggressive growth funds) charge the highest fees, indicating

funds that are able to outperform the market do so just enough to earn back the fees. Malkiel

(1995) emphasizes that most investors would be maximizing utility by investing in low expense

index funds, rather than seeking skilful active fund managers, in concluding markets are efficient.

Chevalier and Ellison (1999), suggest that stock picking ability does exist for a subgroup of man-

agers, in particular those who attended more selective undergraduate institutions have higher per-

formance than those who attended less selective ones. Berk and Green (2004) argue that with the

existence of managerial skill, the lack of abnormal returns in the mutual fund universe can be ex-

plained by diminishing returns to scale. Establishing the level of manager skillfulness, Kacperczyk

and Seru (2006) look at how mutual fund managers adjust portfolio allocation responding to

changes in public information. Using an estimate of the sensitivity of a fund manager’s portfolio

allocation to changes in information they see that managers reacting less to changes in public in-

formation perform better.

3.3 Mutual Fund Characteristics and Their Impact on Performance

Instead of trying to establish manager skillfulness, other studies have looked at fund characteris-

                                        7
tics in relation to performance. Harlow and Brown (2006) document various relationships be-

tween easily observable characteristics and fund excess returns as well as performance persis-

tence. Pollet and Wilson (2008) particularly point out that funds with greater diversification per-

form better, especially when it comes to small cap funds. Furthermore, they find that, as funds

grow, they tend not to increase diversification but rather their ownership in already existing in-

vestments, a finding that is even more evident for funds in large fund families.

The increasingly common incentive fees charged by actively managed funds have become anoth-

er debated topic of recent studies. The reason behind funds using incentive fees is said to be that

these attract more skilful or harder working managers. Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001) claim in-

centive-fee funds do have positive stock picking ability, but at the same time they take on more

risk than funds without incentive fees, specifically increasing risk after experiencing poor perfor-

mance. Interestingly, Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001) show that expense ratios are lower for in-

centive-fee funds than for funds without fees. In brief, the study advises investors are better off

putting their money in incentive-fee funds due to higher risk-adjusted performance, better man-

agement and lower expenses. On the contrary, Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdú (2008) show a negative

relationship between gross returns and the fees charged to investors.

Carhart (1997) propose a strategy based on the persistence in performance among mutual funds

and show that longing the top decile and shorting the bottom, based on last year’s performance,

will generate a return of 8% per annum. The spread is explained primarily by differences in mar-

ket value and momentum of the assets held, but also expense ratios and transaction costs. Bollen

and Busse (2004) also find short term persistence in abnormal returns, but argue the alphas dis-

appear when funds are evaluated over longer periods. Studies by Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers

(1995) and Carhart (1997), show superior performance is due to the momentum effect of

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). When including momentum, Carhart (1997) finds that perfor-

mance persistence largely disappears, suggesting little stock picking ability among managers.
                                        8
Bollen and Busse (2004) conclude that, despite short-term performance persistence, taking trans-

action costs and taxes into account, investors could just as well follow a buy-and-hold approach,

rather than a strategy chasing performance, in order to generate superior returns.

3.4 Mutual Fund Strategies

Some mutual fund strategies are better than others, as shown by Lynch and Musto (2003). Their

model predicts that mutual funds change strategy most often after poor performance, which is al-

so enhanced by Chan, Chen and Lakonishok (2002). Furthermore, Lynch and Musto (2003) show

that the funds that do change strategy receive dollar flow and future performance less sensitive to

the current performance than funds not changing their strategy. In their study of mutual fund in-

vestment styles, Chan, Chen and Lakonishok (2002) specifically find that growth managers tend

to do better than value managers on a style-adjusted basis. Most funds adopt styles close to a

market index, with few funds taking extreme positions differing from the index, and when they

occasionally do, they tend to favor growth over value and high past return over low past return.

Cumby and Glen (1990) find no evidence that funds provide investors with performance that ex-

ceeds that of a broad international equity index. On the other hand, they do find some evidence

that funds outperform U.S. indices, most likely due to the benefits of international diversification.

Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2004) investigate whether performance can be derived from the

concentration of funds asset allocation. Their theory is that active managers might derate a diver-

sified strategy on behalf of investments in industries where they have informational advantages.

Berk and Green (2004) show theoretically that informational advantages among managers will be

short-lived when certain investors direct their capital to “winners”.

According to Brown and Goetzmann (1997), some mutual fund style categories, such as

“growth” and “growth and income” might well be interpreted by managers as an invite into

gamesmanship. Once a fund is included in a specified style category, managers have little incen-

                                        9
tive to carry out an investment strategy ensuring future fund performance closely related to the

style average. Turning to evidence from Sirri and Tufano (1992) and Goetzmann and Peles

(1997), investors tend to flock to alpha-generating funds within each style category. Hence, main-

taining a strategy in line with the style classification will not be rewarded.

4 Data and Methodology

4.1 Data Sample

4.1.1 Mutual Fund Sample

Using the CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund Database, we have retrieved an extensive

sample of U.S. equity mutual funds, including over 3 million monthly observations. The sample

of return data ranges from January 2000 to December 2011. We have chosen 2000 as the first

year of observations since the Lipper Style Classifications, forming our classification structure,

                                      1
were modified as per 1999 . The observations from previous years experience a lot of misleading

style switching why we find it necessary to exclude them. Monthly returns are computed based

                                                                                                                                   2
on change in net asset values, including reinvested dividends but net of all management fees.

The return data is merged with data including explanatory variables, such as total net assets, man-

agement fees and investment objectives, on an annual basis, also retrieved from the CRSP data-

base.

Wanting to look at active mutual funds with U.S. holdings only, we follow Wermers (2000) and

further narrow down the sample, choosing general domestic equity mutual funds, denoted in U.S.

dollars. Funds excluded from the sample includes fixed income funds, international funds, sector

funds, metal funds, and such not investing significantly in U.S. domestic equity. A key assump-

tion in this study is that the Lipper prospectus-based classifications are accurate enough to define

1 As explained in the announcement ”New Classification Structure for USDE Funds“ (1998)
2 CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund Database Guide
                                       10
peer funds. All of the funds in the sample are considered diversified, thus are also assigned a

portfolio-based classification. These are derived from a holding-based classification methodology

performed in two steps. First, a market-capitalization classification is assigned, followed by a style

classification. The final sample consists of eleven classes of actively managed funds, namely Capi-

tal Appreciation, Dedicated Short Bias, Equity Income, Equity Leverage, Equity Market Neutral,

Growth, Growth and Income, Long/Short Equity, Micro-Cap, Mid-Cap and Small-Cap. Table 1

provides descriptions of each class. There is an evident majority of funds in the Growth and

Growth and Income categories and an obvious minority in the Equity Leverage and Equity Mar-

ket Neutral categories. The total number of domestic equity mutual funds in our sample grows

from 3,002 in 2000 to 6,370 in 2011.

As opposed to the Morningstar database, CRSP is said to be survivorship bias free, why this da-

tabase is preferred. However, as pointed out by Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001), the CRSP data-

base is subject to a similar bias, namely omission bias, causing inflation of performance measures.

As described by Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001), omission bias arises due to differences in return

observations, with some funds reporting only annually, some reporting monthly and some not

reporting at all, generally overstating monthly returns. Monthly return data will tend to understate

the number of mergers and liquidations, why the average return of the mutual fund universe tend

                                                                                                                        3
to be overstated. However, referring to the CRSP quarterly update from March 2008 , we will

hereby assume that such misleading returns have been widely corrected from 1998 and forth.

Furthermore, Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001) present evidence that the discrepancies between

the CRSP database and Morningstar is much more observable in the beginning of their sample

period, from 1979 and forth, than in later years, and is recently found to be more of a problem

for small funds. In our original dataset, we find missing values in monthly returns corresponding

to 1.66% of the total number of observations. Seemingly, months with missing observations are

3 CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund Database, March 2008 Quarterly Update
                                       11
in the beginning or the end of a funds life, indicating it has been founded or liquidated in the

middle of a calendar year. However, one cannot conclude that our data sample is completely sur-

vivorship bias free why there is a need of controlling for this bias, as conducted in section 6 Ro-

bustness.

Another advantage of the CRSP database is that the dataset indicates style classifications on a

yearly basis, allowing us to observe whether the funds have been involved in style switching. In

our study, we are assuming the Lipper style classifications are accurate. These style classifications

are, to investors, the information the most readily available, why we chose to use them rather

than introducing a best fit index as an alternate method.

4.1.2 Performance Measures

We use several different measures to capture the performance of mutual funds. According to

Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995), mutual funds tend to follow momentum investing or

trend following strategies. Thus, our starting-point is the Carhart (1997) four-factor model:

                                                                                             (1)

In the model, is the monthly excess return for fund i, (using the monthly 30-day T-bill yield as

a proxy for the risk free rate), is the market excess return (calculated through a value

weighted portfolio using CRSP data on the NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ) and , and

       are returns on factor portfolios (size, book-to-market and momentum). As shown by

Griffin (2002), the factors are country specific, which is accounted for by only looking at U.S.

domestic funds, using North American factor returns. We find the monthly Fama-French North

                                                                                                                                    4
American market factors and returns, including momentum, on the Kenneth French website.

The predecessor model is the Fama-French three-factor model, which we use as a second predic-

4 Kenneth R. French Homepage, Data Library
                                       12
tor of performance:

                                                                                             (2)

For each of the two above models, we extract the alphas from the regressions, further explained

in section 4.2.2 Data Treatment, to evaluate fund performance.

Cumby and Glen (1990) argue that the Jensen measure provides an accurate indication of fund

performance when a manager has selectivity information but no timing information; meanwhile,

Jensen (1972), Admati and Ross (1985) and Dybvig and Ross (1985a) show that superior timing

information can cause the Jensen alpha to be negative. Therefore, we look at the performance

considering the Jensen alpha, as per Jensen (1969):

                                                                                             (3)

We compute a couple of other performance measures in order to internally compare the different

decile portfolios (constructed as described in section 4.2.2 Data Treatment). Hence, we examine

each funds appraisal ratio and, to ensure that the portfolio based approach is not specific to our

factor models, each funds Sharpe ratio. Sharpe (1966) concluded that the measure invented, con-

sidering risk and return of each mutual fund, allows for discovery of differences in performance

exclusionary derived from objective differences, interpreted as differences in the persistence in

risk taken on by funds. These measures are to be interpreted within the boundaries of this thesis,

not to be used in a wider context, as the critique regarding estimation errors presented by Lo

(2002) is applicable in this coherence.

The appraisal ratio for each fund is calculated by dividing the mean of its Carhart four-factor ad-

justed returns over the holding period by their standard deviation. We then take the average

across funds within each decile portfolio to derive the corresponding portfolio appraisal ratio.

Brown, Goetzmann and Ross (1995) show that survivorship bias is positively related to fund re-

                                       13
turn variance. Therefore, including the appraisal ratio, alpha scaled by idiosyncratic risk, when

evaluating portfolios mitigates this bias. We include the Sharpe ratio to capture the risk-return

trade-off among mutual funds. It is calculated for each fund by dividing the mean of its monthly

net fee returns in excess of the risk free rate over the holding period by the corresponding stand-

ard deviation of monthly excess returns. The portfolio Sharpe ratio is calculated using the same

procedure as for the appraisal ratio.

4.2 Method

4.2.1 Defining the SDI Measure and Hypotheses

The goal of this study is to examine whether a distinct investment strategy is an indicator of man-

agerial skill and has predictive power of superior future performance. As concluded by Busse and

Irvin (2004), recognizing the dynamic nature of the holdings of mutual funds would improve per-

formance predictability. Hence, drawing conclusions about strategy distinctiveness, we are using a

measure previously applied in analyzing hedge fund strategies, known for their dynamic holdings.

The SDI measure seeks to examine to which extent funds returns differ from the returns of its

peers.

We make the assumption that an individual fund’s return that co-moves less with those of its

peer group indicates a more distinct and unique investment strategy. The measure proposed to

determine strategy distinctiveness, the SDI, is therefore based on past fund returns. The SDI will

range between 0 and 2 and can be viewed as a distance measure: the higher the SDI, the further

away from its peers, hence the more distinct a funds strategy. Thereby, the measure attempts to

mirror the uniqueness of each funds strategy. The specific formula shows how the returns of an

individual fund are correlated with the average returns of funds in the same style category

( ):

                                       14
                                                                                             (4)

The interpretation of this measure is based on basic economic principle, suggesting that the more

well known a trading strategy is, thus the more people applying it, the lower the profits generated

from that particular strategy will be. Based on previous literature and the discussion held up until

this point, we state our null and alternative hypotheses:

HN: Skilled managers are more capable of generating, and likely to pursue, unique investment strategies that

should result in superior performance.

HA: Skilled managers are not more capable of generating, nor likely to pursue, unique investment strategies that

should result in superior performance.

From the null hypothesis follows that less skilled managers are more likely to practice well known

strategies, thus competing with a large number of other managers for the same returns. If this

hypothesis is accurate, there ought to be a positive relation between strategy distinctiveness and

performance.

To convert the hypothesis into a testable forecast, we first measure strategy distinctiveness

through the correlation between the returns of fund i and the returns of its peers. We continue

by ranking managers based on the SDI measure, assuming that more skilled managers should be

those with lower correlation. To validate the relationship between the SDI measure and manage-

rial skill and subsequent performance, we make two predictions, following below.

Prediction 1: Strategy distinctiveness is a measure of managerial skill.

Our first prediction examines the relation between our measure and managerial skill. We interpret

the correlation between the SDI measure and known fund characteristics. In line with previous

research, we expect the SDI to increase with management fees, while it is forecasted to decrease

                                       15
with the volatility of returns, fund age and fund size. Relating SDI to volatility of returns is con-

sistent with testing for managers pursuing gaming strategies and taking on excess risk, which

should not be confused with managerial talent. On the other hand, we predict managers of

younger and smaller funds to more likely pursue innovative and agile investment strategies. In-

centive fees were initially introduced as a motivating factor to managers in designing more inno-

vative strategies yielding better performance. As shown by Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001), there

is superior stock picking ability among incentive-fee funds, why we forecast a positive relation

between the SDI and management fees. If these predictions are rejected, instead the alternative

hypothesis is supported.

Prediction 2: Strategy distinctiveness is positively related to subsequent portfolio performance.

In the case of managerial skill, these managers should be able to generate superior performance

in using unique investment strategies, standing out from less skilled managers. Thus, we predict a

positive relationship between past SDI and future performance. The prediction would be rejected

if the SDI is found to have no explanatory power of future performance.

When interpreting the SDI measure, funds in broadly defined classes might appear relatively

more distinct than funds in narrowly defined classes. The reason is quite intuitive, as funds in

broader classes will be spread to a larger extent than those in narrowly defined classes. Therefore,

we have investigated the distribution of the SDI measure within each style class to take into con-

sideration this possible confusing style effect, see Figure 1C. As shown by Sun, Wang and Zheng

(2012), the spread of the SDI will be much larger within groups based on the pre-defined style

classifications than when clustering historical returns in order to group funds with their closest

cohorts (however, in their study, the TASS styles used are only reported in the end of each funds

life, while the CRSP provide continuous updates regarding fund style classifications). Further-

more, the SDI measure can be reversed due to counteracting mechanisms. Managers taking on

                                       16
excess idiosyncratic risk, pursuing so called gaming strategies, may appear to have distinct strate-

gies without delivering superior performance. Hence, in this case strategy distinctiveness is not

synonymous with managerial skill.

4.2.2 Data Treatment

In our main analysis, we define fund styles according to pre-specified Lipper prospectus-based

classifications, as described above in section 4.1.1 Mutual Fund Sample. The importance of cor-

rectly defined styles is heavily emphasized in the study by Sun, Wang and Zheng (2012). Even

though we recognize the method described by Brown and Goetzmann (1997, 2003), defining in-

vestment styles by clustering historical returns, we will be using the pre-defined style classifica-

tions in determining which one of the eleven style classes each fund belongs to. This information

is the most readily available to investors, who are the most interested in a measure such as the

SDI. In treating style switching, we have assumed funds can only switch style in the beginning of

the year as the summary statistics can only be retrieved on a yearly basis from the CRSP database.

Following Aragon (2007) we filter out funds missing a Lipper style classification, as they cannot

be analyzed.

For funds switching style, we create new fund identification numbers, ultimately interpreting the

fund as two different funds, before and after the switch. There is a possibility that these funds are

of great interest to us, as the managers taking the initiative to switch style might be the more

skilled ones. In order to control for this theory we calculate the switching rate of each decile

portfolio, further explained in this section.

Furthermore, we follow Sun, Wang and Zheng (2012), limiting the sample by only including

funds with a minimum of 24 months of returns in order to reduce the noise in the measure, and

prepare for analysis using a 24 month rolling window. Following Elton, Gruber and Blake (1996)

we drop funds with less than $15 million in total net assets. Our final sample contains 9,560

                                       17
funds (8,660 without taking switching into consideration) and 656,573 observations of monthly

returns.

Using monthly return observations, we compute the correlations within each class with a step-by-

step method. This is done with a 24-month rolling window (as per the Equation 4) for each term

in the SDI-formula. Further, with similar 24-month estimations, we find both the three- and

four-factor alphas for each fund on a monthly basis. The same procedure is used to retrieve the

Jensen alpha for each fund.

We proceed with testing our first prediction, that strategy distinctiveness is a measure of manage-

rial skill. We look for determinants of the SDI using a multivariate panel regression, controlling

for fund-clustering and time fixed effects. Daniel and Titman (1997) find that stock characteris-

tics do better than factor loadings in explaining the cross-sectional behavior of average returns.

We look at a couple of specific fund characteristics in addition to our performance measures.

Wermers (2000) show that the average mutual fund held stocks that beat the CRSP index by 130

basis points per annum, while net return averaged 100 basis points below the index. For this rea-

son we see the need of controlling for management fees. Specifically, the variables examined are

fund age, monthly return volatility, fund size measured by total net assets, management fees and

performance of each fund. We estimate the following multivariate panel regression for each of

the three alphas from the Carhart, Fama-French and Jensen models:

                                                                                             (5)

The control variables are lagged by one year in line with Brown and Goetzmann (1995) and

Gruber (1996).

In order to test our second prediction, looking at the relationship between the SDI and perfor-

mance, we apply a second regression defining our three different alphas as dependent variables,

                                       18
and the SDI and fund characteristics as independent variables. First, we use a similar multivariate

panel regression approach, adjusting for fund-clustering and time fixed effects. Second, we per-

form the same analysis, using Fama-MacBeth (1973) cross-sectional regression with style fixed ef-

fects and Newey-West heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation adjustment. The Fama-MacBeth re-

gression is a two-step approach. First, cross sectional regressions are used in each time period to

estimate the parameters which, in the second step are used in time series regressions to obtain the

final estimates for parameters and standard errors and thus t-statistics. As shown by Petersen

(2009) the fund effect is best accounted for by clustering standard errors. To take the time effect

into consideration, as returns might be correlated across funds at a given point in time, the most

appropriate approach is using Fama-MacBeth regression. Hence, we need to apply both of these

techniques. In order to do so, we estimate the following regression equation:

                                                                                             (6)

If our null hypothesis holds, we wish to investigate whether we can exploit the relationship found

between the SDI and future fund performance by constructing equally weighted portfolios of the

deciles based on the SDI level of each fund. We look at three different holding periods: quarterly,

semiannual and annual. Rebalancing the portfolios accordingly, we compound the performance

measures, averaged across funds within each portfolio. These are, as earlier explained, the differ-

ent alphas, and appraisal and Sharpe ratios.

5 Results

As seen in Figure 1A, a majority of funds (>95%) have an SDI below 0.20. Considering the his-

togram bins, of 0.02 each, one can see that most funds are found in the 0.00 to 0.10 bins, while

funds scoring an SDI higher than 0.20 account for less than 5% of the sample. Those with an

SDI greater than 1 have returns that are in fact negatively correlated with the average returns of

                                       19
                                                                                    5
their style class peers. These funds account for less than 1% of the sample. As expected, our

findings show that few mutual fund managers are pursuing unique investment strategies, partially

explained by restrictions and extensive disclosure in the mutual fund industry.

Looking at the distribution differences among live and dead funds, we see that dead funds score

a higher average SDI over the period from 2000 through 2011. Live funds have an average SDI

of 0.06 while dead funds score 0.07 on average. The distribution of the SDI between live and

dead funds (Figure 1B) remains fairly constant, indicating that the relationship between the SDI

and performance is not dependent on levels of the SDI among live and dead funds.

Figure 1C presents the distribution of the SDI among different style classifications. However, de-

spite fairly similar distributions overall, Equity Market Neutral and Long/Short Equity are strate-

gies experiencing significantly higher standard deviation of the SDI. These findings could, on the

other hand, be explained by the number of funds observed within these clusters, see Table 2. We

still believe that the number of funds within each style class is sufficient enough to report unbi-

ased results.

Table 2 and 3 further describes the dataset in terms of basic statistics, such as yearly switching

and drop-out rates and emphasizes the return characteristics for each of the style classification

clusters used in this study.

As shown in Table 4, we have not found average positive alphas, based on net fee returns, which

is in line with recent studies discussed in previous sections. The mean monthly alphas for all

funds are negative, ranging between -0.14 (average three-factor alpha) and -0.05 (average Jensen

alpha). However, there are significant differences in the average alphas and their standard devia-

tions of dead funds compared to live funds, with both the four-factor and three-factor average

alphas being close to three times larger (negative) for dead funds.

5 Looking at the findings in the hedge fund industry, Sun, Wang and Zheng (2012) show that, using TASS pre-
defined style classifications, as much as 10% of funds have SDIs higher than 1.
                                       20
Looking at fund characteristics, yearly average (and median) management fees for live funds have

been lower than for dead funds during the sample period, found to be 0.69% and 0.73% respec-

tively. However, the standard deviation of the management fee is higher among live funds. Fur-

thermore, live funds are generally older than dead funds and have a larger average volatility in net

monthly returns. Comparing the total net assets, we see much higher figures for live funds, when

it comes to each of the descriptive measures. For instance, the median is twice as large for live

funds as for dead funds ($138 M and $70 M respectively) and the maximum value of observed

total net assets is almost six times as large ($102,105 M and $17,404 M respectively). Some re-

searchers argue that size can kill while we believe the difference can be explained by the relation-

                                                                    6
ship between past performance and fund flows.

We present the time-series average of the pair-wise correlations between the SDI and available

fund characteristics. Referring to Panel B of Table 4, most notably we see a positive relationship

between the SDI and both the three-factor and Jensen alphas. This supports our prediction of

the SDI being a measure of managerial skill. However, the four-factor alpha is negatively corre-

lated with the SDI, though insignificant at the 10% level, most probably because of the momen-

tum factor creating an imminent amount of negative alphas. Furthermore, as expected, the corre-

lation between the SDI and management fees is positive while it is negative looking at age, vola-

tility of net fee returns and total net assets. Hence younger and smaller funds along with funds

with higher management fees tend to have a higher SDI.

To gain a greater understanding of how the SDI measure varies with different fund characteris-

tics we perform a multivariate panel regression. Table 5 emphasizes the findings described above,

as they are all consistent with the results from the correlation matrix, apart from the fact that the

panel regression generates a highly significant positive coefficient for the four-factor alpha as

6 Bogle (1997) argues that ”nothing fails like success” in describing the recent evolution and growth of the mutual
fund industry, while Berk and Green (2002) concludes that there is a strong relationship between past performance
and subsequent fund flows.
                                       21
well. The SDI increases with past performance, which again corresponds with the skill effect.

The negative coefficient of return volatility implies that the SDI measure is not associated with

managers taking excessive risk in order to maximize performance. More likely, the SDI measures

innovative managers adapting and implementing distinct strategies, in line with our null hypothe-

sis. Further, even more intuitive, managers of younger funds are seemingly more innovative in

designing investment strategies, managers of smaller funds are more agile in their portfolio allo-

cations and higher management fees do provide fund managers with a larger incentive of keeping

their strategies up to date (or the other way around; more talented managers have the possibility

of charging higher fees thanks to higher demand).

At this point we have presented evidence of the SDI being a proxy for managerial skill. To move

on, we test our second prediction, that the SDI is positively related to subsequent portfolio per-

formance, in order to finally confirm or reject our hypothesis. In doing so, the approaches used

are multivariate panel regression, Fama-MacBeth regression and an equally weighted portfolio

approach.

We present the results of the multivariate panel regression in Table 6. The t-statistics are adjusted

for fund-clustering and time fixed effects. The four-factor, three-factor and Jensen alphas act as

dependent variables. The results are statistically significant, showing that the SDI is related to

each of the three alpha measures, when controlling for fund characteristics in the regression. In

addition, the management fee, return volatility and fund size are overall significantly and nega-

tively related to the different alphas. This is in line with earlier research which argues that incen-

tive fees, as an expense, mitigates future alpha (Elton, Gruber and Blake (2003) and Fama and

French (2010)). As discussed by Berk and Green (2004), there are decreasing returns to scale in

the mutual fund industry causing performance corrosion with increased fund flows. The regres-

sion results related to the total net assets are in line with their study, showing a negative relation

between size and future alpha. Fund age, on the other hand, is vaguely but significantly positively
                                       22
related to future alpha. Using standardized independent variables and a panel regression, the

four-factor coefficient of the SDI is 0.20, implying a one standard deviation increase in the SDI

would result in an increase in the subsequent annual four-factor alpha of 0.20 standard devia-

tions. In the same way, the standardized coefficients for the three-factor alpha and the Jensen al-

pha on the SDI are 0.16 and 0.24 respectively. The corresponding results from the regression of

Equation 6 using a Fama-MacBeth approach are presented in Table 7. For the four-factor alpha,

the results are not as significant as using a panel regression. Nevertheless, the results for the

three-factor alpha and the Jensen alpha are significant at the 10% and the 1% level respectively,

showing a positive relation with the SDI.

Further examining this relation, we use an equally weighted portfolio approach, measuring the

subsequent performance over three different holding periods. Considering each of our five per-

formance measures, now including the appraisal and Sharpe ratios, the results show that funds in

the highest decile outperform funds in the lowest. Specifically, looking at a one year holding and

rebalancing period, funds in the highest decile outperform those in the lowest by 1.05% in terms

of Carhart four-factor adjusted returns, as seen in Panel A of Table 9. While this performance

measure is the most exhaustive in this study, the spread between the high and low portfolios are

even greater turning to the three-factor and the Jensen alphas. All of the three different alphas in-

crease (approaches a positive level, since net fee alphas are negative) almost monotonously with

the SDI level for all three holding periods, and the Jensen alpha even turns out to be positive for

the two top decile portfolios for all of the holding periods. Notable, however, is that neither the

Carhart four-factor adjusted returns, nor the Fama-French three-factor adjusted returns are ever

positive. Similar findings have recently been discussed by researchers (e.g. Fama and French

(2010)) arguing that alphas in net fee returns are negative for the aggregate mutual fund universe.

Thus, even though mutual funds on average generate negative alphas given net fee returns, we

find that the SDI does predict subsequent superior performance. In further comparing the port-

                                       23
folios, the appraisal and the Sharpe ratios are presented in Panel B of Table 9. Evaluating the

portfolios, taking unsystematic risk into consideration, we find that the appraisal ratio show a

tendency of increasing with the SDI level, as do the Sharpe ratio. Regardless of holding period

and performance measure, funds in the top decile consistently outperform funds in the bottom

decile.

In Table 8, the characteristics associated with the portfolios are presented. Specifically, the num-

ber of switching funds clearly increase with the portfolio number, thus with the SDI level. Fur-

thermore, the management fee follows a similar pattern, with the low SDI funds charging an av-

erage management fee of 0.47% per annum while the highest decile SDI funds charge 0.86% on

average. As expected, there is an evident decrease in size as the SDI level and portfolio number

increases. Meanwhile, the average volatility in net returns and the age of the funds seem to be less

distinctive for the funds in the different deciles.

6 Robustness Tests

6.1 SDI Based on Absolute Correlation

A mutual fund will, per definition, have a high SDI when the correlation of its returns with the

returns of its peers is low. This implies the measure might be tracing a manager pursuing a

unique investment strategies or one that is simply betting against its peers. To enhance the SDI

being a measure of managerial skill rather than a measure of different risk taking and/or gam-

bling behavior among managers, we construct an alternative distinctiveness index based on the

absolute correlation. The SDI(|correlation|) measure is defined using the same procedure as for

the regular SDI, with the addition of absolute correlation. Thus, in contrast to those managers

who basically bet against their peers, resulting in a negative correlation in returns, only managers

with unique investment ideas will score a high SDI.

                                       24
Running the same panel and Fama-MacBeth regressions as previously described in section 4.2.2

Data Treatment, Panel A and B of Table 10 show the SDI remains statistically significant and

                                                                                          7
positive, implying predictive power of future fund performance . Other control variables show

similar results as well.

Further, we sort funds and construct decile portfolios based on their SDI(|correlation|) measure.

Panel D and E of Table 10 show that for equally weighted portfolios with a holding period of

one year, funds in the highest decile portfolio outperform funds in the lowest by 1.05%, 1.21%

and 3.04% when considering the four-factor, three-factor and Jensen alphas, respectively. The

spread in the appraisal ratio is 1.25 and 0.03 based on the Sharpe ratio.

Third, Panel C of Table 10 shows that the correlation between SDI and SDI(|correlation|) equals

0.77, suggesting a great level of overlapping funds between portfolios sorted on SDI and

SDI(|correlation|). Overall, these results support our findings of the SDI being a measure of man-

agerial skill.

6.2 Survivorship Bias

Survivorship bias is often an issue to consider when analyzing overall performance from histori-

cal data, widely known among researchers and financial economics. As explained in section 4 Da-

ta and Methodology, we have tried to mitigate this potential problem, e.g. by using the CRSP

Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund Database, excluding funds holding less than $15 million to

reduce the risk of survivorship bias due to reporting conventions (Elton, Gruber and Blake

(1996)) and using the appraisal ratio, when evaluating portfolio performance (Brown, Goetzmann

and Ross (1995)). Still, this potential problem, which might be due to funds merging or dropping

out, raises the question whether the SDI decile portfolio performance depends on survival rates.

To asses this problem we use the Heckman correction.

7 Except from the Carhart four-factor adjusted alpha in the Fama-MacBeth regression, t-statistic(0.77)
                                       25
The Heckman correction is a two-step procedure. First, we use a probit model to estimate the

survival probability of mutual funds over the next twelve months. Here, the dependent variable

takes the value of one if the fund survives the following twelve months and zero otherwise. Se-

cond, we add the inverse mills ratio (Heckman Lambda) from the first-step regression to our

control variables in the panel and Fama-MacBeth regressions from Equation 6.

Panel A of Table 11 reports the results of the probit regression, showing that younger funds are

associated with a lower probability of survival, while larger funds with better past performance

and higher SDI have a higher probability. The second-step regression results from the Heckman

correction, including the inverse mill ratio, are presented in Panel B of Table 11. The coefficient

of interest, the SDI, remains statistically significant and positive, as before, in Table 6 and 7, sug-

gesting that the previous positive relationship between strategy distinctiveness and mutual fund

performance is not due to survivorship bias.

7 Conclusion

Wealth-maximizing investors are interested in the evaluation of mutual funds, attempting to find

innovative managers pursuing unique investment strategies. With increasing flows into mutual

funds, and a corresponding increase in the supply of different funds for investors to choose

from, there is also a greater need for evaluating the contribution of active management to inves-

tor utility. Specifically, a measure easily assessing managerial ability in the fierce competition de-

fining the mutual fund industry of today would be desirable for investors. In this study, following

Sun, Wang and Zheng (2012), we examine to what extent a fund correlates with its peers in terms

of return series. We hypothesize that skilled managers are more likely to generate and pursue

unique investment strategies, thus deliver superior performance relative to that of less skilled

managers. In order to access the hypothesis we formulate two predictions. First, we predict that

strategy distinctiveness is a measure of managerial skill. Second, we predict that strategy distinc-
                                       26
tiveness is related to superior performance.

To measure a mutual fund’s strategy distinctiveness, we define and estimate the strategy distinc-

tiveness index, SDI, as 1 minus the correlation of its returns with the returns of its peers, being

clustered by pre-defined style classifications. Our findings suggest that the SDI is an indicator of

managerial skill and innovative talent. We see that younger and smaller funds are able to pursue

innovative and agile investment strategies. Furthermore, we find that management fees act as a

motivating factor for managers in designing more innovative strategies. Looking at the volatility

of returns, we conclude that the SDI is not affected by managers pursuing gaming strategies, tak-

ing on excessive risk.

The main results of this study prove that the SDI is related to significantly better mutual fund

                                                                                       8
performance, in line with findings in the hedge fund industry . Our analyses continuously show

that funds with higher SDI consistently outperform funds with lower SDI. This evidence indi-

cates that skilled active managers do exist. Thus, our overall findings provide investors with a

measure that can be used in evaluating and selecting mutual funds, further facilitating finding

managers with the capability of generating superior future performance. However, skillfulness is

rare, only attributable to a minority of fund managers, with most mutual funds generating largely

correlated returns. Thus, despite investors having the possibility of identifying superior mutual

fund managers, the overall negative net of fee alphas suggest that investors are better of indexing

their investments. However, an investor should bear in mind that this study has been executed

during a time characterized by large shifts in the financial markets. To investigate the accuracy of

the measure given different market conditions, extended evaluation should take into considera-

tion potential differences caused by periods of market downturn and boom respectively.

8 Referring to evidence of Sun, Wang and Zheng (2012).
                                       27
This study is performed using an investor perspective, taking the CRSP pre-defined styles as giv-

en. The results show that certain strategies tend to perform better than others, in particular, these

are found within the Equity Market Neutral and Long/Short Equity styles. An extension of this

study should redefine style clusters based on a “best fit” approach, similar to that of Brown and

Goetzmann (1997, 2003). Previous literature has shown that mutual funds are often subject to

misclassification, sometimes even due to managers consciously deviating from the pre-defined

styles. Thus, our measure would be more accurate comparing funds with their closest cohorts as

found through clustering historical returns.

                                       28
8 References

Admati, A., Ross, S., 1985, Measuring Investment Performance in a Rational Expectations Mod-
el, Journal of Business 58, 1-26

                                                        2
Amihud, Y., Goyenko, R., 2011, Mutual Fund’s R as Predictor of Performance, Working Paper,
New York University – Stern School of Business and McGill University – Desautels Faculty of
Management

Aragon, G., 2007, Share Restriction and Asset Pricing: Evidence from the Hedge Fund Industry,
Journal of Financial Economics 83, 33-58

Berk, J., Green, R., 2004, Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational Markets, Forth
coming, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-1295

Bogle, J., 1997, Nothing Fails Like Success - The Investment Implications of the Great Mutual
Fund Boom, Remarks By John C. Bogle, Founder and Chairman of The Vanguard Group, Be-
fore The Contrary Opinion Forum

Bollen, N., Busse, J., 2004, Short-Term Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, The Review of
Financial Studies 18, 569-597

Brown, S., Goetzmann W., 1995, Performance Persistence, The Journal of Finance 50, 679-698

Brown, S., Goetzmann, W., 1997, Mutual Fund Styles, Journal of Financial Economics 43, 373-399

Brown, S., Goetzmann, W., Park, J., 2001, Careers and Survival: Competition and Risk in the
Hedge Fund and CTA Industry, The Journal of Finance 56, 1869-1886

Brown, S., Goetzmann, W., Ross, S., 1995, Survival, The Journal of Finance 50, 853-873

Busse, J., Irvine, P., 2006, Bayesian Alphas and Mutual Fund Persistence, The Journal of Finance 61,
2251-2288

Busse, J., Goyal, A., Wahal, S., 2010, Performance and Persistence in Institutional Investment
Management, The Journal of Finance 65, 765-790

Carhart, M., 1997, On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, The Journal of Finance 52, 57–82

Chan, L., Chen, H., Lakonishok, J., 2002, On Mutual Fund Investment Styles, The Review of Finan-
cial Studies 15(5), 1407-1437

Chevalier, J., Ellison, G., 1999, Are Some Mutual Fund Managers Better than Others? Cross-
Sectional Patterns in Behavior and Performance, The Journal of Finance 54, 875-899

CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund Database, March 2008 Quarterly Update, as found
on the CRSP website
(http://www.crsp.com/documentation/pdfs/relnotes/2008/mf_200803.pdf)

CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund Database Guide, Page 6, as found on the CRSP
website (http://www.crsp.com/documentation/index.html)

Cumby, R., Glen, J., 1990, Evaluating the Performance of International Mutual Funds, The Journal
of Finance 45, 497-521
                                       29
Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1997, Measuring Mutual Fund Performance
with Characteristic-Based Benchmarks, The Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058

Daniel, K., Titman, S., 1997, Evidence on the Characteristics of Cross-Sectional Variation in
Stock Returns, The Journal of Finance 52, 1-33

Dybvig, P., Ross, S., 1985a, Differential Information and Performance Measurement Using a Se-
curity Market Line, The Journal of Finance 40, 401-416

Elton, E., Gruber, M., Blake, C., 1996, Survivor Bias and Mutual Fund Performance, The Review of
Financial Studies 9, 1097-1120

Elton, E., Gruber, M., Blake, C., 2001, A First Look at the Accuracy of the CRSP Mutual Fund
Database and a Comparison of the CRSP and Morningstar Databases, The Journal of Finance 56,
2415-2430

Elton, E., Gruber, M., Blake, C., 2003, Incentive Fees and Mutual Funds, The Journal of Finance 58,
779-804

Fama, E., French, K., 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns, The Journal of Finance
47, 427–465

Fama, E., French, K., 2010, Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mutual Fund Returns, The
Journal of Finance 65, 1915-1947

Fama, E., MacBeth, J., 1973, Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests, Journal of Political
Economy 81 (3), 607-636

French, K., Homepage, Data Library,
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/)

Gil-Bazo, J., Ruiz-Verdú, P., 2009, The Relation between Price and Performance in the Mutual
Fund Industry, The Journal of Finance 64, 2153-2183

Goetzmann, W., Ibbotson, R., 1994, Do Winners Repeat? Patterns in Mutual Fund Return Be-
havior, The Journal of Portfolio Management 20, 9-18

Goetzmann, W., Peles, N., 1997, Cognitive Dissonance and Mutual Fund Investors, Journal of Fi-
nancial Research 20, 145-158

Griffin, John M., 2002, Are the Fama and French Factors Global or Country Specific?, The Review
of Financial Studies 15, 783–803

Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1995, Momentum Investing Strategies, Portfolio Perfor-
mance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior, American Economic Review, 85, 1088–1105

Grossman, S., Stiglitz, J., 1980, On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets, Ameri-
can Economic Review 70, 393-408

Gruber, M., 1996, Another Puzzle: The Growth in Actively Managed Mutual Funds, The Journal of
Finance 51, 783-810

                                       30
Harlow, W., Brown, K., 2006, The Right Answer to the Wrong Question: Identifying Superior
Active Portfolio Management, Journal of Investment Management 4, 1-26

Hendricks, D., Patel, J., Zeckhauser, R., 1993, Hot Hands in Mutual Funds: Short-Run Persis-
tence of Relative Performance, The Journal of Finance 48, 93-130

Ingersoll, J., Spiegel, M., Goetzmann, W., Welch, I., 2007, Portfolio Performance Manipulation
and Manipulation-proof Performance Measures, The Review of Financial Studies 20, 1503-1546

Jegadeesh, N., Titman, S., 1993, Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for
Stock Market Efficiency, The Journal of Finance 48, 65–91

Jensen, M., 1968, The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-1964, The Journal of Fi-
nance 23, 389-416

Jensen, M., 1969, Risk, the Pricing of Capital Assets, and the Evaluation of Investment Portfoli-
os, Journal of Business 42, 167-247

Jensen, M., 1972, Optimal Utilization of Market Forecasts and the Evaluation of Investment
Portfolio Performance, in Szego, G. and Shell, K., eds.:Mathematical Methods in Investment and Fi-
nance (North Holland, Amsterdam)

Kacperczyk, M., Seru, A., 2007, Fund Manager Use of Public Information: New Evidence on
Managerial Skills, The Journal of Finance 62, 485-528

Kacperczyk, M., Sialm, C., Zheng, L., 2005, On the Industry Concentration of Actively Managed
Equity Mutual Funds, The Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2011

Lo, A., 2002, The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios, Financial Analysts Journal 58, 36-52

Lynch, A., Musto, D., 2003, How Investors Interpret past Fund Returns, The Journal of Finance 58,
2033-2058

Malkiel, B., 1995, Returns from Investing in Equity Mutual Funds 1971 to 1991, The Journal of Fi-
nance 50, 549-572

New Classification Structure for USDE Funds, 09-12-1998, Lipper Thompson Reuters, found at
www.lipperweb.com

Petersen, M., 2009, Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing Ap-
proaches, The Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480

Pollet, J., Wilson, M., 2009, How Does Size Affect Mutual Fund Behavior?, The Journal of Finance
63, 2941-2969

Sharpe, W., 1966, Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Business 39, 119-138

Skoulakis, G., 2008, Panel Data Inference in Finance: Least-Squares vs Fama-MacBeth, Working
Paper Series, University of Maryland – Department of Finance

Stein, J., 2009, Presidential Address: Sophisticated Investors and Market Efficiency, The Journal of
Finance 64, 1517-1548

Sun, Z., Wang, A., Zheng, L., 2012, The road less traveled: Strategy Distinctiveness and Hedge
Fund Performance, The Review of Financial Studies 25, 96-143
                                       31
U.S. Open-End, Closed-End, and Variable Annuity Fund Classification Descriptions, 2011-11-
08, Lipper Thomson Reuters, found at www.lipperweb.com

Wang, A., Zheng, L., 2008, Strategy Distinctiveness and Hedge Fund Performance, Working Pa-
per, University of California, Irvine - Paul Merage School of Business

Wermers, R., 2000, Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into Stock-Picking
Talent, Style, Transactions Costs, and Expenses, The Journal of Finance 55, 1655-1695
Wermers, R., 2003, Is Money Really “Smart”? New Evidence on the Relation Between Mutual
Fund Flows, Manager Behavior, and Performance Persistence, Working Paper, University of
Maryland – Robert H. Smith School of Business

                                       32
9 Appendix

                           9.1 Figure 1: Histogram of the SDI
Figure 1A presents the histogram of the SDI for all funds in the sample during 2000-2011. Figure
 1B presents the histogram of the SDI on Live and Dead (Graveyard) Funds. Figure 1C presents
  the histogram of the SDI for each style classification. Note: All figures show SDI levels up to
                                    (max) 0.5 for visual reasons.

                          Figure 1A: Histogram of the SDI on the Full Sample

                        Figure 1B: Histogram of the SDI on Live and Dead Funds

                                       33
           Figure 1 – continued

Figure 1C: Histogram of the SDI per Style Classification

                   34
                          9.2 Table 1: Classification Descriptions
 Table 1 presents the Lipper Style Classifications with descriptions as found through “U.S. Open-
  End, Closed-End, and Variable Annuity Fund Classification Descriptions” on the Lipper web.

Classification Description
Capital Appreciation Funds Funds that aim at maximum capital appreciation, frequently by means of
                               100%-or more portfolio turnover, leveraging, purchasing unregistered se-
                                 curities, purchasing options, etc. The funds may take large cash positions.
Dedicated Short Bias Funds Funds that employ portfolio strategies consistently creating a “net short”
                                  exposure to the market. This classification also includes short-only funds,
                                 i.e., funds that pursue short sales of stock or stock index options
Equity Income Funds Funds that seek relatively high current income and growth of income
                                through investing 65% or more of their portfolio in equities.
Equity Leverage Funds Diversified and non-diversified equity funds that seek daily investment re-
                               sults of more than 100% of the daily performance of a stated benchmark
                                through any combination of futures contracts, derivatives, and leverage.
Equity Market Neutral Funds Fund that employ portfolio strategies generating consistent returns in
                                both up and down markets by selecting positions with a total net market
                               exposure of zero.
Growth Funds Funds that normally invest in companies with long-term earnings ex-
                                  pected to grow significantly faster than the earnings of the stocks repre-
                             sented in the major unmanaged stock indices.
Growth and Income Funds Funds that combine a growth-of-earnings orientation and an income re-
                                quirement for level and/or rising dividends.
Long/Short Equity Funds Funds that employ portfolio strategies combining long holdings of equi-
                                 ties with short sales of equity, equity options, or equity index options. The
                                funds may be either net long or net short, depending on the portfolio
                               manager’s view of the market.
Micro-Cap Funds Funds that, by prospectus or portfolio practice, invest primarily in com-
                                 panies with market capitalizations less than $300 million at the time of
                              purchase.
Mid-Cap Funds Funds that, by prospectus or portfolio practice, invest primarily in com-
                                  panies with market capitalizations less than $5 billion at the time of pur-
                                chase.
Small-Cap Funds Fund that, by prospectus or portfolio practice, invest primarily in compa-
                                    nies with market capitalizations less than $1 billion at the time of pur-
                                chase.

                                       35
                                                     9.3 Table 2: Yearly Observations
              Table 2 shows descriptive statistics containing switching and drop-out rates as well as data on each of the style classifications.

                               Total 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mean Median Min Max Std
        Nr of Funds (before switching) 8 660
         Nr of Funds (after switching) 9 560 3 002 3 392 3 650 3 865 4 243 4 451 4 759 5 240 6 075 5 902 6 350 6 370 4 775 4 605 3 002 6 370 1 196
       Yearly change in nr of funds (%) 12.99 7.61 5.89 9.78 4.90 6.92 10.11 15.94 -2.85 7.59 0.31 7.20 7.59 -2.85 15.94 5.30
                     Dead Funds 2 475 1 333 1 453 1 457 1 385 1 431 1 305 1 202 1 137 903 627 423 242 1 075 1 254 242 1 457 426
             Yearly drop out rate (%) 25.89 44.40 42.84 39.92 35.83 33.73 29.32 25.26 21.70 14.86 10.62 6.66 3.80 25.75 27.29 3.80 44.40 14.23
                      Live Funds 7 085 1 669 1 939 2 193 2 480 2 812 3 146 3 557 4 103 5 172 5 275 5 927 6 128 3 700 3 352 1 669 6 128 1 589
                  Switching funds 2 185 165 205 230 259 286 293 314 343 340 322 328 265 279 290 165 343 56
Yearly switching rate (% of total #funds) 22.86 5.50 6.04 6.30 6.70 6.74 6.58 6.60 6.55 5.60 5.46 5.17 4.16 5.95 6.17 4.16 6.74 0.79
 Yearly switching rate (% of #live funds) 30.84 9.89 10.57 10.49 10.44 10.17 9.31 8.83 8.36 6.57 6.10 5.53 4.32 8.38 9.07 4.32 10.57 2.20
          Capital Appreciation Funds 533 228 236 259 276 305 313 272 269 288 274 290 286 275 275 228 313 25
          Dedicated Short Bias Funds 153 1 1 1 1 1 1 36 69 105 87 110 92 42 19 1 110 47
              Equity Income Funds 441 144 161 163 157 184 191 200 225 275 269 291 289 212 196 144 291 55
             Equity Leverage Funds 43 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 32 37 34 11 0 0 37 17
        Equity Market Neutral Funds 72 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 34 39 44 60 59 21 9 0 60 25
                    Growth Funds 3 263 974 1 154 1 229 1 317 1 427 1 529 1 622 1 786 2 062 2 046 2 160 2 152 1 622 1 576 974 2 160 416
          Growth and Income Funds 2 058 690 754 817 842 906 920 971 1 052 1 233 1 220 1 397 1 446 1 021 946 690 1 446 250
           Long/Short Equity Funds 95 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 41 53 58 71 71 26 9 0 71 30
                 Micro-Cap Funds 85 42 45 52 45 50 57 62 65 56 45 42 43 50 48 42 65 8
                  Mid-Cap Funds 1 229 336 381 424 470 534 570 633 717 843 821 841 846 618 602 336 846 193
                 Small-Cap Funds 1 588 587 660 705 757 836 870 927 982 1 090 1 006 1 051 1 052 877 899 587 1 090 169

                                                             36
                                         9.4 Table 3: Style Class Statistics (mean values 2000-2011)
Table 3 describes the style classifications in terms of average sample period SDI, performance measures including four-factor, three-factor and Jensen
                                                  alpha, and average yearly appraisal and Sharpe ratios.

                                                                             Fama-
                                                                                Carhart 4-  French 3-
                                                                                       factor      factor     Jensen's
                                                                                alpha      alpha      alpha     Appraisal    Sharpe
                                                                   SDI      (%p.m.)    (%p.m.)    (%p.m.)  Ratio (p.a.) Ratio (p.a.)
                                    Capital Appreciation Funds 0.174 -0.172 -0.179 -0.084 -1.117 0.116
                                       Equity Leverage Funds 0.087 -0.366 -0.407 -0.099 -3.299 0.495
                                    Dedicated Short Bias Funds 0.366 -0.968 -0.963 -0.981 -4.189 -0.491
                                         Equity Income Funds 0.046 -0.055 -0.051 -0.016 -0.458 0.376
                                  Equity Market Neutral Funds 0.523 -0.094 -0.089 -0.062 -1.609 -0.027
                                               Growth Funds 0.057 -0.162 -0.159 -0.155 -1.026 0.031
                                    Growth and Income Funds 0.048 -0.123 -0.110 -0.071 -1.244 0.160
                                     Long/Short Equity Funds 0.177 -0.188 -0.163 -0.148 -1.692 0.166
                                              Mid-Cap Funds 0.050 -0.047 -0.055 0.081 -1.553 -0.350
                                            Micro-Cap Funds 0.062 -0.110 -0.117 0.185 -0.754 -0.143
                                            Small-Cap Funds 0.047 -0.144 -0.160 0.093 -0.969 0.396

                                                             37
                                                9.5 Table 4: Summary Statistics (2000-2011)
Table 4 presents the data used in greater detail. Panel A presents the time-series average of cross-sectional summary statistics for the main variables di-
  vided on the full sample and live and dead funds. Variables included are number of funds per year (during the period 2000-2011), the SDI measure,
 and fund characteristics such as monthly net returns, four-factor alphas and the corresponding appraisal ratio, the three-factor alphas, Jensen alphas,
  Sharpe ratio, management fees, fund age, volatility of monthly returns (net of fees) and total net assets. Further explaining these variables, Panel B
                                            summarizes the pair-wise correlation between these variables.

                                                                       Panel A: Fund Performance and Characteristics
                                       Full Sample (9 560 unique funds) Live Funds (7 085 unique funds) Dead Funds (2 475 unique funds)
                              Mean Median Min Max Std Mean Median Min Max Std Mean Median Min Max Std
                           SDI 0.062 0.036 0.000 1.986 0.123 0.062 0.034 0.000 1.986 0.129 0.065 0.045 0.000 1.784 0.095
           Net fee returns (%p.m.) 0.327 0.794 -94.202 64.038 5.730 0.415 0.878 -94.202 64.038 5.700 0.011 0.521 -38.600 59.616 5.824
      Carhart 4-factor alpha (%p.m.) -0.135 -0.119 -9.602 6.472 0.410 -0.102 -0.962 -9.602 4.280 0.394 -0.269 -0.230 -5.169 6.472 0.442
 Fama-French 3-factor alpha (%p.m.) -0.136 -0.120 -9.896 6.133 0.429 -0.101 -0.096 -9.896 4.017 0.413 -0.275 -0.234 -6.090 6.133 0.463
            Jensen's alpha (%p.m.) -0.048 -0.078 -10.246 6.687 0.505 -0.011 -0.048 -10.246 4.541 0.490 -0.200 -0.200 -5.600 6.700 0.500
             Appraisal Ratio (p.a.) -0.707 -0.612 -2.911 1.247 1.303 -0.601 -0.507 -2.911 1.247 1.274 -1.109 -1.108 -2.911 1.247 1.331
               Sharpe Ratio (p.m.) 0.210 0.265 -1.424 1.572 0.931 0.269 0.314 -1.424 1.572 0.908 -0.007 0.104 -1.424 1.572 0.980
           Management fee (%p.a.) 0.699 0.719 0.001 4.014 0.280 0.691 0.710 0.001 4.014 0.288 0.726 0.740 0.001 2.680 0.251
                     Age (years) 9.536 7.000 1.000 87.000 9.456 9.716 8.000 1.000 87.000 9.447 8.881 7.000 1.000 86.000 9.460
     Vol of monthly returns (%p.m.) 4.644 4.668 0.002 21.244 1.942 4.761 4.914 0.002 21.244 1.923 4.162 3.619 0.003 15.262 1.943
                 TNA($M) (p.a.) 644 116 15 102 105 2 707 760 138 15 102 105 3 032 226 70 15 17 404 609
                Nr of funds (p.a.) 4 775 4 605 3 002 6 370 1 196 3 700 3 352 1 669 6 128 1 589 1 075 1 254 242 1 457 426

                                                             38
                                                       Table 4 - continued

                                                                                Panel B: Parwise Correlations
                                                                      Fama-French                                                                  Vol of
                                                    Net fee     Carhart 4-     3-factor      Jensen's                                                            monthly
                                                  returns    factor alpha     alpha        alpha      Appraisal   Sharpe Ratio Management                 returns     TNA($M)
                                      SDI       (%p.m.)      (%p.m.)      (%p.m.)     (%p.m.)    Ratio (p.a.)     (p.m.)     fee (%p.a.) Age (years)    (%p.m.)       (p.a.)
                         SDI 1.000
                             significance level
           Net fee returns (%p.m.) -0.022*** 1.000
                                     0.000
     Carhart 4-factor alpha (%p.m.) -0.002 0.032*** 1.000
                                  0.197 0.000
Fama-French 3-factor alpha (%p.m.) 0.0045*** 0.042*** 0.964*** 1.000
                                 0.002 0.000 0.000
           Jensen's alpha (%p.m.) 0.045*** 0.070*** 0.648*** 0.679*** 1.000
                                 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
            Appraisal Ratio (p.a.) 0.055*** 0.028*** 0.687*** 0.660*** 0.474*** 1.000
                                 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
              Sharpe Ratio (p.m.) -0.122*** 0.320*** 0.0415*** 0.057*** 0.125*** 0.060*** 1.000
                                 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
          Management fee (%p.a.) 0.196*** -0.002 -0.036*** -0.039*** 0.037*** 0.064*** -0.019*** 1.000
                                0.000 0.202 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0
                    Age (years) -0.023*** 0.004*** 0.004*** 0.003** -0.021*** 0.025*** 0.014*** -0.035*** 1.000
                                0.000 0.002 0.006 0.021 0.000 0.000 0 0.000
    Vol of monthly returns (%p.m.) -0.143*** -0.102*** -0.064*** -0.053*** 0.053*** -0.024*** -0.207*** 0.037*** 0.014*** 1.000
                                0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0 0.000 0.000
                 TNA($M) (p.a.) -0.018*** -0.004*** 0.043*** 0.043*** 0.015*** 0.048*** -0.015*** -0.130*** 0.283*** -0.039*** 1.00
                                 0.000 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
 * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                                           39
                         9.6 Table 5: Determinants of the SDI
 Table 5 reports the multivariate panel regression of the SDI, as the dependent variable, on one
 year lagged control variables - alpha, management fees, fund age, size and volatility in monthly
                                           net fee returns:

In column I, the regression results are presented with the alpha being represented by the Carhart
four-factor adjusted returns. In column II the Fama-French three-factor adjusted returns are set
 as the independent alpha variable in the regression and in column III the Jensen alpha is used.
 Each alpha and the volatility of returns (net of fees) are measured over a window of 24 months
   and lagged by one year. The t-statistics are presented in parentheses and adjusted for fund-
                                  clustering and time fixed effects.

                                                   I II III
                               Alpha 0.437*** 0.041*** 0.158
                                   (t -stat) (3.2) (2.76) (1.36)
                      Management fee 0.002 0.002 0.001
                                             (0.41) (0.4) (0.33)
                             Fund age -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002***
                                            (-14.22) (-14.16) (-12.97)
                       Return volatility -0.836*** -0.838*** -0.845***
                                            (-44.28) (-44.54) (-40.65)
                    ln(Total net assets) 0.122*** -0.002*** -0.002***
                                            (27.56) (-2.81) (-2.71)
                 Total number of funds 6 485 6 485 6 485
          Total number of observations 380 925 380 925 380 925
                                     2
                             R (%) 20.13 20.12 20.03
            * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                       40
  9.7 Table 6: Multivariate Panel Regression of Mutual Fund Performance on the SDI
                                       (2000-2011)
Table 6 presents the results of the multivariate panel regression with the three different adjusted
   alphas, estimated using a rolling 24-month window, as dependent variables on the one year
            lagged SDI and other fund characteristics, as per the following regression:

Fund characteristics include management fee, fund age, size and volatility of monthly net fee re-
turns. The t-statistics presented in parentheses are adjusted for fund-clustering and time fixed ef-
                                                    fects.

                                      Carhart 4-factor    Fama-French 3-
                                           alpha           factor alpha Jensen's alpha
                             SDI 0.007*** 0.006*** 0.010***
                               (t -stat) (9.68) (8.30) (10.15)
                   Management fee -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***
                                           (-2.92) (-2.92) (-3.00)
                         Fund age 0.000*** 0.000*** -0.000**
                                          (13.66) (11.99) (-2.19)
                   Return Volatility -0.033*** -0.026*** 0.028***
                                          (-24.17) (-17.81) (16.27)
                 ln(Total net assets) -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***
                                          (17.00) (-17.55) (-24.59)
              Total number of funds 6 264 6 264 6 264
        Total number of observations 370 576 370 576 370 576
                                 2
                          R (%) 6.67 5.11 11.03
        * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                       41
  9.8 Table 7: Fama-MacBeth Analysis of Mutual Fund Performance on the SDI (2000-
                                          2011)
Table 6 presents the results of the Fama-MacBeth regression with the three different adjusted al-
phas, estimated using a rolling 24-month window, as dependent variables on the one year lagged
               SDI and other fund characteristics, as per the following regression:

Fund characteristics include management fee, fund age, size and volatility of monthly net fee re-
turns. The coefficients are multiplied by 100. The t-statistics presented in parentheses are adjust-
                          ed for heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

                                       Carhart 4-factor   Fama-French 3-
                                             alpha          factor alpha Jensen's alpha
                              SDI 0.020 0.062* 0.203***
                                 (t -stat) (0.46) (1.67) (3.55)
                     Management fee -0.045*** -0.050*** 0.062***
                                            (-4.38) (-5.70) (7.19)
                           Fund age -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***
                                             (-5.54) (-6.42) (-4.63)
                     Return Volatility -3.951*** -3.370*** -4.351***
                                             (-4.67) (-3.72) (-3.37)
                   ln(Total net assets) 0.011*** 0.012*** 0.007***
                                           (10.55) (12.49) (5.90)
         Total number of observations 370 576 370 576 370 576
                                   2
                            R (%) 6.34 6.39 12.11
       * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                       42
                      9.9 Table 8: Portfolio Descriptive Statistics
   Table 8 describes the characteristics of the decile portfolios, based on the level of SDI.

                                                                         Vol of
              Number of                                         monthly
               switching               Management                 returns     TNA($M)
                 funds SDI       fee (%p.a.) Age (years)     (%p.m.)       (p.a.)
  (Low SDI) 1 98 0.010 0.473 9.808 0.046 1 139.073
           2 126 0.017 0.602 10.540 0.045 836.808
           3 166 0.023 0.657 11.046 0.046 731.393
           4 192 0.029 0.687 10.986 0.047 711.120
           5 198 0.036 0.702 11.029 0.047 673.290
           6 232 0.044 0.721 10.879 0.047 652.238
           7 260 0.054 0.733 10.823 0.047 592.217
           8 263 0.068 0.747 10.647 0.047 555.335
           9 253 0.090 0.761 10.486 0.047 531.558
(High SDI) 10 397 0.254 0.856 10.155 0.043 501.628

                                     43
                 9.10 Table 9: Portfolio Performance Based on the SDI
Panel A of Table 9 reports the time-series mean of the post-formation performance measures for
    each of the decile portfolios based on the SDI. The portfolios are equally weighted and re-
balanced as per the holding periods defined, namely quarterly, semiannually and annually. Further
 presented is the spread between the high and the low portfolios for each alpha and holding peri-
    od. Panel B of Table 9 reports the appraisal and Sharpe ratios as alternative performance
             measures. Further, the table is constructed in the same way as Panel A.

                                                           Panel A: Alphas
                     Carhart 4-factor alpha Fama-French 3-factor alpha Jensen's alpha
                 3m 6m 1y 3m 6m 1y 3m 6m 1y
                  (%p.q.) (%p.sa.) (%p.a.) (%p.q.) (%p.sa.) (%p.a.) (%p.q.) (%p.sa.) (%p.a.)
      (Low SDI) 1 -0.382 -0.766 -1.693 -0.396 -0.789 -1.729 -0.282 -0.578 -1.192
               2 -0.395 -0.792 -1.711 -0.407 -0.817 -1.757 -0.317 -0.633 -1.236
               3 -0.450 -0.909 -2.067 -0.458 -0.903 -2.133 -0.293 -0.579 -1.284
               4 -0.484 -0.933 -1.973 -0.488 -0.922 -2.064 -0.296 -0.545 -1.193
               5 -0.498 -1.012 -2.005 -0.509 -1.023 -2.032 -0.274 -0.574 -1.195
               6 -0.574 -1.229 -1.906 -0.613 -1.413 -1.983 -0.335 -0.810 -1.046
               7 -0.483 -0.947 -1.865 -0.492 -0.966 -1.922 -0.175 -0.343 -0.708
               8 -0.443 -0.860 -1.620 -0.441 -0.854 -1.616 -0.013 -0.009 0.019
               9 -0.317 -0.626 -1.211 -0.290 -0.578 -1.118 0.248 0.508 1.021
    (High SDI) 10 -0.136 -0.043 -0.640 -0.111 0.013 -0.515 0.510 1.388 1.844
 Spread(High-Low) 0.247 0.723 1.052 0.285 0.802 1.214 0.792 1.966 3.036

                                                   Panel B: Alternative Measures
                                     Appraisal Ratio                          Sharpe Ratio
                        3m 6m 1y 3m 6m 1y

             (Low SDI) 1 -0.944 -1.000 -1.332 0.099 0.158 0.234
                       2 -0.802 -0.834 -0.985 0.103 0.159 0.236
                       3 -0.808 -0.858 -1.065 0.096 0.172 0.231
                       4 -0.801 -0.850 -0.910 0.099 0.189 0.229
                       5 -0.768 -0.824 -0.951 0.101 0.163 0.226
                       6 -0.754 -0.832 -0.712 0.094 0.107 0.248
                       7 -0.652 -0.683 -0.845 0.110 0.183 0.249
                       8 -0.545 -0.588 -0.616 0.115 0.200 0.310
                       9 -0.388 -0.485 -0.476 0.115 0.195 0.298
            (High SDI) 10 -0.187 -0.160 -0.091 0.114 0.165 0.264
        Spread(High-Low) 0.758 0.840 1.241 0.014 0.008 0.030

                                       44
           9.11 Table 10: Robustness - Regression Analysis of Mutual Fund Performance on the SDI(|correlation|) (2000-2011)
Panel A shows the results of the panel regression of mutual fund performance on the SDI measure based on absolute correlation and other fund char-
                                   acteristics during the full sample period, 2000-2011, as per the following regression:

 The post-formation adjusted alphas are used as dependent variables and control variables are lagged one year, including SDI(|correlation|), manage-
  ment fees, fund age, size, and volatility of monthly net fee returns. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses, adjusted for fund-clustering and time
 fixed effects. Panel B reports the corresponding Fama-MacBeth regression. T-statistics, presented in parentheses, are adjusted for heteroscedasticity
 and autocorrelation in standard errors. In Panel B, the coefficients are multiplied by 100. Panel C reports the pair-wise correlations between SDI and
 SDI(|correlation|). Panel D reports the time-series mean of the post-formation performance measures for each of the decile portfolios constructed
 sorting the SDI(|correlation|). The portfolios are equally weighted and rebalanced as per the holding periods defined, namely quarterly, semiannually
and annually. Further presented is the spread between the high and the low portfolios for each alpha and holding period. Panel E reports the appraisal
                       and Sharpe ratios as alternative performance measures, further constructed in the same way as Panel D.

                                                      Panel A: Panel Regression Panel B: Fama-MacBeth
                                             Carhart 4-factor   Fama-French 3-                          Carhart 4-factor   Fama-French 3-
                                                 alpha          factor alpha Jensen's alpha              alpha          factor alpha Jensen's alpha
                            SDI(|corr|) 0.008*** 0.006*** 0.012*** 0.051 0.099* 0.392***
                                    (t -stat) (11.34) (9.27) (12.58) (0.77) (1.75) (3.98)
                         Management fee -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.049*** -0.054*** 0.050***
                                               (-2.97) (-2.95) (-3.10) (-4.70) (-6.07) (6.66)
                               Fund age 0.000*** 0.000*** -0.000* -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001***
                                               (14.05) (12.21) (-1.76) (-5.95) (-6.61) (-4.68)
                         Return Volatility -0.033*** -0.026*** 0.028*** -3.888*** -3.315*** -4.040***
                                              (-23.90) (-17.64) (16.43) (-4.60) (-3.67) (-3.06)
                       ln(Total net assets) -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** 0.011 0.012*** 0.007***
                                              (-16.95) (-17.51) (-24.51) (10.36) (12.30) (5.75)
                    Total number of funds 6 257 6 257 6 257
              Total number of observations 370 347 370 347 370 347 370 347 370 347 370 347
                                       2
                                R (%) 6.86 5.22 11.37 6.63 6.61 12.81
             * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                                             45
                               Table 10 – continued

                          Panel C: Pairwise Correlations between SDI(corr) and SDI(|corr|)
                                                     SDI SDI(|corr|)
                                             SDI 1.000
                                                            (t -stat)
                                        SDI(|corr|) 0.767*** 1.000
                                                               (0.000)
                           * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                                                         Panel D: Alphas
                         Carhart 4-factor alpha Fama-French 3-factor alpha Jensen's alpha
                  3m 6m 1y 3m 6m 1y 3m 6m 1y
                    (%p.q.) (%p.sa.) (%p.a.) (%p.q.) (%p.sa.) (%p.a.) (%p.q.) (%p.sa.) (%p.a.)
 (Low SDI(|corr|)) 1 -0.382 -0.766 -1.693 -0.396 -0.789 -1.729 -0.282 -0.578 -1.192
                2 -0.395 -0.792 -1.711 -0.407 -0.817 -1.757 -0.317 -0.633 -1.236
                3 -0.450 -0.909 -2.067 -0.458 -0.903 -2.133 -0.293 -0.578 -1.284
                4 -0.484 -0.934 -1.975 -0.488 -0.922 -2.065 -0.297 -0.545 -1.195
                5 -0.497 -1.011 -2.005 -0.509 -1.022 -2.033 -0.274 -0.574 -1.195
                6 -0.573 -1.228 -1.903 -0.613 -1.411 -1.980 -0.335 -0.810 -1.044
                7 -0.482 -0.945 -1.857 -0.492 -0.965 -1.913 -0.175 -0.341 -0.701
                8 -0.444 -0.862 -1.625 -0.443 -0.856 -1.623 -0.017 -0.018 -0.001
                9 -0.319 -0.628 -1.210 -0.292 -0.579 -1.115 0.245 0.507 1.032
(High SDI(|corr|)) 10 -0.133 -0.041 -0.644 -0.108 0.015 -0.518 0.517 1.396 1.847
   Spread(High-Low) 0.249 0.724 1.049 0.287 0.804 1.210 0.799 1.974 3.039

                                                          Panel E: Alternative Measures
                                       Appraisal Ratio Sharpe Ratio
                           3m 6m 1y 3m 6m 1y

          (Low SDI(|corr|)) 1 -0.944 -1.000 -1.332 0.099 0.158 0.234
                          2 -0.802 -0.834 -0.985 0.103 0.159 0.236
                          3 -0.808 -0.858 -1.065 0.096 0.172 0.231
                          4 -0.801 -0.850 -0.910 0.099 0.188 0.228
                          5 -0.768 -0.824 -0.951 0.101 0.160 0.225
                          6 -0.753 -0.832 -0.712 0.093 0.104 0.246
                          7 -0.655 -0.685 -0.845 0.109 0.182 0.249
                          8 -0.549 -0.593 -0.620 0.114 0.199 0.310
                          9 -0.391 -0.487 -0.476 0.114 0.194 0.297
         (High SDI(|corr|)) 10 -0.177 -0.153 -0.086 0.118 0.173 0.267
            Spread(High-Low) 0.767 0.847 1.246 0.019 0.015 0.033

                                      46
         9.12 Table 11: Robustness - Survivorship Bias with Heckman Correction
  Panel A of Table 11 presents the probit regression results on mutual fund survival probability.
 The dependent variable takes the value of one at any given point in time if the fund survives in
   the subsequent twelve months, and zero otherwise. The probit model estimates the survival
probabilities of mutual funds over the next twelve months. From this model, the inverse mills ra-
 tio is used as the Heckman lambda in Panel B. Panel B.1 presents the panel regression and Panel
  B.2 the Fama-MacBeth regression of the different adjusted alphas on the SDI and other fund
 characteristics, including the Heckman lambda as one of the independent variables. We estimate
                          the following Heckman adjusted regression:

The t-statistics are presented in parentheses and adjusted for fund-clustering and time fixed effect
  and heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation respectively. In Panel B.2 the coefficients are multi-
                                           plied by 100.

                    Panel A: Heckman Correction - Probit Model, Mutual Fund Survivorship
                                         Variable name Coefficient
                                             SDI 0.189***
                                                 (z -value) (5.48)
                                         Net fee return 6.495***
                                                                        (29.66)
                                  Carhart 4-factor alpha 39.344***
                                                                        (41.71)
                                     Management fee 0.073***
                                                                           (4.82)
                                            Fund age -0.013***
                                                                         (-30.19)
                                        Return volatility 5.678***
                                                                        (25.85)
                                     ln(Total net assets) 0.383***
                                                                        (96.49)
                               Number of observations 451 801
                                           LR chi2 (7) 16 210
                                         Prob>chi2 0.1272
                     * 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                       47
                                                  Table 11 - continued

                                                          Panel B: Regression Analysis with Heckman Adjustment
                                             B.1: Panel Regression B.2: Fama-MacBeth Regression
                                 Carhart 4-factor  Fama-French 3-                        Carhart 4-factor  Fama-French 3-
                                      alpha         factor alpha Jensen's alpha             alpha         factor alpha Jensen's alpha
                         SDI 0.005*** 0.004*** 0.009*** 0.043 0.084*** 0.229***
                          (t -stat) (7.23) (5.92) (8.97) (1.28) (2.97) (4.78)
              Heckman lambda -0.036*** -0.036*** -0.030*** -2.972*** -2.921*** -2.772***
                                    (-25.84) (-24.48) (-20.18) (-19.29) (-20.06) (-16.66)
               Management fee -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.096*** -0.101*** 0.013*
                                     (-5.90) (-5.55) (-4.99) (-9.28) (-10.95) (1.74)
                     Fund age 0.000*** 0.000*** -0.000 0.004*** 0.004*** 0.003***
                                    (17.73) (15.79) (-0.68) (15.81) (15.93) (14.82)
               Return volatility -0.045*** -0.037*** 0.018*** -4.176*** -3.573*** -4.462***
                                    (-31.15) (-24.50) (10.37) (-5.20) (-4.20) (-3.66)
             ln(Total net assets) -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.090*** -0.088*** -0.087***
                                    (-27.41) (-27.24) (-29.56) (-19.71) (-19.93) (-16.14)
         Total number of funds 6239 6239 6239
   Total number of observations 369319 369319 369319 369 319 369 319 369 319
                            2
                       R (%) 14.37 12.23 15.1 16.08 15.77 18.37
* 10% significance; ** 5% significance; *** 1% significance

                                                      48