 The Capital Structure Dynamics of Swedish Firms over the Business Cycle
               Leverage Cyclicality and Credit Supply Contractions

                Daniel Ahleniusᶲ Gustav Lundgrenᶺ

                 Stockholm School of Economics Stockholm School of Economics

                                           Bachelor Thesis
                                  Stockholm School of Economics
                                      Department of Finance
                                       Tutor: Ramin Baghai
                                         May 24, 2012

                                      Abstract

This paper focuses on the leverage dynamics of Swedish firms over the business cycle from 1987
to 2010, a period in which Sweden experienced two major recessions. Our two-part study finds
evidence that Swedish firms have counter-cyclical target leverage. In contrast to previous
international research, Swedish firms have a higher speed of adjustment towards target leverage
in times of recession. Significant demand driven factors are found for financially constrained and
unconstrained firms. The speed of adjustment becomes significantly higher for financially
unconstrained firms during recession periods, indications which our case study supports.

Keywords: Swedish business cycle, leverage dynamics, credit supply constraints, target leverage

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Ramin Baghai for his guidance and for introducing us to the
subject of capital structure dynamics. Additionally, we wish to extend our gratitude to the respondents of
our case study and for their helpful comments.

ᶲ21862@student.hhs.se
ᶺ 21839@student.hhs.se
                                    Table of contents
1. Introduction............................................................................................................................................................... - 2 -
2. Previous research.................................................................................................................................................... - 4 -
   2.1. Capital structure dynamics over the business cycle ........................................................................ - 4 -
   2.2. Supply and demand effects on capital structure dynamics ........................................................... - 5 -
3. Data ............................................................................................................................................................................... - 6 -
   3.1. Possible selection bias .................................................................................................................................. - 7 -
4. Methodology.............................................................................................................................................................. - 8 -
   4.1. Quantitative regression analysis – demand factors ......................................................................... - 8 -
   4.2. Statistical methods ......................................................................................................................................... - 9 -
      4.2.1. Target leverage estimation...............................................................................................................- 10 -
     4.2.2. Partial adjustment towards target ................................................................................................- 10 -
      4.2.3. GMM estimator ......................................................................................................................................- 11 -
  4.3. Case study – Credit supply contractions over the global financial crisis...............................- 12 -
5. Results........................................................................................................................................................................- 13 -
   5.1. Summary statistics .......................................................................................................................................- 13 -
   5.2. Tables and comments .................................................................................................................................- 13 -
   5.3. Implications and analysis ..........................................................................................................................- 15 -
      5.3.1. Firm characteristics over the business cycle ............................................................................- 15 -
     5.3.2. Target leverage ratio response to the business cycle ...........................................................- 16 -
     5.3.3. Speed of adjustment towards target leverage ratio ...............................................................- 17 -
     5.3.4. Case study – Credit supply contractions over the global financial crisis ......................- 18 -
      5.3.5. Robustness tests and significance issues ...................................................................................- 20 -
      5.3.6. Combined analysis ...............................................................................................................................- 21 -
6. Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................................- 22 -
   6.1. Research going forward .............................................................................................................................- 23 -
Appendix........................................................................................................................................................................- 24 -
References.....................................................................................................................................................................- 26 -
Survey format ..............................................................................................................................................................- 28 -
Figures ............................................................................................................................................................................- 29 -
Tables ..............................................................................................................................................................................- 32 -

                                                               - 1 -
                                       1. Introduction
Swedish private firms increased their leverage significantly in a surge of expansion following the
credit deregulation of 1985. Loosened credit handling together with a growth-oriented macro
policy resulted in an asset pricing boom. External factors hitting the Swedish economy at this
time lead investors to flee the market, causing market prices to plummet, resulting in the
Swedish real estate crisis of 1990-1993 (Englund, 1999). Coming out of the real estate crisis
Swedish banks were forced to absorb losses and open up their books to the public after
introducing a bank resolution policy. This, combined with fiscal policies introduced to mitigate
the effects of the crisis, allowed for a quick economic recovery (Jonung, L. 2009).

The following expansion period lasted until the global financial crisis of 2008-2009. How
Swedish firms were able to handle the recent crisis raises questions regarding capital structure
dynamics, having experienced two recessions and an extensive period of expansion. What drives
Swedish firms’ capital structure dynamics? Can the quality of the firms explain these
differences? Do firms suffer from credit supply restraints and does it affect choice of financing
sources?

International studies show that firms leverage ratios are counter-cyclical in civil law countries,
such as Sweden (Halling, Yu and Zechner, 2012). Our intuition is that Swedish firms will have
counter-cyclical leverage and that the main determinants of Swedish leverage dynamics will
differ from previous studies on comparable countries due to the real estate crisis.

The choice of capital structure for firms has been the subject of numerous reports. The topic
ranges from the unimportance of capital structure in the valuation of firms in efficient markets
(Modigliani and Miller, 1958), to capital structure optimisation, bankruptcy risk and agency
costs of financing. But only a handful of the reports investigate the business cycle’s effect on
capital structure dynamics.

The study is divided into two parts. The first section applies the theory and approach of Halling,
Yu and Zechner’s paper (2012) on leverage dynamics over the business cycle on 18 countries. To
determine if any firm characteristics have an impact on capital structure dynamics, we regress
the actual change in leverage from one year to another on certain key firm variables, such as
sales, profitability and capital expenditures. Sub-sample analysis is also performed to document
differences between financially constrained and unconstrained firms. Finally, tests are made to

determine the cyclicality of and the speed of adjustment towards firms target leverage ratio.1

1 A firm’s target leverage is defined as the leverage ratio that optimises the capital structure according to
trade-off theory. Further discussed in Fama, French (2002)

                                                               - 2 -
To analyse this we collect accounting and market data for all Swedish listed firms from 1987 to
2010, both active and now inactive firms. The structure of the data is in the form of a panel data
set where we isolate the business cycle effect with dummy variables. Endogeneity issues occur
when controlling for firm characteristics from the same period, i.e. omittance of explanatory
variables and within-firm correlation with past and present errors has to be considered. These
issues are controlled for using an econometric setup based on a GMM panel estimator applying
lags. Industry differences are also accounted for in the regression analysis.

The second part of the study describes the supply and demand dynamics of financing that
Swedish firms faces over business cycles. This is made in the form of a case study. A survey was
sent out to almost all currently listed Swedish companies. The main discussion revolves around
the financing dynamics between firms, credit institutions and the public market. Only a few
studies has been made on the subject (see for example, Becker and Ivashina, 2011, Erel, Julio,
Kim and Weisbach, 2011) making a single market study interesting for depth understanding. A
US market study reveals large correlation between bank credit contractions and the issuance of
public debt (corporate bonds) (Becker and Ivashina, 2011). To further observe and understand
the capital structure dynamics over the business cycle explained by supply and demand effects
of debt, we link this to the quantitative part of the study.

We are able to find significant results in sub-samples between the firm characteristics and
estimated target leverage, such as tangibility and profitability. Both observed leverage and
target leverage are counter-cyclical, consistent with what Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012) find in
their study over 18 countries. However, our speed of adjustment (SOA) estimates deviate from
their international study where SOA declines in recessions, when our results indicate that
Swedish firms adjust towards target leverage at a more rapid pace. The case study show that
firms on smaller marketplaces had more problems receiving bank credit during the global
financial crisis, Large Cap firms having the least issues and First North having the most. Finally,
we conclude that Swedish capital structure dynamics are significantly different both between
constrained and unconstrained firms and compared to other countries.

Going forward, including all Scandinavian countries in a related study would be interesting to
see similarities and differences in leverage dynamics between Sweden and comparable
countries (in terms of equivalent banking system and state of economy). This would also
increase the number of recession years and not unlikely the significance. The results presented
in the study raises questions of how the relationship between Swedish firms and banks differ
compared to an international setting, which would also be an interesting topic for further
research.

                                                               - 3 -
The rest of the paper is organised in the following way; Section two presents previous research,
section three and four describes data sources used and methodology applied. Section 5 presents
our results and analysis and the conclusion is stated in section 6.

                                  2. Previous research

2.1. Capital structure dynamics over the business cycle
The existence of market frictions gives rise to issues optimising the firm’s capital structure,
issues which, in academics consensus, are viewed as dynamic. One frequently used model is the
dynamic trade-off theory. In the trade-off model, firms theoretically strive for a target leverage
ratio that is dynamically optimised for each firm’s conditions. At optimum, the benefit (e.g. tax
reduction) and cost (e.g. bankruptcy risk) of adding on incremental debt are equal. Dividends
are analogous according to the trade-off model’s predictions. At target leverage, the value of the
firm is maximised. By definition, this is the optimal capital structure if possible to reach without
transaction costs. In general, transaction costs exist when acquiring capital. Hence, implied
target leverage is only possible to reach in a theoretical perfect capital market (Fama and
French, 2002).

The trade-off model can be compared to another theory, in which firms have no target leverage
ratio, i.e. randomly select capital structure. There are two frequently discussed scenarios where
the firm either decide on a random capital structure, keeping it fixed over time, or follows a
random walk in leverage ratio. Although a well-discussed theory, prior research rejects this
model (See for example Halling, Yu and Zechner, 2012).

The paper working as an outline for our quantitative regression study (Halling, Yu and Zechner,
2012) show that book and market target leverage ratios move counter-cyclically. However, for
firms in common law countries a pro-cyclical behaviour is observed. Significant causality is
found for profitability and capital expenditure and target leverage. Increased capital
expenditures show significant positive increase on leverage ratios in times of recession, i.e. firm
investments during recessions have a greater positive effect on target leverage. The same study
indicates that profitability have a larger negative impact on target leverage in recessions; firms
use retained earnings to avoid external financing when reinvesting. Furthermore, significant
results are found for the counter-cyclicality of target leverage ratios. According to the study,
firms move slower towards target leverage in times of recession, explained by a significantly
lower speed of adjustment estimate. The reason for this is stated to be credit institutions’
contractions in credit lending.

                                                               - 4 -
Financially constrained and unconstrained firms2 have different leverage cyclicality behaviour

(Korajczyk and Levy, 2003). Financially constrained firms tend to have a pro-cyclical leverage.
These firms show less change in target leverage and choice of financing due to macro-economic
effects than the unconstrained firms, which have a more counter-cyclical leverage pattern.
Financially constrained firms keep a more stable leverage ratio than financially unconstrained
firms. The latter group show strong counter-cyclical leverage ratio behaviour. (Levy and
Hennessy, 2006)

2.2. Supply and demand effects on capital structure dynamics
The pecking order theory (Myers and Majluf, 1984) helps to describe the order of how firms
choose their financing sources. Private information gives cause for managers to issue high-risk
securities when it is the manager’s opinion that the securities are over-priced. Investors are
cognisant of this asymmetric information and therefore discount both new and outstanding
securities, to account for this premium. Managers will be aware of the investor discounts, which
might force managers to relinquish profitable investments if the financing was planned to come
from the issuance of high-risk securities. Retained earnings will be the first choice of financing
for managers since internal funding eliminates the issue of asymmetric information, for low-risk
debt this problem is imperceptible. The agency and flotation costs incurred through the issuance
of equity and high-risk debt will always exceed other factors determining optimal capital
structure (Myers, 1984). Hence, the pecking order is as follows; retained earnings, low-risk debt
(bank credit), high-risk debt (bonds) and lastly equity.

On the US market the difference in cyclicality between investment and non-investment graded
borrowers has been observed (Erel, Julio, Kim, and Weisbach, 2011). Whilst non-investment
grade borrowers show bias towards pro-cyclical capital raisings, investment grade borrowers
are more counter-cyclical. This observation is consistent with the previous literature of
financially constrained and unconstrained firms’ cyclicality (Korajczyk, Levy, 2003, and Levy,
Hennessy, 2006).

Empirical evidence on the US market show that in recessions, bank credit supply contractions
lead to an increase in bond issuances (Becker and Ivashina, 2011). This concurs with the pecking
order theory, moving from a preferred source of funding to the next in order (Myers and Majluf,
1984). The Becker and Ivashina paper (2011) focuses on the financially unconstrained firms that
have the option of switching between bank credit and public bonds. They condition the sample
on raising debt which eliminates the uncertainty regarding firms’ choice to raise or not raise
debt due to lack of refinancing demand.

2 Definition of financially constrained firms – Firms lacking adequate cash for possible investments and
faces high flotation costs when accessing financial markets. (Korajczyk and Levy, 2003)

                                                               - 5 -
Financially constrained firms, which cannot access the public bond market to the same extent,
experience larger contractions in credit supply in times of recession (Gertler and Gilchrist,
1993).

The information asymmetry between managers and investors, as described by Myers and Majluf
(1984), is also valid for the equity market timing theory. Inefficient capital markets create
incentives for managers to issue equity instead of debt when they consider the current share
price to be overvalued. However, when valuation is low, they choose to repurchase shares.
Consequently, since business cycle effects often affect valuation, timing of equity issuances is
important.

                                          3. Data
Economic Cycle Research Institute (ECRI) – To control for business cycles we use ECRI’s

international cycle dates. They provide dates for when economies enter and exits recessions.3

The Swedish economy was in recession between June 1990 – July 1993 and April 2008 – March
2009. The database holds a record from 1948 to 2010 for several economies.

Accounting and Market value data – Datastream – Worldscope – Annual firm accounting data was
extracted using Worldscope. The extracted data holds records of all Swedish listed firms, both

active and inactive, for the period 1987 to 2010.4 This database also provides market data for

firms at the end of each fiscal year. The sample period was chosen to include as many Swedish
recession years as possible. Before 1987 only limited accounting and market data was available.
Extending the sample period further than 1987, would reduce the quality of the data, hence we
chose this time period.

Further miscellaneous data – Datastream – Worldscope – For instance industry indicator, firm
name, number of employees and dividends per share are available and was merged into our
dataset. Worldscope’s group industry classification was used to group firms into different
sectors, for the purpose of industry fixed effects analysis.

Case study data – The sample of the case study was all currently listed Swedish firms at the April
24, 2012 (the date the survey was sent out). The sample period ranges from January 2006 to
December 2011. An e-mail survey was designed for the case study. E-mail addresses were

3 The ECRI’s explanatory factors for when an economy is in a recession are proprietary information. The
ECRI data is widely accepted as a standard and is therefore used to define our recession periods.
4 The dataset is constructed as an unbalanced panel dataset with the individual firms as the panel variable
and the fiscal year as the time variable. The number of years of observations for each firm ranges from 1
to 23 years, with a mean of 7.31 years.

                                                               - 6 -
collected manually from the company websites. The survey was sent to the CFO’s, CEO’s or head
of IR depending on listed responsibilities. Approximately 450 firms were contacted by e-mail
and the response rate was 19.1 % (86 firms). The sample suffered fall-outs due to invalid e-mail
addresses and declines to participate in the survey. For survey format, see appendix.

3.1. Possible selection bias
The case study sample is subject to potential selection bias. Since only currently listed firms are
included, delisted firms active during the study period are eliminated, giving a survivorship bias.
Given that the sample period only focuses on time in proximity of the recent global financial
crisis, the Swedish crisis of 1990-1993 is excluded. Although relevant, information quality and
accuracy of responses from current management would be significantly lower than for questions
regarding the recent events of the global financial crisis.

Since the accounting data sample includes all active and inactive listed firms available in
Worldscope we see no possible selection or survivorship bias in the regression analysis.

                                                               - 7 -
                                  4. Methodology
The methodology will be presented in two sections treating the quantitative regression analysis
and case-study separately.

4.1. Quantitative regression analysis – demand factors
First off, accounting data for Swedish listed firms, from the period between 1987 and 2010, was
imported from Worldscope using Datastream. Market valuation, dividend per share and
earnings per share was also extracted from Worldscope. A detailed summary of variable
definitions is presented in the appendix.

The yearly firm accounting data was then reconfigured from Datastream’s vector type of output,
into a panel dataset. The firm ID (ISIN code) act as the panel variable and the fiscal year as the
time variable, with accounting data observations for each firm-year. The data has been deflated
to millions of Swedish kronor. In order to control for industry fixed effects in our regression
analysis, identification data containing company name and Worldscope industry group
classification was merged with the accounting data using ISIN-code.

Both financial and utility firms are dropped from the sample, in accordance with the
methodology of Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012), since their choice of leverage structure is
usually regulated and the dynamics of these are supposedly quite different from other industrial
firms. We choose to define a firm’s fiscal year to be in a recession if more than 6 months of it

coincides with the ECRI defined recession period.5

Both market (ml) and book (bl) leverage ratios are used as the dependent variable in the
regression analysis. Firm characteristics are controlled for as independent variables (for
detailed definitions of all the variables, see appendix). Lagged leverage ratios are also controlled
for in the regression, which are used to estimate the speed of adjustment in firms leverage
dynamics.

To make all observations comparable and to ensure that the sample only consists of operational
firms which are likely to be affected by the business cycle to some extent, observations are
excluded if any of the following firm-year criteria are met (in line with Halling, Yu and Zechner,
2012).

 (a) total assets < 0, (b) market cap < 0, (c) total debt > total assets, (d) assets market value <
cash, (e) total assets < cash and (f) cash < 0. Furthermore, observations with (g) net sales < 0, (h)

5 This definition is slightly different from Halling, Yu and Zechner where a firm year is defined as in a
recession if the entire fiscal year overlaps with a recession. However, since the recession period is less
than 1 year during 2008-2009, that definition would exclude this entire recession period and greatly
lower the significance of our results.

                                                               - 8 -
net debt/assets book value < -1, and (i) net debt/assets market value < -1 are also dropped from
our dataset. The reason for excluding (h) and (i) is that these firms holds a very large portion of
cash in comparison to assets and are most likely not operational firms. To remove any distortion
effects of existing outliers, the variables are winsorised at; market to book (95%), tangibility
(99%) and profitability (99%).

We also control for differences within sub-samples of our dataset, more specifically firms
considered to be financially constrained and unconstrained. In order to determine whether a
firm is financially constrained or not we classify them by using two factors: size or dividend

payout ratio.6

By using the logarithm of net sales across observed years, the median size for all firms is
calculated, resulting in a distribution of firm-sizes. The largest 25% (Size 75) and smallest 25%
(Size 25) are assigned the label financially unconstrained and constrained, respectively. The
dividend proxy is calculated as the over-time median dividends/earnings ratio for all firms.
Correspondingly, the largest 25% (Div 75) and smallest 25% (Div 25) are assigned the label

financially unconstrained and constrained, respectively.7

4.2. Statistical methods
The starting-point of the study’s econometric approach is that Swedish firms strive to optimise
their capital structure in accordance with the trade-off theory. Since this is often seen as a
dynamic problem, we modulate for changes in capital structure. The assumption, given that
firms are not at their current target leverage ratio, is that they adjust gradually towards their
target, never reaching it due to market frictions. Consequently, the econometric setup controls
for this partial adjustment of firms’ observed leverage ratio towards their target leverage ratio

over time, a so called DPACS model – Dynamic Partial Adjustment Capital Structure model.8

The model captures the business cycle effect on target leverage, the speed of adjustment
towards this ratio and the significance for the selected independent firm characteristics affecting
the partial movement.

6 Categorisation of financially constrained and unconstrained firms according to Acharya, Almeida and
Campello (2007). We use this definition in our quantitative regression analysis and not the recently
mentioned one by Korajczyk and Levy, 2003.
7 This classification of constrained and unconstrained firms indicates that the firms are permanently
classified to belong in these sub-samples, i.e. they do not switch. A main reason for this is the use of lags in
the statistical analysis and hence a continuous stream of firm observations is necessary for significant
results.
8 This is the same econometric setup model used in Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012). This model is based
on Fama and French’s (2002) partial adjustment model and estimates the dynamic partial adjustment
capital structure model (DPACS-model). This model includes both year and firm fixed effects.

                                                               - 9 -
4.2.1. Target leverage estimation
To model target leverage ratios changing over time while controlling for business cycles we
estimate a firm’s target leverage to be Target_lev:

The regressions are performed with book and market leverage ratios, i.e. . The
        ( ) act as an exogenously given indicator of the Swedish state of the economy at a

specific time (t), i.e. a dummy variable with value 1 in times of recession (expansion), otherwise
0. Additionally, the effect of a number of firm and industry specific characteristics are controlled
for and explained by the column vector .

This model enables capturing the direct and indirect effects of the business cycle, through
changes in the intercept determined by the estimate of and firm specific factors,
respectively. Determining the indirect effect of firm and industry specifics is possible through
the coefficient vectors . Equation (1) can be redefined as:

4.2.2. Partial adjustment towards target
Since the target leverage ratio is unobserved, we cannot simply regress it on business cycle
effects. Instead, we use the fact that transaction costs only allow firms to partially adjust towards
target leverage. Therefore, the DPACS model also controls for cycle varying speed of adjustment
towards target leverage.

                                                        - 10 -
Using the definition of from equation (1), inserting it into equation (4) and
rearranging it, a model estimating the leverage dynamics over the business cycle is established.

The variable represents the change in gap between the implied target and current
leverage ratio over 1 year. This is also referred to as the speed of adjustment (SOA).

For robustness tests, a simplified model with the assumptions is
constructed. This model removes any differences for the firm fixed effects over the business
cycle. It only focuses on the state of economy effect on the lagged leverage variables while
allowing for constants to change.

In the results section, equation (5) will be referred to as the DPACS model and equation (6) as
the “Static coefficient DPACS” model.

4.2.3. GMM estimator
The regression analysis is performed using xtabond2, a system generalised method of moments
(GMM) estimator used in STATA to handle dynamic panel datasets. The estimator works well for
situations with small T (short time periods of observations) and large N (many firms). The
regression is run while controlling for firm and industry fixed effects. A main issue with this
regression analysis is the existence of endogeneity for the yearly firm characteristics being
correlated with past and present errors. In xtabond2, instruments are constructed from the
available data sample using lags, in order to improve the estimates for the endogenous firm

characteristics.9 We apply clustered standard errors to control for heteroskedasticity and

autocorrelation (within-firm correlation).

9 For more information on xtabond2 use and setup, see Roodman (2006).

                                                        - 11 -
4.3. Case study – Credit supply contractions over the global financial crisis
In order to study the access of capital for Swedish firms over the business cycle, a survey was
designed and sent out to Swedish listed firms with questions regarding their financing activity.
The aim was to determine access and preference of financing sources through the global
financial crisis and what affected these choices. The questions were inspired by Servaes and

Tufano’s global capital structure survey (2005).10

To retrieve both quantitative and qualitative information, the survey was divided into two
sections. The first part consisted of questions regarding the raising of capital, i.e. equity
issuances, bond issuances and bank credit. The study time includes three periods; before the
financial crisis (January 2006 – March 2008), during the financial crisis (April 2008 – March
2009) and after the financial crisis (April 2009 – December 2011). This time span includes both
expansion and recession periods.

According to Becker and Ivashina (2011), difficulties raising bank credit and higher transaction
costs shift firms financing from bank credit towards bonds. Therefore, qualitative questions
were included to give an indication if the choice of financing was affected by credit supply
contractions. Gertler and Gilchrist (1993) find that smaller firms suffer more from credit
contractions. For that reason we sort the sample by marketplaces in order to observe differences
between firms with different sizes.

In the analysis, we make the different time periods comparable by conditioning only to include
firms raising debt, indicating that the firm is in need of external financing. This condition reveals
access and preference for the different sources of financing over the business cycle.

10 See appendix for survey format

                                                        - 12 -
                                          5. Results

5.1. Summary statistics
Table 1 presents the summarised data for the Swedish firm characteristics. The table is divided
into Panel A which displays characteristics when firms are in recessions, and Panel B for firms
when they are in expansions. First off, in the full sample there are significant differences of firm
characteristics between the two stages of the business cycle. The results indicate that both book
and market leverage ratios are counter-cyclical. In other words, firms increase their leverage
ratio during recessions.

There are also significant differences in firm characteristics between the sub-samples of
financially constrained firms, defined after their dividend policy (Div 25) or their size (Size 25),
and unconstrained firms identified as Div 75 and Size 75. In particular, constrained firms seem
to have higher growth opportunities (determined by higher market to book ratios), be less
profitable and have a lower level of tangibility than unconstrained firms. Constrained firms also
have lower leverage ratios than unconstrained firms, across the entire business cycle. Consistent
with the full sample, leverage ratios are counter-cyclical for constrained and unconstrained
firms, true for both dividend and size sub-samples.

5.2. Tables and comments
For all the estimated coefficients in the following regression results, the presented coefficients
have been adjusted to present the direct impact and not the estimate of . This
is to display the true impact of each firm characteristic on the target leverage ratio. The lagged
leverage ratio estimate has been extracted to determine the speed of adjustment (SOA) estimate
directly by subtracting the lagged leverage estimate from 1.

Coefficient estimates are displayed with their robust standard error (clustered by firm) given in
parentheses. Significant differences in results for recession coefficients have been tested using
post-estimation commands and are marked with ***, ** and *, representing 1%, 5% and 10%
significance respectively.

Table 2 summarises the regression results made to ensure model robustness to be in line with
further regressions. A simplified version of the DPACS model with no business cycle effect, in
columns 2 and 3, and the Static Coefficient DPACS model, in column 4 and 5, are regressed and
presented in table 2. The tests are made on the full sample and results are highly significant. The
results display consistency for the two models and other regression results in table 3-5 are in
line with these benchmark models. The speed of adjustment estimate in column 5 for recession

                                                        - 13 -
periods is significantly different from the expansion estimate. The recession constant has
significantly higher positive impact on implied target leverage.

Table 3 presents the regression results from the DPACS model on the full sample, as seen in
equation (5). We allow for business cycle effects not only to the lagged leverage ratios and
constants but also for firm characteristics.

Significant difference in recession estimates can only be found for tangibility while using book
leverage as the dependent variable. For the market leverage regression the speed of adjustment
towards target leverage is significantly higher in recessions. For the market to book estimate, on
the other hand, the negative impact increases during recessions. The recession coefficient
indicates significantly higher target leverage in recession periods.

Table 4 tests for the same DPACS model as in table 3 but splits the regression into financially
constrained and unconstrained firms, determined by their dividend policy or size. Panel A and B
displays book and market leverage, respectively.

The SOA of financially unconstrained firms is significantly higher for book and market leverage
while constrained firms only show little significance in changes of the SOA for market leverage
during recessions. A stronger negative impact of capital expenditures and profitability on target
leverage is observed for the sub-sample Div 75. Evidence is found for that market to book affect
target leverage of constrained firms positively and negatively for unconstrained firms in times of
recession.

Tables 5-8 are explained in section 5.3.4.

Table 9 provides further robustness tests where different firm characteristics are removed from
the model to check for consistency and that the model still provides significant results when
changing assumptions.

                                                        - 14 -
5.3. Implications and analysis

5.3.1. Firm characteristics over the business cycle
Running the regression on the full sample (as in table 3), allows us to estimate how Swedish firm
characteristics affect the target leverage dynamics. Estimated firm characteristics shown in table
3 imply that in general, an increase in size, tangibility, industry mean and capital expenditures
increases the target leverage. However, an increase in market to book and profitability show
strong negative change to target leverage.

The firm characteristic variables that vary significantly over the business cycle are the ones that
yield the most interesting results. These are the internal demand factors that have high
explanatory power for changes in leverage dynamics across the business cycle of Swedish firms,
marked with * for level of significance in tables.

One of the estimates with significant negative impact on target leverage during recessions is the
market to book ratio. This observation is consistent over the full sample and across all sub-
samples when regressing on market leverage (see table 4). The interpretation is that an increase
in share prices and increase in growth opportunities will significantly lower a firm’s target
leverage in recessions. We do not find significant results for the book leverage regression.
Therefore, we suspect that this effect is exaggerated due to the direct relationship in the variable
definitions of the two ratios, implying that a market to book increase consequently lowers the

target leverage.11

Furthermore, Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012) find evidence that both capital expenditure and
profitability vary significantly over the business cycle for both financially constrained and
unconstrained firms. They estimate profitability to have a large negative impact on target
leverage while firms with more capital expenditure increase their target leverage during
recessions.

Comparing their results with ours, we fail to find the same significant pattern for the full sample.
Looking at different sub-samples, we find significance for one sub-sample, the financially
unconstrained, based on dividends, Div 75, in which estimates are consistent with Halling, Yu
and Zechner (2012). This indicates that Swedish financially unconstrained firms, based on their
dividend payout ratio, are profitable and retain their earnings in times of recession which has a
negative impact on their target leverage.

11 Since market leverage includes market capitalisation of equity in the denominator and in the nominator
of market to book, the ratios naturally move in opposite directions when market capitalisation of equity
increase or decrease.

                                                        - 15 -
The higher capital expenditure estimate during recessions for the Div 75 sub-sample could be
interpreted as firms that invest more positively affect their target leverage. This also indicates
that this sub-sample uses debt funding to finance their capital expenditures to a greater extent in
times of recession. This result confirms with the market timing of equity theory avoiding equity
financing when costs are considered to be too high, for example in a recession.

For our sub-sample Size 25 we find significant positive influence for tangibility on target
leverage during recessions. This positive impact could partly be explained by the fact that
Sweden is a bank-oriented country rather than public market oriented. Financially constrained
firms are required to have a higher level of collateral to receive bank credit, especially in times of
recession when banks become more risk averse, hence the increased tangibility estimate in
recessions (Antoniou, Guney and Paudyal, 2006).

Further sub-sample observations worth mentioning is the industry mean estimate of the
unconstrained firms having a negative impact on target leverage for Div 75 while increasing for
the Size 75 sub-sample during recessions. Significant difference is also found for the Size 75 sub-
sample where an increase in sales positively affects target leverage, consistent with the findings
in descriptive statistics.

5.3.2. Target leverage ratio response to the business cycle
Figures 1-3 graphically illustrates how target leverage estimates and observed leverage ratios

move over the global financial crisis.12 By using equation (3), the definition of target leverage,

and the regressed estimates shown in tables 2-4, the implied target leverage can be calculated.

In Figure 1 the implied target leverage ratios are presented, these are calculated on both book
and market leverage estimates, showing the dynamics over both expansion and recession
periods. Models included in Figure 1 are two versions of the DPACS model, one including full
business cycle effects and a simplified version ignoring all business cycle effects. The static
coefficient model and observed leverage are also included. Similar to the conclusions from
descriptive statistics, observed leverage and estimated target leverage are shown to be counter-
cyclical.

When removing all business cycle effects from the DPACS model, the target leverage estimates
(labelled: No business cycle target leverage) are assumed to be the same regardless of the
current state of the economy. Since the majority of observations correspond to years of
expansion, the target leverage will be relatively low since there are more observed expansion

12 The figures display the period 2006-2010 to include both recession and expansion periods through the
global financial crisis. This time period corresponds to a large part of the survey sample period for
improved comparability.

                                                        - 16 -
years, mitigating the recession effect. Allowing for business cycle differences in lagged leverage
and constants (i.e. Static business cycle target leverage) significant results for counter-cyclical
target leverage ratios are found. This is also consistent with the DPACS model, when allowing for
full business cycle differences.

In Figure 2, target leverage estimates for financially constrained and unconstrained firms are
illustrated. The dividend based approach indicates that target leverage estimates are counter-
cyclical as in Figure 1. Constrained firms have higher target leverage ratios for both book and
market leverage. Dividend payouts can be connected to firm profitability which is closely related
to cash holdings. Via the definition of financial constraint, this implies that the constrained firms
are more likely to be in need of external financing, thus explaining the more volatile target
leverage ratio observed for the Div 25 sub-sample in Figure 2.

In Figure 3 when target leverage estimates are based on size we observe counter-cyclical target
leverage but have difficulties explaining the Size 75 target leverage estimate. This sub-sample is
inconsistent with the rest of our observations for target leverage response to the business cycle.
This is most likely due to the relatively high estimated expansion constant in Table 4, Panel B,
but we are unable to determine why or find support for this observation in previous literature.

5.3.3. Speed of adjustment towards target leverage ratio
The DPACS model estimates partial adjustment towards target leverage. A high estimate
signifies rapid speed of adjustment (SOA) of observed book leverage towards the implied target
leverage ratio. These SOA-estimates (calculated as: 1 – lagged leverage estimate) are presented
in tables 2-4. When regressing on book leverage we only find significant differences in SOA-
estimates for the unconstrained firms. While regressing on market leverage, all SOA-estimates
are significantly different in recessions. All coefficient estimates but one indicates higher SOA
during recessions.

The Swedish SOA-estimates actually increase during recessions while Halling, Yu and Zechner’s
(2012) international study show the opposite results. They claim stagnation of the financial
markets decreases capital supply, which is an essential factor as to why the SOA decrease during
recessions.

The financially constrained Div 25 sub-sample is the only deviating SOA observation when
regressing on book leverage. Its speed of adjustment in expansion periods exceeds its level in
recessions, which concurs with the intuition regarding the effects of transaction costs. Their
financially more problematic situation could explain why the estimate differs from the rest of
the results. This segment is most likely to be affected by credit contractions, not allowing them

                                                        - 17 -
the opportunity of a higher SOA. However, the difference in SOA for this estimate is not
significant enough to support this explanation.

Concluding that SOA-estimates increase in times of recession, comparing sample segments,
results suggest that financially unconstrained firms’ SOA increase more, in relative terms, than
constrained firms in times of recession. This is accurate across both panels in Table 4.

5.3.4. Case study – Credit supply contractions over the global financial crisis
A significant decline of having an expressed target leverage ratio is observed in the case study
sample, from 67% in the Large Cap, 62% in Mid Cap, 26% in Small Cap and 0% in the First North
and Aktietorget marketplaces (displayed in table 5). The frequency of an expressed target
leverage ratio diminishes the smaller the firms get. This is consistent with a previous survey of

the Swedish market.13 The higher frequency of issuing equity by smaller firms could explain why

they do not have expressed target leverage ratios. According to the pecking order theory equity
is the last resort of financing. This indicates that the options of debt financing might be limited
and that the focus on leverage ratios can therefore be considered redundant for smaller firms.

In table 6 the general tendencies of debt financing for the listed firms are illustrated. Bond
issuances are most frequent for Large Cap firms. Smaller firms issue more equity compared to
debt than larger firms. This distribution of equity issuances is consistent with the pecking order
theory (Myers and Majluf, 1984) since smaller firms have larger problems raising debt in times
of credit supply contractions (Gertler and Gilchrist, 1993). Consequently, this forces the smaller
firms to turn to the public market through secondary offerings when experiencing inadequate
internal funding.

The decrease in liquidity of the financial markets during the financial crisis might have some
explanatory power as to why bond issuances diminished so significantly (see full sample in table
6). However, comparing the US and Swedish bond markets, Sweden, can be considered a bond
market with low activity. This raises questions of the explanatory power of change from bank
credit to bonds on the Swedish market. Going forward, we assume that the issuance of bonds
have little explanatory power on the dynamics of credit supply contractions over the business
cycle in Sweden. Therefore, our analysis is shifted towards the frequency of equity issuances and
raising credit.

The survey included qualitative questions14 regarding the factors of acquiring new financing.

(See table 7). Observing firms’ experience of acquiring debt financing during the global financial

13 “Kartläggning av svenska icke-finansiella företags finansiering” – Swedish Riksbank, 2011
14 On a scale from 1 to 7, 1 being “Not at all” and 7 representing “To a high degree”, low being (1-3),
moderate (4) and high (5-7)

                                                        - 18 -
crisis (April 2008 – March 2009), 65% of the full sample experienced a low level, 7% a moderate
and 28% a high level of difficulty. The level of difficulty increased for smaller firms, where 83%
of Large Cap, 68% of Mid Cap, 61% of Small Cap and 40% of First North experienced a low level

of difficulty receiving bank credit.15 These observations are conformable with the flight-to-

quality theory (for empirical studies, see, Kashyap et al, 1993, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1993) where
in market distress, smaller firms experience larger contractions in credit supply than larger,
more stable firms. Comparing this to table 6, it should be noted that no decrease in credit
lending to the smaller firms was noted. Comments extracted from the respondents suggested
that rather than limiting smaller firms bank credit, the banks made it more expensive. Therefore,
the only indicator of credit contractions is the level of difficulty raising credit experienced by the
firms.

Question3 in table 6 indicate that the relatively higher transaction costs during the financial
crisis had low impact on the choice of financing. 72% of the full sample considered the effect of
the transaction costs to be low. Interestingly, Large Cap firms found this effect to have a larger
impact (42% considered it to be at a high degree) than the other marketplaces (22-25%).

In table 8 we observe within-firm financing shifts to try to determine preference and access to
debt financing. None of the firms, not issuing bonds but receiving bank credit before the financial
crisis (January 2006 – March 2008) issued bonds during the financial crisis, however, 78%
received additional bank credit. This indicates that there is no substantial shift from bank credit
towards bonds in recessions in Sweden.

A study of the US market made by Becker and Ivashina (2011) found that bank credit compared
to bonds is pro-cyclical, our case-study observations (see table 8) do not find support for this at
all. The inability to explain credit contractions with changes in bond issuances indicate that the
out-of-sample results presented by Becker and Ivashina (2011) are more consistent with our
results and also with Gertler and Gilchrist, (1993).

15 71% of the Aktietorget sub-sample experienced a low level of difficulty receiving bank credit. However,
more firms expressed to have had low difficulty raising bank credit than actually raised bank credit, giving
this observation less significance than the rest of the sub-samples.

                                                        - 19 -
5.3.5. Robustness tests and significance issues
The possible problems with our DPACS model are, as mentioned earlier, the yearly firm
characteristics being endogenous, causing our independent firm variables to be correlated with
both present and past errors. Problems with autocorrelation also exist (known as within-firm
correlation). In the GMM setup we can correct for these issues by creating lagged instrument
variables and applying robust standard errors clustered by firm.

To control the robustness for our DPACS model we change the assumptions for it and see if it
still remains effective. In Table 2 we apply a DPACS model with no business cycle effect and also
the Static Coefficient DPACS model for robustness reasons. Results show estimates being
significant and consistent with the DPACS model with full business cycle effects, as in table 3,
indicating that our DPACS model is robust.

In order to check for multicollinearity between our independent firm characteristic variables we
can run the DPACS model while removing certain firm characteristic variables at a time and look
for changes in estimations and significance. Correlation tests in STATA show high correlation
between sales and profitability, capital expenditures and tangibility and also between tangibility
and industry mean. In Table 9 we present the results for these robustness tests. In regression (x)
we remove market to book and profitability, (y) sales and tangibility and (z) capital
expenditures and business cycle constants.

The three regressions all estimate significant results that are consistent, both in comparison to
each other, and also for the full DPACS model estimates in table 3. This result suggests that our
DPACS still remain robust and handles variability in assumptions while still presenting
significant results. A potential sign for some multicollinearity issue can be seen in regression (y)
where the significance of industry mean during recessions increases significantly when
dropping tangibility. Nonetheless, we conclude that our DPACS model still manages to present
robust results based on our extensive robustness test.

Regarding the case study, its results should be treated more as an indication, both in respect to
the size of the sample and time comparability. We chose different time periods, both to facilitate
for the respondents, which we suspected linked events to fiscal years rather than specific dates,
and to capture as many responses as possible. We made the different periods comparable
conditioning for firms raising debt. This gives us an indication on the preference and access of
different sources of financing. Given that most of the respondents raising debt, raised credit, the
best indication was found in the level of difficulty the firms experienced trying to raise credit.
The significance of this data can be argued, but a strong trend was noted, giving a reasonable
indication of the state of the Swedish credit supply over the global financial crisis.

                                                        - 20 -
5.3.6. Combined analysis
We do not observe the same clear pattern of firm characteristics driving the target leverage in
recessions for the full sample as Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012) do. They estimate the impact of
profitability and capital expenditures to be the main drivers of target leverage during recession
periods. However, our significant firm characteristic variables vary across different sub-samples
and do not provide us with a comprehensive picture for the full sample. Hence, we can only be
sure of internal key drivers for Swedish leverage dynamics regarding sub-samples.

One of our main findings is the significantly higher SOA estimate in recession periods across
almost the entire sample, most noticeable for the unconstrained firms. Intuitively, debt supply
contractions and transaction costs should prevent firms from adjusting towards target leverage
in recessions and previous studies on an international level report this. However, this paper’s
results suggest that any impact of increased transaction costs when acquiring debt during
recession periods is not substantial enough to prevent Swedish firms from moving towards their
target leverage at a faster pace. Lumpiness might also contribute to the increase of SOA in
recessions, assuming that firms have a passive capital structure management until a triggering
factor forces them to act, such as a recession. We also find indications in the case study
supporting our SOA results even though they may seem contradicting. Such indications include
that larger firms (could be compared to unconstrained firms based on sales) experiencing less
difficulty receiving credit than smaller firms (could be compared to constrained based on sales)
during the financial crisis (Table 7). This suggests that they can still access debt financing in
recessions to a large extent and improve their speed of adjustment. This could also be partially
explained by the flight to quality effects by credit institutions.

We find that our initial intuition of counter-cyclical leverage ratios for Swedish firms is
confirmed. Additionally, evidence is found that both the main internal drivers of leverage
dynamics and SOA estimates for the full sample are significantly different from the results of
Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012).

                                                        - 21 -
                                     6. Conclusion
In this study we determine Swedish firms’ capital structure dynamics and the impact of the
business cycle. Strong relationship between firm characteristics and firms’ estimated target
leverage dynamics can only be found for sub-samples of Swedish firms. Furthermore, we find
that both the estimated target leverage and observed leverage ratios are counter-cyclical. This
study finds evidence, contradicting previous international research, that the speed of adjustment
(SOA) towards target leverage is in fact higher in times of recession. Our case study data
indicates that Swedish firms are still able to raise bank credit during recessions. Although at a
higher cost, it still validates the contradicting evidence of Swedish firm’s higher SOA-estimates
in recessions. We also see differences between financially constrained and unconstrained firms
in their leverage dynamics. The case study show that smaller firms experienced larger
difficulties raising bank credit than larger firms during the financial crisis. Within the boundaries
of this research area, we find significant results indicating that Swedish firms have distinct
leverage dynamics in comparison to previous international research.

                                                        - 22 -
6.1. Research going forward
The increasing Swedish SOA estimates in times of recession would be interesting to further
research. A comparison between our study’s result and a study including all Scandinavian
countries, having similar economies and banking systems, examining the leverage dynamics
could increase understanding of the general firm capital structure dynamics in Sweden and
Scandinavia as a whole. Since Sweden only have experienced two recession periods between
1990 and 2010, the number of recession year observations becomes relatively small. Including
more countries might improve the recession estimates and significance.

Another topic for further discussion could be the interaction of Swedish firms and Swedish
banks in comparison to an international setting. Our results suggest that Swedish firms still
access debt financing in times of recession and are able to adjust towards their target leverage
indicated by higher SOA. This could possibly be explained by Sweden being a strongly bank
oriented country with a currently less functioning public debt market, being no real substitution
to credit borrowing at the moment. Hence, the relationships between Swedish firms and
Swedish banks might institutionally be very different than on other markets, creating an
interesting subject to study.

                                                        - 23 -
                                 Appendix

Worldscope accounting data definitions16

     long term debt – Interest bearing financial obligations, excluding amounts due within one
       year (Worldscope variable = WC03251).
     short term debt – Portion of debt payable within one year including current portion of
       long term debt and sinking fund requirements of preferred stock or debentures
      (WC03051).
     total debt – The sum of long term debt and short term debt.
     net sales – Gross sales and other operating revenue less discounts, returns and
       allowances (WC01001).
     cash & short term investments – The sum of cash and short term investment (WC02001).
    common equity – Common stockholders’ investment in a company (WC03501).
     market capitalisation (market cap) – The product of market price times number of shares
       outstanding (WC08001).
     total assets – The sum of total current assets, long term receivables, investment in
       unconsolidated subsidiaries, other investments, net property plant and equipment and
       other assets (WC02999)
     assets market value – Total Assets less Common Equity plus Market Capitalisation of
       Equity
    EBITDA – The earnings of a company before interest expense, income taxes and
       depreciation, depletion and amortisation (WC18198).
    PPE – Gross property, plant and equipment less accumulated reserves for depreciation,
       depletion and amortisation (WC02501).
     capital expenditures – Funds used to acquire fixed assets other than those associated
       with acquisitions (WC04601).
     dividend per share – Total dividends per share declared during the fiscal year
      (WC05101).
     earnings per share – Earnings divided by number of shares for the fiscal year (WC05201).
     payout ratio – Dividend per Share to Earnings per Share ratio.

16 The Worldscope definitions are used to define the firm characteristics variables. These are also the
same variable setup used in Halling, Yu and Zechner (2012) for comparability reasons.

                                                        - 24 -
Industry Characteristics

     industry group classification – We use Worldscope’s industry group classification to split
        our firms into different sectors. In order to control for industry fixed effects.

Leverage ratios

     ml – Total Debt to Assets’ Market Value ratio
     bl – Total Debt to Total Assets ratio

Independent variables for regression analysis

     sales – logarithm of Net Sales
     market to book (mtb) – Assets’ Market Value ratio to Total Assets
     profitability (profit) – EBITDA to Total Assets ratio
     tangibility (tang) – PPE to Total Assets ratio
     capital expenditure (capex) – Capital Expenditure to Total Assets ratio
     industry mean (ind. mean) – Mean leverage ratio of an industry to which firms belong
     rec = 1 if more than 6 months of a firm’s fiscal year matches the ECRI defined recession
       period and 0 otherwise.
     exp = 1 if rec= 0, exp= 0 if rec=1

                                                        - 25 -
                                   References
Antoniou, Guney and Paudyal, 2006, The Determinants of Capital Structure: Capital Market
Oriented versus Bank Oriented Institutions, Forthcoming: Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis

Acharya, Viral V., Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2007, Is cash negative debt? A hedging
perspective on corporate financial policies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515–554.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, The Journal of
Finance 57, 1–32.

Becker, Bo, and Ivashina, Victoria, 2011, Cyclicality of credit supply: firm level evidence, HBA
Working Paper.

Blundell, Richard, and Bond, Stephen, 1998, Initial conditions and moment restrictions in
dynamic panel data models, Journal of Econometrics 87, 115–143.

Chang, Xin, and Sudipto Dasgupta, 2009, Target behavior and financing: How conclusive is the
evidence, The Journal of Finance 64, 1767–1796.

Englund, Peter, 1999, The Swedish Banking Crisis: Roots and Consequences Oxford review of
economic policy, vol. 15, no. 3.

Erel, Isil, Brandon Julio, Woojin Kim, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2011, Macroeconomic conditions
and capital raising, Dice Center WP 2011-9, forthcoming The Review of Financial Studies.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, Testing trade-off and pecking order predictions
about dividends and debt, The Review of Financial Studies 15, 1–33.

Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., 1993. The role of credit market imperfections in the monetary
transmission mechanism: Arguments and evidence. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95, 43-
63.

Halling, Michael, Yu, Jin, and Zechner, Josef, 2012, Leverage Dynamics over the Business Cycle,
AFA 2012 Chicago Meetings Paper

Jonung, Lars, 2009, The Swedish model for resolving the banking crisis of 1991-93. Seven
reasons why it was successful, Economic papers 360, European Commission

Kashyap, Anil, Jeremy Stein, and David Wilcox (1993), Monetary Policy and Credit Conditions:
Evidence from the Composition of External Finance, American Economic Review, 83(1), 78‐98.

                                                        - 26 -
Korajczyk, Robert A., and Amnon Levy, 2003, Capital structure choice: Macroeconomic
conditions and financial constraints, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 75–109.

Levy, Amnon, and Hennessy, Christopher A., 2007, Why does capital structure choice vary with
macroeconomic conditions, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1545–1564.

Modigliani, Franco and Miller, Merton H., Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
Investment, The American Economic Review, Vol. 48, No. 3. (Jun., 1958), pp. 261-297.

Myers, S., Majluf, N., 1984. Corporate financing decisions when firms have information investors
do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.

Roodman, David, 2006, How to do xtabond2: An introduction to ”difference” and ”system” gmm
in stata, Working Paper 103 Center for Global Development Washington.

Servaes, Henri and Tufano, Peter, 2005, A Global Survey of Corporate Capital Structure &
Treasury Risk Management Practices & Policies

Strebulaev, Ilya A., 2007, Do tests of capital structure theory mean what they say?, The Journal of
Finance 62, 1747–1787.

Swedish Riksbank, Survey 2011, Kartläggning av svenska icke-finansiella företags finansiering

                                                        - 27 -
                                  Survey format
The Firm has an expressed target leverage ratio (Total debt/Total assets): (Yes/No)

Before the financial crisis (January 2006 – March 2008) the Firm acquired new capital
through:

        Loans from credit institutions: (Yes/No)
        Issuance of bonds (Yes/No)
        Issuance of new shares (Yes/No)
        The target leverage ratio was attained (Yes/No/No expressed target leverage ratio)

During the financial crisis (April 2008 – March 2009) the Firm acquired new capital through:

        Loans from credit institutions: (Yes/No)
        Issuance of bonds (Yes/No)
        Issuance of new shares (Yes/No)
        The target leverage ratio was attained (Yes/No/No expressed target leverage ratio)

After the financial crisis (April 2009 – December 2011) the Firm acquired new capital through:

        Loans from credit institutions: (Yes/No)
        Issuance of bonds (Yes/No)
        Issuance of new shares (Yes/No)
        The target leverage ratio was attained (Yes/No/No expressed target leverage ratio)

On a scale from 1-7, where 1 = Not at all and 7 = To a high degree

     The Firm had difficulties receiving loans from credit institutions during the financial
        crisis (April 2008 - March 2009):
     Under-/over valuation of the share price affects the decision whether to issue shares or
        not:
     During the financial crisis the relatively high agency costs, when acquiring new capital,
        affected the choice of financing:

                                                        - 28 -
                                      Figures
Figure 1: Cyclicality of leverage ratios over the business cycle – Separate target leverage
models: Illustration of book and market estimates of target leverage focusing on the event of the
global financial crisis. Observed leverage ratios are also displayed.

  Observed and target                      Book leverage
  leverage ratio
  0.30

  0.25

  0.20

  0.15

  0.10
             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                No business cycle target leverage Static business cycle target leverage

               DPACS model target leverage Observed book leverage

  Observed and target                      Market leverage
  leverage ratio
  0.35

  0.30

  0.25

  0.20

  0.15

  0.10

  0.05
             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                No business cycle target leverage Static business cycle target leverage

               DPACS model target leverage Observed market leverage

                                                        - 29 -
Figure 2: Cyclicality of leverage ratios over the business cycle – financially constrained and
unconstrained firms – dividend based: Illustration of DPACS-estimates for target leverage
ratios and observed leverage ratios.

  Observed and target                      Book leverage
  leverage ratio
  0.30

  0.25

  0.20

  0.15

  0.10

  0.05
             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                    Div 25 target leverage Div 25 observed leverage

                    Div 75 target leverage Div 75 observed leverage

  Observed and target                      Market leverage
  leverage ratio
  0.30

  0.25

  0.20

  0.15

  0.10

  0.05
             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                  Div 25 target leverage Div 25 observed leverage

                  Div 75 target leverage Div 75 observed leverage

                                                        - 30 -
Figure 3: Cyclicality of leverage ratios over the business cycle – financially constrained and
unconstrained firms – based on size of sales: The graphs illustrate DPACS-estimates for target
leverage ratios and observed leverage ratios.

  Observed and target                       Book leverage
  leverage ratio
  0.30

  0.25

  0.20

  0.15

  0.10
             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                    Size 25 target leverage Size 25 observed leverage

                    Size 75 target leverage Size 75 observed leverage

  Observed and target                      Market leverage
  leverage ratio
  0.40
  0.35
  0.30
  0.25
  0.20
  0.15
  0.10
  0.05
  0.00
             2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                    Size 25 target leverage Size 25 observed leverage

                    Size 75 target leverage Size 75 observed leverage

                                                        - 31 -
                                      Tables
Table 1: Summary statistics: The table reports summary statistics of our firm independent
variables of interest for the full sample and for all the different sub-samples of interest.

                Panel A : Recession Panel B: Expansion
 Variable Mean Std. Dev. N Variable Mean Std. Dev. N
                                          Full Sample
 bl 0.268 0.225 710 bl 0.211 0.200 4,778
 ml 0.261 0.234 636 ml 0.164 0.183 4,169
 sales 6.256 2.746 692 sales 6.089 2.713 4,681
 mtb 1.350 0.838 636 mtb 1.885 1.164 4,169
 profit 0.021 0.257 694 profit 0.034 0.261 4,672
 tang 0.286 0.273 709 tang 0.243 0.257 4,772
 capex 0.059 0.093 688 capex 0.058 0.088 4,573
                                          Div 25
 bl 0.187 0.195 223 bl 0.162 0.189 1,516
 ml 0.176 0.200 197 ml 0.112 0.160 1,251
 sales 4.008 2.571 205 sales 3.964 2.610 1,426
 mtb 1.562 1.100 197 mtb 2.209 1.354 1,251
 profit -0.166 0.356 213 profit -0.137 0.349 1,457
 tang 0.168 0.234 222 tang 0.156 0.225 1,512
 capex 0.052 0.087 204 capex 0.052 0.101 1,371
                                          Div 75
 bl 0.259 0.218 186 bl 0.206 0.193 1,245
 ml 0.240 0.215 169 ml 0.157 0.169 1,111
 sales 7.370 2.889 186 sales 7.256 2.615 1,240
 mtb 1.301 0.561 169 mtb 1.833 1.029 1,111
 profit 0.123 0.127 183 profit 0.139 0.143 1,221
 tang 0.297 0.246 186 tang 0.278 0.255 1,243
 capex 0.056 0.093 184 capex 0.059 0.089 1,221
                                              Size 25
 bl 0.170 0.220 181 bl 0.129 0.183 1,184
 ml 0.145 0.218 157 ml 0.080 0.140 983
 sales 2.769 2.123 168 sales 2.622 2.013 1,118
 mtb 1.834 1.228 157 mtb 2.464 1.473 983
 profit -0.197 0.404 171 profit -0.184 0.380 1,118
 tang 0.143 0.245 180 tang 0.113 0.200 1,178
 capex 0.052 0.125 162 capex 0.040 0.092 1,047
                                              Size 75
 bl 0.297 0.169 202 bl 0.256 0.160 1,195
 ml 0.291 0.177 183 ml 0.190 0.146 1,079
 sales 9.233 1.250 197 sales 9.233 1.283 1,172
 mtb 1.261 0.704 183 mtb 1.669 0.871 1,079
 profit 0.098 0.103 202 profit 0.137 0.089 1,186
 tang 0.326 0.167 202 tang 0.305 0.194 1,195
 capex 0.059 0.053 202 capex 0.061 0.057 1,182

                                                        - 32 -
Table 2: Limited business cycle effects and robustness test: Test results are displayed
through a simplified DPACS model in columns 2 and 3 when removing all business cycle effect.
Results are presented for the Static coefficient DPACS model (equation 6) in column 4 and 5,
where only lagged leverage and the constants vary due to the business cycle. The lagged
leverage ratio is presented in the form of the speed of adjustment (SOA) estimate by subtracting
it from 1. The state dependent constants for column 4 and 5 are presented in the form of
      and not as . Regressions are made using System GMM (STATA tool xtabond2).
The lagged leverage variable is set to be predetermined. Firm characteristics are treated as
endogenous, using lags II and III as instruments. Firm characteristics have yearly fixed effects
which are set as exogenous variables in the level equation. Robust standard errors (clustered by
firm) correct for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, values for these are given in the
parentheses. ***, ** or * next to coefficients at times of recession (rec) indicates that the
coefficient for this variable differs significantly from the expansion variable.

                          Standard Dynamic Partial                  Static Coefficient Partial
                       Adjustment Capital Structure              Adjustment Capital Structure
                           Model - No BC                            Model
                      Book Lev. Market Lev. Book Lev. Market Lev.
 SOA 0.472 0.476
                      (0.000) (0.000)
 SOA (exp) 0.476 0.423
                                                              (0.057) (0.045)
 SOA (rec) 0.476 0.488***
                                                              (0.053) (0.040)
 sales 0.015 0.010 0.016 0.014
                      (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003)
 mtb -0.010 -0.060 0.002 -0.036
                      (0.005) (0.004) (0.006) (0.004)
 profit -0.296 -0.215 -0.305 -0.263
                      (0.035) (0.027) (0.035) (0.025)
 tang 0.219 0.167 0.208 0.180
                      (0.049) (0.042) (0.048) (0.040)
 ind. mean 0.788 0.665 0.818 0.730
                      (0.089) (0.079) (0.090) (0.077)
 capex 0.433 0.483 0.420 0.468
                      (0.072) (0.077) (0.071) (0.074)
 cons -0.097 0.052
                      (0.034) (0.028)
 exp-cons -0.138 -0.042
                                                              (0.034) (0.027)
 rec-cons -0.079 0.082***
                                                              (0.033) (0.026)
 Firm Years 4,218 3,917 4,218 3,917
 Number of Firms 579 547 579 547

                                                        - 33 -
Table 3: Full sample DPACS model with firm characteristics varying over time: This table
presents results from the DPACS model seen in equation (5) where all coefficients are allowed to
vary over the business cycle. The lagged leverage ratio is presented in the form of the speed of
adjustment (SOA) estimate by subtracting it from 1. The state dependent constants are
presented in the form of and not as . Regressions are made using System GMM
(STATA tool xtabond2). The lagged leverage variable is set to be predetermined. Firm
characteristics are treated as endogenous, using lags II and III as instruments. Firm
characteristics have yearly fixed effects which are set as exogenous variables in the level
equation. Robust standard errors (clustered by firm) correct for heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation, values for these are given in the parentheses. ***, ** or * next to coefficients at
times of recession (rec) indicates that the coefficient for this variable differs significantly from
the expansion variable.

                                         Full Sample
                                     Book Leverage Market Leverage
                SOA (exp) 0.360 0.359
                                       (0.048) (0.041)
                SOA (rec) 0.365 0.439***
                                       (0.045) (0.038)
                sales (exp) 0.017 0.008
                                       (0.002) (0.002)
                sales (rec) 0.015 0.003
                                       (0.003) (0.004)
                mtb (exp) 0.000 -0.033
                                       (0.005) (0.004)
                mtb (rec) 0.014 -0.088***
                                       (0.010) (0.010)
                 profit (exp) -0.324 -0.242
                                       (0.029) (0.021)
                 profit (rec) -0.347 -0.267
                                       (0.045) (0.041)
                tang (exp) 0.124 0.090
                                       (0.030) (0.030)
                tang (rec) 0.301* 0.149
                                       (0.044) (0.045)
                ind. mean (exp) 0.734 0.777
                                       (0.056) (0.057)
                ind. mean (rec) 0.679 0.626
                                       (0.078) (0.082)
                capex (exp) 0.707 0.660
                                       (0.068) (0.091)
                capex (rec) 0.336 0.591
                                       (0.146) (0.173)
                exp-cons -0.115 -0.003
                                       (0.027) (0.022)
                rec-cons -0.071 0.217**
                                       (0.039) (0.042)
                Firm Years 4,218 3,917
               Number of Firms 579 547

                                                        - 34 -
Table 4: DPACS model with firm characteristics varying over time - Constrained and
Unconstrained firms: This table presents results from the DPACS model seen in equation (5)
where all coefficients are allowed to vary over the business cycle. The lagged leverage ratio is
presented in the form of the speed of adjustment (SOA) estimate by subtracting it from 1. The
state dependent constants are presented in the form of and not as .
Regressions are made using System GMM (STATA tool xtabond2). The lagged leverage variable
is set to be predetermined. Firm characteristics are treated as endogenous, using lags II and III
as instruments. Firm characteristics have yearly fixed effects which are set as exogenous
variables in the level equation. Robust standard errors (clustered by firm) correct for
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, values for these are given in the parentheses. ***, ** or *
next to coefficients at times of recession (rec) indicates that the coefficient for this variable
differs significantly from the expansion variable. Panel B – next page.
                                                  Panel A: Book Leverage
                               Div 25 Div 75 Size 25 Size 75
SOA (exp) 0.515 0.249 0.347 0.218
                               (0.085) (0.041) (0.067) (0.036)
SOA (rec) 0.453 0.300** 0.355 0.270***
                               (0.091) (0.052) (0.093) (0.038)
sales (exp) 0.005 0.017 0.035 -0.005
                               (0.004) (0.002) (0.004) (0.004)
sales (rec) 0.009 0.018 0.049 0.022
                               (0.011) (0.003) (0.011) (0.005)
mtb (exp) -0.030 -0.009 -0.004 0.061
                               (0.007) (0.005) (0.007) (0.005)
mtb (rec) 0.044* -0.028 0.046 0.017
                               (0.021) (0.025) (0.019) (0.012)
profit (exp) -0.155 -0.354 -0.250 -1.678
                               (0.041) (0.031) (0.030) (0.054)
profit (rec) -0.039 -0.744*** -0.313 -0.834
                               (0.079) (0.056) (0.055) (0.097)
tang (exp) 0.148 0.102 0.110 -0.068
                               (0.063) (0.039) (0.057) (0.023)
tang (rec) 0.201 0.236 0.618* 0.124
                               (0.127) (0.073) (0.114) (0.043)
ind. mean (exp) 0.578 0.829 0.763 0.320
                               (0.135) (0.053) (0.115) (0.067)
ind. mean (rec) 0.683 -0.038* 0.609 0.482*
                               (0.224) (0.102) (0.260) (0.062)
capex (exp) 0.320 0.355 0.434 1.722
                               (0.113) (0.144) (0.106) (0.118)
capex (rec) 0.213 1.589* -1.127 1.579
                               (0.390) (0.171) (0.379) (0.142)
exp-cons 0.050 -0.104 -0.156 0.264
                               (0.044) (0.026) (0.035) (0.048)
rec-cons -0.025 0.113 -0.232 -0.089
                               (0.092) (0.062) (0.091) (0.053)
Firm Years 1,126 1,168 852 1,182
Number of Firms 240 131 189 101

                                                        - 35 -
Table 4 (continued)

                                                    Panel B: Market Leverage
                                  Div 25 Div 75 Size 25 Size 75
 SOA (exp) 0.325 0.245 0.220 0.222
                                  (0.087) (0.045) (0.069) (0.042)
 SOA (rec) 0.406** 0.354*** 0.316* 0.379***
                                  (0.085) (0.057) (0.101) (0.047)
 sales (exp) 0.011 0.008 0.028 -0.017
                                  (0.004) (0.002) (0.004) (0.004)
 sales (rec) -0.012 0.003 -0.001 0.036***
                                  (0.010) (0.004) (0.013) (0.006)
 mtb (exp) -0.049 -0.042 -0.021 -0.034
                                  (0.006) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005)
 mtb (rec) -0.064 -0.123* -0.080 -0.073**
                                  (0.023) (0.022) (0.016) (0.009)
 profit (exp) -0.204 -0.163 -0.239 -1.140
                                  (0.026) (0.025) (0.019) (0.048)
 profit (rec) 0.085* -0.327* -0.298 -0.296
                                  (0.062) (0.043) (0.042) (0.095)
 tang (exp) -0.066 0.079 -0.188 -0.038
                                  (0.042) (0.039) (0.035) (0.020)
 tang (rec) -0.056 0.262 0.237 0.039
                                  (0.109) (0.078) (0.104) (0.055)
 ind. mean (exp) 0.918 0.861 1.032 0.136
                                  (0.105) (0.060) (0.104) (0.045)
 ind. mean (rec) 0.667 -0.170** 0.695 0.364*
                                  (0.207) (0.112) (0.216) (0.081)
 capex (exp) 0.886 -0.086 1.043 1.794
                                  (0.079) (0.174) (0.064) (0.108)
 capex (rec) 0.950 1.365* 0.122 1.562
                                  (0.427) (0.193) (0.438) (0.147)
 exp-cons 0.014 0.016 -0.114 0.453
                                  (0.030) (0.021) (0.024) (0.044)
 rec-cons 0.318* 0.334 0.226 -0.110*
                                  (0.091) (0.068) (0.076) (0.078)
 Firm Years 1,011 1,103 772 1,130
 Number of Firms 218 126 174 99

Table 5: The occurrence of expressed target leverage (Total Debt to Total Assets): Table
summarising the occurrence of expressed target leverage in the case study sample. The table
presents the distribution of responses over the different marketplaces.

                                                 Target leverage ratio
          Full Sample Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North Aktietorget
 Yes 36% 67% 62% 26% 0% 0%
 No 64% 33% 38% 74% 100% 100%
 N 87 12 26 27 13 9

                                                        - 36 -
Table 6: Summary statistics of the case study sample: Table summarising the data collected
from the case study survey. The sample displays the results for each marketplace over the three
time-periods of the survey; Before the financial crisis (January 2006 - March 2008), During
(April 2008 - March 2009) and After (April 2009 - December 2011). % indicates the percentage
relative to firms raising debt in each period. Firms issuing bonds receiving no bank loan do not
state whether the specific firm chose not to increase its bank credit or was denied further bank
credit.
                                                             Before During After
                                                  Full Sample
 Number of firms 84 84 86
 Number of firms acquiring new capital 71 56 66
 Number of firms raising debt 59 46 53
 Only raising debt (%) 66% 83% 72%
 Receiving bank credit (%) 95% 98% 98%
 Issuing bonds (%) 20% 11% 25%
 Issuing bonds receiving no new bank loan (%) 5% 2% 2%
 Issuing equity (%) 54% 39% 55%
                                                   Large Cap
 Number of firms 15 13 13
 Number of firms acquiring new capital 15 12 11
 Number of firms raising debt 15 11 11
 Only raising debt (%) 67% 91% 91%
 Receiving bank credit (%) 80% 91% 91%
 Issuing bonds (%) 53% 36% 73%
 Issuing bonds receiving no new bank loan (%) 20% 9% 9%
 Issuing equity (%) 20% 18% 9%
                                                Mid Cap
 Number of firms 24 24 24
 Number of firms acquiring new capital 21 18 19
 Number of firms raising debt 20 17 17
 Only raising debt (%) 65% 76% 76%
 Receiving bank credit (%) 95% 100% 100%
 Issuing bonds (%) 10% 6% 18%
 Issuing bonds receiving no new bank loan (%) 5% 0% 0%
 Issuing equity (%) 40% 29% 41%
                                                  Small Cap
 Number of firms 26 25 26
 Number of firms acquiring new capital 20 15 18
 Number of firms raising debt 18 13 17
 Only raising debt (%) 78% 92% 65%
 Receiving bank credit (%) 94% 100% 100%
 Issuing bonds (%) 6% 0% 0%
 Issuing bonds receiving no new bank loan (%) 6% 0% 0%
 Issuing equity (%) 33% 23% 41%
                                                      First North
 Number of firms 13 13 13
 Number of firms acquiring new capital 11 7 11
 Number of firms raising debt 6 4 5
 Only raising debt (%) 17% 75% 60%
 Receiving bank credit (%) 100% 100% 100%
 Issuing bonds (%) 17% 0% 20%
 Issuing bonds receiving no new bank loan (%) 0% 0% 0%
 Issuing equity (%) 167% 100% 160%
                                                      Aktietorget
 Number of firms 8 9 10
 Number of firms acquiring new capital 6 4 7
 Number of firms raising debt 2 1 3
 Only raising debt (%) 50% 0% 33%
 Receiving bank credit (%) 100% 100% 100%
 Issuing bonds (%) 0% 0% 33%
 Issuing bonds receiving no new bank loan (%) 0% 0% 0%
 Issuing equity (%) 250% 400% 200%

                                                        - 37 -
Table 7: Qualitative survey questions: Table displaying the distribution of sample firms' experience of bank credit supply during the financial crisis,
importance of share price valuation in decisions regarding equity issues and transaction costs effect on choice of financing sources. Differences in
sample size for the different questions are due to firm-specific factors not making the question applicable. Questions answered on a scale from 1-7
where 1 = Not at all and 7 = To a high degree.

                                                                     Level of difficulty receiving credit during the financial crisis (April 2008 - March 2009)
                        Not at all Moderate To a high degree
                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 N
 Full Sample 50% 9% 5% 7% 9% 7% 12% 74
 Large Cap 67% 17% 0% 0% 8% 8% 0% 12
 Mid Cap 45% 14% 9% 5% 9% 9% 9% 22
 Small Cap 43% 9% 9% 4% 13% 9% 13% 23
 First North 40% 0% 0% 30% 10% 0% 20% 10
 Aktietorget 71% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 29% 7
                                                                       The valuation of the share price affects the decision whether to issue equity or not
 Full Sample 29% 4% 6% 15% 11% 13% 22% 72
 Large Cap 33% 17% 0% 17% 0% 0% 33% 6
 Mid Cap 43% 0% 5% 10% 24% 14% 5% 21
 Small Cap 26% 9% 0% 17% 0% 17% 30% 23
 First North 17% 0% 8% 17% 17% 17% 25% 12
 Aktietorget 20% 0% 20% 20% 10% 0% 30% 10
                                                    Relatively higher transaction costs during the financial crisis (April 2008 - March 2009) affected the choice of financing
 Full Sample 49% 17% 6% 3% 12% 4% 10% 78
 Large Cap 33% 8% 17% 0% 17% 0% 25% 12
 Mid Cap 48% 22% 9% 0% 9% 4% 9% 23
 Small Cap 61% 13% 4% 0% 13% 0% 9% 23
 First North 42% 17% 0% 17% 8% 8% 8% 12
 Aktietorget 50% 25% 0% 0% 13% 13% 0% 8

                                                             38
Table 8: Within-firm debt financing shifts: Conditioning on within-firm shifts across periods on firms receiving bank credit. Comparing the three
periods, Before (January 2006 – March 2008), During (April 2008 – March 2009) and After (April 2009 – December 2011) the financial crisis, the
Before period signifies the percentage of firms receiving debt during the financial crisis which received bank credit before April 2008.

                                                                                                                                           Issuing bonds
                                                                                Receiving bank                       Receiving bank
                                                                Receiving bank                                                               not receiving   Not raising any
                                                                                      credit not issuing    Issuing bonds     credit and issuing
                                                       credit during next                                                       bank credit     debt during     N
                                                                                 bonds during next  during next period  bonds during next
                                                                   period                                                                  during next     next period
                                                                                  period                              period
                                                                                                                                        period
                                                                                                                 Full Sample
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 78% 78% 0% 0% 0% 23% 40
     Before
            Firms receiving bank credit 77% 73% 6% 4% 2% 21% 48
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 95% 78% 16% 16% 0% 5% 37
     During
            Firms receiving bank credit 93% 73% 23% 20% 3% 5% 40
                                                                                                              Large Cap
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 100% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 5
     Before
            Firms receiving bank credit 83% 67% 25% 17% 8% 8% 12
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 88% 38% 50% 50% 0% 13% 8
     During
            Firms receiving bank credit 90% 30% 60% 60% 0% 10% 10
                                                                                                         Mid Cap
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 78% 78% 0% 0% 0% 22% 18
     Before
            Firms receiving bank credit 79% 79% 0% 0% 0% 21% 19
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 100% 88% 13% 13% 0% 0% 16
     During
            Firms receiving bank credit 94% 82% 18% 12% 6% 0% 17
                                                                                                                Small Cap
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 71% 71% 0% 0% 0% 29% 17
     Before
            Firms receiving bank credit 71% 71% 0% 0% 0% 29% 17
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 92% 92% 0% 0% 0% 8% 13
     During
            Firms receiving bank credit 92% 92% 0% 0% 0% 8% 13
                                                                                                                      First North
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 80% 80% 0% 0% 0% 20% 5
     Before
            Firms receiving bank credit 67% 67% 0% 0% 0% 33% 6
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 75% 75% 0% 0% 0% 25% 4
     During
            Firms receiving bank credit 75% 75% 0% 0% 0% 25% 4
                                                                                                                   Aktietorget
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 50% 50% 0% 0% 0% 50% 2
     Before
            Firms receiving bank credit 50% 50% 0% 0% 0% 50% 2
            Firms receiving bank credit, not issuing bonds 100% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 1
     During
            Firms receiving bank credit 100% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 1

                                                             39
Table 9: Robustness test of firm characteristics: This table presents robustness results from the DPACS model, we exclude certain firm
characteristics at each regression to check the model for robustness. The lagged leverage ratio is presented in the form of the speed of adjustment
(SOA) estimate by subtracting it from 1. The state dependent constants are presented in the form of and not as . Regressions are
made using System GMM (STATA tool xtabond2). The lagged leverage variable is set to be predetermined. Firm characteristics are treated as
endogenous, using lags II and III as instruments. Firm characteristics have yearly fixed effects which are set as exogenous variables in the level
equation. Robust standard errors (clustered by firm) correct for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, values for these are given in the parentheses.
***, ** or * next to coefficients at times of recession (rec) indicates that the coefficient for this variable differs significantly from the expansion
variable.

                                                                       Robustness test of firm characteristics
                                                      x (book) x (market) y (book) y (market) z (book) z (market)
 SOA (exp) 0.328 0.297 0.298 0.317 0.348 0.418
                                                      (0.048) (0.042) (0.039) (0.033) (0.050) (0.043)
 SOA (rec) 0.339 0.378*** 0.298 0.401*** 0.368 0.498***
                                                      (0.044) (0.038) (0.037) (0.031) (0.048) (0.041)
 sales (exp) 0.005 0.000 0.009 0.009
                                                      (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
 sales (rec) 0.002 -0.015 0.012 0.021***
                                                      (0.003) (0.005) (0.002) (0.002)
 mtb (exp) -0.022 -0.045 -0.014 -0.029
                                                                                          (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.002)
 mtb (rec) -0.007 -0.099 -0.005 -0.038*
                                                                                          (0.009) (0.008) (0.007) (0.005)
 profit (exp) -0.206 -0.186 -0.227 -0.200
                                                                                          (0.021) (0.013) (0.024) (0.016)
 profit (rec) -0.278 -0.241 -0.321 -0.331**
                                                                                          (0.040) (0.039) (0.053) (0.043)
 tang (exp) 0.087 0.062 0.217 0.186
                                                      (0.029) (0.029) (0.025) (0.025)
 tang (rec) 0.311** 0.203 0.354* 0.251
                                                      (0.041) (0.042) (0.033) (0.043)
 ind. mean (exp) 0.696 0.824 0.739 0.825 0.610 0.733
                                                      (0.056) (0.055) (0.046) (0.046) (0.049) (0.060)
 ind. mean (rec) 0.754 0.527 0.982** 0.771* 0.544 0.707
                                                      (0.087) (0.092) (0.054) (0.066) (0.066) (0.083)
 capex (exp) 0.826 0.800 1.000 0.911
                                                      (0.067) (0.103) (0.061) (0.069)
 capex (rec) 0.120 0.418 1.315 0.971
                                                      (0.125) (0.182) (0.099) (0.138)
 exp-cons -0.037 -0.035 0.044 0.069
                                                      (0.015) (0.013) (0.011) (0.008)
 rec-cons 0.004 0.251** 0.031 0.254
                                                      (0.035) (0.044) (0.018) (0.019)
 Firm Years 4,537 3,955 4,265 3,950 3,950 3,987
 Number of Firms 597 549 590 557 557 561

                                                             40