STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS

B.Sc Thesis in Finance
Spring 2013
Tutor: Kathryn Kaminski

Has S&P’s impact on equity returns changed due to
the financial crisis?

Gustav Pettersson” Jacob Wennerdal®

Abstract

Since the financial crisis, rating agencies have received a lot of negative criticism,
when skewed incentive systems may have led to overrated securities causing
asymmetric information in the market. Despite this criticism, CRAs still play an
essential role in the market place today. This thesis focuses on the impact of changes
in credit rating on equity prices by employing an event study method on companies
downgraded by S&P pre and post the financial crisis (07-08). We calculate cumulative
abnormal returns based on the CAPM model and then make a cross-sectional analysis
using an event window 5 days before to 5 days after the announcement. Data shows
that pre-crisis, downgrades have a significant impact on equity returns around the
announcement date at the 1% level. Surprisingly this coefficient is positive for the post
sample at the 10% level. Furthermore we find that the downgrade coefficients are
significantly different between the two periods of time, suggesting that S&P’s impact
on equity prices has decreased due to the financial crisis.

22092@student. hhs. se* 22099 @student. hhs. se’

Keywords: Credit rating agency, S&P, Downgrade, Event study, Financial crisis,
Equity prices

* We would like to thank Kathryn Kaminski for providing valuable insights and
assistance during the process of writing this thesis.
Table of Contents

1. TMtrOCuection 00... eececceccssesesseseesesceseecescescsccseesesneseeseeseseeseseesceaeaecseesesecseeseseseeseeeeseeaeeeeaeeasees 3
2. Overview Of CRAS .o.ccccssesssessssssssesessesesesencsceseseseseesesesescesesesesessesescceseseeeseseseeenseseeeeeseseeees 4
2.1 CRAS’ role in the market ......c.ccccceccesssesessesesesesessecesesesceseseseseeseseseeeeseseseeeseseseeeeseseeeneees 4
2.2 S&P’S ratings... ecececececesesssseessseseseseeseecescscsescscaesescecscseecseseseseseaeaeseaeaeseaeaeaeaeseseaeaeeeeeaeees 4
2.3 S&P’s Credit rating Process ..........sscecssssssesseseeeseseseseseseseseseseneaeseseaeaeaeaeaeeeseaeeeeeeeeeeeees 5
3. Literature review 0.0... cececesscesecseeeseeseeseeseceeeseeseeseceaeeseesecseceaeeaecsecseeesecseeaeceeeeeeseeeeenseneeaes 6
A. Data .eececccceccssseseeeeceeceseeseceececcesecsecceeseesecsecsaseeeeseesecaeeseesecseeeaeeaecsecaeeeseeseeseceeeeeeaeeaeseneeneeaes 8
5. Methodology... eeeessssessscssessssseeseseeesesesesesscscseseseescsceeesscseeeeseseeeeeessseseeesseaeeeeeeaeseeeees B
5-1 Event Study occ eeesssssessesesessesssceeseseseseeseseseseeeescscseeasseseseeseseeeeeacaceeeesseaceeeesseseeeeaes 13
5.2 Cross sectional analysis... cesssesssssseseeseseseseeeeeescseseessseseeeeseseseeecseacseeesaeaeeeaeeeseeeeees 15
5.2.1 Variables used in regression ..........ccecsessessseseseseceeseseeeescsceeeeseseseeesseseseeesscneeeeesaees 15
5.2.2 Econometric Data Corrections..........ccecesssscceceesseseeseeeeeeaceseceeeceeaeesececeaeeaeeaeenees 17

6. RESUItS......ceeesceccesescesceseseeseseesecescessucenecasscesecsssacsessesseseeseeaeseeasaseaeeaeaesecseseeaeeseeeeeeaeereeeens 19
6.1 Cumulative abnormal returns .........ccccecessesessesseseecescescecesceseeeseeseeseseeseeseaeeseeeeaeeeeeeeaes 19
6.2 Significance of cumulative abnormal returns ............:.seseseseeseseseseseceseneeeseseneeeeeeees 20
6.3 Cross sectional amalysis.........cecessessesesesessesesescesecescseseessseseeeessseseeeeseacsesesaesceeaeseseeeeaes 21
6.4 Hypothesis test 00.0... cceeescssseesesessesescseeescscseseesescseseescscseseeaeseeesesacacueeasacaeeeeasacseseees 23

7. Analysis and CisCUSSION .........cecsssesesesesesseeeseseseeeeseseeeeseseseeeseseseeeeacseseeesseaeeeeesaeseeeeesaeeees 23
8. Conclusion & Future research ........ceeescesessssesseseeseesesceseeecseesesecseesesecseceaeeseeseaeeseeeeeeeseeaes 25
References ......cccccccssssssesessesesesesecesesesescesesesccesesessscesesesceaesesecesesesessesesesesseseseeecseseseeeeseseseeees 27
APPeNdix.....cceceseesseesesessesesesssseeescseeeessscsseesseseseeeesescseeeessacseeaescseseeasscaceasasasueeasacaceeseaeseeaeas 29
1. Introduction

Credit rating agencies (CRA) play a crucial role in financial markets; they provide an
independent analysis of a company’s ability to meet its short and long-term
obligations. Companies are dependent on CRAs in order to issue debt and
communicate information to investors. Since the financial crisis, rating agencies have
received a lot of negative criticism, when skewed incentive systems may have led to
overrated securities causing asymmetric information in the market. Despite this
criticism, CRAs still play an essential role in the market place today. Recently the
downgrades of Sovereigns have caused financial turmoil, demonstrating that despite
the public’s decreasing confidence in CRAs, their role in assigning ratings is still very

important.

This thesis focuses on the impact of changes in credit rating on equity prices. The
linkage between equity prices and credit risk is less intuitive than the effect on bond
yields but has still been validated in previous studies. From previous studies it has
been shown that there is a negative correlation between downgrades and equity
prices. This has been verified both on the announcement date but also prior to the
rating change, suggesting a certain degree of market anticipation. This link has not
been proved to exist between upgrades and share price returns. In particular we want
to investigate if the impact of rating changes on equity prices has changed pre and
post the financial crisis (07-08). A large majority of previous studies on the
relationship between equity prices and credit events have been conducted pre the
financial crisis. We see the financial crisis as a major event in the history of CRAs
because of the involvement of CRAs in the crisis and the negative criticism that
followed. Building on previous research, we provide insight on how this impact has
changed over time. To our knowledge this is the first study that has investigated this

question.

We find that pre-crisis downgrades have a significant impact on equity returns around
the announcement date at the 1% level. Surprisingly this coefficient is positive for the

post sample on the 10% level. Furthermore we find that the downgrade coefficients are
significantly different between the two periods of time, suggesting that S&P’s impact

on equity prices has decreased due to the financial crisis.

2. Overview of CRAs

To better understand what criteria are important to equity holders when rating

agencies assign credit ratings we examine how S&P assesses credit risk.

2.1 CRAs’ role in the market

Credit ratings are primarily an assessment of a firm’s ability to commit to its payments
to debt holders and the potential loss for debt-holders should the firm fail to meet its
obligations. CRAs aim to provide rigid, through-the-cycle ratings, meaning that
ratings should not be influenced by cyclical volatility, but rather be affected by
fundamental changes in the firm. CRAs’ roles in debt capital markets are considered to
be so crucial that some say that these markets would be close to non-existent without
the presence of rating agencies. It is argued that investors would find it more
profitable to take bank loans than communicating the same information as ratings do
to investors. Especially institutional investors are dependent on credit ratings since
they often are required to hold securities with a certain rating, mostly within the

investment-grade sector.

2.2 S&P’s ratings

The ratings assigned by S&P range from AAA to D, with AAA being the highest
possible rating and D the lowest. All ratings entities or securities can be assigned are

provided in Table 1 (note that this is for long term debt only).
Table 1 - S&P’s Long term credit rating scale

A Investment Grade

B- Non Investment Grade
CcCcC+
ccc
ccc-

cc

D In default

A credit rating is not equivalent to a recommendation (buy, hold or sell), often
assigned to stocks. This is due to the rating’s nature, which merely is a relative

measure on the companies’ capability of serving its debt.

Another important aspect of the assigned ratings is the outlooks, which give a more

nuanced picture within each rating category. Outlooks are released by the CRAs as a
view of the likely direction of the current rating of an issuer. Outlooks often have an
18-month horizon and can contribute to the degree of market anticipation once a

credit event occurs.

2.3 S&P’s Credit rating process

The credit rating process is a structured process, which may leave room for conflicts of
interest or bias. The process often starts with a credit rating agency being mandated to
assign a rating for an issuer. Previously, CRAs sold rating opinions to investors, but

nowadays the main source of income is the fee they charge issuers. When the assigned

rating team has analyzed the fundamentals of the issuer and discussed with top
management, a rating recommendation is presented to a rating committee. The rating
committee must, by a majority, vote for the rating recommendation to be assigned to

the issuer. This is done to decrease the risk of conflicts of interests.

After a rating has been decided, the issuer can choose to publish the rating or not.
This can lead to a bias in the kinds of ratings being published. Previous studies have
shown that management has incentives not to disclose negative ratings (Boot et al
2005). This can decrease the amount of movement in the share price in the event of a
downgrade as investors knows that rating changes are biased to positive news (or less

negative news).

3. Literature review

Previous research has been inconclusive regarding to how much informational value
CRAs actually add. Some argue that the information CRAs base their ratings on should
be publicly available to all investors through financial reports. Among others
Weinstein (1977), Pinches & Singleton (1978) and Kaplan & Urwitz (1979) show that
rating agencies only have access to public information and add no value. However,
more recent studies show that rating agencies have access to information that is not
available for the public (Liu et. al 1999) and that CRAs are better at interpreting this
data (Danos, Holt, & Imhoff, 1984). Other research has also shown that CRAs add
informational value since they are better informed of the values of a firm’s intangible

assets than the public (Cornell, Landsman & Sharpio 1989).

Possible ways to explain how the information provided by CRAs is incorporated into
share prices is by using the three forms of the efficient market hypothesis. The weak
form of the efficient market hypothesis states that only past information is accounted
for in share prices. According to this form, a change in credit rating should not be
priced in and thus there should be an impact on equity returns. The semi-strong form
of the EMH states that all public information should be reflected in equity prices and
that share prices adjust immediately to new information. If CRAs add any

informational value there should be an impact on equity returns but this should be
immediately adjusted. According to the strong form of the EMH all information,
public and private, is incorporated in share prices. If this hypothesis holds there

should not be any impact of a change in credit rating.

The majority of studies that have been done on the relationship between rating
announcements and equity returns have concluded that there is a negative correlation
between downgrades and equity returns around the announcement date (i.e.
Holthausen et al 1985). In their study they examine the effect of bond rating changes
on common equity returns around the announcement date. They look at both
upgrades and downgrades and separate their data into a contaminated and non-
contaminated sample. According to their definition a credit event is contaminated if
there are simultaneous news surrounding the company at the time of the credit event.
Their evidence show that downgrades are associated with negative abnormal stock
returns in the two-day window around the change in rating. When examining the
non-contaminated sample there are increased effects on stock prices compared to the
contaminated sample. This suggests that the market anticipates downgrades. They

also show that this effect is bigger for companies defined as non-investment grade.

The negative impact of downgrades has also been verified on a longer term by Griffin
& Sanvicente (1982). In their study they measure the stock price return eleven months
before the announcement as well as the effect during the month of the
announcement. In conjunction to Holthausen et al they also find that downgrades are
associated with significant negative abnormal returns, both before and during the

month of the announcement whereas there are no impacts of upgrades.

Furthermore studies by Chandy et al (1993), Matolscy & Lianto (1995), Boot et al
(2005) and Altman & Rijken (2005) all show that downgrades are more informative to
equity markets than upgrades and concludes that management has less incentives to

release negative information.

These findings do not necessarily need to be entirely attributed to the rating event. A
downgrade may both be an event in itself or overlapping other fundamental changes
affecting a company’s stock price return. Garlappi et al (2005) has shown that the

effects of a change in rating is amplified for firms with large balance sheets, low R&D
costs, low book-to-market ratios and a high costs of liquidation. Industry group
characteristics can also contribute to an amplified negative effect in the event of a
downgrade. Gropp & Richards (2001) find that banks and other sectors that are highly

regulated react more strongly to downgrades.

One hypothesis trying to explain stock price behavior around the announcement date
of a credit rating is the wealth redistribution hypothesis. According to this hypothesis
the wealth of the firm is redistributed between bondholders to equity holders in the
event of a downgrade. This has to do with the characteristics of the equity holders’
position in the company. Shares can be seen as long call options on the firm’s future
cash flow with a strike price equal to the value of the firm’s total liabilities.
Shareholders’ may thus benefit from increased volatility as long as the returns do not
decrease and the downgrade is motivated by firm characteristics (solvency, liquidity)
and not financial performance. This is supported in a study by Ederington and Goh
(1999), who show that rating updates caused by changes in a firm’s financial
performance are of more relevance to equity holders than changes in solidity or debt
structure. Bondholders’ value decreases since they implicitly have to pay for the firm’s

increased cost of capital while equity holders do not.

The effect of rating changes on bondholders is quite intuitive and has been examined
extensively in previous research. The findings are in many ways consistent with how

equity prices have been found to react to rating changes.

4. Data

Our data consists of a total of 195 rating changes on 183 companies rated by Standard
& Poor’s, meaning 12 companies are downgraded twice. As mentioned previously,
studies have shown that investors rate S&P higher when it comes to credibility. That
along with the fact that there might be discrepancies in ratings assigned between
agencies is the reason why we have chosen to look at ratings by S&P only. The
companies in our sample are listed on US stock exchanges and are traded in US

dollars. The initial rationale behind the fact that we look at the US only is because it
was there the presence and misconduct of CRAs was most noticeable during the
financial crisis. Therefore the US market provides the best geographical area to

examine.

The data ranges over two distinct time periods; pre and post the financial crisis. The
gap in time we consider the financial crisis is between 1* Jan 2007 to 31" Dec 2008. The
pre-crisis data sample spans from 1* Jan 2005 to 31 Dec 2006 and the post-crisis data
sample spans from 1 Jan 2009 to 31" Dec 2010. The date on which the rating change
was announced has been obtained from Bloomberg, and a time dummy is created to
divide our data into a pre and post sample, taking the value o for downgrades 05-06
and the value 1 for downgrades 09-10. Some companies are downgraded more than
once in the respective time periods, but we only include the first downgrade in our
analysis, meaning that there is only one downgrade per company in our data set. For
example, if a company is downgraded 1* Jan 2005 and then again 1" Aug 2006, only the

first downgrade is accounted for in our data sample.

As mentioned previously, the data does consist of 12 companies that are downgraded
twice. These companies are downgraded both in the first time period pre-crisis and
then again in the time period post-crisis. We separate these companies from the main
sample by constructing a duplicate dummy, taking the value 1 if the company is

downgraded in both time periods and the value o if it is not.

We look at downgrades only, mainly because previous research has found that
upgrades don’t have any significant impact on equity prices. All companies in our data
set have been defined as investment grade according to Standard & Poor’s, i.e. they
have received a rating of BBB or above. Returns for investment grade companies are
often said to be driven by flight to security and previous research has shown that non-
investment grade companies react more strongly to downgrades. Non-investment
grade companies are to a large extent dependent on CRAs in order to communicate
with investors, which makes it hard to believe that credibility issues for CRAs should
have an equally large impact within this segment. Also non-investment grade
companies tend to have less analyst coverage, making it difficult to use this segment in

order to investigate market anticipation. Furthermore, the data has been filtered to
only display changes in rating for the issuer’s local long term issued debt. This means
that changes in ratings of short-term debt as well as foreign long term issued debt
have been excluded. The reason for this is mainly that local issued debt will be
denominated in the same currency as the share price of the companies. Debt issued in
foreign currency may possibly receive different ratings and for this reason we filter our
data for any such exogenous effects. Most previous research on rating changes
exclusively focuses on long term issued debt. Long-term ratings may be the simplest

proxy of a company’s ability to meet its obligations.

The below graphs show the distribution of downgrades over time across the two

samples:

Graph 1 - Density of the 79 downgrades Pre-crisis

an N ©

we >

Oo PR N w + uw
JS
Feb 0
VS
rs =
May
US
A, S ———
Sep-05 =
0c

Nov-05

pre Xx

eh
at
Vay
le
Jul-06 =

Feb-06 =

Mar
Aug-06 ee
Sep a

0th
ow - ===
dee

Graph 2-Density of the 16 downgrades Post-crisis

20
18
16
14
12
10

ON BODO

Jan EO
Feb-0D
Mao =

Apo ===

May-09 =—_

Ju 090

lio

Aug-09

Oct-09 =

Sep-09 ==!
Nov-09 @

ib)
Ma

Apr-10 =!

l-l) —
AL) =

Dec-09 =!
Jan-10
May-10 —_—_

Jun-10

Nov-10 =!
Dec-10 =

Oct-10 =!

Sep-10
As we can see, the downgrades are evenly distributed over time for the pre sample. For
the post sample the majority of downgrades occurs in the beginning of sample period.
This might suggest that downgrades caused by events that occurred during the
financial crisis. Moreover, 59 of the 16 companies downgraded post-crisis were also

downgraded during 07-08.

The below graphs show the distribution among rating values before downgrades:

Graph 3 - Rating distribution of the 79 companies downgraded Pre-crisis

AAA
AAA-
AA+
AA
AA-

At

BBB+
BBB

BBB-

°
wu
b
ro)
b
a

20 25

Graph 4 -Rating distribution of the 16 companies downgraded Post-crisis

AAA
AAA-
AA+

AA

BBB+
BBB

BBB-

°
wu
R
o

15 20 25 30
As shown in the tables, the ratings distributions for the pre- and post-crisis samples
are similar among the rating values within the investment grade segment for both
samples. Both samples have more companies in the lower tier of the investment grade

segment.

Daily share prices (business days only) for the individual companies are collected from
Bloomberg, ranging back from 1* of Jun 1999 YTD. In order to obtain the abnormal
return for all securities during the event period, the S&P 500 Index is used as
benchmark index. Index data is also collected from Bloomberg and goes back to
beginning 2000. As a proxy for the risk free rate we use the generic 3-month treasury

bill. This data is collected from Datastream.

Individual company data is retrieved from Bloomberg. All companies are listed US
equities, however when looking for balance sheet specific numbers, such as interest
coverage ratio or debt-to-equity ratios, to be used as explanatory variables for
potential abnormal returns we find large discrepancies in what is reported by
individual companies. As a result we filter the data to obtain independent variables
containing market data only, available for all companies to avoid any biases in our
analysis. It can also be argued that figures from the balance sheet should not impact
abnormal returns to such a large extent just around the announcement date, as they
are normally more rigid. The independent variables used to control for cross-sectional

variations are defined in the methodology section.

One potential bias with the data collected is that it is a relatively small sample, which
can lead to skewed results when it comes to measuring the impact of a downgrade.
The whole data sample may consist of a larger portion of companies that for some
reason react more strongly to downgrades. This can be because they operate in certain
industries where the credit rating is more important, or that they have an investor
base that put more weight on ratings. Another bias that we potentially see is that there
is no information as to why there has been a downgrade. If the downgrade is
motivated by changes in financials, such as earnings etc. there should be a larger
impact on share prices as those measures are more linked to the share price and

investors care more about them. A downgrade due to a controlled change in capital

12
structure on the other hand may not be of concern to equity holders, thus there might

not be such a large impact on share prices.

Another potential bias with our data is that the post-crisis sample is too close to the
financial crisis. As can be seen in the density graphs above, the timing of the
downgrades is to a large extent skewed to the beginning of 2009 for our post-crisis
sample. As investors’ were so risk-averse every single negative event regarding a
company might have led to amplified impacts. This may potentially lead to our post
sample to be characterized by bigger movements in equity prices, both because of
lagging effects from the financial crisis but also suffering from amplified effects in a

risk-off environment. This can make it difficult to separate the downgrading effect.

Thirdly, one bias we believe our data might suffer from is that the two samples contain
different companies. If one sample contains a larger number of companies that are
more sensitive to downgrades (i.e. there’s a larger portion of Financial Institutions in
one sample) the results might be biased and data may show a larger impact of
downgrades for this sample. Even if the two samples would contain the same portion
of different industries there might still be a bias since there is no guarantee that the

share price reaction of a downgrade is the same for all companies within an industry.

5. Methodology

5.1 Event study

To test the change in impact of downgrades on share price returns we conduct an
event study. Over relevant event windows we examine pre and post the financial crisis,
starting by calculating the abnormal equity returns. Abnormal returns (ARs) are
defined as the stock prediction error that share price return deviates from a market
model. We employ the CAPM to estimate the theoretical stock return. The CAPM is
defined below:

Rie —Rp =@+ Bie * Rmetp (0)

B
The model states that the return R;, above the risk free rate (Ry) (i.e. the excess
return) equals beta times the market premium (indicated by Bj * Rmxtp) plus the
return above the market premium (a), this last variable should be zero in a perfect
market. We regress the actual excess returns (Rj, — Ry) on the monthly market
premium (R,, — Rr) to obtain the intercept (a) and the slope (f;,¢) for all stocks. OLS
assumptions are tested to ensure the validity of the regressions and it is found that
equity returns follow a normal distribution. We apply a cautious approach and use
robust standard errors in the regressions’. In the regressions we use monthly return

data 5 years back to adjust for any “extraordinary” events in the market.

In previous research, it has been more common to use daily returns to calculate betas
and alphas when studying daily abnormal returns. However, employing such a method
would mean that certain betas and alphas derived for our post sample would be
entirely based on data from the midst of the financial crisis, a period with extreme
volatile returns. Therefore this study bases betas and alphas on monthly returns. We
compute the expected return for every share according to the CAPM, using betas and

alphas from two calendar months prior to the announcement date.
The expected return according to the CAPM is:
E(Rit|Rmtp) Sat Bit * Rinktp (2)

We subtract this from the actual returns in our whole event window (-20 to +20

business days) to obtain the abnormal returns:
AR, = (Rit — Rey — & — Bit * Rmetp (3)

The abnormal returns are summarized over the estimation windows of interest, in

order to obtain the cumulative abnormal returns (CAR).

CAR; ¢ = LE ARie (4)

"See Econometric Data Correction section on how to test for OLS assumptions

4
This methodology is in line with previous research such as Holthausen & Leftwich

(2992).

We look at four different estimation windows. Our main estimation window is
between t=-5 and t=+5, taking into account both the time pre and post the
announcement date. In addition we look at a long-term window ranging from t=-20 to
t=+20 days, a post-event estimation window between t=+2 and t=+10 and finally a pre-

event estimation window between t=-10 to t=-2.

The main group we look at consists of separate companies being downgraded pre- and
post-crisis (excluding the duplicates in our sample). The reason why we want to do
this distinction is to see whether or not being downgraded two times has any

additional effects compared to companies receiving their first downgrade.
To test if CARs are significant we us a Brown-Warner test, which is defined as:

CAR (=

(X= )/a( a

0,5
) ~ t with N-2 degrees of freedom

5.2 Cross sectional analysis

In order to explain cross-sectional variations and isolate the effects of the downgrade
we do multivariate regression analysis on the results of CARs from the window
spanning. As the dependent variable we use the CARs over the announcement date

(t=-5 to t=+5). We formulate our multivariate regression as:

CARi, = @ + B, * Downgrade + f, * Historical Call Implied Vol + $3 * logmarketcap + B,
* Negative Outlook + B; * marketvolatility + B, * Financial Leverage + B, * drift
+ (Bg * Downgraded 0708) + ¢;

5.2.1 Variables used in the regressions

" Downgrade
First we rank all S&P’s investment grade ratings (from AAA=10 to BBB-=1), and
then define the downgrade variable as the difference between the pre-
downgrade value and the post-downgrade value. For example, for a company
being downgraded from AAA (10) to AA (8), the downgrade variable takes the

value o in t=-20 to t=-1, and then takes the value 2 in the period t=o to t=20.

5
This is our main variable and is aimed to measure the impact of the downgrade
event. The coefficient is expected to be negative and thus have a negative effect

on cumulative abnormal returns.

Historical Call Implied volatility

The historical call implied volatility measures the implied volatility for
underlying securities calculated from a weighted average of the implied
volatilities of the two closest call options. For all securities, the contract that is
used is the closest pricing contract month that is expiring at least 20 business
days out from any given date. This variable is interesting to include since it
provides the future volatility implied by the options market around the
downgrade event. A stronger belief in volatile share prices should be reflected

in this variable.

Log marketcap

This variable is the natural logarithm of the firm’s market capitalization. This
variable may contain additional information about the degree of market
anticipation. Smaller firms should have a larger degree of informational

asymmetry, thus perhaps increasing the impact of a downgrade.

Negative outlook

This variable tries to capture market anticipation. The variable is a dummy
variable that takes the value 1 if the company has a negative outlook assigned by
S&P and the value o if it has a stable outlook (no company has a positive
outlook in our samples). When a negative outlook is at hand we expect a higher

degree of market anticipation and a lower impact of the actual announcement.

Market volatility

This variable is intended to capture the overall volatility in the market. As a
proxy for this we use the standard deviation of the 3-month generic US treasury
bill. A larger deviation in this parameter should indicate a more unstable

market and an impact of a rating change should be larger.

16
" Financial Leverage
The variable financial leverage is defined as the average total assets divided by
the average of total common equity. Average is defined as the average between
opening balance and closing balance. This variable should be able to capture a
firm’s increased cost of capital due to an increase in debt or decrease in

solvency, which might have led to a downgrade.

" Drift
Drift is a complementary measure to market anticipation. It is defined as the
aggregated abnormal return between t=-20 and t=-n before the announcement
date. The variable should give an indication on how much new information a
downgrade provides. If there is large negative drift it shows that the market
may have already priced in the fundamental change in the firm and that the

actual downgrade is really just postponed information.

"Downgraded 07-08
Being downgraded once should have a different impact than being downgraded
twice. This variable is only applied to the sample post the financial crisis to
capture if the company was downgraded during 07-08, which we have defined
as our window of the financial crisis. This is also a dummy variable with the

value 1 if the company was downgraded during 07-08 and 0 if it was not.

5.2.2 Econometric Data Corrections

In order to ensure the validity of our cross sectional multivariate regression we must
make sure that our data is adjusted for potential errors. The lack of heteroscedasticity
is of large importance in order to have a valid OLS regression. This means that the
variances of the error terms are not constant and varies with the dependent or some of

the explanatory variables. This means that
E(u?) = 0?

We test for heteroscedasticity by running the Breusch-Pagan test. We also test for

multicollinearity between our independent variables by calculating their pair-wise

17
correlations variables and running a Variance Inflation Factor test, which measures
how much the variances of the regression coefficients are inflated because of

collinearity.
VIF(6;) is calculated using the following formula:

VIF(B) ==

1-R?

As a rule of thumb if VIF(g,)>5 , multicollinearity is high.

The error terms in an OLS regression are assumed to be normally distributed. If this
assumption is violated the significance of our model cannot be validated. A simple way
to test for normality is a Jarque-Bera test. This is defined as follow’:

s? K-3)42
JB=n[+ ee |-2

The cross sectional model will fit differently to the varying periods of time. Foremost
the two sub samples, for which we run each event study, do not contain the same
companies, which might be spurious bias. One sample might consist of a greater
portion of firms that are more sensitive to rating changes depending on which
industry they operate in. Therefore we want to test if the coefficients affected by a
downgrade are significantly different between the two sub samples. By running such a
test we can determine if there is a statistical difference and use our multivariate
regression results to determine whether this difference has changed in a positive or
negative direction. The test we run is a z-test based on the work of Clogg et al (1995),

which is defined as:

7 bin bi
2 2
Vt, [6
where 3, is the downgrade coefficient pre-crisis and fj is the downgrade coefficient

post-crisis.

2
This test both takes into account the skewness and kurtosis of the error terms. However, STATA does not allow us to conduct
this test, so we will use a slightly modified version of the Jarque-Bera test, suitable for STATA.

18
6. Results

6.1 Cumulative abnormal returns

We focus on the event window from 5 days prior to the announcement to 5 days after.
Many previous studies have chosen to focus on another event window, namely one
day before announcement until one day after. The rationale for our choice is that we
want to see the effects of not only the announcement itself, but of the actual
downgrade, which often have effects both several days pre-announcement (when
information regarding the downgrade might be leaked), and post-announcement
(when investors seek not to dump all their shares at once, but rather rebalance their

portfolios in a way that does not excessively affect the share price).

Graph 5 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Pre-crisis period (t=-5 to t=5)

As we can see in Graph 5, the average abnormal return for the stocks in the main
sample downgraded in the period 05-06 are negative throughout the event window t =
-5 tot =5, they have a negative drift. In this graph it is difficult to see any clear effect

of the downgrade announcement on abnormal returns.

19
Graph 6 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Post-crisis period (t=-5 to t=5)

In Graph 6 we see the average abnormal return during the event window for companies
in the main sample downgraded in the period 09-10. The impact of the downgrade
announcement is more evident here, with average abnormal returns falling on the
announcement date and then rising again in the post-announcement period. However,
the magnitude of the negative effect during the entire window is much smaller than in

the pre-crisis event study.

The same trends with companies on a negative drift pre-crisis and more volatile
abnormal returns post-crisis are seen for this event window in the duplicates sample

(see Graph 18 and Graph 19).

6.2 Significance of cumulative abnormal returns

The significance of the cumulative abnormal returns differ greatly between the two
event studies. Pre-crisis we find that the CAR are strongly negative and highly
significant for all event windows, which is consistent with the findings in Graph 5 that
these companies have a negative drift. Post-crisis figures are rather ambiguous and are

only negative in two of the event windows, with relatively low significance levels.

20
Table 2 - Mean and t-value for cumulative abnormal returns

Pre-crisis

Day (-5 35) (-20 : 20) (-10 : 0) (0:10)
Mean -0.0386 -0.1206 -0.0344 -0.0375
t-value -12.23 -25.33 -11.22 -12.06

Post-crisis

Day (-5 35) (-20 : 20) (-10 : 0) (0:10)
Mean -0.0045 0.0283 0.0094 -0.0096
t-value “1.12 6.35 2.67 -2.47

The findings are similar in the duplicates sample, with negative and highly significant
cumulative abnormal returns in all event windows pre-crisis, and inconclusive results

post-crisis (see Table 17).

6.3 Cross sectional analysis

Before running any regressions we need to make sure the OLS assumptions are
applicable to the data set. As demonstrated in Table 2, the data does not show
important signs of multi-collinearity between the explanatory variables, meaning the
effects caused by them are not amplified or skewed due to high correlation with other
explanatory variables. We also find that the distribution of the residuals of the linear
regression model resembles very much to a normal distribution, which is required
within the OLS framework. Furthermore, the data shows significant signs of
heteroscedasticity (see Table 20), but this effect is compensated by using robust

standard errors in our regressions.

21
Table 3 - Cross sectional regression on event window Pre-crisis (t=-5 to t=5)

Pre-crisis No. of obs = 638 R-squared = 0.5144
Robust

Cum. ab. return (-5 :5) Coefficient Std. Err. t P>|t|
Downgrade -0.0231537 0.0038463 -6.02 0.000
Historical call implied -0.0019802 0.0004105 -4.82 0.000
Log marketcap 0.0009729 0.0024742 0.39 0.694
Negative outlook 0.0093712 0.0057337 1.63 0.103
Market volatility 0.012023 0.0031002 4.20 0.000
Financial leverage 0.0021987 0.0007552 4.24 0.000
Drift 0.5946866 0.0349072 17.04 0.000
Constant 0.02341 _0.0250626 0.93 0.351

Table 4 - Cross sectional regression on event window Post-crisis (t=-5 to t=5)

Post-crisis No. of obs = 1,067 R-squared=0.2167
Robust

Cum. ab. return (-5 :5) Coefficient Std. Err. t P>|t|
Downgrade 0.0119748 0.0061977 1.93 0.054
Historical call implied -0.0007133 0.0001518 -4.70 0.000
Log marketcap 0.0082179 — 0.0033317 2.47 0.014
Negative outlook 0.0322553 0.0077983 4.14 0.000
Market volatility 0.0019181 0.0072677 0.26 0.792
Financial leverage 0.0014149 0.000408 3.47 0.001
Drift 0.4707189 0.0285598 16.48 0.000
Downgraded 07-08 0.0021269 0.009643 0.22 0.824
Constant -0.060921 _0.0326208 -1.87 0.062

As presented in Table 3 and Table 4 above, the cumulative abnormal returns during
the chosen event window (t=-s to t=5) are largely explained by the drift of the
company, i.e. the abnormal returns realized by the company prior to the event
window. Furthermore, we see that the historical call implied volatility, which is a
proxy for future volatility, has a significant negative impact in both periods and
financial leverage seems to affect cumulative abnormal returns positively in both time

periods and the same goes for the variable negative outlook.

What is more striking is that the downgrade variable has different effects pre- and
post the crisis; pre-crisis the downgrade coefficient is negative at a high significance

level; post-crisis the effect is reversed but with a lower significance. In the duplicate

22
sample, the pre-crisis downgrade coefficient is relatively significant and negative,

whereas the post-crisis regression show insignificant results (see Table 18 and 19).

6.4 Hypothesis test

The calculations from our hypothesis test, testing if the difference between the

downgrade coefficients pre- and post-crisis is distinct from o are shown below:

= 0.000235

wl 7g - bec
2 2
J+ J:

As we can see, there does seem to be a significant change in the correlation between

equity returns and S&P downgrades at the 1% level.

7. Analysis and discussion

In this article we study the change in impact that credit rating downgrades by S&P
have on equity prices pre and post the financial crisis in 2007-2008. Consistent with
previous research we find significant evidence for negative abnormal returns around
the announcement date of a downgrade. Pre-crisis we find that the coefficient
associated with the change in credit rating is negative and significant at the 1%.
Looking at the coefficient associated with the change in rating post the financial crisis;
we find that it is positive and significant at the 10%. This supports our conjecture that
there might be a greater impact of downgrades pre-crisis compared to post-crisis. In
order to adjust for the fact that the pre and post samples do not consist of the same
firms we run a hypothesis test to see if the downgrade coefficients are significantly
different from zero. This test shows that the null hypothesis can be rejected at the 1%
level. This suggests that the impact of downgrades has decreased due to the financial

crisis.

23
The effect of being put on credit watch list is significant at the 1% for the post-crisis

sample (indicated by the Negative outlook variable). The positive coefficient suggests
that the variable negative outlook affects the degree of market anticipation, resulting
in less negative abnormal returns around the announcement date for companies with
negative outlook. This suggests that there may be less informational asymmetry after

the financial crisis, and that the informational value that CRAs add has decreased.

Pre-crisis the explanatory value of the model is relatively high (R3,. = 0.5144). Post-
crisis the explanatory value of the model decreases (R255 = 0.2167). This is also an
indication that abnormal returns around the announcement date of a downgrade are

dependent on other factors post the financial crisis.

Possible explanations of why there is a difference in impact on equity returns around a

downgrade event pre and post the financial crisis can be:

(1) The negative effect of downgrades has already been priced in.

(2) Changes in rating are more frequent post-crisis, thus decreasing the
market reaction of a downgrade.

(3) Investors perceive CRAs as unreliable in the aftermath of the financial

crisis, thus putting less emphasis on rating announcements.

The negative outlook coefficient increases in magnitude and significance post-crisis,
while the downgrade coefficient clearly decreases between the post and pre sample.
This supports our first theory that markets have become more efficient post-crisis,
since the effect of the downgrade already has been priced in before the actual
announcement. The drift variable also supports this fact during both time periods but
might not be the best indicator since it is composed of the cumulative abnormal
returns up to 1 days before the announcement date, which might be too close to the
announcement date to give a fair result. Another source of market anticipation can be
market capitalization. Smaller firms tend to have more informational asymmetry and
fewer analysts following, suggesting a larger impact of a credit event. In our results we
find that the coefficient associated with a firm’s size has a positive impact, significant
at the 1% post the financial crisis. This is not the case pre the financial crisis. There is a

possibility however that this is not entirely attributed to an increased anticipation in

24
financial markets, but rather that our post sample on average contains more

companies with a larger market capitalization.

Another reason for the decreasing impact of rating changes is that downgrades are
more frequent post the financial crisis. This might be because of S&P applying a more
cautious approach, trying to regain its reputation, which was harmed during the
financial crisis. Pre-crisis, S&P might have downgraded companies with seriously
deteriorating credit quality, suggested by the negative drift of the downgraded
companies. Post-crisis, S&P may have applied a looser rating policy, downgrading
companies showing less signs of deteriorating credit quality. It also might be because
the economy still was in recession and that downgrades were motivated in many cases.
Either way, market participants might place less emphasis on rating changes, as there

might exist a “cry wolf’ mentality among investors.

CRAs played a big role in the last financial crisis when skewed incentive systems may
have led to overrated securities. CRAs suffered severely from this negative attention
and this might offer one explanation why the impact of downgrades has decreased. As
the credibility for S&P might have decreased, investors seek information from other
sources. There have been studies verifying that damaged reputation leads to a
decreased impact of downgrades. Reputational changes and the change in impact on
bond yields, have been examined in previous studies. Allen & Dudney (2006) studied
the impact of rating agency reputation on local government bond yields. They found
that Moody’s influence on bond yields decreased after an investigation in 1995,

regarding market misconduct, by the Department of Justice.

8. Conclusion & Future research

The findings in this thesis show that S&P’s impact on equity returns has decreased
post the financial crisis. We study the abnormal equity returns around the
announcement date of a downgrade for two separate samples, one before the financial
crisis and one after the financial crisis. In line with previous research we find that

downgrades are associated with negative abnormal returns around the announcement

25
date. We regress cumulative abnormal returns over the announcement date (t=-5 to
t=5) on a set of explanatory variables and find that the impact of the actual downgrade
has decreased post the financial crisis. We also find that being given a negative
outlook prior to the actual downgrade event has a positive impact on CARs over the
announcement date for our post-crisis sample. This suggests that markets have
become more efficient after the financial crisis and that downgrades are anticipated to
a larger extent. The other possible explanations we offer is that downgrades have
become more frequent post-crisis, which could lead to investors putting less emphasis
on credit ratings. The third explanation we discuss to this finding is that investors
perceive S&P as unreliable in the aftermath of the financial crisis, leading investors to

seek information from other sources.

Suggested future research on the topic could be to conduct a similar study on bond
returns instead of equity returns. As we have established the decreasing impact of
downgrades on equity returns the impact on bond returns should be similar and
would provide more evidence for S&P’s decreasing influence. One could also expand
this analysis to cover non-investment grade companies and other geographical areas.
In this thesis we focus on S&P only, but further studies could be done comparing CRAs
and see if a particular CRA experiences a larger decreasing impact. This analysis could

also be expanded to include split-rated issuances compared to dual-rated issuances.

26
References

Articles

Allen, C.A., Dudney, D.M., (2006) “The Impact of Rating Agency Reputation on
Local Government Bond Yields.” Journal of Financial Services, vol 33. pp 57-76

Altman, E.I., Rijken, H.A., (2005) “The Impact of Rating Agencies’ through-the-cycle
Methodology on Rating Dynamics.” Economic Notes, vol 34, No. 2. pp 127-154

Boot, A.W., et al (2005) “Credit ratings as coordination mechanisms.” Center for
Economic Policy Research, No. 3331

Chandy, P.R., et al., (1993) “Effects of preferred stock re-rating on common stock
prices: further evidence.” The Financial Review, vol 28. pp 449-467

Clogg, C.C., Petkova, E., Haritou, A., (1995) “Statistical Methods for Comparing
Regression Coefficients between Models” American Journal of Sociology

Cornell, B., Landsman, W., Sharpio, A.C., (1989) “Cross sectional regularities in the
response of stock prices to bond rating changes.” Journal of Accounting, Auditing and
Finance, vol 4

Danos, P., Holt, D.L., Imhoff, E.A., 1984. “Bond Raters’ use of management financial
forecasts: An experiment in expert judgment.” The Accounting Review, vol 56. pp 544-

571

Garlappi, L., Yawitz, J.B., Roberts, B.E., (2005) “Default risk, shareholder advantage
and stock returns.” University of Texas, working paper.

Goh, J.C., Ederington L.H., (1999) “Cross-sectional variation in the stock market
reaction to bond rating changes.” The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, vol

39. Pp 101-112

Griffin, P.A., Sanvicente, A.Z., (1982) “Common stock returns and rating changes; a
methodological comparison.” The Journal of Finance, vol 37. pp 103-119

Gropp, R., Richards, A.J., (2001) “Rating Agency actions and the pricing of debt and
equity of European Banks: What can we infer about private sector monitoring of Bank
soundness?”, European Central Bank, working paper No. 76

Holthausen, R.W., Leftwich R.W., (1992) “The Effect of Bond Rating Changes on
Common Stock Prices.” Journal of Financial Economics, vol 47. pp 733-752

Kaplan, R.S., Urwitz, G., (1979). “Statistical Models of Bond Ratings: A
Methodological Inquiry.” The Journal of Business, vol 52. pp 245-263

27
Liu, P., et al (1999) “The independent impact of credit rating changes—the case of
Moody’s rating refinement on yield premiums.” Journal of Business Finance &
Accounting, vol 26. pp 337-363

Matolscy, Z.P., Lianto, T., (1995) “The incremental information content of bond

rating revisions: The Australia Evidence.” Journal of Banking and Finance, vol 19. pp
891-902

Pinches, G.E., Singleton, J.C., (1978). The adjustment of stock prices on bond rating
changes.” Journal of Finance, vol 33. pp 25-48

Standard & Poor’s (2011) “What are credit ratings and how do they work.” Guide to
Credit Rating Essentials

Standard & Poor’s (2011) “Why criteria are important and how they are applied.”
Guide to Credit Rating Essentials

Weinstein, Mark. (1977). “The effect of a rating change announcement on bond
price.” Journal of Financial Economics, vol 5, pp 301-353

Databases

Bloomberg data base. (2013)

Datastream. (2013)

28
Appendix

Table 5 - Correlation matrix of estimated regression coefficients Pre-crisis

Qgnzz5n9
SLPEee EE
Bae aa fz
aPRea ES
Pare Eos
a a8 35 Bog
B ETS aSS
> =6§ eh
reek nt
aReee
2S Ts
mee 8
oe a=}
=
a
i]
i}
: =
Slololeioiglonk
saisiealeisey
SES8 S238
BR S/S) REISS |e
=
a
°
1 : i)
9 gio|oin) |=
BEERERS iF
BS 5G
G/2\oS\R IAs) fe
-
io]
oo
Slolele\S is 5
Sig islale a
AG SS 88 8
SIE WP ale 3
Zz
s &
Slololdle 2
B15 |8 2
3
ABS 5
B18 B18 cal
p
a
slolole 5
Eloi le
DB Bo & 8 é
STi So on
mi
Solr 5
io E
Bl 2/8 rl
a\E lo g
Ain | o by
ole =
°
ie} Ft
a8 5
a
°
5 a
° a
: 5
o tal

This table presents the pair wise correlation between the independent regression factors pre-crisis; the numbers of
notches downgraded (Downgrade), the future implied volatility (Hist Call Imp), the size of the company (Log mkt
cap), the dummy variable indicating a negative outlook (Neg Outl), the volatility of the market (Market vol.), the
level of financial debt (Fin lev), the aggregated abnormal return before the announcement date (Drift).

29
Table 6 - Correlation matrix of estimated regression coefficients Post-crisis

Qo0on zo i)
SPSFEFSES
Bz2RaaeR fz
Qi rR sass
43 BREE: 3
ag BAA Se Bae
So pc saad
aD Be eee
a -=S80oR =a
ic Qneenraon
a 2haS po
SEER E
9 ££ Eon =
y as 6 i"
¢ et r 8
oe © 2
=
a
—]
g
=
siglg ' Lie 3
2 219\S 0/3 /S\r ae
SQlS\o alk lo\olols
PS Se SSeS se
WO |S TS | MNS) olel/e
=
2
°
°
A fae 3
Sie|Siole/8ielg =
Nie in & -¥
BIGGAR S/)S/&)8) [5
SMSILG ESS) bs
WAANO OH SO >
_
°
08
tlslololo|o |= Z
Slglelelelsis) | |s
BALSIE 2S 8 5s
OOH) OR HS s
Zz
s}elale &
Slold|old\e a
° ololo|e
A883 15/8 &
Sin yoo o
AGE SNS E
=
2
a
L1d]O] 0 |e a
0/9} :
Bielgigig 2
DOS G18 ro)
AIS | ATAIS bal
mi
Slolole 5
BE S83 |
Sole |S e
SSS s
b/d) 5
Llele =)
weiss <!
ha |S 4
oMlS -
i]
=
oS
L a
Oo
al §
3
88 &
fa)
io)
a
fo} >
3 8
° *

This table presents the pair wise correlation between the independent regression factors post-crisis; the numbers of
notches downgraded (Downgrade), the future implied volatility (Hist Call Imp), the size of the company (Log mkt
cap), the dummy variable indicating a negative outlook (Neg Outl), the volatility of the market (Market vol.), the
level of financial debt (Fin lev), the aggregated abnormal return before the announcement date (Drift), the dummy
variable indicating if the company has been downgraded during the financial crisis (Dowgr 07-08)

30
Graph 7 - Regression residuals pre-crisis (t=-5 to t=5)

o4
+4
=
a
fe!
oa
a
a4
So T T T T T
-1 -5 10) 25) 1
Residuals

Graph showing the residuals of the multivariate regression pre-crisis. The residuals seem to follow a normal
distribution with minor tails.

Graph 8 - Regression residuals post-crisis (t=-5 to t=5)

Density

Residuals

Graph showing the residuals of the multivariate regression post-crisis. The residuals seem to follow a normal
distribution with minor tails.

31
Density

Graph 9 - Residuals of equity returns

50

0

Average

Graph showing the distribution of the average equity returns for both samples. The returns seem to follow a normal

distribution.

Table 7 - VIF table Pre-crisis

VIF Pre-crisis

Independent variable VIF 1/VIF
Downgrade 1.53 0.654
Historical call implied 1.13 0.885
Log marketcap 1.22 0.820
Negative outlook 1.49 0.671
Market volatility 1.07 0.935
Financial leverage 1.19 0.840
Drift 1.06 0.943

VIF table Pre-crisis for the main sample. As a rule of thumb, a VIF value of more than 5 suggests that data suffers
from high collinearity. The collinearity in this sample is thus low.

32
Table 8 - VIF table Post-crisis

VIF Post-crisis

Independent variable VIF 1/VIF
Downgrade 1.33 0.752
Historical call implied 1.77 0.565
Log marketcap 1.16 0.862
Negative outlook 1.32 0.758
Market volatility 1.37 0.730
Financial leverage 1.47 0.680
Downgraded 07-08 1.06 0.943
Drift 1.04 0.962

VIF table Post-crisis for the main sample. As a rule of thumb, a VIF value of more than 5 suggests that data suffers
from high collinearity. The collinearity in this sample is thus low.

Table 9 - Sktest statistics for pre and post regressions

Regression Pr(skewness) Pr(kurtosis) Pr(>chi2)
Residuals pre-crisis (-5:5) 0.000 0.000 0.000
Residuals post-crisis (-5:5) 0.000 0.000 0.000

Probabilities that the residuals in the respective regressions are skewed (above a certain threshold), show kurtosis
(above a certain threshold), and lastly are both skewed and show kurtosis (above a certain threshold). The residuals
in these samples seem to be normally distributed..

33
Graph 10 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Pre-crisis (t=-20 to t=20)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns over the whole event window (t=-20 to t=20) for the
pre sample. Abnormal returns seem to have a negative drift for the pre sample.

Graph u - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Pre-crisis (t==-10 to t=0)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns over the pre event window (t=-10 to t=o) for the pre
sample. Abnormal returns seem to have a negative drift before the announcement date of the downgrade.

34
Graph 12 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Pre-crisis (t=o to t=+10)

Curnulative abnormal returr Abnormal retu

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns over the post event window (t=-o to t=10) for the pre
sample. The negative drift for abnormal returns continues after the announcement date of the downgrade.

Graph 13 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Post-crisis (t=-20 to t=20)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns over the whole event window (t=-20 to t=20) for the
post sample. Abnormal returns see a small decrease just before the announcement date and recover after the
announcement.

35
Graph 14 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Post-crisis (t=-10 to t=0)

coneeeene Line imulative abnormal return)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns over the pre event window (t=-10 to t=o) for the post
sample. Abnormal returns see a small decrease from t=-4 to t=o. It does not seem that the downgrades are
anticipated 10 days before the announcement date of the downgrade.

Graph 15 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Post-crisis (t=o to t=10)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns over the post event window (t=0 to t=10) for the post
sample. Abnormal returns seem to recover after the announcement date of the downgrade.

36
Table 10 - Companies in the Pre-crisis sample

Companies Pre-crisis

Acuity Brands Inc

American Axle & Manufacturing Holdings Inc
American International Group Inc
Anadarko Petroleum Corp
Archer-Daniels-Midland Co
AutoNation Inc

Beam Inc

Belo Corp

Boston Scientific Corp
Brinker International Inc
Bunge Ltd

Cameron International Corp
CBS Corp

CenturyLink Inc

Computer Sciences Corp
Cooper Tire & Rubber Co
CVS Caremark Corp

Cytec Industries Inc

Deluxe Corp

Dominion Resources Inc
Dover Corp

Edison International

EI du Pont de Nemours & Co
Empire District Electric Co
Energen Corp

EQT Corp

Exelon Corp

Fifth Third Bancorp
Furniture Brands International Inc
Gannett Co Inc

GTE Southwest Inc

HCP Inc

Health Management Associates Inc
Hill-Rom Holdings Inc
Hillshire Brands Co

HJ Heinz Co

HJ Heinz Co

Home Depot Inc
Huntington Bancshares Inc
Janus Capital Group Inc
Johnson Controls Inc

Jones Group Inc

Kaman Corp

KeyCorp

Kohl's Corp

Kroger Co

Macy's Inc

Mattel Inc

McClatchy Co

MDU Resources Group Inc
Middlesex Water Co
Mohawk Industries Inc
Molson Coors Brewing Co
Murphy Oil Corp

National Western Life Insurance Co
New York Times Co

News Corp

Noble Energy Inc

Northeast Utilities

NuStar Energy LP

ONEOK Inc

ONEOK Partners LP

Pepco Holdings Inc

PHH Corp

Pinnacle West Capital Corp
RadioShack Corp

RPM International Inc

RR Donnelley & Sons Co
Safeway Inc

SEACOR Holdings Inc
Sherwin-Williams Co
Snap-on Inc

Sonoco Products Co
Southwestern Energy Co
Sprint Nextel Corp
Telephone & Data Systems Inc
Tyson Foods Inc

United Fire Group Inc
United States Cellular Corp
Universal Corp

Weingarten Realty Investors
Verizon Communications Inc
Whirlpool Corp

Companies in bold are included in both pre and post samples, and are treated separately in the duplicates sub-
sample.

37
Table 11 - Companies in the Post-crisis sample

Companies Post-crisis

Avon Products Inc

Bank of America Corp
BB&T Corp

Beam Inc

Bemis Co Inc

Berkshire Hathaway Inc
BlackRock Inc

Boeing Co/The
BorgWarner Inc

Camden Property Trust
Capital One Financial Corp
Carnival Corp

CBS Corp

Cigna Corp

Cincinnati Financial Corp
Cintas Corp

CIT Group Inc

City National Corp/CA
Comerica Inc

Commercial Metals Co
ConAgra Foods Inc

Cytec Industries Inc

Duke Realty Corp

Eli Lilly & Co

Energen Corp

FBL Financial Group Inc
Fidelity National Financial Inc
Fifth Third Bancorp

First Horizon National Corp
First Midwest Bancorp Inc
FirstEnergy Corp

Fiserv Inc

GATX Corp

General Electric Co
Genworth Financial Inc
GTE Southwest Inc
Harley-Davidson Inc
Hartford Financial Services Group Inc
Hawaiian Electric Industries Inc
Herman Miller Inc
Hillshire Brands Co
Hospitality Properties Trust

Hubbell Inc
Humana Inc

Huntington Bancshares Inc

Hyatt Hotels Corp

Illinois Tool Works Inc
Integrys Energy Group Inc
Jefferies Group LLC
Johnson Controls Inc
Kemper Corp

KeyCorp

Leggett & Platt Inc
Lexmark International Inc
Lincoln National Corp
Lowe's Cos Inc

Marriott International Inc
Matson Inc

Mercury General Corp
MetLife Inc

MF Global Holdings Ltd
Molson Coors Brewing Co
Mondelez International Inc
National Fuel Gas Co
Nelnet Inc

Newell Rubbermaid Inc
NextEra Energy Inc
Nordstrom Inc

Northwest Natural Gas Co
Nucor Corp

NYSE Euronext

Omnicom Group Inc

Regency Centers Corp
Regions Financial Corp

RR Donnelley & Sons Co
SCANA Corp

Selective Insurance Group Inc
Southwest Airlines Co

State Auto Financial Corp
State Street Corp

SunTrust Banks Inc
Susquehanna Bancshares Inc
Synovus Financial Corp

TCF Financial Corp

Textron Inc

US Bancorp

Walgreen Co

Washington Post Co

Webster Financial Corp
Wells Fargo & Co

Verizon Communications Inc
Weyerhaeuser Co

Whirlpool Corp

White Mountains Insurance Group Ltd
Vulcan Materials Co

Xerox Corp

Zions Bancorporation

OneBeacon Insurance Group Ltd

PACCAR Inc
PepsiCo Inc
Pfizer Inc

Pitney Bowes Inc

PNC Financial Services Group Inc

Portland General Electric Co

Post Properties Inc
PPG Industries Inc

Principal Financial Group Inc

Protective Life Corp
Prudential Financial Inc

Companies in bold are included in both pre and post samples, and are treated separately in the duplicates sub-

sample.

38
Table 12 - Correlation matrix of estimated regression coefficients Pre-crisis (duplicate sample)

Q0n é
SYPEESES
BREE Le
a2PR_ER aS
25 RrR 595
a a8 5a 20
5 Boa aa3
~ = ree
Tee aaoe
2225 2
i= =
aes =
mae 8
° )
=
a
i)
g
515
gicle|s esi se
ANG S SIS | BIE|S |B
BinS OA NN 6 0
z
a
o
ry
' 2
b\9\o|/2 oi gin =
elsis eis =
SSE Seale)
BAS ABS |S
ial
°
a
fa fl ]
o|9 1 Oo)
BID/L/S Bio a
eee s/8| |
BE SoS |S) S s
Zz
s re
Sloldo/ole
Bio/5/e/e ro)
BES 38 z
NT] HS | LO =
=
wy
a
siglo &
el/o|/f\e
clk io}
E\R GIS 4
WD A | O 1S 2
ei 10 1 o ™
fi fcr)
élite 5
Sisis F
Sy |8 z
SS 16 s
Olr 9
Mm Oo
Sis =
Rees} |
a
°
ns 5
° a
: :
is} >

This table presents the pair wise correlation between the independent regression factors pre-crisis for the duplicate
sample; the numbers of notches downgraded (Downgrade), the future implied volatility (Hist Call Imp), the size of
the company (Log mkt cap), the dummy variable indicating a negative outlook (Neg Outl), the volatility of the
market (Market vol.), the level of financial debt (Fin lev), the aggregated abnormal return before the
announcement date (Drift).

39
Table 13 - Correlation matrix of estimated regression coefficients Post-crisis (duplicate sample)

O°von 25a
SPLPE SR ES
Behe ae a2
a ee eo 3
25 BRERES Ss
@ gg QAsSe oo
BS sc FaSS
> a i eae
PB Freon oe
A fRESS
anf &
S Ss EOU
pt © 5
6 ws 8
oe * —
=
a
S
g
5
2 \Slole|Slolo\o |= ae
JT |e Nog
SIS ISB RPE SIBE
6 |S IK AIS Ia 8 oe
z
a
5
\ rlo =
pi9|S|/ol/dgjo\S le =
Olas le s "i
aie a edie) >
0/78 | o|\OP iS 18S | B/S 5
SS IRA BIAS 6 LS
ENA | iN )\0 16 =
t
S
08
Sololg ole 3
MS |G WIN Sik g 3
AS | SIF S/S S
LOS AIS DS bo)
Zz
e
elSlololgle >
lw ha} e ha 5 |S
oe Ee Sls 2
BAP) o | B18 =
=
a
el
6}2lo}ole cl
e/Slole
#/9|2 <
PRIS) 8 Ss
BTA Oo bs
\ cy
o\S}ole B
DO |4 =
BME B
MW aE lS x
olole
° S
Be z
KO 1 | S |
i=]
=
os
, 2
oO
: Ss
fo}
aS yt
wo 8 i}
Mi oO o
fe)
io)
a 5
° a
= 2
3 3

This table presents the pair wise correlation between the independent regression factors post-crisis for the
duplicate sample; the numbers of notches downgraded (Downgrade), the future implied volatility (Hist Call Imp),
the size of the company (Log mkt cap), the dummy variable indicating a negative outlook (Neg Outl), the volatility
of the market (Market vol.), the level of financial debt (Fin lev), the aggregated abnormal return before the
announcement date (Drift).

40
Graph 16 - Regression residuals Pre-crisis for duplicate sample (t=-5 to t=5)

o-

Residuals

Graph showing the residuals of the multivariate regression pre-crisis for the duplicate sample. The residuals seem.
to follow a normal distribution with minor tails.

Graph 17 - Regression residuals Post-crisis for duplicate sample (t=-5 to t=5)

Residuals

Graph showing the residuals of the multivariate regression post-crisis for the duplicate sample. The residuals seem
to follow a normal distribution but with heavy tails.
Table 14- VIF table Pre-crisis (duplicate sample)

VIF Pre-crisis

Independent variable VIF 1/VIF
Downgrade 1.38 0.725
Historical call implied 2.01 0.498
Log marketcap 2.86 0.350
Negative outlook 1.73 0.578
Market volatility 1.42 0.704
Financial leverage 1.61 0.621
Drift 4.72 0.212

VIF table Pre-crisis for the duplicate sample. As a rule of thumb, a VIF value of more than 5 suggests that data
suffers from high collinearity. The collinearity in this sample is thus moderate.

Table 15 - VIF table Post-crisis (duplicate sample)

VIF Post-crisis

Independent variable VIF 1/VIF
Downgrade 3.51 0.285
Historical call implied 8.31 0.120
Log marketcap 6.63 0.151
Negative outlook 3.96 0.253
Market volatility 1.62 0.617
Financial leverage 14.48 0.069
Downgraded 07-08 10.36 0.097
Drift 1.65 0.606

VIF table Post-crisis for the duplicate sample. As a rule of thumb, a VIF value of more than 5 suggests that data
suffers from high collinearity. The collinearity in this sample is thus severe.

Table 16 - Sktest statistics for Pre- and Post-crisis regressions (duplicate sample)

Regression Pr(skewness) _ Pr(kurtosis) Pr(>chiz)
Residuals pre-crisis (-5:5) 0.0773 0.0000 0.0000
Residuals post-crisis (-5:5) 0.0126 0.0001 0.0002

Probabilities that the residuals in the respective regressions are skewed (above a certain threshold), show kurtosis
(above a certain threshold), and lastly are both skewed and show kurtosis (above a certain threshold). The residuals
in these samples seem to be skewed, but with no or little kurtosis.

42
Graph 18 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Pre-crisis (t=-5 to t=5)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns for the duplicate sample pre-crisis over the
announcement date (t=-5 to t=5). The data does not seem to behave any differently from the main sample.

Graph 19 - Average abnormal return and development of cumulative abnormal return Post-crisis (t=-5 to t=5)

Development of abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns for the duplicate sample post-crisis over the
announcement date (t=-5 to t=5). The data behaves in many ways the same as the main sample, however, these
findings have low significance.

43
Table 17 - Significance of cumulative abnormal returns for duplicate sample

Pre-crisis

Day (-5 35) (-20 : 20) (-10 : 0) (0:10)
Mean -0.0319 -0.1504 -0.0453 -0.0449
t-value -5.13 -15.00 -7.65 -7.20

Post-crisis

Day (-5 35) (-20 : 20) (-10 : 0) (0:10)
Mean 0.0103 -0.0180 -0.0041 -0.0140
t-value 0.94 -1.32 -0.29 71.24

Table 18 - Regression table for duplicates Pre-crisis

Duplicates Pre-crisis No. of obs = 10 R-squared = 0.7568
Robust

Cum. ab. return (-5:

5) Coefficient Std. Err. T P>|t|
Downgrade -0.0105419 0.0064589 -1.63 0.106
Historical call implied -0.0008941 —0.0010388 -0.86 0.391
Log marketcap -0.0158517_ _ 0.0033649 -4.71 0.000
Negative outlook 0.0672671 —0.0103323 6.51 0.000
Market volatility -0.0037801 0.0039205 -0.96 0.337
Financial leverage -0.0006454 0.006959 -0.93 0.356
Drift 0.8434913 0.0664486 12.69 0.000
Constant 0.1974406 _0.0393585 5.02 0.000

Regression table for the duplicate sample pre-crisis. The downgrade coefficient is negative but not significant on
the 5% level. The results are considered to be weak as there are few observations.

44
Table 19 - Regression table for duplicates Post-crisis

Duplicates Post-crisis No. of obs = 121 R-squared = 0.5670
Robust

Cum. ab. return (-5:

5) Coefficient Std. Err. t P>|t|
Downgrade -0.0115139 0.0269 423 -0.43 0.670
Historical call implied 0.0023176 0.0007485 3.10 0.002
Log marketcap 0.0670958 _—_0.0174896 3.84 0.000
Negative outlook -0.0258243 0.0366572 -0.70 0.483
Market volatility -0.0754554 0.0279665 -2.70 0.008
Financial leverage -0.0384899 —0.0103365 -3.72 0.000
Drift 0.1410415 0.0830787 1.70 0.092
Downgraded 07-08 0.6328745 0.1191982 5-31 0.000
Constant -0.4886102 0.1438231 -3.40 0.001

Regression table for the duplicate sample post-crisis. The sample suffers from severe collinearity and no
conclusions can be drawn from this regression.

Table 20 - Test for heteroscedasticity (main sample)

Regression Chi2(1) Pr(>chiz)
Pre-crisis (-5:5) 45-4 0.0000
Post-crisis (-5:5) 135.2 0.0000

A high Chi2(1) level indicates a high level of heteroscedasticity

45

