STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of Finance
Bachelor Thesis
Spring 2013

      The Prevalence and Causes of Multiple Directorships    .
                                                         .

                                         *                                   †
          Diana Imreorowa          Therese Kollin

                         ABSTRACT
         This thesis investigates the determinants of the number of directorships held
         by board directors, using a cross-sectional methodology with Swedish data
        from  year  2007. Individual, board and company characteristics are used as
           explanatory variables to find out what affects the number of directorships held,
        and from these results we  argue for three main causes of  the existence of
         multiple   directorships.   The   implication   of   the   results   is   that   multiple
          directorships is in some cases a conscious decision made by companies,  with
         the   purpose   of   strengthening   the   relationships   within   their   contractual
         environment.  However,  it  can  also  be  seen  as  an  outcome  of  market
         imperfections,  caused by  an excess demand for skilled directors.  Further, we
         find that the incentives of the directors to hold multiple directorships is
         essential to the existence of multiple directorships.  Finally, the low incidence of
         multiple directorships  indicates  that regulating against it would  probably  be
          ineffective.

Key Words:  Multiple directorships,  corporate interlocks, corporate governance, market for directors,
board of directors

Tutor: Laurent Bach
                                th
Presentation Date: May 29  2013

*
 22317@student.hhs.se
†
 22142@student.hhs.se
Acknowledgements:  We would like to thank Laurent Bach for his valuable help and  inspiration.
TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION ..........................................................................................................................................2

2. PREVIOUS LITERATURE ...........................................................................................................................4

3. DATA  ..............................................................................................................................................................7
   3.1 DATA ORIGIN ............................................................................................................................................................ 7
   3.2 DATA RESTRICTIONS............................................................................................................................................ 7
   3.3 DATA ISSUES ............................................................................................................................................................. 9

4. METHODOLOGY ..........................................................................................................................................9
   4.1 EXPLANATIONS OF THE VARIABLES ............................................................................................................. 9
      4.1.1  DEPENDENT VARIABLE ...................................................................................................................................9
      4.1.2 EXPLANATORY VARIABLES ......................................................................................................................... 10
       4.1.3 CONTROL VARIABLES .................................................................................................................................... 13
   4.2 SUMMARY STATISTICS ..................................................................................................................................... 13
   4.3 REGRESSIONS........................................................................................................................................................ 15
       4.3.1 SIMPLE .................................................................................................................................................................. 15
       4.3.2 MULTIVARIATE ................................................................................................................................................. 15
       4.3.3 ROBUSTNESS TESTS ....................................................................................................................................... 15
   4.4 METHODOLOGY ISSUES .................................................................................................................................... 16

5. RESULTS ..................................................................................................................................................... 16
  5.1 THE PREVALENCE OF MULTIPLE DIRECTORSHIPS ............................................................................. 16
   5.2 SIMPLE REGRESSIONS....................................................................................................................................... 18
   5.3 MULTIVARIATE REGRESSIONS ..................................................................................................................... 19
   5.4 COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS RESEARCH .................................................................................................. 20
   5.5 ROBUSTNESS TESTS ........................................................................................................................................... 21

6. IMPLICATIONS AND  CONCLUSIONS ................................................................................................... 21
  6.1 THREE CAUSES OF MULTIPLE DIRECTORSHIPS ................................................................................... 22
   6.2 CONCLUSION ......................................................................................................................................................... 25
   6.3 FUTURE RESEARCH ............................................................................................................................................ 26

REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................................. 27

APPENDIX A ................................................................................................................................................... 29

APPENDIX B ................................................................................................................................................... 36
1.  INTRODUCTION

Board composition is a highly debated topic and criticism has been put forward regarding the
efficiency of having board directors active on several boards, a phenomenon known as multiple
directorships. It has been argued that it in fact inhibits the ability of the board directors to
adequately monitor the management and carry out the strategic work of the board. Recently,  a
debate article in Dagens Industri  suggested  that the Swedish Corporate Governance Code should
be revised in order to hinder CEOs to hold multiple directorships. The criticism of multiple
directorships has caused several scholars to present studies on the subject and they have mainly
focused on examining whether multiple directorships has  a positive or negative impact on
companies. However, before determining the consequences of multiple directorships, it is
important to understand why multiple directorships exist and understand whether it stems from
an efficient process or market imperfections.

Previous research on multiple directorships focuses on different aspects of the subject and is
within numerous academic fields. It exists several studies on how multiple directorships affect the
corporate performance and the value of the firm. However, these studies are ambiguous with no
clear consensus regarding the effects of multiple directorships. Core et al  (1999),  Shivdasani and
Yermack (1999)  and Fich and Shivdasani (2006)  argue that over-committed directors lead to poor
firm performance whereas Weisbach  (1988), Cotter et al (1997)  and Miwa and Ramseyer (2000)
find multiple directorships to have a positive impact on companies. Furthermore, it is difficult to
provide a generalised conclusion based on the studies since they have been focusing on specific
types of companies and contexts. In contrast to examining the effects of multiple directorships,
there have been studies trying to explain the determinants of multiple directorships. Many of
these studies have been within the fields of social science or economic theory. However,  some of
the studies have been within the field of finance, and the most influential ones are Fama and
Jensen (1983), Kaplan and Reishus (1990), Gilson (1990), Ferris and Jagannathan (2001), and
Ferris et al  (2003).

The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the incidence and determinants of multiple director-
ships in order to understand the causes of the phenomenon. Based on this we want to discuss
whether the market for directors is efficient or not.  We aim  to make a comparison with previous
researchers’ methods when analysing our results, due to the lack of solid theoretical frameworks.
The contribution of our study is to investigate Swedish data, include  companies  of varying sizes
and also include private and public companies. A majority of the  previous  studies  have  mainly

                                                                           2
focused  on large, publicly listed companies in the U.S. In addition, unlike previous scholars, we
do not only investigate the determinants of number of multiple directorships, but also the
underlying causes of why multiple directorships exist.

The data sets used in this investigation are obtained from PAR AB. It includes accounting and
company data for Swedish companies over the years 1997-2008. From this data several re-
strictions are made. Micro-companies,  bottom-level subsidiaries and inactive companies are ex-
cluded and we only focus on year 2007. After the restrictions  the data consists  of 1421
companies, 4122 unique directors and 4591 directorships. Summary statistics are provided for
this data to explain the incidence of multiple directorships in Sweden. Furthermore,  we perform
non-parametric tests in order to find if there are any correlations between the different explana-
tory variables. This is made on both an individual and a company level, with emphasize on the
latter. Moreover, simple and multivariate OLS regressions are carried out to further investigate
the determinants of multiple directorships. Robustness tests are made for these regressions by
exchanging some of the independent variables with alternative  proxy  variables. Finally, we
analyse the variables explaining the number of directorships in order to come to a conclusion
regarding the underlying causes of the phenomenon of multiple directorships and the efficiency
of the director market.

Through our investigation we find the phenomenon of multiple directorships not to be
widespread  in  Sweden.  Only  1.92%  of  the  directors  in  our  study  hold  three  or  more
directorships. This is lower than the results obtained by previous scholars. However, those
studies were carried  out more than ten years ago, meaning there could be discrepancies from
today. This low incidence of multiple directorships raises questions about the need for regulating
against it.  Our  results are consistent with earlier research with regards to the explanatory variables
chosen on the basis of previously used variables.  Size,  Return on Assets for 2004  and  Number of
Board Members  are all positively and significantly correlated with  Mean Directorships  whereas  Mean
Tenure  has a significant negative relation  to mean directorships. The additional explanatory
variables presented in this thesis are of both economic and statistical significance.  Young Companies
have on average more directorships than mature companies and companies with a  CEO Director
has on average fewer directorships than those companies  without. Through an analysis of the
explanatory variables for  the  number of directorships we conclude that there are three underlying
causes for the existence of multiple directorships: the companies’ need for networking, the excess
demand for skilled directors and the directors’  strive  for empire building. Companies make

                                                                           3
conscious decisions of letting their directors sit on key customer and supplier  boards in order to
strengthen business relationships. Multiple directorships are also created by a shortage of skilled
directors forcing the companies to share those directors between them. Finally, the director’s
willingness to build empires and sit on several boards  is crucial to  the existence of multiple
directorships.

2.  PREVIOUS LITERATURE

Multiple directorships is a topic present within numerous academic fields, stretching from
sociology to finance. Many of these studies combine the research to include several academic
perspectives. Mizruchi (1996) argues that  multiple directorships  are significant indicators of
network connections between firms and that there is a need for continued research to provide
insight into corporate behaviour. Another reason for continuing studying this subject is that
many studies have  been on cross-sectional data or panel data during a specific period in time.
Due to the dynamic nature of corporate governance and board composition there is a need to
have continued and updated insight of the behaviour of the board of directors.

Within the finance related studies there are different approaches to understand  the phenomenon
of multiple directorships. The first category includes research on how multiple directorships
affects  the performance and the value of the firm. Within this field of study there are various and
different opinions to whether this effect is negative or positive. Scholars like Core et al. (1999),
Shivdasani and Yermack (1999)  and Fich and Shivdasani (2006)  believe that over-commitment
leads to a lack of monitoring, which results in greater agency costs for the firm, with a subsequent
reduction in firm performance and firm value as a result.  However, there are other scholars who
suggest that multiple directorships affect firm performance positively. Miwa and Ramseyer (2000)
found this to be true for cotton spinning industries in Japan, Cotter et al (1997) made the same
conclusion while studying  acquisitions and Weisbach (1988) came to the same insight with
regards to discharging of CEOs of poor performing firms. However, Ferris  et al  (2003) highlights
that these findings are made under specific circumstances and it might be difficult to come to a
generalized conclusion.

Furthermore, scholars have realised that there is a need for understanding the determinants of
multiple  directorship  in  order  to  correctly  understand  and  interpret  the  effects  multiple

                                                                           4
directorships  has on firm performance and value. Mizruchi (1996) highlights that another reason
for the importance of studying the determinants is that the number of busy directors  do not
necessarily stem from a conscious decision of the company, but might just be a result from the
companies’ contextual environment.  According to Fama and Jensen (1983), there is a strong
correlation between past firm performance and number of outside directorships held, explained
as a reputational effect. Directors of firms performing well are viewed as high quality directors in
the external labour market of directors and the conclusion is thus that in an efficient labour
market the best directors should receive the most  directorship offers. Other researchers that has
come to the same conclusion regarding the past performance correlation are Kaplan and Reishus
(1990) and Gilson (1990). Kaplan and Reishus investigate, in a similar fashion to Fama and
Jensen, if past firm performance relates to number of additional directorships. However, they are
only interested in additional directorships accepted by top executives  and have  used the reduction
of the dividends as a proxy for poor performance. Their empirical work results in the conclusion
that top executives of companies reducing their dividends with 50% are less likely to be offered
other directorships than are those that do not reduce their dividends. This is further evidence of
the reputational effect, first introduced by Fama and Jensen. Furthermore, they conclude CEOs
of poorly performing firms have less time to engage in activity on outside boards, since they need
to focus on their own firm’s survival. Also, they reason that  CEOs  tenure is a proxy for his
reputation in his own firm. Gilson (1990) focuses on financially distressed firms and conclude
that directors that leave those firms hold approximately one third fewer directorships three years
after their departure.

Previous performance is only one of several factors influencing the number of directorships held,
and researchers have tried to find these other variables through empirical studies. Some of the
most influential studies have been made by Dooley (1969), Booth and Deli (1996), Ferris and
Jagannathan (2001) and Ferris et al  (2003).

One of Dooley’s (1969)  main finding is that the largest corporations tend to have more multiple
directorships since directors of large corporations are the most capable and competent directors
available and that  directors of large corporations have more personal influence over other
companies. Furthermore, management controlled boards seem to avoid multiple directorships
with other companies. Moreover, Dooley finds that non-financial firms tend to have more
multiple directorships than financial firms.

                                                                           5
Booth  and  Deli  (1996)  investigate  several  factors  that  explain  why  CEOs  hold  outside
directorships. Their results can analogously be used in order to examine the explanation to why
directors hold multiple directorships. Their main finding is that the number of directorships held
is linked to the marginal products of the CEO. Growth opportunities,  which  are  represented by
market-to-book,  correlate  negatively to the number of outside directorships held by a CEO. This
suggests that a CEO in a firm with growth opportunities is busy to manage the own firm,
implying that the marginal product of the CEO is high. When the chairman is a different
individual from the CEO, their research suggests that CEOs will hold more outside  directorships
implying that the CEOs marginal product is low. Finally, they find that CEOs on larger firms
have on average more directorships.

As opposed to Booth and Deli, Ferris and Jagannathan (2001) does not focus solely on the CEO,
but studies the determinants of multiple directorships for the entire board. Similar to Booth and
Deli they find a significant positive relationship between the firm size and the number of multiple
directorships per board member. Their explanation for this is that larger firms have a greater
number of external contracting relationships leading to a greater opportunity for directorship
offerings. Similar to firm size, the board size also affects  the number of multiple directors
positively since a larger board is thought of as  providing an opportunity to use more directors to
form more external contracting relationships. Market-to-book ratio is used as a proxy for growth
opportunities and they find that there is a negative relationship  to the  number of multiple
directorships. The reason for this being that additional board assignments may lead to reduced
oversight and attention and focus deterring from primary decisions regarding the growth
opportunities. In line with previous research on past firm performance, they moreover find that
previous firm performance is positively correlated with multiple directorships. Furthermore, they
come to the conclusion that board equity ownership has an inverse relation to multiple
directorships because directors accept board memberships as a form of perquisite consumption,
implying the agency conflict’s presence. Finally, they reach the conclusion that directors of
regulated firms hold fewer directorships because of the limited competition and insulation from
the market.

Two  years after Ferris  and Jagannathan’s first study on multiple directorships, they, together with
Pritchard, carried out another study on multiple directorships’ effect on firm performance as well
as the determinants of multiple directorships. In the latter study they find no  evidence that
multiple directorship harm subsequent firm performance. Regarding the determinants they

                                                                           6
provide an additional variable, average age of the director, which is positively significant for
existing directorships and negatively significant for additional directorships. Age is a proxy for
experience as well as the energy that an individual might have for the demands of board service.
This is in line  with  them  reporting  that lack of time is the reason most often cited for declining
offers of board seats. Furthermore, they provide an alternative explanation for the firm size
factor and state that it is a proxy for the intensity of monitoring required of the director. Big
firms might demand more effort, but they might also send a positive signal of a director’s skill as
a monitor.

3. DATA

3.1 DATA ORIGIN

The data sets used in this study are obtained from PAR AB, a Swedish company focusing on
gathering company information, CRM and direct marketing. The Department of Finance  at the
university  purchased the data sets and has been made available to us for the purpose of thesis
writing. In the data sets there are information on accounting records, company specific
information, consolidated account information and finally information on individuals having  a
function related to the governing, ownership or auditing of the company. The data sets consist of
information on all Swedish companies from year 1997 to year 2008. Important to highlight is the
unique nature of the data, since it includes companies  of varying sizes  and the data sets also
include private and public companies.

3.2 DATA RESTRICTIONS

Due to the extent of the data sets and in order to use a cross sectional methodology, the data is
restricted to only include observations within a given point  in time. The fiscal year of 2007 is
chosen because it is the most updated data available without uncertainties regarding the
observations’ end time, which is true for year 2008. Furthermore, it is after the implementation of
the Swedish Corporate Governance Code in 2005, making the conclusions in this thesis
applicable to the business environment today. In the original data sets there is a significant
amount of information that is irrelevant to our study and thus several restrictions are made.
Starting with the accounting data set, all observations regarding micro-companies are excluded,
because of their limited economic impact. In accordance with the definitions made by the

                                                                           7
European Commission in 2006, a company is considered to be a micro-company if it has total
assets and sales below 2 million EUR as well as number of employees below 10.  The accounting
data set also include consolidated accounts as well as standalone entity accounts. Thus, the data
set is further restricted to not include consolidated accounts. The reason for this being that it is
impossible to investigate the structure of ownership for  all companies and also because
companies which are consolidated at some level  will be included, even if these companies are
subsidiaries to a parent company. Furthermore, if a consolidated account were reported instead
of stand alone  accounts it would be counted multiple times.

Along with the accounting data, a data set consisting of information regarding parent and
subsidiary information is used to sort out those companies being bottom-level subsidiaries, i.e.
those companies owned by a parent company and not having any subsidiary companies
themselves. The logic behind this is that board of directors of bottom-level subsidiary companies
rarely have real influence over the strategy of the company, but instead follow the directives from
board of directors higher up in the ownership structure. It is also common that board of
directors and top management of the parent company sit on the board of the subsidiary,  which is
why it is important to exclude them. However, companies that are consolidated at some level,
implying that they are a parent company for  at least one subsidiary, are kept, since  the board of
directors are considered to possess some real influence  of the company.

As the focus of our study is multiple directorships, those individuals having a function in the
company other than being a board member, are excluded from the data set. However, those
individuals being CEOs sitting on its own board are still included. Furthermore, for those board
directors where there is no information provided with regards to the end date of their mandate,
but information regarding their start date, we interpret it as those board directors still being active
during year 2008, when the data was compiled. In the data we find duplicates with regards to the
same social security number (SSN) showing up twice or more for the same company.  Joining the
time frames for those duplicate observations and dropping one of them solve this  problem.
Moreover, for some of the observations the whole SSN is missing or the last four digits of the
SSN is missing and all these observations are therefore excluded from the data set.

In the company data, industry codes for specifying the nature of  the industry for each company is
according to SCB year 2002 classification, even though the company information is from year
2007. In 2007,  SCB changed its classification codes and in order to find the equivalent definition

                                                                           8
of each code the 2002 industry  codes are converted into the codes for year 2007. The codes in
the data set are expressed in specific industry definitions, and in order to make it comprehensible
and economically interesting for analysing differences across industries, the industry codes  are
recodified to their main categories, resulting in 16 main categories. As a last restriction within the
company data, all companies that are reported to be inactive in year 2007 are excluded.

3.3 DATA ISSUES

The main issue with the data set is missing values. Observations with missing values with regards
to assets, sales and number of employees are excluded, since it is crucial for our study that the
size of the company is known. There are some companies that do not have any company
information. These  companies are also excluded because they are missing several important data.
The other data issue is regarding the use of standalone accounting data. When choosing to take
standalone entity accounts  we are aware of the fact that some assets may  not  be  included.

4. METHODOLOGY

A cross-sectional methodology is used, i.e. restricting the data to one point in  time, which  is year
2007. The condition for an observation to be considered to belong to the year of interest is that
the director  has been sitting on  the board for  at least  a day during 2007. A cross-sectional analysis
will provide us with an understanding of whether  there is a significant impact of the independent
variables, what the direction of the correlation is and of  what magnitude they affect multiple
directorships. Because of the  large size of the original data, a panel data methodology is  time wise
outside the scope of this thesis.

4.1 EXPLANATIONS OF THE VARIABLES

4.1.1 DEPENDENT VARIABLE

Initially, the number of directorships per director is calculated in order to carry out an analysis at
the individual level. The variable is calculated by counting the number of directorships associated
with every SSN. An extension from this variable is the mean number of directorships per
director, which is  calculated at a company level. In order to calculate this second dependent
variable, the first step is to identify all individuals that are directors in each company. After this is

                                                                           9
done the total number of directorships held by these individuals are added  and then divided by
the number of board directors within each company. The reason for doing this distinction is to
be able to examine individual director characteristics and firm characteristics separately. The
dependent variable  Mean Number of Directorships per Board Director within a Company Board  will
henceforth  be referred to as  Mean Directorships  in order to make it more comprehensible for the
reader.

4.1.2 EXPLANATORY VARIABLES

In an attempt to find the causes of multiple directorships, possible determinants are defined and
these are related to either individual, board or company characteristics. Additional calculations
and definitions of variables can be found in  Appendix B.

Individual Characteristics

Female
We hypothesize that females hold more directorships because of a historical shortage of supply
of qualified and experienced females on boards, and because of an increasing public pressure,
which indicates an increasing demand to have females on boards.

CEO Director
Both  Booth  and  Deli  (1996)  and  Dooley  (1969)  examine  the  effect  on  the  number  of
directorships held within a board if the CEO of the company also sits on the board, indicating
that the firm in some sense is management controlled. When we use this variable at the individual
level  we want to test the hypothesis that a director who also is a CEO  hold less directorships
than other directors.

Board Characteristics

Number of Board Members
Ferris  and  Jagannathan’s  (2001)  reason  for  including  number  of  board  members  as  an
explanatory  variable  is that the firm might use its directors to create advantageous external

                                                                          10
contracting relationships. Furthermore, Yermack (1996) reasons  that large boards are often
unwieldy. We believe this to enable the directors to spend less time on that specific board and
instead hold more multiple directorships. Thus we have decided to hypothesise that increasing
number of board members should lead to an increase in mean directorships.

Mean Tenure
According to Kaplan and Reishus (1990), a director’s tenure on the board can be viewed as the
director’s internal reputation  within  the firm. We reason that this implicates that a long tenure
will lead to positive reputation and attractiveness in the market for directors, which will lead to
more offers and thus more  directorships held. Therefore, we hypothesise that increased tenure
leads to higher mean directorships.

Mean Age
The age of a director can proxy for experience and therefore imply attractiveness on the labour
market for elder directors. However it can equally be a proxy for a declining energy level when a
director is considered old and thus lowering their attractiveness. The two contrasting perspectives
on age are described in previous research by Ferris et al (2003). We are interested in finding out
what effect the age of a director has on the number of directorships and thus not taking a stand
to what perspective we believe to be true.

Female Ratio
This variable is an extension of the female dummy variable that is used for the individual level,
where we instead look at the female ratio of the board. For the same reasons stated for the
female variable, we hypothesize that female ratio will be positively related to mean directorships.

CEO Director
A CEO sitting on its own board is an extensively studied  phenomenon and we consider it to be
of importance to explain the  Mean Directorships  for a company. We assume that when a CEO is on
the board the other directors are required to spend more time on the board, since the CEO will
be somewhat occupied by its responsibilities as a CEO. This is rather consistent with Dooley’s
study from 1969 where he concludes that directors on management-controlled boards tend to
avoid holding multiple directorships.  Therefore, we hypothesise that a company with a CEO
director  will on average have lower mean directorships than companies not having a CEO on the
board.

                                                                          11
Company Characteristics

Size
Ferris et al (2003) describe the incidence of multiple directorships as a large-firm  phenomenon.
Booth and Deli (1996) further reason  that a larger firm has a more widespread external
contracting environment with more contracting relationships and thus more to gain from
multiple directorships. Based on this previous research we expect size to have a positive
correlation with  Mean Directorships.  Assets are used as a proxy for size.  The reason for taking the
logarithm of size is because there are major differences between the sizes of firms in our sample.

Return on Assets 2004
According to previous research by Fama and Jensen (1983) and Ferris and Jagannathan (2001),
the  return on assets has  a positive impact on multiple directorships because of the reputational
effect. We therefore assume that return on assets will have a positive correlation with mean
directorships. The return on assets  three years prior  to  2007 is used since we assume the effect
from performance not to be evident immediately. This is consistent with the research of Kaplan
and Reishus (1990) who finds that directors of poor performing firms do not gain or lose outside
directorships in the three fiscal years after a firm present poor results.

Scaled Research & Development
Previous research focuses on the market-to-book ratio and believes it to be a proxy for future
growth opportunities. Ferris and Jagannathan (2001) and Booth and Deli (1996) come to the
conclusion that firms’ growth opportunities are negatively related to number of directorships
since multiple directorships are characterized by opportunity costs due to decreased oversight
and attention. A director for a firm with growth opportunities has more to lose by neglecting its
own firm. Since we do not only look at public firms we have decided to proxy growth
opportunities with research and development  expenses  (R&D) with the reason being that we
believe firms with more future opportunities are in a greater need of R&D. The R&D is scaled
against  yearly sales  since we believe that to be more accurate when comparing firms of different
sizes. Based on previous research we believe  Mean Directorships  to decrease as R&D increases.

                                                                          12
Young Company
Directors holding multiple directorships are according to Hermalin and Weisbach (1988) sources
of counsel, since they provide experience and expertise to the board and might have other
valuable perspectives. Furthermore, Mace (1986) believes that directors signals prestige and serve
as business contacts. For the reasons stated above we believe that  young companies are in need
of this guidance by experienced directors and therefore strive to recruit these directors holding
multiple directorships. Therefore, we hypothesise that a young company has, on average, higher
Mean Directorships  than mature companies. Those companies older than ten years are defined as
mature companies. The reason for drawing the line at ten years is because  the youngest ten
percent of the companies are eight years or younger.

4.1.3 CONTROL VARIABLES

Industry Dummy Variables
Since the sample consists of companies operating in different industries, there might be some
industry specific differences with regards to mean directorships, which we want to control for.

4.2 SUMMARY STATISTICS

Individual Level Summary Statistics
The analysis begins with a simple description of the data in terms of  Individual  Multiple
Directorships, which includes mean, median, minimum, maximum and standard deviation values of
the sample. In order to find to  what  extent multiple directorships exist  in Sweden a frequency
chart is provided for the number of directorships held per director. Based on the frequency chart,
absolute and cumulative percentages are calculated. Furthermore, it is investigated how large
percentage of the board members that have three or more directorships  to evaluate  to what
extent the directors have multiple directorships. Summary statistics regarding if the individual is a
Female  is also provided in terms of mean, median, minimum, maximum and standard deviation to
see if there are any major differences between male and female directors. Similar summary
statistics are provided for  CEO  Director.

                                                                          13
Company Level Summary Statistics
General summary statistics for the  Mean Directorships  are provided in terms of mean, median,
minimum,  maximum and standard deviation.  In order to get an overview of the independent
variable and its relatedness to the number of multiple  directorships, the first approach is to divide
Size, Number of Board Members, Mean Tenure,  Female Ratio, Mean Age  and  Return on Assets  2004  into
quartiles. Thereafter, the  average  of  Mean Directorships  is calculated for each quartile and presented
in a chart. By doing this,  a basic analysis can be made based on the differences in the  Mean
Directorships  between the different quartiles. Because there is a need to make a statistical
conclusion,  non-parametric tests  are  used, as it is independent subsamples and normality cannot
be assumed. The tests are performed in order to investigate if there is a significant correlation
between the mean values of the sub samples and if the mean values differ. First, the Kruskal
Wallis test is performed to see if there is any difference in the mean between the different
subsamples. A significant p-value indicates that it is a significant difference between the means.
Second, the Spearman Correlation is calculated in order to arrive at a possible correlation
between the quartiles.  The Spearman Correlation indicates if it is a negative or positive
correlation between the samples and the p-value shows if the correlation is significant.

Moreover, the dummy variables  CEO Director  and  Young Company  are analysed by  dividing the
sample into two sub samples and investigating whether there is a significant difference between
the  two using a Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test. The Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test is the appropriate
statistical  method  since  the  subsamples  are  independent  and  an  assumption  of  normal
distribution cannot be made. Also, this test approaches  a  normal distribution as the number of
sample observations increases and because of  the  large number of observations  in the sample  it
becomes even more accurate to use.

Industries
Industry specific summary statistics are provided in terms of number of companies, number of
directorships and mean firm size as well as mean, median, max and standard deviation for  Mean
Directorships. This is done in order to discover differences across industries with regards to
multiple directorships.

                                                                          14
4.3 REGRESSIONS

4.3.1 SIMPLE

The Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression model is used in order to find the determinants
that are of  significance in explaining the  Mean Directorships  for a company. In order to use the
OLS regression model, the four MLR assumptions  presented in Table 18  need to be assumed to
be  true.  The regression formulas can be found in Table 19.

4.3.2 MULTIVARIATE

Multivariate regressions are also executed using the OLS regression model, but now the
explanatory variables are used in the same regression to be able to control for several factors
simultaneously. However, the  independent variables that yield insignificant result from the simple
regressions and are assumed  to  not  be correlated to the variables that yield significant result  will
not be included in the multivariate specification. The multivariate regressions are performed with
and without the industry dummy variables  in order to see the difference the control variables
make. From a regression output we can extract information if there is a correlation and to what
magnitude a change of one independent variable will affect the dependent variable.  The
multivariate  regression formulas can be found in Table 20.

4.3.3 ROBUSTNESS TESTS

Since most of the independent variables proxies for something, it is  particularly  important  to
check for the robustness in our findings. This is done by replacing the variable  used  with another
variable, which proxies for the same underlying  variable. By doing this we test if it is the proxy
chosen that is the cause of the results or if it is the underlying factor for which we proxy for that
is the determinant.  However, this  is not possible for all the variables, but is  carried out for  Size,
Young Company  and  Return on Assets 2004.  For  Size, we check the robustness by changing the total
assets to  Sales  and also to the  Number of  Employees. For the dummy variable,  Young Company, we
check the robustness by taking a continuous variable that measures the  Company Age.  For  Return
on Assets 2004, we check the robustness by replacing it with the  Operating Margin for 2004.

                                                                          15
4.4 METHODOLOGY ISSUES

Because of the large  size of the  sample, we are aware that statistical significance may  not
particularly  difficult to achieve. This implies that we must be careful when interpreting the
economic significance of the results.

Many of the independent variables are in reality not exogenously given, implying that they
themselves are determined by other factors. For example,  the number of board seats  could  be
affected by the ability of the company to be able to pay for their board directors and at the same
time affect the number of directorships. We are critical to our implicit assumption with regards to
the zero conditional mean  when using an OLS regression model. The misspecification of our
model could potentially lead to an endogeneity problem,  which would  result in a biased
estimation.

The order of causality is another methodology issue that needs to be addressed. By recognising
some variables as independent variables we indirectly say that these are the factors causing the
number  of  directorships  held.  Usually  economic  and  finance  theory  should  provide  the
establishment of causality, due to the lack of it in our field of study, we have used intuition,
reason and previous research to specify the order. For instance it could be argued that  the
number of directorships held could affect  Return on Assets 2004. We are thus aware of the
potential reversed causality.

5. RESULTS

5.1 THE PREVALENCE OF MULTIPLE DIRECTORSHIPS

After limiting the data through various restrictions, our sample consists of 1421 unique
companies and 4122 unique individual directors. The first results indicate that  directors holding
multiple directorships are  in fact not a widespread phenomenon.  Looking at Table  1  in  Appendix
A  it can be observed that the average number of directorships held by an individual director  is
1.11. This indicates that most directors sit on only one company board during  a year. The median
value is exactly one directorship, which is lower than the mean. The standard deviation (0.46) is
seemingly high in comparison to the mean. However,  since it is impossible for our dependent
variable to take a value less than one, the variation of the distribution has to come from
observations having  multiple  directorships.  In Table 2 it can be observed that the maximum

                                                                          16
number of directorships an individual director holds is eight directorships and by calculating the
cumulative percentage  we find that only 1.92% of the individual directors hold three or more
directorships. This strengthens the suggestion that multiple directorships seem not to  be
prevalent in a wider context.

707 directors out of 4122 directors are  females, which is  approximately  17 percent of the sample.
The total number of board seats held by females within the sample is 779 out of 4591, which is
presented in Table 3.   When we test the hypothesis that females on average hold more
directorships we find that this does not  hold. In fact, males have on average more directorships
than females, but the difference is not statistically significant. The summary statistics for  CEO
Directors  are presented in Table 4,  and  we find that 400 out of 4122 individuals of the sample hold
double positions, both as a CEO and as a director. Further, we find that our hypothesis holds,
that a CEO who also is a director within the same company on average hold less directorships, at
a significant level.

Table 5  in the Appendix provides summary statistics for the  Mean Directorship. We find that the
mean value for this variable is 1.27  Mean Directorships  and  the median is one directorship.

In  Table 6, the summary statistics for all the company explanatory variables can be found  and in
Table 7,  the  summary statistics for the dummy variables  can be found.  The results from the non-
parametric tests are presented in Table 8  for the regular explanatory variables, and in Table 9  and
Table 10  for the dummy variables. We find that there  is a positive and significant correlation
between  Size  and  Mean Directorships. The same holds for the  Number of Board Members, which we
find to have a positive  and significant correlation to  Mean Directorships. When we test for the  Mean
Age  of the board we find that there is a  significant and positive correlation. However, this
correlation coefficient is relatively small, which indicates that the economic significance is low.
The  Female Ratio  of the board  is positively correlated with  Mean Directorships  and it has a
significant  Spearman Correlation. No significant correlation is established for  Return on Assets
2004,  Mean Tenure  and  Research and Development.  The explanation to why it is difficult to establish a
significant result for research and development is because there are  too few observations.

When the test is performed for comparing a  Young Company  with a mature company, we find that
the young company holds on average 1.35  Mean Directorships, whereas a mature company holds
1.24  Mean Directorships. This test  shows a significant difference. Finally, we find that boards with a

                                                                          17
CEO Director  has on average 1.22  Mean Directorships,  which is lower compared to the average for
boards without a  CEO Director, which is 1.28. However, the difference between the two is not
statistically significant, when we perform this test on the company level.

Summary statistics for  Mean Directorships,  number of board seats  and size is provided with regards
to different industries in Table  11  in the Appendix. There are  16  different industries represented
in our sample, although the number of companies within each industry varies. In our sample, the
manufacturing industry consists of 373 companies whereas mining and quarrying only consists of
five companies. The one industry where  Mean  Directorships  is the highest is human health and
social work activities. The average for the human health industry is 2.35  Mean Directorships, which
is relatively high compared to the education industry, where the industry average is 1.49  Mean
Directorships. At a third place we find administrative and support service activities, which has 1.37
Mean Directorships  as the average for the industry. However,  all three industries that hold the top
three places consist  of a small number of companies. The industry which consist of more than 30
companies and places among the industries above average for all companies is wholesale and
retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles, which consists of 336 companies and has
an average value of 1.35  Mean Directorships.  The average size of all the companies within the
sample in terms of total assets is 2.3 Billion SEK. However, the industry  average in size is  lower
than the total average of the sample. This is because the industry of financial and insurance
activities has relative  large amount of total assets,  which increases the total average. It  is
interesting to notice that  financial and insurance firms have lower mean directorship than the
sample average.

5.2 SIMPLE REGRESSIONS

Table 12  provides output from the simple regressions  for variables hypothesized to be of
explanatory power to the dependent variable,  Mean Directorships. It is a further extension to the
company non-parametric tests in the previous section and the simple regression provide us a
stronger statistical tool  to capture the effect of a change in the independent variable to the
dependent variable.

For  Size  we find a strong significant positive correlation to  Mean Directorships, which is consistent
with our results in the quartile analysis. We achieve similar results for  Number of Board Members
that have a positive relation and are strongly significant to  Mean Directorships. Moreover, this does
not differ from the results in the quartile analysis.  R&D Scaled  is another variable that show

                                                                          18
comparable results to the non-parametric tests. It is neither significant nor has an economical
viable  interpretation since its correlation coefficient is  relatively  low. For the two dummy
variables,  Young Company  and  CEO Director, we find simple regressions results  for  Young Company
to almost mimic the results in the non-parametric test above whereas  CEO Director  differs.  Young
company  is positively correlated with mean multiple, but insignificant. If a CEO sits on the board
of directors the mean number of directorships is higher  compared to a board without the CEO
holding a directorship position and the results are significant even though they were insignificant
in the non-parametric test.  Mean Age  and  Female Ratio  differs from the non-parametric tests since
they in the previous  tests are significant, but in the simple regressions turn out to be statistically
insignificant. Moreover, no economic significance could be established for  Mean Age  since the
coefficient is relatively  low. However, the  Female Ratio  has a slightly positive  correlation with
mean directorships, which could be interpreted in an economic sense, even though it is
statistically insignificant.  Mean Tenure  and  Return on Assets 2004  stand out as the only variables
showing better results in the simple regression than in the non-parametric tests. In the quartile
tests  Mean Tenure  is highly insignificant, whereas in the regression it is significant and has a
negative correlation with the dependent variable. For  Return on Assets for 2004  we find that it
differs from the  quartile analysis in the sense that it  has a positive correlation to  Mean Directorships
in the simple regression instead of a negative. Furthermore, the coefficient for  Return on Assets for
2004  is significant in the simple regressions. Since  R&D, Female  Ratio  and  Mean Age  yield
insignificant results, they will not be included in the multivariate regressions. However,  Return on
Assets 2004  and  Young Company  are included despite their statistical insignificance due to their
inherent correlation to size.

5.3 MULTIVARIATE REGRESSIONS

Table 13  provide  multivariate regression  output for variables that we have decided to use as
explanatory variables based on analysis of the  simple  regressions.  Model 1  is without industry
dummy variables  and  Model 2  shows multivariate regression with industry  dummy variables.

The multivariate regressions demonstrate similar results to the simple regressions, with some
improvements in the significance level for some of the variables. For the regression without the
industry  dummy  variables  Size, Young Company, Number of Board Members  and  Mean Tenure  show
comparable results to the simple regressions. However,  Return on Assets 2004  and  CEO Director
are of greater significance and with higher magnitude in the correlations. The explanatory power
of this regression is 0.023.

                                                                          19
For the multivariate regressions with the industry dummy variables  the variable results differ
compared to the other multivariate regression on several variables. There is no significant
difference for  Return on Assets 2004  and  Young Company  when comparing the two multivariate
regressions. However,  Number of Board Members  and  Mean Tenure  show a significance level of 5%
instead of 1%, but with almost unchanged coefficients. Conversely,  Size  and  CEO Director  have a
higher impact on  Mean Directorships  when controlling for industries.  The explanatory power of
this regression is 0.088.

5.4 COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS RESEARCH

Our finding that the prevalence of multiple directorships among Swedish firms is low is similar to
Ferris and Jagannathan’s  (2001) conclusion with regards to the incidence of directorships among
U.S. companies. However, Ferris et al (2003) find that the proportion  of directors holding
multiple directorships is higher and in Ferris and Jagannathan’s study (2001) they find that 4% of
the individual directors hold three or more directorships, while we find that only 1.92% sit on
three or more board seats. This difference could be explained by the fact that we try to explain
multiple directorships in Sweden  and holding multiple directorships may be more common in the
U.S.  However, we need to keep in mind that their study was performed a decade earlier than
ours and the trend of  multiple directorships seems to be of declining  nature.  Our results from the
summary statistics regarding industries differ in some aspects from previous research. The
industries in which we find to have most directorships per board member, the educational and
human health industries, received a lower rank in Ferris and Jagannathan study (2001).

Regarding the multivariate regressions we find, similar  to Ferris and Jagannathan (2001) and
Ferris et al (2003), that  Size  has a positive and significant relation to  Mean Directorships.  Indicating
that multiple directorships is  a large-firm phenomenon. Correspondingly, Ferris and Jagannathan
also find  Number of Board Members  to be positively correlated with  Mean Directors. A result achieved
by this study as well. Furthermore, our findings are consistent with the research of Ferris and
Jagannathan, Ferris et al and Fama and Jensen (1983) that found firm performance to have a
positive and significant correlation with  Mean Directorships.  The significance of  Mean Tenure  as an
explanatory variable has been studied by Kaplan and Reishus (1990), but  their focus lies at
additional directorships accepted by top executives.   This makes it difficult to compare our
findings to theirs. They find a negative correlation to additional directorships accepted and we
can conclude that their findings are similar to ours since we find a negative correlation to  Mean
Directorships.  Dooley (1969) come to the conclusion that a board with a higher ratio of officers

                                                                          20
have a tendency to avoid multiple directorships. This can be compared to our results that a board
with a CEO present has on average lower  Mean Directorships  than those boards without a CEO.

5.5 ROBUSTNESS TESTS

We test the robustness of our findings in the multivariate regression by first replacing the dummy
variable,  Young Company, with the age of the company as a continuous variable.  The results are
provided in Table 14 and we find that age of the company has a statistically significant negative
impact on  Mean Directorships, even though the magnitude of the impact is rather small. The small
magnitude can be  explained by the fact that  Company Age  is measured in years and that just one
year in difference does not have a huge impact but aggregated in years it could potentially have.
Since company age show, with significance, the same impact the  Young Company  has  as our first
variable, we conclude that our choice of proxy does not affect the outcome of the regressions.

The robustness test results  for  Size  with the replacement with  Sales  are presented in Table 15 in
Appendix  A,  and  we find that the impact has the  same direction as before. However, it is only
significant at the 10 percent level. Yet, with the replacement of assets to  Number of Employees, we
find that this latter variable is significant at the one percent level and roughly shows the same
positive magnitude as assets do. Hence, we conclude that our choice of proxy does not affect the
outcome of the regressions.

When we replace  Return on Assets 2004  with the  Operating Margin  2004  we find that it also show a
positive impact on  Mean Directorships,  although the magnitude of the impact is relatively small.
Since both are statistically significant at the one percent level, we conclude that our choice of
proxy does not affect the outcome of the regressions.  These results can be found in Table 16.

6. IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

The fact that multiple directors exist could be used to argue that the supply of directors is smaller
than the demand for them. This line of reasoning would lead to the conclusion that multiple
directorships is a consequence of  market imperfections within the labour market for directors.
However, this rather simplistic way of interpreting multiple directorship, neglects the fact that
companies may in fact want to have directors serving as directors elsewhere too. These two

                                                                          21
conflicting ways of interpreting multiple directorships, raises the question whether it is an
unconscious or a conscious decision made by companies to have multiple directors.

The results show that holding more than one directorship is not  common among directors.  Even
if  multiple directorships  is interpreted  as a consequence of market imperfections, we would still
be able to argue that because of the rather low prevalence of multiple directorships, it could be
concluded that the market for directors is almost efficient in reality. If we abandon the market
imperfections interpretation and see multiple directorships as something that is valued either by
companies or directors, we quickly go from seeing the low prevalence as a sign of almost
efficiency to wanting to understand the underlying causes for it.

Our study implies three main causes for the prevalence of multiple directorships, where two of
them take the perspective of the company and the third of the director. Furthermore, a
restriction for the directors is identified, which impacts the number of directorships held by
them.

6.1 THREE CAUSES OF MULTIPLE DIRECTORSHIPS

We believe one of the mechanisms leading to the creation of multiple directorships is some
companies’ need for maintaining and managing relationships with key customers and suppliers
and other important stakeholders. By letting a company’s board member sit on customer and
supplier boards it strengthens the relationship and enable for closer cooperation. We come to this
conclusion by an analysis of  the determinants of  Mean Directorships. It is evident that size is
positively and significantly related to  multiple directorships  indicating  that  Mean Directorships  is a
large-firm phenomenon.  Similar to Booth and Deli (1996) we believe the reason for this  to be
that larger firms have a naturally larger external contracting environment. They have a higher
frequency of negotiations and thus  use  multiple directors as a way of simplifying these
negotiations. Through common board members, with insight into the  companies, it should be
easier to come to a conclusion to what decisions profit the companies the most. Furthermore, the
board  size  also  indicates  a  cause  of  multiple  directorships  being  a  company’s  need  for
networking. A larger board leads to higher  Mean  Directorships. If every director enters the company
with an array of possible business contacts to the company, the company would probably, for the
reasons stated above, want to engage with some of these contacts by letting its board members
sit on those boards. Thus, for every additional board member recruited to a board, the possible
companies for which the company would want to place its board members increase.  Moreover,
we believe the results that young companies have higher  Mean Directorships  implies  that they have
a need to recruit multiple directors in order to have a foundation from where they can create new

                                                                          22
business contacts.  To have multiple directors can thus be  viewed as a conscious decision  for
some companies.

Another explanation to the existence of multiple directorships is  some companies’  need for
recruiting experienced directors possessing some sort of expertise or other valuable characteristic,
henceforth  called a skilled director.  When this demand for experienced directors exceeds the
supply of the experienced directors it leads to a necessity of sharing the directors among the
companies demanding them. This creates multiple directorships among the experienced directors
since they will be sitting on several boards in order to satisfy the demand. This cause is supported
by the findings of the determinants of multiple directorships. First, large firms are evidently more
difficult for a board to monitor and are thus in need of directors capable of doing this. In our
results we find that larger  firms have higher  Mean Directorships  implying  that they demand more
expertise directors than are supplied and thus leading to creation of multiple directorships.
Second, the number of board members could be viewed as a signal of the company’s complexity.
A  more complex company would need more board directors in order to tackle the different
aspects of the company strategy and these directors would also need to have the skills to monitor
such a complex company. Our findings support an excess demand of these  skilful  directors since
higher number of board members lead to more directorships held. Third, a young company also
experience this shortage of supply of skilled directors, leading to multiple directorships. Young
companies’ usually does not have the expertise gained by years of experience of  strategizing  and
are in need of recruiting directors possessing this expertise. This is in line Hermalin’s research
from 1988 saying that directors add experience and expertise to the board. In our results we find
that  young companies have on average more multiple directors further supporting the shortage
supply of skilled directors as a possible cause for multiple directorships. Finally, by analysing the
Mean Directorships  for different industries we find that the two  industries  having the highest  Mean
Directorships  are human health and social work activities as well as education. These two industries
have during the past years been undergoing a deregulation in Sweden. According to Ferris and
Jagannathan  (2001), a regulated company has fewer multiple directorships because of less
competition and we argue that the increased competition within the two industries creates a
greater demand for directors having the abilities to handle higher competition. Since the skilled
directors are in lesser supply, multiple directorships are created. In contrast to the previous cause,
the need for networking, is  this not necessarily a conscious decision made by the company. The
multiple directorships created are merely  a result  of the excess demand for these skilled
directors.

                                                                          23
We argue in the previous two paragraphs that companies either have a direct or indirect demand
for multiple directors. The common ground for when either choosing a director because of the
network opportunity or when  choosing a director because of scarce expertise, is that companies
are dependent on the willingness of director to act as multiple director. Without a director’s
willingness to serve several boards, multiple directorships would not exist. The motives of the
directors for serving on multiple boards are therefore of interest. We believe that our findings
along with previous research imply that some directors are not only interested in the wellbeing of
the company, but directors take on more directorships in  order to pursue their own motives, a
form of empire building. According to Mace (1986) are acceptance of additional directorships a
way for directors to achieve prestige and acceptance from their peers. This becomes evident in
our results where some variables  indicate  a director’s need for prestige achievement. One of these
variables  is  firm size. Due to the nature of large firms being more difficult to monitor and thus
requiring more skills, and because of the power and influence it brings being a director  for such a
large firm, we argue that they are attractive for those directors wanting to achieve respect from
their peers. This becomes evident since larger firms have on average more multiple directorships.
The variable, number of board members, have a similar interpretation. Companies with larger
boards have more multiple directorships indicating that directors are willing to be multiple
directors for those companies, probably due to the prestige associated with complex companies.
Furthermore, our results  show increasing  Mean Directorships  for firms with higher return on assets
three years prior. This is an indication of the reputational effect, mentioned by Fama and Jensen
(1983), meaning that directors are attracted to firms doing well in order to continue building their
directorship empire. What further strengthens our idea of directors engaging in empire building is
that our results indicate that a company board, which has directors sitting a shorter period of
time will hold more multiple directorships.  The implication of this is that multiple directors seem
not to be as loyal to a specific company as directors holding only one directorship are.  We reason
about it as multiple directors stay a shorter period of time to receive a merit of being on a specific
board in order to achieve  more prestigious directorships in the future.

A  director’s willingness to hold multiple directorships is not a sufficient explanation enough for
the creation of multiple directorships. Restrictions exist preventing directors to  accept or hold the
amount of directorships  wanted. Through our explanatory variable analysis we find that the two
main restrictions are the time available to the directors and the competence they posses.  Ferris et
al  (2003) write that  lack  of time is  the  foremost reason for directors declining directorship offers.
This is consistent with our results in the multivariate regression. Decreasing  Return on Assets  leads
to decreased  Mean Directorships. The interpretation being that directors of poor performing firms

                                                                          24
need to focus on its own company in order to solve the situation, thus leaving no or little time to
hold additional directorships.  The same results are found when studying the effect a CEO on a
board has on  Mean Directorships. The CEO himself will have both obligations as a CEO and
director and thus have limited time available to hold additional directorships. Dooley (1969) came
to the same conclusion saying that companies ruled by managers  have on average fewer multiple
directors on the board. Furthermore, the other directors on the board will also need to spend
more time on their own company since one of the directors, the CEO, will be somewhat
preoccupied by his CEO obligations. These two arguments  are  supported by the results that a
board with a CEO  as a director has on average lower multiple directors.  Moreover, a director on
a larger board, in terms of number of board seats, will have more time to hold multiple
directorships since larger boards are often  unwieldy,  making it more difficult to see each
director’s personal contribution. This is consistent with our results showing that companies with
larger boards have higher Mean Directorships. Additionally, the skills of a director determine  its
level of attractiveness on the market for directors. It  seems to be a shortage of skilled directors,
giving them the opportunity to sit on multiple boards.

6.2 CONCLUSION

The low  incidence of multiple directorships  suggests that the market for directors, even from a
critical point of view, is almost efficient. However, because multiple directorships still is an
observable phenomenon the underlying reasons for its existence is of importance and the
conclusion we draw is that multiple directorships is a consequence of three main causes. The first
being the networking opportunity multiple directorships offer. The second being the scarcity of
expert directors and the last reason being the motive of a director to  gain prestige  and  be
influential,  and hence engage in empire building. The bottom line is that multiple  directorships is
both a valued occurrence and an outcome of market imperfections. Perhaps would multiple
directorships even be a more prevalent phenomenon if it were not for the time restriction faced
by the directors.

However, critiques regarding multiple directorships seem to have exaggerated the incidence and
implications of multiple directorships. Even seeing multiple directorships as a consequence of
market imperfections, it could be argued that the prevalence of it is low, and hence unnecessary
to regulate against it. By regulating against multiple directorships, we argue, would force firms to
recruit  lesser-suited  candidates, due to the companies being unable to share the skilled directors.
Companies would also need to find other ways to network with  suppliers and other contractual

                                                                          25
partners, if there was a regulation against holding multiple directorships. Since we acknowledge
that there is an incentive by directors to build a directorship empire, we suggest  stimulating  the
future supply of  skilled  directors.

6.3 FUTURE RESEARCH

Our hope is that this thesis will inspire other researchers into continuing the research of the
underlying reasons for the existence of multiple directorships. We are aware of the fact that there
are probably additional perspectives and underlying causes to investigate further.  One example
could be  the  existence of  information asymmetry between current and potential investors  and  it
could be of interest to  examine  the potential signalling effects  multiple directorship  offers  to this
asymmetry. Furthermore, a comparison between public and private companies should be done to
investigate potential differences between them. Another area for future research to tackle is how
board ownership affects  the motives of directors to engage  in multiple directorships. This is an
important aspect to examine further in order to see if the incentives of directors to build a
directorship empire are affected if a director becomes an owner of the company.  Moreover, in
order to determine if choosing  a multiple director is a conscious or unconscious decision, future
research need to investigate further the decisions made by the recruiter and what the causes and
arguments are for the recruitment of an multiple director. It would also be interesting to  perform
a qualitative study of how often and the reason why a director neglects an additional directorship
to better understand the  incentives  and the restrictions faced by directors. A last suggestion for
future researchers is to do a qualitative analysis  of the prevalence of directors that sits on supplier
and customer boards, to further  investigate our  conclusion that multiple directorships serve  the
function of networking opportunities.

                                                                          26
REFERENCES

Booth, J.R.  And  Deli, D.N. (1996), “Factors Affecting the Number of Outside Directorships Held by
CEOs”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 81  -104.

Core, J.E., Holthausen, R.W. and Larcker, D. F. (1999), “Corporate Governance, Chief Executive Officer
Compensation, and Firm Performance”, Journal  of Financial Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 371-406.

Cotter, J.F., Shivdasani, A. and Zenner, M.  (1997), “Do Independent Directors Enhance Target
Shareholder Wealth during Tender Offers?”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 43, pp. 195-218.

Dagens Industri  (2013), ”Debatt: Ska vd:n ha styrelseuppdrag?”, January 10. (Accessed: 2013-03-10),
<http://www.di.se/artiklar/2013/1/10/debatt-ska-vdn-ha-styrelseuppdrag/>.

Dooley, P.C. (1969), “The Interlocking Directorate”, American Economic Review, Vol. 59, pp. 314-323.

European Commission (2006), ”Den nya definitionen av SMF-företag”, Publikationer om Näringsliv och
Industri, (Accessed: 2013-03-10)
<http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/files/sme_definition/sme_user_guide_sv.pdf>.

Fama, E.F. and Jensen, M.C. (1983), “Separation of Ownership and Control”, Journal of Law and
Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 301-326.

Ferris, S.P. and Jagannathan, M. (2001), “The Incidence and Determinants of Multiple Corporate
Directorships”,  Applied Economics Letters, Vol.  8, pp. 31-  35.

Ferris, S.P., Jagannathan, M. and Pritchard, A.C. (2003), “Too  Busy to Mind the Business? Monitoring by
Directors with Multiple Board Appointments”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, pp. 1087-1111.

Fich, E.M. and Shivdasani, A. (2006), “Are Busy Boards Effective Monitors?”, The Journal of Finance,
Vol. 61, pp. 689-724.

Gilson, S.C. (1990), “Bankruptcy, Boards, Banks and Blockholders: Evidence on Changes in Corporate
Ownership and Control When Firms Default”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 355-387.

Hermalin, B.E. and Weisbach, M. (1988), “The Determinants of Board Composition”, RAND Journal of
Economics, Vol. 19, pp. 589-606.

Kaplan, S.N. and Reishus, D. (1990), “Outside Directorships and Corporate Performance”, Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 389-410.

Mace, M. (1986),  Directors: Myth and Reality,  Harvard Business School Press Boston, MA.

Miwa, Y. and Ramseyer, J.M (2000), “Corporate Governance in Transitional Economies: Lessons
from the Prewar Japanese Cotton Textile Industry”, Journal of Legal Studies, Vol. 29, pp. 171-203.

Mizruchi, M.S. (1996), ”What Do Interlocks Do? An Analysis, Critique, and Assessment of Research on
Interlocking Directorates”, Annual Review of Sociology, Vol. 22, pp. 271-298.

Shivdasani, A. and Yermack, D. (1999), “CEO Involvement in the Selection of New Board Members:
An Empirical Analysis”,  Journal of Finance, Vol.  54, pp. 1829–1853.

Weisbach, M.S. (1988), ”Outside Directors and CEO Turnover”,  Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 20,
pp. 431-460.

                                                                          27
Wooldridge, J. M. (2009),  Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach.  4th Ed. Canada: South-Western
Cengage Learning.

Yermack, D. (1996), “ A Higher Market Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of Directors”,
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 185-205.

                                                                          28
APPENDIX A

         Table1. Summary Statistics  -  Number of Directorships per Director

                              Mean       P10   Median       p90      Max       Std.
    Directorships per Director       1,11       1,00       1,00       1,00       8,00        0,46

                Table 2. Frequency of Number of Directorships

                           Freque
Directorships per Director                   Absolute Percentage       Cumulative Percentage
                              ncy
            1                  3780              91,70%                    91,70%
           2                  263               6,38%                    98,08%
           3                  57               1,38%                    99,47%
           4                   9               0,22%                    99,68%
           5                   6               0,15%                    99,83%
           6                   3               0,07%                    99,90%
           7                   2               0,05%                    99,95%
           8                   2               0,05%                   100,00%

          Table 3. Summary Statistics  -  Number of Directorships per Gender

                        Mean     Median      Max       Std.     Wilcoxon z-score (p-value)
    Male                 1,12        1,00       8,00       0,45              1,581
    Female               1,10        1,00       8,00       0,49               0,11

                 Table 4. Number of Directorships  -  CEO Director

                        Mean   Median       Max       Std.      Wilcoxon z-score (p-value)
  CEO Director           1,12       1,00       8,00       0,85               2,738
  Other Directors          1,29       1,00        4,00       0,39               0,01

                                                                          29
                       Table 5. Summary Statistics  -  Mean Directorships

                                 Mean      p10   Median      p90     Max      Std.
               Mean Directorships      1,27       1,00       1,00       2,00       8,00       0,64

                      Table 6. Summary Statistics  -  Explanatory Variables

                      Mean   Median       p10       p90      Min      Max      Std.   Observations
Size                      2,28       0,12       0,03       1,88       0,02     637,00      20,50           1421
Nr. of Board Members     3,23       2,00       1,00       7,00       1,00      18,00       2,52           1421
R&D Scaled              0,08       0,04       0,01       0,22       0,00       0,60       0,10           105
Mean Tenure            2,83       2,51       1,42       4,67       0,23      10,62       1,44          1387
Mean Age               50,40      50,50      40,00      60,00      22,00      86,00       7,78          1421
Company Age           19,77      18,00       8,00      36,00       1,00      36,00      10,32          1421
Return on Assets 2004      0,10       0,04       -0,09       0,28       -5,00      24,83       0,82           1392
Female Ratio             0,15       0,00       0,00       0,50       0,00       1,00       0,26           1421
CEO Director             0,13       0,00       0,00       1,00       0,00       1,00       0,34           1421

                       Table 7. Summary Statistics  -  Dummy Variables

                                                     Observations   Percentage
                     Young Company                     323        23%
                      Mature Company                    1098        77%
                       Total                               1421        100%

                      CEO Director                       400        28%
                      Other Directors                      1021         72%
                       Total                               1421        100%

                     Regulated Company                   77         5%
                      Non-Regulated Company             1344         95%
                       Total                               1421        100%

                                                                               30
         Table 8. Non-Parametric Tests on Company and Board Characteristics
                           Mean and (Standard Deviation)

                                                                  Spearman Correlation     K Wallis
                                Q1    Q2    Q3    Q4                      (p-value)    (p-value)
Size                             1,17   1,24   1,32   1,33                           0,219       69,234
                                       (0,71    0,57    0,72   0,54)                              (0,00)         (0,00)
Nr. of Board Members            1,18   1,21   1,30   1,38                           0,299      132,073
                                       (0,64    0,58    0,65   0,68)                              (0,00)         (0,00)
Return on Assets 2004             1,25   1,25   1,31   1,25                           -0,021         1,179
                                       (0,53    0,60    0,83   0,60)                              (0,43)         (0,76)
Mean Tenure                     1,29   1,32   1,27   1,20                          -0,011        8,333
                                      (0,68    0,82    0,57   0,46)                              (0,68)         (0,04)
Mean Age                       1,19   1,35   1,34   1,18                          0,055       39,977
                                       (0,57    0,80    0,70   0,42)                              (0,04)         (0,00)
Company Age                    1,35   1,27   1,22   1,23                          -0,038        4,007
                                       (0,83    0,70    0,47   0,54)                              (0,16)         (0,26)
Female Ratio                    1,18   1,21   1,30   1,38                           0,299      132,073
                                       (0,64    0,58    0,65   0,68)                              (0,00)         (0,00)
R&D Scaled                     1,33   1,22   1,20   1,44                          0,083        3,513
                                       (0,54    0,44    0,34   0,70)                              (0,40)         (0,32)

                            Table 9. Mean  Directorships for
                          Young and Mature Companies

                                 Mean    Median   Max   Std.         Wilcoxon z-score
          Young Company            1,35        1,00    8,00   0,83                     -1,816
          Mature Company           1,24        1,00    7,00   0,58                      0,07

                            Table 10. Mean  Directorships for
                    Companies with and without CEO Directors

                                  Mean    Median   Max   Std.         Wilcoxon z-score
          CEO Director               1,22        1,00    3,20   0,43                     -0,184
          No CEO Director           1,28        1,00    8,00   0,71                      0,85

                                                                             31
           0,4 0,1 0,5 0,6 1,8 2,5 0,2 7,6 0,4 1,7 3,1 35,23,4 1,2 0,5 6,3    2,3

       Mean Size (Assets in Billion SEK)

       Std.2,160,750,760,840,530,500,490,390,340,420,460,280,280,170,180,00   0,64


       Max6,503,003,338,003,505,804,003,002,004,002,802,002,501,501,601,00   8,00


          1,001,071,001,001,001,001,001,001,001,001,001,001,001,051,001,00   1,00
     Median


          2,351,491,371,351,281,271,221,221,201,191,171,161,111,101,071,00   1,27

      Mean Directorships

         11440 36 95151766725523359    56 92 34057 53 15
                                    1106                    4591

      Nr. of Board Members

         23 12 15          91 45 12    16 24    8  17 5
                  336131211         373      102            1421

Table 11. Summary Statistics - Industries

      Nr. of Companies




















      IndustryHuman health and social work activitiesEducationAdministrative and support service activitiesWholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcyclesConstructionProfessional, scientific and technical activitiesInformation and communicationElectricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supplyOther service activitiesManufacturingAgriculture, forestry and fishingFinancial and insurance activitiesTransportation and storageWater supply; sewerage, waste management and remediation activitiesAccommodation and food service activitiesMining and QuarryingTotal
                                                      32
                                                                       1050.001
                                                          0.00827(0.0387)1.327***(0.141)



                                                       (0.0310)        (0.0222)1,4210.002
                                                  -0.0575*        1.281***



                                             0.0402(0.0642)               (0.0183)1,4210.000
                                                                 1.259***



                                       0.113**(0.0492)                     (0.0174)1,4210.005
                                                                 1.239***



                                                                      (0.0818)1,4210.000
                                -0.00102(0.00151)                       1.316***



                                                                      (0.0370)1,3910.004
                          -0.0279***(0.00940)                             1.348***



                                                                      (0.0174)1,3920.001
                   0.0178**(0.00768)                                   1.263***



                                                                      (0.0251)1,4210.005
             0.0184***(0.00538)                                         1.206***



Table 12. Simple Regression - Mean Directorships         (0.168)1,4210.008
       0.0334***(0.00865)                                               0.629***










      Natural Log of Size (Assets in SEK)Nr. of Board MembersReturn on Assets 2004Mean TenureMean AgeYoung CompanyFemale RatioCEO DirectorR&D ScaledConstantObservationsR-squaredRobust standard errors in parentheses*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                33
                                      Table 13. Multivariate Regressions

                                     (1) Mean Directorships without Industry Dummies (2) Mean Directorships with Industry Dummies
Company Characteristics

Natural Log of Size (Assets in SEK)                       0.0299***                                 0.0412***
                                                          (0.00894)                                   (0.00929)
Return on Assets 2004                                 0.0216***                                0.0196***
                                                          (0.00746)                                   (0.00741)
Young Company Dummy                              0.119**                                 0.109**
                                                            (0.0494)                                    (0.0476)

Board Characteristics

Nr. of Board Members                               0.0156***                                0.0141**
                                                          (0.00558)                                   (0.00603)
CEO Director Dummy                               -0.0663**                                -0.0777**
                                                            (0.0316)                                    (0.0331)
Mean Tenure                                      -0.0291***                                -0.0221**
                                                          (0.00929)                                   (0.00889)

Industry Dummies                              NO                              YES

Constant                                          0.721***                                 0.438**
                                                             (0.186)                                      (0.184)

Observations                                        1,362                                   1,362
R-squared                                          0.023                                   0.088

Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                         Table 14. Robustness Test - Young Company

                                                                Mean Directorships

               Natural Log of Size                             0.0293***           0.0322***
                                                                 (0.00881)           (0.00900)
              Number of Board Members                     0.0172***          0.0175***
                                                                 (0.00560)           (0.00565)
               Return on Assets 2004                          0.0195***           0.0179**
                                                                 (0.00738)           (0.00722)
               Mean Tenure                                 -0.0237***          -0.0239***
                                                                 (0.00839)           (0.00850)
               CEO Director                                 -0.0470            -0.0486
                                                                   (0.0324)             (0.0325)
              Young Company                            0.125**
                                                                     (0.0496)
             Company Age                                            -0.00550***
                                                                                         (0.00183)
               Constant                                     0.699***           0.780***
                                                                    (0.180)              (0.183)

               Observations                                   1,385              1,385
               R-squared                                      0.022              0.023

                 Robust standard errors in parentheses
                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                             34
                  Table 15. Robustness Test - Return on Assets

                                                            Mean Directorships

Natural Log of Size                                     0.0293***          0.0297***
                                                           (0.00881)           (0.00875)
Number of Board Members                             0.0172***          0.0169***
                                                           (0.00560)           (0.00547)
Return on Assets 2004                                 0.0195***
                                                              (0.00738)
Operating Margin 2004                                               3.59e-05***
                                                                                      (6.31e-06)
Mean Tenure                                         -0.0237***          -0.0233***
                                                           (0.00839)           (0.00823)
CEO Director                                         -0.0470            -0.0391
                                                             (0.0324)            (0.0322)
Young Company                                      0.125**            0.124**
                                                             (0.0496)            (0.0489)

Constant                                             0.699***           0.692***
                                                              (0.180)             (0.178)

Observations                                           1,385              1,414
R-squared                                             0.022              0.022
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                         Table 16. Robustness Test - Size

                                                   Mean Directorships

Natural Log of Size                  0.0293***
                                           (0.00881)
Natural Log of Turnover                               0.0193*
                                                                 (0.0100)
Natural Log of Nr. of Employees                                       0.0376***
                                                                                       (0.0137)
Number of Board Members             0.0172***          0.0201***          0.0189***
                                       (0.00560)           (0.00556)           (0.00552)
Return on Assets 2004                  0.0195***          0.0170**           0.0165**
                                       (0.00738)           (0.00769)           (0.00760)
Mean Tenure                        -0.0237***          -0.0227***          -0.0224***
                                       (0.00839)           (0.00857)           (0.00863)
CEO Director                         -0.0470            -0.0565*           -0.0556*
                                        (0.0324)            (0.0317)            (0.0315)
Young Company                      0.125**            0.123**            0.125**
                                        (0.0496)            (0.0498)            (0.0498)

Constant                            0.699***           0.875***           1.084***
                                         (0.180)             (0.202)             (0.0688)

Observations                          1,385              1,385              1,385
R-squared                             0.022              0.018              0.022
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                                    35
   APPENDIX B

                           Table 17. Summarized Variable Description

Variable                                 Definition

Nr of Directorships                           Number of directorships for each individual director.

Female                                  A dummy variable which takes the value of one if the individual director is a female, otherwise it takes the value of zero.
                                                               We use the SSN to determine whether an individual director is a female. If the second last digit is an even number,
                                                                    it give us the information that it is a female.

CEO Director- individual level                     A dummy variable which takes the value of one if the individual director is also a CEO, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Mean Directorships                           The average number of directorships per board director witin a company.

Number of Board Members                     The number of board members within a board.

Mean Tenure                              The average tenure of the board directors presented in years.

Mean Age                               The average age of the board directors within a board.
                                                                 We calculate the mean age for directors within a board by first calculating the age of each individual director,
                                                              through the SSN, and then take the average for all directors within each company.

Female Ratio                               The number of female directors over the total number of directors witin a board.

CEO Director                             A dummy variable which takes the value of one if the CEO of the company also sits on the board.

Natural Log of Size                           The natural logarithm of size is taken in order to make the interpretaion meaningful.

Return on Assets 2004                         The return on assets is calculated as the earnings before interest expences (EBIE) over total asses in 2004.

Scaled Research & Development                   Research and Development expenses over the sales in 2007.

Young Company                           A dummy variable which takes the value of one if the company is considered young,
                                                               otherwise it takes the value of zero. The definition to be considered a young company is that it has been established before 1997.

Industry Dummies

Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply          Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Water supply; sewerage, waste management etc           Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Human health and social work activities               Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Professional, scientific and technical activities            Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Accommodation and food service activities             Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Mining and quarrying                          Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Financial and insurance activities                    Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Construction                               Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Education                                Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Information and communication                   Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Transportation and storage                       Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Administrative and support service activities             Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Manufacturing                              Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles        Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Agriculture, forestry and fishing                    Taking the value of one if the company is in the industry, otherwise it takes the value of zero.

Robustness Variables

Natural Log of Sales                           The natural logarithm of total sales during 2007 to proxy for the size of the company.

Natural Log of Nr. of Employees                  Thenatural logarithm of number of employees within a company to proxy for the size of the company.

Operating Margin 2004                         The operating margin for the company calculated as the earnings before interest expenses over total sales in 2007,
                                                           to proxy for the performance of the company.

Company age                             The age of a company in years.

                                                                              36
                                                                  ‡
Table 18.  OLS Regression Model Assumptions

Assumption MLR 1. Linearity in parameters
The model in the population can be written

                    !  = !! +  !!!! +  !!!! + ⋯ +  !!!! + !,

where  !!, !!, … , !!  are the unknown parameters (constants) of interest  and  u  is an unobservable
random error or disturbance term.

Assumption MLR 2. Random sampling from the population
We have a random sample on  n  observations, {(x!", x!", … , x!", y!):  i  = 1, 2, …, n}, following the
population model in Assumption MLR 1.

Assumption MLR 3. No perfect Collinearity
In the sample (and therefore in the population), none  of the independent variables are  constant,
and there  are no exact linear relationships  among the independent variables.

Assumption MLR 4. Zero conditional mean
The error term  u  has an expected value of zero given any values of the independent variables. In
other words,

                                E (!|x!, x!, … , x!)  =  0

‡  Wooldridge (2009)

                                                                          37
Table 19. Model Specifications for Simple Regressions

For each  independent variable we specify the model as
                             !  =  !! +  !!! + !,
where y is the dependent variable,  !  is the independent variable,  !!  is the intercept,  !!  is the
slope parameter which measures the effect of one increase of the independent variable and finally
u  is the error term.
The specific models are as follows:
             !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!"!"#$% !"# !" !"#$  + !
            !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  =  !! +  !!!". !" !"#$% !"#$"%&  + !
            !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  =  !! +  !!!"#$%& !" !""#$" 2004 + !
               !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!"#$ !"#$%"  + !
                 !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!"#$ !"# + !
              !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!"#$% !"#$%&' + !
               !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!"#$%" !"#$!  + !
                !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!"# !"#$%&'# + !
                !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#  = !! +  !!!&! !"#$%& + !

Table 20. Model Specifications for Multivariate Regressions

In the multivariate regression we specify the model as
                    !  = !! +  !!!! +  !!!! + ⋯ +  !!!! + !,
where y is the dependent variable,  !!  through  !!  are the independent variables and  u  is the error
term.  !!  is the intercept and  !!  though  !!  are slope parameters measuring the effect on the
dependent variable of one increase in the independent variable,  keeping the other variables
constant.

Multivariate regression without controlling for industries:

                                                                          38
 !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#
             =  !! +  !!!"#!"#$ !"# !" !"#$  + !!!"#$%& !" !""#$" 2004
             + !!!"#$% !"#$%&'  +  !!!". !" !"#$% !"#$"%&  + !!!"# !"#$%&'#
            + !!!"#$ !"#$%" + !

Multivariate regression when controlling for industries:
 !"#$ !"#$%&'#(ℎ!"#
             =  !! +  !!!"#$%"& !"# !" !"#$  + !!!"#$%& !" !""#$" 2004
             + !!!"#$% !"#$%&'  +  !!!". !" !"#$% !"#$"%&  + !!!"# !"#$%&'#
            + !!!"#$ !"#$%" + !"#$%&'( !"#$%"& !"##$ !"#$"%&'( + !

                                                                          39