Government’s effect on too big to fail guarantees

                                   ∗
             Magnus Arén       Anton Dahlberg
                      22359                    20489

                        May 15, 2013

         Bachelor thesis in Finance, Stockholm School of Economics

                              Abstract
         After a period of bank crises around Europe, it is now the govern-
      ment’s around Europe that are facing financial and economical difficulties.
      Coming from a period where bank bailouts became common practice, the
      European debt crisis now raises doubts about ability of governments to
      rescue failing banks. With a sample of large European banks from 17
      countries in the years 2004-2012, we set out to investigate whether the
      financial and sovereign turmoil of the past few years have affected bank
      guarantees, as measured by their credit rating uplift. We find that the
      guarantees afforded to banks have changed dramatically over the sample
       period, and that countries in crisis affords their banks less extensive guar-
      antees. Further we show that bank size, a government’s debt level and the
      yields on government bond is negatively related to bank guarantees. We
      also find that the macroeconomic conditions in a country seem to have
      little effect on the guarantees, unless economic inertia is considered. We
      conclude that the extent of bank guarantees, seem to be affected by gov-
      ernments’ fiscal capacity, and that both bank size and government ability
      can render banks too large to save.

Keywords: Banking, government, sovereign crisis, too big to fail, too big to
save

   ∗
    Both authors wish to thank our supervisor Prof. Pehr Wissén for his valuable input and
suggestions. We also wish to thank our respective friends and families for their support and
patience. All possible errors are our own.
Contents

1   Introduction                                                  2

2   Review of previous literature                                   4
   2.1   Literature on governments and TBTF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
   2.2   Literature on credit ratings and TBTF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7

3   Data and methodology                                        9
   3.1   Panel data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
         3.1.1   Too big to fail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
         3.1.2   Country variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
         3.1.3   Data sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
   3.2   Methodology   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15

4   Empirical analysis                                            17
   4.1   Descriptive statistics   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
   4.2   Model estimations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
         4.2.1   Regression results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
         4.2.2   Regression analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
   4.3   Robustness checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24

5   Conclusion                                                  26

6   Appendix A                                                33

                                   1
1   Introduction

In May of 1984 Continental Illinois, the seventh largest bank in the United States
at the time (Stern and Feldman, 2004) was rescued from defaulting on its debt
obligations by the United States government. The $1 billion rescue package not
only protected depositors, but also the bank’s stock- and bondholders (Morgan and
Stiroh, 2005). The Comptroller of the Currency, Todd C. Conover , who engineered
the bailout received criticism for what many observers considered an exception-
ally generous protection (Stern and Feldman, 2004).  Following the controversy,
Conover was called to a hearing at the United States Congress in September 1984
to testify. After admitting that other large banks might be eligible for government
support, Congressman Stewart McKinney asserted that:

         ”Mr.  Chairman, let us not bandy words.  We have a new kind of

                                                                                          1
      bank. It is called too big to fail. TBTF, and it is a wonderful bank.”

While Conover never explicitly named which other banks that would receive gov-
ernment support, he admitted that this policy would apply to America’s eleven
largest banks.   O’Hara and Shaw (1990) used event study methodology to test
the e↵ect of Conover’s testimony on the stock market and found significant pos-
itive wealth e↵ects for the eleven largest banks.  Since O’Hara and Shaw (1990)
the topic have been expanded, with research further confirming the existence of
too big to fail (henceforth TBTF), examining its implications and its cost, and
what determines whether a bank is considered TBTF. The topic has seen a revival
since the global financial crisis of 2008, which saw governments around the world
making explicit the implicit guarantees to large banks. The financial turmoil that
followed, especially in small countries like Iceland and Ireland, raised new ques-
tions related to TBTF: were banks outgrowing their sovereigns? Had they become

   1
    Stern and Feldman (2004, p. 13)

                                   2
too big to save (TBTS)? Several studies (Brown and Dinc, 2011; Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt
and Huizinga, 2012, e.g.) have shown that the relative size of banks in relation to
their sovereign could have a negative e↵ect on the protection banks receive. There
seem to be a connection, then, between the level of support, and the size of the
economy.
    In this paper we set out to answer whether a government’s financial position and
the economic situation a↵ects the implicit guarantees that TBTF entails.  More
specifically, we ask:  have the financial and sovereign turmoil of the past few years
a↵ected the guarantees a↵orded to large European banks?  Employing a panel data
approach with fixed e↵ects estimations, we examine large banks in 17 European
countries over the nine-year period between 2004 and 2012; a period characterized
by both a time of stability and growth, a time of financial turmoil, and lately a
sovereign debt crisis in parts of Europe. We proxy for TBTF by using Moody’s
credit ratings, and derive the implicit guarantee as the di↵erence between a bank’s
long-term credit rating (which takes into account external support) and its stand-
alone credit rating (which measures a banks intrinsic capacity), following Bijlsma
and Mocking (2013), and Schich and Lindh (2012).
   We find that guarantees received by banks have changed dramatically over our
sample period: from a stable and low level pre-crisis, to dramatically increasing
during the financial crisis, and finally declining during the European debt crisis.
Further, our results show that there is a clear di↵erence between the implicit
guarantees a↵orded to banks in the five crisis-economies Greece, Italy, Portugal,
Spain and Ireland (Castro, 2013), and the rest of Europe. These results suggest
that the economic climate and the state of a sovereign a↵ect the guarantees it can
a↵ord its banks.
   We further find that the implicit guarantees has a significantly negative rela-
tion to a government’s ability to raise funds, as measured by its debt level and

                                   3
the yield on government bonds.  We also find that bank size has a negative im-
pact on government guarantees.  This is in line with the TBTS hypothesis, that
large banks face smaller bailout prospects in fiscally strained countries (Demirg¨u¸c-
Kunt and Huizinga, 2012), suggesting that TBTF banks can become TBTS when
the financial and economic situation worsens.  This result is robust to including
macroeconomic determinants, and is consistent across all specification of our test.
The macroeconomic determinants overall does not show any significant relation to
the government guarantees. Introducing time lag e↵ect, though, our results show
that the overall economic situation is significantly related to the guarantee.
   Overall, while being careful in drawing too strong conclusions from our results
because of varying results and extreme values possibly introducing bias into the
estimations, we conclude that the European debt crisis seem to show that the
status of large banks, whether too big to fail or to big to save, depends not only
on the size of the bank itself, but on the overall strength of its sovereign.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:  in the next section we
review previous research on TBTF. In section 3 we describe the data, its sources
and the econometric model. Section 4 presents the empirical findings and discuss
their implications. Section 5 concludes this paper.

2   Review of previous literature

The notion of too big to fail, and its implications have been assessed through
various perspectives. You can broadly classify the empirically conducted studies on
TBTF into three categories; studies that approach the theory through event study
methodology, studies examining mergers and acquisitions, and studies focused
on a market distortion perspective.  There are attempts to conceptualize TBTF
by conducting single-bank to lender of last resort models, emphasizing the time-

                                   4
inconsistency of bank closure policy (Mailath and Mester, 1994; Freixas, 1999,
e.g.).   However, the vast majority of the papers on the subject are of empirical
character.
   O’Hara and Shaw (1990) was one of the first who set out to investigate the im-
plication of TBTF. They conducted an event study, investigating abnormal bank
equity returns, after the Comptroller of the Currency in the United States implied
comprehensive deposit insurance for eleven banks in USA. The study showed sig-
nificant positive residual returns on the day of the announcement for the banks
deemed TBTF, whereas smaller banks did not show any significant e↵ects.
   Mergers and acquisition-oriented studies have attempted to quantify and put a
value on the premium implied by TBTF. The most commonly tested hypothesis is
that banks pay higher premiums for acquisitions when they are perceived to lead
to the acquirer gaining TBTF status. Brewer and Jagtiani (2013) estimate that in
the US, between 1991 and 2004, financial institutions paid a premium of approx-
imately $14 billion to become TBTF. They used asset holdings of $100 billion as
the size-threshold for TBTF status. In a related manner, Kane (2000) examines
what he calls  megamergers  during the period 1991-1998, and finds evidence of
TBTF, concluding that institutions engage in megamergers to become too large
and benefit from system-risk premiums. Moreover, Kane show that such mergers
render stock value gains for acquirers around the announcement date.
   Instead of looking at equity pricing Penas and Unal (2004) consider the returns
to bond holders around US bank mergers in the period of 1991-1997. They find
that adjusted returns on merging banks’ bonds are positive across pre-merger and
announcement months. They argue the positive returns are attributed to gaining
TBTF status, albeit in addition to diversification and synergy gains. Consistent
with the reasoning of Brewer and Jagtiani (2013), Penas and Unal argue a thresh-
old in asset size for gaining the TBTF status. In common for these papers is the

                                   5
central role of bank size for examining and explaining TBTF.
   Size as a measurement of whether a bank is TBTF or not, is according to some
research not an optimal measurement. Recent studies by Zhou (2010), Moore and
Zhou (2012), and Barth and Schnabel (2013) suggest size in itself is not su cient
to determine a bank’s TBTF status. Rather, they argue, a bank’s systemic impor-
tance is what determines whether a bank is TBTF. Their approach is to measure
systemic importance through methods of calculating the probability of the distress
of a bank  j  given distress of banks  i.  Their approach is related to literature on
contagion e↵ects, common in the financial sector.  For an outline, see e.g.  Chen
(1999), who shows that contagion e↵ects may arise as a consequence of information
revealed to deposit owners after bank failure and how that in turn could initiate
bank runs because depositors fear their bank will experience financial trouble.
   V¨olz and Wedow (2011) and Balasubramnian and Cyree (2011), among oth-
ers, assess TBTF through a market distortion perspective. V¨olz and Wedow find
evidence for correlation between financial institution’s size relative GDP and CDS
spreads.   Controlling for risk and liquidity, with a panel data sample including
91 banks from 24 countries, a 1% increase in the size to GDP ratio is found to
reduce CDS spread by about 2 basis points. Consistent with the argument that
size a↵ect financing costs, Balasubramnian and Cyree (2011) finds evidence that
yield spreads reflect the bond market’s perception about large banks being TBTF.

2.1   Literature on governments and TBTF

Brown and Dinc (2011) shares close origins with this paper, in the sense that their
article account for a government’s fiscal position when investigating bank failure.
Brown and Dinc (2011) is, as far as our knowledge, the first paper to provide
evidence that a country’s ability to support its financial sector is reflected in its
public deficit, which analogously a↵ects its treatment of distressed banks. Their

                                   6
approach is to consider government takeover or closure decisions of banks in 21
emerging market economies during the 1990s.   By adopting a hazard standard

       2
model   they find evidence that a bank is more likely to be taken over by the
government if its own capital ratio is low. However, the bank is less likely to be
taken over, if the average capital ratio of other banks in the same country is low
as well. This is taken to be evidence of  too many to fail, as they state it, implying
that the sovereign may be unable to save many struggling banks simultaneously.
   A recent study from Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga (2012) examines a similar
question, that government finances impact financial institutions. They examine the
impact a country’s fiscal position have on bank valuation and credit default swap-
spreads. They investigate if banks are TBTF or rather too big to save (TBTS).
They find evidence, which suggest that a country’s public finances impose con-
straints on the generosity of the financial safety net, and analogously that these
limits are reflected in bank valuation and CDS-spreads. Brown and Dinc (2011)
and Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga (2012) both recognize the central role govern-
ments’ financial situation has on the TBTF status of banks. Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and
Huizinga illuminate this through a market perspective-oriented study while Brown
and Dinc are more oriented towards a government perspective.

2.2   Literature on credit ratings and TBTF

Rime (2005) set out to examine the potential e↵ect of TBTF expectations on
large banks issuer ratings from a market distortion perspective, looking at data
from the years 1999 to 2003. They use two measurements of TBTF: the natural
logarithm of total bank assets and total bank assets relative the total assets of the
banking sector of its home country, accounting for the fact that a bank may be
more important if it is big relative its home banking sector. In their model they

   2
    For an outline of a hazard standard model, see Wooldridge (2002, pp. 685-694)

                                   7
use credit rating institution issuer ratings, which considers all factors that decide
the capacity of the bank to repay its debt, including potential external support, as
the dependent variable. They test this against the individual bank ratings, which
only include the intrinsic capacity of the bank to repay its debt. They find that
both their size measures have a significant positive impact on bank issuer ratings.
Moreover, this e↵ect is larger for banks with low intrinsic financial strength.
   A study made by Schich and Lindh (2012) is closely related to this paper.
They set out to investigate the di↵erence between implicit government guaran-
tees to banks across countries, and whether these implicit guarantees change over
time. The authors employ credit ratings from Moody’s and Fitch to create a vari-
able,uplift, that measure the implicit government guarantees. They measure the
state of the governments by using government credit ratings and conclude, by using
data of 123 large European banks, that there are significant di↵erences in implicit
government guarantees for financial institutions in countries with di↵erent govern-
ment ratings. Further, they conclude that banks which benefit from these implicit
guarantees benefit from significantly lower funding cost, thus creating distortion
on the bank market.
   Bijlsma and Mocking (2013) perform a study in a similar fashion.  However,
they examine the relation between a bank’s funding costs and credit ratings. They
do this by collecting bank individual bond data on a daily basis and test how debt-
servicing costs change with the presence of external support. They use a similar
variable to Schich and Lindh (2012), but instead use a relative measure of the
uplift. They conclude that large banks experience higher rating uplifts, and that
banks with higher uplift do have funding advantages.   They also find a TBTS
e↵ect, consistent with e.g.  Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga (2012) and Barth and
Schnabel (2013), by showing that funding advantages diminishes for banks with
total assets above $1000 billion.

                                   8
3   Data and methodology

3.1   Panel data

The dataset consists of a panel of 37 banks from 17 countries within the European
Union from the years 2004 to 2012.  Table 1 lists all banks and countries in the
dataset. All banks represent the largest banks - in terms of total assets - in their
respective country for which data was available.
   The time period was decided upon by considerations of the economic climate
and also constrained by data availability. Earlier research on related topics have
often started around the year 2007, to include e↵ects of the global financial crisis
and the uncertainty that followed (Bijlsma and Mocking, 2013; Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt
and Huizinga, 2012, e.g.).   Our dataset stretches further back in time, to also
include a pre-crisis period.

3.1.1   Too big to fail

As described in section two, a number of methods have been employed to examine
TBTF. One method is to use event study methodology to test whether outcomes
of an event di↵er between larger and smaller banks (O’Hara and Shaw, 1990, e.g.).
Another method is to measure the e↵ect on market variables such as CDS spreads
and/or market to book value, controlling for size (Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga,
2012; Barth and Schnabel, 2013).   A third method makes use of credit rating
agencies’ ratings on firms to examine TBTF (Rime, 2005; Schich and Lindh, 2012;
Bijlsma and Mocking, 2013).   The latter of these methods allow us to create a
variable that can act as a measurement of government guarantees (Schich and
Lindh, 2012).
    A credit rating is an assessment of the likelihood that a debt issuer will be able
to meet their debt obligations (Stern and Feldman, 2004).  The rating agencies

                                   9
assign firms ratings in numeric of alphabetical scales, where the highest ratings
indicate a very low probability of the issuer not meeting its debt obligations. The
major rating agencies are the American firms Fitch, Moody’s and Standard &
Poor’s (Stern and Feldman, 2004). Each of these rating agencies publishes a set
of ratings assessing a banks’ ability to meet various debt obligations. In addition
to such ratings, Fitch and Moody’s release a  stand-alone credit rating  (Schich and
Lindh, 2012).  This rating only takes into account a banks’ intrinsic capacity to
meet its debt obligations (Rime, 2005).  We use Moody’s credit ratings because
of their availability. Moody’s stand-alone rating is called  Bank Financial Strength
Rating  (BFSR). It measures the likelihood that a bank will  ”require assistance
from third parties such as its owners, its industry group, or o cial institutions.”
(Moody’s, 2012, p. 29)
   To measure the assessment which includes external support we gather long-term
credit ratings (LTCR) for all banks in the sample. The LTCR measures a banks
ability to meet its domestic or foreign currency deposit obligations.  A separate
rating is released for both domestic and foreign currency. We gather Moody’s Bank
financial strength rating and the long-term deposit rating on foreign currency. The
ratings on foreign currency spans over a longer time period on Moody’s website
than does the domestic ratings, and allow us to gather ratings for the entire sample.
   The BFSR and LTCR are measured in di↵erent scales, where BFSR range from
A down to E with additional signs (+ and -) below A and above E, and LTCR
range from Aaa down to C, with numeric and alphabetical combinations further
specifying the rating (see Table 2 for the exact scales). We use the mapping table
from Moody’s (2012), and reproduced in Table 2, to convert the BFSR and the
LTCR into numerical values.   The LTCR is simply converted its corresponding
numerical value, while we calculate averages for BFSR values that corresponds to
more than one LTCR. We convert the LTCR to the 1-20 scale of the LTCR rating

                                   10
according to Table 2.   Since there is no BFSR corresponding to Ca (Moody’s,
2012) this value is not included when calculating the average rating corresponding
to rating E. The lowest LCTR, C, is excluded altogether since banks still operating
does not receive such rating as it indicates a company in default.
   The BFSR is subtracted from the LTCR to create a variable that measures
the uplift generated by external support (Schich and Lindh, 2012; Bijlsma and
Mocking, 2013). To account for the fact that the absolute value of this uplift is
restricted by the BFSR value we create a value for the relative uplift (Bijlsma
and Mocking, 2013). The relative uplift relates the absolute uplift to the highest
uplift possible (see Table 9 for details of calculations of all variables). The relative
uplift is our dependent variable, and measures the implicit government guarantees
(Schich and Lindh, 2012).
   The method of using credit ratings as proxy for TBTF is not unproblematic.
First of all, the LTCR does not only account for external support from the gov-
ernment, but also external support from a possible parent company. This would
mean we overestimate the government support, which would make any inference
dubious.  Secondly, the rating is the result of Moody’s subjective assessment of
the size of the external support a bank is a↵orded (Bijlsma and Mocking, 2013).
A subjective measurement is certainly subject to questions about its empirical
worth, but ratings from the major credit rating institutions are extensively used
and in both the private and public sector, suggesting their output is viewed as
credible (Stern and Feldman, 2004).  We attempt to minimize the e↵ect of the
former problem by selecting only the largest domestic banks from each country, to
attempt to isolate the government support and guarantees.

                                   11
3.1.2   Country variables

We first consider a country’s ability to finance a bailout through three variables:
the government debt in relation to its gross domestic product, the yield on long-
term government bonds, and the government’s reserves. These variables are  ”es-
sential for the question whether a country has enough resources or whether it can
raise enough money for bailing out its banking sector”  (Barth and Schnabel, 2013,
p. 14).
   The government’s debt ratio is the year-end value of the central government’s
gross debt divided by the year-end GDP. For 2012, the year-end value of the
government debt ratio is, as of writing, yet to be published and therefore the ratio
at the end of the third quarter of 2012 is used.   A higher debt ratio indicates
more di culties to raise funds (Barth and Schnabel, 2013), and is consequently
expected to have a negative relation with the dependent variable.   That is, for
banks in countries with higher debt levels we expect a decrease in the implicit
guarantee o↵ered by its sovereign.

                                                                                                 3
   The yield on government bond is the yearly rate of the Maastricht criterion
long-term bonds. A higher yield indicates more di culty raising funds, and should
therefore have a negative relation with our independent variable.
   The government reserves are the foreign o cial reserves in relation to GDP
at the year-end and include financial assets such as foreign currency, securities
and derivatives that the government holds. It also includes gold reserves as well as
other claims on foreign governments. The variable is intended to measure the funds
at the government’s disposal. Larger reserves should indicate a greater likelihood

   3
    ”The Maastricht Treaty EMU convergence criterion series relates to interest rates for long-
term government bonds denominated in national currencies.  Selection guidelines require data
to be based on central government bond yields on the secondary market, gross of tax, with a
residual maturity of around 10 years.” (Eurostat, 2011)

                                   12
that the government can rescue a distressed bank.   Consequently, we expect a
positive relation between the uplift and government reserves.
    In addition to testing the financial ability of governments to rescue large banks,
we also include a set of macroeconomic determinants to control for the overall state
of the economy and for specific economic phenomena.
   The growth rate of the stock market index indicates the financial conditions of
the largest firms in the country (Bonfim, 2009). It also gives indications for the
markets belief in the future state of the economy. A higher growth rate signals a
healthier economy with a positive outlook for the future, and hence, we expect a
positive relation to the dependent variable.
   The unemployment rate is the European Commission  Macroeconomic Imbal-
ance Procedure  (MIP) three-year moving average unemployment rate. Unemploy-
ment rate is an indicator that has many possible implications. A high unemploy-
ment rate is a costly burden for the government, both in terms of decreased tax
revenue and costs for social benefits linked with unemployment. It can also be seen
as a measurement of the level of demand in the economy; as higher unemployment
rate might signal decreased production (Castro, 2013). Thus, we expect a nega-
tive relation between unemployment and the guarantees a government a↵ords its
banks.
   The change in exchange rate is also MIP-criterion 3 year moving average. The
rates are the yearly percentage change relative to 35 other industrial countries,
based on HICP/CPI deflators. Exchange rates can control for the external com-
petitiveness of the country’s industries; increasing exchange rates indicate that the
local currency is appreciating towards its trading partners, meaning the country’s
production is relatively more expensive (Castro, 2013).   We therefore expect a
negative relation to the dependent variable.
   Real GDP growth rate is added to control for the overall business cycle in the

                                   13
country (Castro, 2013). In growing economies the support should be higher than
in economies with slow growth, meaning we expect a positive relation with TBTF
guarantees.
   GDP per capita is expressed in Euro for all countries to remove exchange rate
di↵erences. It is included to measure the country’s overall economic development
(Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga, 2012). We expect that richer countries can a↵ord
their banks a higher degree of protection, and consequently we expect a positive
relation with the dependent variable.
    We also include the rate of inflation in the country. High inflation could indicate
monetary di culties in the country (Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Detragiache, 2005). The
e↵ect of high inflation is that the real income level in the country decreases (Castro,
2013).  High inflation can be seen as a sign of a troubled economy and thus we
should expect a negative relation. An alternative view is that the reduction in the
real value of money makes debt servicing easier (Castro, 2013).  This would see
banks being more likely to be able to meet their debt obligations, which could be
reflected in a bank’s uplift and should therefore show a positive relation with the
uplift variable. The expected direction of the coe cient on this variable, then, is
uncertain.
   Lastly, we have collected Moody’s government ratings for each country.  The
government rating uses the same scale as the LTCR, and the conversion to numer-
ical values follows those in the second column in Table 2. The variable is used in
the robustness tests in an attempt to validate the model specification.
   In addition to these country variables we use the natural logarithm of bank
assets to control for the size of banks (Rime, 2005).  Consistent with the TBTF
hypothesis, size should be positively related to the uplift.
    All independent variables are listed in Table 3 with a short description and the
expected relation to the dependent variable. Table 4 shows descriptive statistics

                                   14
for the government variables.

3.1.3   Data sources

Credit ratings are collected from Moody’s webpage manually.   We collect each
bank’s rating at the year-end to correspond with the time of our explanatory
variables. The government ratings were also collected manually from Moody’s.
   All national accounts and macroeconomic data are collected from Eurostat.
Bank accounts data were collected from Datastream.   All data were gathered
through March and April of 2013.

3.2   Methodology

When confronted with panel data it is likely that residuals are correlated across
observations, and standard OLS estimators can be biased. The bias enters as an
unobserved e↵ect, and introduces an omitted variable bias to the model.   The
correlation can occur both in the time series and in the cross-section. We consider
the model:

                                                           0    0
                       y i,t  =  ↵ +    X i,t  + μ i  +   t  + " i,t                    (1)

    Where  y i,t  is the relative uplift of bank  i  at time  t,     is a K x 1 vector of
coe cients and X is a K x 1 vector of explanatory variables. The term μ i  is the time
consistent unobserved e↵ects,    t  is the firm consistent unobserved e↵ects, and  " i,t
is the error term. The term  μ i  represents the bank fixed e↵ects that are correlated
over time, while    t  represents any time fixed e↵ects that are correlated across firms.
A fixed e↵ects transformation allows us to eliminate the unobserved bank e↵ects
μ i  (Wooldridge, 2002). This absorbs bank fixed e↵ects that are constant over time.
It does not, however, account for the time fixed e↵ects (Petersen, 2009). To absorb
the time e↵ect we include period dummies pd1, pd2 and pd3 that represent the

                                   15
years 2004-2006, 2007-2009 and 2010-2012 respectively.  This leaves us with the
two-way fixed e↵ect estimation equation:

                                                  ˆ0    0       0
                        yˆ i,t  = ˆ↵ +    X i,t  + ˆ   P D + ˆ"                     (2)

Further, we use clustered standard errors, which should provide unbiased standard
errors as long as the time e↵ect is indeed fixed (Petersen, 2009). Clustered standard
errors are also robust to heteroskedasticity (Petersen, 2009).   We follow (Barth
and Schnabel, 2013) and cluster standard errors at the country level to account
for correlation between banks within each country.
   We run four specifications of equation (2). The specifications and the results
are presented in Table 7 and in more detail in Section 4.2.1.   We discuss their
implications in section 4.2.2.
   Further, we perform two checks of robustness. First, we run one of the spec-
ifications again, but replace the variables intended to measure the government’s
ability to fund bank bailouts with Moody’s ratings of a government’s creditworthi-
ness (Bijlsma and Mocking, 2013). This variable acts as an alternative indicator
of a government’s ability to raise funds. We examine whether earlier results are
robust to changes in the specification, and consequently expect similar results as
the original specification. Second, we replace the most extreme values of the sam-
ple by winsorizing at the 95% level.  This means that we set the maximum and
minimum values in the sample equal to the 2,5% percentile in each tail, trimming
the sample from extreme values. In this test we examine whether the results are
robust to controlling for a potential long-tailed sample distribution (Tukey, 1962).

                                   16
4   Empirical analysis

We begin the empirical analysis by presenting and analyzing descriptive statistics.
We then test the model outlined in section 3. Testing the robustness of our results
concludes this section.

4.1   Descriptive statistics

Panel A in Table 5 reports summary statistics of the size of the relative uplift for
the three three-year periods and for the entire sample, together with statistics for
Moody’s BFSR and LTCR ratings. The mean uplift is about 30,3% for the entire
sample period. More interesting, though, is the drastic changes that has occurred
between the three-year periods of the sample. The development of the uplift over
the sample period is shown in Figure 1. It shows a remarkable development. In the
first period the uplift was stable for the entire period with an average of 6,95%. The
e↵ect of the financial crisis in the second period is unmistakable with the uplift
rocketing to 49,4% between the years 2006 and 2007, and remaining relatively
stable at this level until 2009. Since 2009 the uplift has steadily decreased, and in
the third period it averages 33,8%. Examining Moody’s actual ratings in panel B
of Table 5 can o↵er some insight into this development. Focusing on the second
period we notice both a decrease in the average stand-alone rating compared to
the previous period, but also higher long-term ratings.  At first glance, it seems
surprising that in the midst of a global financial crisis, where the lower stand-alone
rating indicate a realization that banks were not as stable as previously thought,
Moody’s rate their long-term creditability higher. However, this is in line with the
notion of TBTF as a government guarantee to its banks. As the banks were facing
extraordinary di culties, expectations of government intervention were put into
practice in this period with numerous bailouts throughout Europe, and with the

                                   17
European Commission approving commitments of an incredible  e3,5 trillion to
the crumbling financial sector (European Commission, 2009), implicit guarantees
during this time became very explicit. With such support, the risk of a large bank
defaulting on its debt obligations was actually deemed lower than during the years
of stability and growth between 2004 and 2006.
   The decrease in the third period could be seen as an indication that the Eu-
ropean debt crisis has indeed a↵ected government’s ability to support financially
strained banks. Expectations of government support certainly seem to be decreas-
ing.  While it could be an e↵ect of the economic climate in European countries
declining in the period, a more reasonable explanation is that many of the ex-
plicit emergency guarantees were withdrawn, which would account for the decrease
(Schich and Lindh, 2012). However, the reason for withdrawing the guarantees is
unclear: is it in response to a more stable financial system, or an e↵ect of govern-
ments’ deteriorating finances?
    It could also be viewed as the level of support beginning to return to pre-crisis
levels. However, market participants - having seen that when circumstances call
for it - will expect governments to reinstate these extensive guarantees (Schich
and Lindh, 2012), and a full return to the levels of 2004-2006 seem unlikely. The
interpretation of what has happened since 2010 is di cult. To get further insight
into how the government a↵ects TBTF we take a closer look at the third period
the European debt crisis   and in particular at Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and
Ireland, labeled GIPSI by Castro (2013). Table 6 reveals the di↵erence in uplift
between the countries most severely hit by the European debt crisis and the rest of
Europe. The relative uplift in the GIPSI countries is less than half of that in the
rest of the sample, with a mean uplift of about 17,7% compared to 39,8%. This
result further indicates that the health of an economy influences the support that
can be a↵orded to banks. Countries in crisis seem less likely to provide extensive

                                   18
guarantees than healthier economies. To get more insight into what a↵ects the level
of support banks receive from their sovereigns we perform a series of regressions
on the relative uplift in the next subsection.

4.2   Model estimations

We start by estimating the model specified in Section 3. We then proceed to test
how the determinants of a country’s financial ability to rescue failing banks, iden-
tified by Barth and Schnabel (2013), a↵ect the uplift. This is followed by including
a set of macroeconomic variables that control for the overall state of the economy.
In the last subsection we check the robustness of our results by first replacing de-
terminants of fiscal ability for Moody’s government ratings to test if specification
of the model holds under di↵erent circumstances, and secondly by winsorizing all
variables at the 95% level to control if the results are robust to outliers in the
sample. We begin by describing the regression results in the subsection below and
continue to assess their implications in the succeeding subsection.

4.2.1   Regression results

The results from regressions (1) to (4) are presented in Table 7. Each regression
uses the relative uplift as the dependent variable and a set of independent variables
as described in Section 3.   An overview of the independent variables is found
in Table 3.  The estimation intends to test whether guarantees to TBTF banks
are a↵ected by the government’s financial position and the economical state of
its sovereign.  Across regressions (1) to (4) the variable controlling for size   the
natural logarithm of total bank assets  is negatively related to the uplift at levels
of significance ranging from the 10% to 1% level.   Regressions (1) to (4) show
that a country’s debt level and the yield on its government bonds are negatively
related to the uplift variable at significant levels, while total government reserves

                                   19
are not related at any level of significance. The former two is intended to capture
a country’s ability to raise funds, whereas the latter measures the funds already
at its disposal (Barth and Schnabel, 2013). Regression (2) adds controls for the
macroeconomic conditions identified by Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Detragiache (2005)
as significantly correlated with banking crises. The results show that the rate of
inflation is negatively related to the uplift, while the growth rate of real GDP is not
significantly related at any level. Regression (2) was performed on 285 observations

           2
with an  R  of 0.618.
   In regression (3) we use a set of macroeconomic determinants from Castro
(2013), and Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga (2012) instead. The results show that
the growth rate of the stock market, the unemployment rate and GDP per capita
is not significantly related to the dependent variable, while percentage change in
the exchange rate and growth rate of real GDP is negatively and significantly re-

                                                                            2
lated. This regression was performed on 238 observations, yielding  R  of 0.683. In
regression (4) we control for potential inertia in the macroeconomic determinants
from regression (3) (Patro, Wald, and Wu, 2002; Castro, 2013, e.g.). All macroe-
conomic variables are lagged, except for the growth rate of the market, which is
assumed to be more responsive to the economic climate. The results show that the
growth rate of the stock market and GDP per capita is positively, and significantly
related to the uplift (at the 10% and 5% levels respectively). The unemployment
rate, the central bank interest rate and the growth rate of real GDP are negatively

                                                               2
related to the banks’ uplift. Regression (4) yielded an  R   of 0.678 across the 271
observations.

4.2.2   Regression analysis

The results from regressions (1) to (4) reveal a negative relation between the up-
lift variable and bank size. Earlier research has found size to be positively related

                                   20
to TBTF variables (V¨olz and Wedow, 2011; Bijlsma and Mocking, 2013, e.g.).
This result, though, is in line with the hypothesis that banks can grow too big
to save (Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga, 2012; Barth and Schnabel, 2013). Taking
into consideration that our sample consist of the largest banks in their respective
countries, this result shows that at some level of size the guarantees o↵ered by the
government decreases.  When banks grow too large, it puts a constraint on the
government’s ability to rescue failing banks (V¨olz and Wedow, 2011). Further, a
substantial part of the very largest banks’ business activities and operations takes
place across borders and therefore introduces a need for cross-country coordina-
tion (V¨olz and Wedow, 2011).  Consequently, as banks become bigger and thus
more diversified across countries, the link between bank and a specific government
becomes more vague and introduces more di culties regarding any guarantees.
Essentially, a bailout for the absolute largest banks in Europe is too costly for
their governments alone (Acharya and Yorulmazer, 2007). This is especially true
for small countries with a local currency and with a large, internationally exposed
banking sector (Buiter and Sibert, 2008).
   In all regressions (1) to (4) we test whether a government’s fiscal ability a↵ects
the uplift. The variables measure both the government’s ability to raise funds, as
well as the funds at its disposal (Barth and Schnabel, 2013). We include macroe-
conomic variables that control the macroeconomic environment in regressions (2)
to (4). In all regressions the government debt level and the yield on long-term gov-
ernment bonds has coe cients that indicate that limited fiscal possibilities puts a
constraint on the guarantees. As a government’s debt level increases it will result
in more di culties, or reluctance, to take on more debt to rescue failing banks.
The long-term government bond yields measures the cost of issuing debt for the
government. The negative coe cient on both these variables are in line with the
argument that a country’s ability to raise funds has an impact on the guarantees

                                   21
it is believed to be able to o↵er (Barth and Schnabel, 2013). The funds already
at the government’s disposal seem to have no e↵ect on the uplift in our sample.
Overall, across all regressions it seems the ability to raise funds, and the cost of
raising funds a↵ect the size of the implicit guarantees o↵ered by the government.
   We include variables that control for business cycle e↵ects that represent a
banks growth opportunities, and monetary policy e↵ects by introducing the real
GDP growth and inflation rate variables in regression (2).  Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and
Detragiache (2005) argue that slow economic growth and loss of monetary control
contributes to banking crises. This suggests that banks are negatively a↵ected by
higher rate of inflation.  As described earlier, the expected direction of inflation
was uncertain. Higher inflation could, as mentioned, be seen as signs of a loss of
monetary control, which could be an indicator of economic di culties. In which
case there should be a negative relation to the relative rating uplift. It could also
have the opposite e↵ect, through enabling banks to repay their debt more easily
(Castro, 2013).   The negative and significant result suggests that the e↵ect on
banks’ ability to repay their debt does not outweigh the negative e↵ects of high
inflation.
   In regression (3) we have a di↵erent set of macroeconomic variables. We include
the unemployment rate and the growth rate of the stock market, as well as the
percentage change in the exchange rate.   These variables test the e↵ect of the
level of production and demand, the strength of a country’s industries, and for the
strength of the export industries in a country, respectively.  The results suggest
that a country’s relative competitiveness on the export market is related with its
government’s support to incumbent banks. The nature of this relation is debatable.
One argument would be that struggling export industries also needs government
support, and that this puts constraints on the level of support the government
can o↵er to the financial sector. An alternative argument is that struggling export

                                   22
industries are simply a good indicator of a country in distress. The growth rate
of real GDP is significantly opposite to the hypothesized direction. As mentioned
in Section 3, higher GDP growth should indicate that the economy is performing
well and is in a positive stage of the business cycle, and hence our expectation
was that higher GDP growth should be related positively to the probability that
governments protect its banks.
   We run the same regression as in (3) in regression (4), but with a one-year
lag on four of the variables. When controlling for economic inertia the coe cients
are more in line with their hypothesized directions.  The positive coe cient on
the economic development of a country, measured by GDP per capita, suggests
that wealthier countries can o↵er more extensive guarantees to their banks.  In
this specification, the growth rate of the stock market is also significantly positive,
while the unemployment rate, exchange rate and real GDP growth are negative.
The overall interpretation of results from regression (4) is that, taking into account
macroeconomic inertia, the macroeconomic conditions could very well a↵ect the
level of support received by banks. As in regression (3), the negative result on real
GDP growth rate is somewhat surprising. A simple interpretation of this result is
that in growing economies banks are less likely to be in need of government support.
In growing economies banks have more growth opportunities (Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and
Huizinga, 2012), which seem to be reflected in the uplift. This result, coupled with
the lack of significant results on some of the macroeconomic variables from earlier
regressions, raises questions about making inference on which economic conditions
really a↵ect the uplift, and certainly how.
   Our results show that as Europe was hit by sovereign debt crisis the level of
government support, as measured by the relative rating uplift, decreased.  We
have also shown that for countries in crisis, the relative uplift is less than half
the level of the rest of the countries in the sample.   Both seem to point to a

                                   23
conclusion that the state of an economy seems to a↵ect the guarantees banks
receive. In regression analysis we show our result on bank size is consistent with
the TBTS hypothesis, stating that as banks grow very large their prospect being
saved decrease (Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga, 2012).
   The e↵ect of the macroeconomic conditions is inconclusive, due to changing
results in the estimations.   The e↵ect of a government’s fund-raising abilities,
though, seems to really a↵ect a bank’s uplift. The results from these variables are
consistently significant in their hypothesized direction through all four regressions,
and suggest that the government’s fiscal situation does a↵ect the guarantees that
banks receive.

4.3   Robustness checks

In this section we present the results of regressions that test the robustness of
the results from the previous subsection.   We perform two separate tests, both
presented in Table 8. To test the robustness of our specification, we replace the
fiscal determinants  Debt to GDP,  Gov. bond yield  and  Gov. reserves  with Moody’s
rating of a government creditworthiness and repeat regression (4). Regression (1)
reveals that country’s creditworthiness, as evaluated by Moody’s, has a positive
e↵ect on a bank’s uplift. That is, in stronger economies banks has a more extensive
implicit protection from their government. This result is significant at the 1% level
and is consistent with Bijlsma and Mocking (2013), and Schich and Lindh (2012).
Bank size has a negative relation to government guarantees in this specification
as well. Both these results are consistent with the main test. The result on the
unemployment rate from regression (4) is no longer significant when changing the
specification.   The rest of the variables are still significant and have the same
direction as in regression (4).
   Overall, the results seem robust to replacing fiscal determinants with a proxy,

                                   24
and are in line with our previous tests and reinforce the hypothesis that the state
of the sovereign’s economy a↵ects the guarantees it can a↵ord its banks.
   To control for extreme values and outliers in the sample we perform a second
robustness test, winsorizing all variables at the 95% level and repeating regression
(4) from the main estimation. The results from this regression show that bank size
and debt to GDP, both of which were significant in the main estimation, is not in
this specification. In both cases extreme values seem to have introduced a positive
bias in these estimators.  Comparing these estimators’ coe cients, bank size in
the main specification (-0.107) with (-0.604) in regression (2), and debt level (-
0.344) with (-0.215) show that the extreme values causes overestimated coe cients
and significance levels.   The result on bank size, it could be argued, could still
be consistent with our interpretation from earlier:  that the negative coe cient
signals that the very largest banks could be TBTS. The loss of significance could
be viewed as being in line with this reasoning, since the very largest banks are
now ”smaller” and the TBTS e↵ect is partially removed from the sample.  The
loss of significance on the coe cient on the level of debt is more problematic.
It has been consistently, and significantly, in line with its hypothesized direction
across all earlier specifications. This result indicates that extreme values cause the
previous estimations to overstate the importance of the debt level in explaining
a government’s ability to o↵er protection to its banks. The result could indicate
that the e↵ect of a country’s indebtedness is only relevant at extreme levels, and
any conclusions must be made with this in mind.
   The yield on government bonds, unemployment rate, interest rate and real
GDP growth are still negatively and significantly related to the uplift. Comparing
their coe cients and standard errors with the earlier results give no indication
that the previous specification consistently over- or understates the estimates.

                                   25
5   Conclusion

This paper has examined how a government’s financial abilities and the economical
situation in a country a↵ects the generosity of the guarantees it a↵ords its banks.
By using the relative rating uplift in Moody’s credit ratings as a measure for
these guarantees we have shown that there has been a dramatic development in
the rating uplift over the sample period, with a sharp increase during the recent
financial crisis, and a clear decrease since 2010 when the European debt crisis
hit. Whether the decrease is simply the uplift returning to its pre-crisis level, or
a↵ected by the economic situation in Europe remains to be seen. An indication of
the latter is the result that average uplift is more than twice as high in the healthier
European economies than in the countries in crisis: Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain
and Ireland.
    In four regressions we then test the relation between the relative rating uplift
to a set of government variables and control for bank size. The results show that
a bank’s relative uplift is negatively related with its size, the government’s debt
level and the yield on government bond across all four specifications. These results
suggest that a government’s fiscal ability a↵ects how generous guarantees it can
a↵ord its banks. They also suggest that larger banks are a↵orded less protection.
We see this as a result of the sample, which consist only of the largest banks in
their respective country. The negative e↵ect of size could indicate that the largest
banks are simply too large, and have become too big to save, a result and an
interpretation consistent with Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt and Huizinga (2012).
   The e↵ect of size and debt level is not robust to trimming the sample from
extreme values, indicating the significance could be overestimated by a potential
bias from extreme values.
   Introducing macroeconomic determinants we control for such e↵ects as the
business cycle, the level of production and demand, and for the relative com-

                                   26
petitiveness of a country’s industries. The regressions give mixed results for the
macroeconomic variables.  But when considering time lag e↵ects unemployment
rate, exchange rate and real GDP growth show a negative and significant relation
to the relative uplift, while the growth rate of the stock market index and GDP per
capita are positively related. These results suggest that, with inertia considered,
a government’s financial ability and the country’s macroeconomic situation a↵ect
bank guarantees. But the mixed results from regressions that include macroeco-
nomic variables, as well as questions regarding the length of the time lag (that
is, is a one-year lag the correct length to capture potential inertia) leads us to
conclude that further investigation is needed to draw conclusions on which, and
how, macroeconomic determinants a↵ect bank protection.
   Overall, we believe our results show that bank protection is a↵ected by the
bank’s home country, and that a government’s ability, and possibility, to raise
funds a↵ect the protection it a↵ords its banks. The ability to, and cost of, taking
on new debt to rescue financial institutions in distress seem key to the level of
support a bank receives.  Although, with the caveat that the debt level did not
hold up in robustness checks.
    A bank’s status, whether too big to fail or too big to save, seem to not only be a
result of the bank outgrowing its sovereign, but could also be a result of an economy
becoming too small in relation to its banks. Given that earlier research has found
funding advantages for banks perceived as too big to fail (Bijlsma and Mocking,
2013; Schich and Lindh, 2012), an implication of these results is that banks that
have become too big to save are not optimally sized, and that the optimal size
depends on the home government’s finances.   Very large banks, and banks in
struggling economies could have a funding disadvantage. Governments not being
able to provide su cient protection to banks, whether because of too large banks
or too weak public finances, could also have implications for governments, and the

                                   27
society as a whole. As V¨olz and Wedow (2011) argues, when banks become too
large the private sector risk having to bear a larger part of the cost if these banks
become distressed. It should be in the interest of banks, governments and the rest
of society that banks are cautious about growing too large.

                                   28
References

Acharya, Viral V, and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2007, Too many to fail: An analysis of
  time-inconsistency in bank closure policies,  Journal of Financial Intermediation
  16, 1–31.

Balasubramnian, Bhanu, and Ken B Cyree, 2011, Market discipline of banks: Why
  are yield spreads on bank-issued subordinated notes and debentures not sensitive
  to bank risks?,  Journal of Banking & Finance  35, 21–35.

Barth, Andreas, and Isabel Schnabel, 2013, Why banks are not too big to fail–
  evidence from the cds market,  Economic Policy  28, 335–369.

Bijlsma, Michiel, and Remco Mocking, 2013, The private value of too-big-to-fail
  guarantees, Discussion paper, CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy
  Analysis.

Bonfim, Diana, 2009, Credit risk drivers: Evaluating the contribution of firm level
  information and of macroeconomic dynamics,  Journal of Banking & Finance  33,
  281–299.

Brewer, Elijah, and Julapa Jagtiani, 2013, How much did banks pay to become too-
  big-to-fail and to become systemically important?,  Journal of Financial Services
  Research  43, 1–35.

Brown, Craig O, and I Serdar Dinc, 2011, Too many to fail? evidence of regulatory
  forbearance when the banking sector is weak,  Review of Financial Studies  24,
  1378–1405.

Buiter, Willem, and Anne Sibert, 2008, The icelandic banking crisis and what to
  do about it: The lender of last resort theory of optimal currency areas,  CEPR
  Policy Insight  26, 1–23.

                                   29
Castro, V´ıtor, 2013, Macroeconomic determinants of the credit risk in the banking
  system: The case of the gipsi,  Economic Modelling  31, 672–683.

Chen, Yehning, 1999, Banking panics: The role of the first-come, first-served rule
  and information externalities,  Journal of Political Economy  107, 946–968.

Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache, 2005, Cross-country empirical stud-
  ies of systemic bank distress: A survey,  National Institute Economic Review  192,
  68–83.

Demirg¨u¸c-Kunt, Asli, and Harry Huizinga, 2012, Are banks too big to fail or too
  big to save? international evidence from equity prices and cds spreads,  Journal
  of Banking & Finance  37, 875–894.

European Commission, 2009, Economic crisis in europe: Causes, consequences and
  responses, .

Eurostat,   2011,   Reference   metadata,   http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/
  cache/ITY_SDDS/en/irt_lt_mcby_esms.htm  Accessed: 2013-05-01.

Freixas, Xavier, 1999, Optimal bail out policy, conditionality and creative ambi-
  guity, Discussion paper, Financial Markets Group.

Kane, Edward J, 2000, Incentives for banking megamergers: what motives might
  regulators infer from event-study evidence?,  Journal of Money, Credit and Bank-
  ing  pp. 671–701.

Mailath, George J, and Loretta J Mester, 1994, A positive analysis of bank closure,
  Journal of Financial Intermediation  3, 272–299.

Moody’s, 2012,  Rating Symbols and Definitions.

                                   30
Moore, Kyle, and Chen Zhou, 2012, Identifying systemically important financial
  institutions: size and other determinants,  De Nederlandsche Bank Working Pa-
   per.

Morgan, Donald, and Kevin Stiroh, 2005, Too big to fail after all these years,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta↵  Report 220.

O’Hara, Maureen, and Wayne Shaw, 1990, Deposit insurance and wealth e↵ects:
  the value of being ”too big to fail”,  The Journal of Finance  45, 1587–1600.

Patro, Dilip K, John K Wald, and Yangru Wu, 2002, The impact of macroeco-
  nomic and financial variables on market risk: evidence from international equity
  returns,  European Financial Management  8, 421–447.

Penas, Marıa Fabiana, and Haluk Unal, 2004, Gains in bank mergers: Evidence
  from the bond markets,  Journal of Financial Economics  74, 149–179.

Petersen, Mitchell A, 2009, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets:
  Comparing approaches,  Review of financial studies  22, 435–480.

Rime, Bertrand, 2005, Do too-big-to-fail expectations boost large banks issuer
  ratings,  Swiss National Banks, Systemic Stability Section: Working Paper (May
   9).

Schich, Sebastian, and Sofia Lindh, 2012, Implicit guarantees for bank debt: Where
  do we stand?,  OECD Journal-Financial Market Trends  102, 45.

Stern, Gary H, and Ron J Feldman, 2004,  Too big to fail: The hazards of bank
  bailouts  (Brookings Institution Press, Washington D.C.).

Tukey, John W, 1962, The future of data analysis,  The Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics  33, 1–67.

                                   31
V¨olz, Manja, and Michael Wedow, 2011, Market discipline and too-big-to-fail in
  the cds market: Does banks’ size reduce market discipline?,  Journal of Empirical
  Finance  18, 195–210.

Wooldridge, Je↵rey M, 2002,  Econometric Analysis Cross Section Panel  (MIT
  press, Camebridge, MA).

Zhou, Chen, 2010, Are banks too big to fail? measuring systemic importance of
  financial institutions,  Measuring Systemic Importance of Financial Institutions
   (December 1, 2009).

                                   32
6    Appendix A

                                    Table 1
                     List of all countries and banks in the sample
 Country          Number of banks    Name of bank
 Austria                 2          Erste Bank AG
                                        Raiffeisen Bank Int. AG
 Belgium                2          Belfius Bank SA/NV  (formerly Dexia)
                               KBC Group NV
 Cyprus                 2          Bank of Cyprus Group
                                    Cyprus Popular Bank PCL
 Czech Republic           1          Komercni Banka
 Denmark               1         Danske Bank A/S

 France                  4          Crédit Agricole SA

                                    BNP Paribas
                                          Natixis
                                         Société Générale
 Germany               2         Commerzbank AG
                                   Deutsche Bank AG
 Greece                 3          Alpha Bank AE
                                    EFG Eurobank Ergasias SA
                                       National Bank of Greece SA
 Hungary                1         OTP Bank Plc.
 Ireland                  1          Bank of Ireland
 Italy                    2          Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena SpA
                                     UniCredit SpA
 Netherlands             1          ING Bank NV
 Poland                 2          Bank Polska Kasa Opieki SA
                                       Powszechna Kasa Oszczednosci Bank Polski
 Portugal                2          Banco Comercial Português SA
                                       Banco Espirito Santo SA
 Spain                   2          Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria SA
                                     Banco Santander SA
 Sweden                 4          Svenska Handelsbanken AB
                                      Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB
                                 Swedbank AB
                                  Nordea AB
 UK                  5         Barclays Bank Plc.
                                              HSBC Bank Plc.
                                                          !Lloyds TSB Bank Plc.
                                             Royal Bank of Scotland Plc.

                                         33
                                  Table  2
                        Moody’s credit rating conversion
The table shows the method employed to convert Moody’s ratings to numerical values, and
converting them to the same scale. We follow Moody’s conversion table (see Moody’s, 2012).
When the BFSR rating corresponds to more than one LTCR an average is calculated. Rating
Ca has no corresponding BFSR in Moody’s conversion scale, and is hence excluded when
averaging the BFSR rating E.
Long-term  credit                              Bank Financial
                     Numeric Value                             Numeric Value
rating                                     Strength  rating
Aaa               20                A                 20
Aa1                19                 A-                 19
Aa2               18                B+                18
Aa3               17                 B                 17
A1                 16                 B-                 16
A2                15                C+               15
A3                14                C                 14
Baa1                13                  C-                  12,5
Baa2                12                                    12,5
Baa3               11                 D+                10,5
Ba1                 10                                    10,5
Ba2               9                 D                 9
Ba3                8                  D-                 8
B1                7                 E+                6
B2                 6                                    6
B3                 5                                    6
Caa1               4                  E                 3
Caa2               3                                    3
Caa3               2                                    3
Ca                  1                   -                   -

                                        34
                                    Table 3
                   Descriptive statistics  by  groups of economies
This table presents all independent variables with a short description and their expected relation
to the dependent variable.
Variable           Description                  Source                Expected sign
Size               Natural logarithm of bank       Rime (2005)
                                            +
                        assets. Controls for size effects.
Debt to GDP       Government debt in relation     Barth and Schnabel
                     to GDP. Measures a country’s    (2013), Demirgüc-Kunt
                                                                                                        -
                     ability to raise money.           and Huzinga (2012),
                                                         Castro (2013), etc.
Gov. bond yield      The Maastricht criterion yield    Barth and Schnabel
                     on 10-year government bonds.    (2013)
                                                                                                        -
                      Measures of a country’s ability
                     to raise money.
Gov. reserves        Government reserves in         Barth and Schnabel
                      relation to GDP. Includes all     (2013)
                       financial assets, claims on
              other governments and gold.                         +
                    Intended to measure a
                     government’s present financial
                         ability.
Market Growth      The growth rate of the stock     Bonfirm (2009), Castro
                     market index. Controls for the    (2013)
                 financial status of the largest                              +
                      firms, and for the market’s
                      outlook on the future.
Unemployment      Three-year moving average      Castro (2013)
                    unemployment rates. Controls
                                                                                                        -
                      for production levels and
                   domestic demand.
Exchange  rate       Percentage change in exchange   Castro (2013)
                       rates to 35 industrialized
                                                                                                        -
                      countries. Controls for external
                     competitiveness.
Real GDP growth    Annual growth rate of real       Demirgüc-Kunt and
                                            +
                     GDP. Controls for business      Detragiache (2005),
                     cycle movements.                Demirgüc-Kunt and
                                                      Huzinga (2012), Castro
                                                     (2013)
GDP per capita      Included to control for the       Demirgüc-Kunt and
                                            +
                    level of economic development.   Huzinga (2012)
Rate of inflation     Annual rate of inflation.         Demirgüc-Kunt and
                      Controls for effects from real     Detragiache (2005),
                                                                      +/-
                   money value changes.           Castro (2013)
                     Predicted effect is  uncertain.
Gov. rating         Moody’s government rating.     Bijlsma and Mocking
                     Proxies for the overall fiscal      (2013)
                                            +
                     and economical situation in a
                        country-

                                        35
                                   Table 4
                  Summary statistics for all government variables
This table provides descriptive statistics for all government variables in the sample. The data
stretches over the period 2004-2012. All data were collected from Eurostat.
                    Observation
Variable                       Mean       St. Dev.     Min          Max
                    s
Debt to GDP       333           0.6743303     0.317154     0.21          1.812
Gov. bond yield     333           0.0453126     0.024846     0.014         0.225
Gov. reserves       333           0.0661833     0.0618956     0.0033858      0.421452
Market Growth      280           0.0213887     0.2149482     -0.4469078     0.6184597
Unemployment      333           0.081        0.0320338     0.035         0.223
Exchange  rate       296           0.0138615     0.067447      -0.199         0.244
Real GDP growth    333           0.013042      0.0293865     -0.071         0.07
GDP per capita     329           26229.76     8820.227     5300          43700
Rate of inflation     333           0.0237477     0.0120702     -0.017         0.079
Gov. rating         333           17.77778     3.69286      0            20

                                        36
                                   Table 5
     Summary  statistics for the  credit rating variables over the sample period
Panel A shows summary statistics for the relative uplift of all 37 banks in the sample, for three
three-year periods and the sample total. Panel B shows summary statistics for Moody’s credit
ratings. All data in this table were collected manually from Moody’s website and converted
into numerical values in accordance with  Table 2.
                                    Panel A: Relative uplift
Variable                         2004-2006     2007-2009     2010-2012      Total
Relative uplift       Observations   105         108         111           324
                  Mean         0.0695489    0.4935473    0.3381717      0.3029099
                     Min           -0.25         -0.2          -0.1666667      -0.25
                  Max          0.6666667    1           0.8           1
                   Std. Dev.      0.1484985     0.2088842     0.2303495      0.2643985
                               Panel B: Moody’s credit ratings
Variable                         2004-2006     2007-2009     2010-2012      Total
Stand alone rating   Observations   108         108         111           327
                  Mean         16.15278     14.82407     11.47297       14.12538
                  Min          10.5         9           3            3
                  Max         20          18          16           20
                   Std. Dev.      2.291245     2.037401     3.441616       3.316791
Long-term rating     Observations   108         108         111           327
                  Mean         16.62963     17.22222     13.99099       15.92966
                  Min          13          14          3            3
                  Max         20          20          19           20
                   Std. Dev.      1.683302     1.613803     4.095442       3.072429

                                        37
                                    Table 6
                   Descriptive statistics  by  groups of economies
Panel A shows summary statistics for the relative uplift of all 37 banks in the sample, grouped
into countries in crisis: Greece,  Italy, Portugal, Spain and Italy (GIPSI), and the rest of the
sample, as well as the sample total. Panel B shows summary statistics for Moody’s credit ratings.
All  data  in  this  table  were  collected  manually  from  Moody’s  website  and  converted  into
numerical values in accordance  with  Table 2.
                                Panel A: Relative uplift

Variable                                GIPSI       Rest of sample        Total

Relative uplift       Observations             30              81             111
                   Mean                0.1765217        0.3980421        0.3381717
                    Min                   -0.0666667        -0.1666667        -0.1666667
                   Max                    0.75             0.8             0.8
                   Std. Dev.              0.2242408        0.2032301        0.2303495
                            Panel B:  Moody’s credit ratings

Variable                                GIPSI       Rest of sample        Total

Stand alone rating   Observations             30              81             111
                  Mean                9.083333         12.35802         11.47297
                  Min                    3              3              3
                  Max                   16             16             16
                   Std. Dev.              4.398439         2.51773         3.441616
Long-term rating     Observations              30              81             111
                  Mean                10.46667         15.2963         13.99099
                  Min                    3              4              3
                  Max                   19             19             19
                   Std. Dev.              5.008499         2.75429         4.095442

                                        38
                                       Table 7
                           Fiscal and economical determinants
The table provides regression results with the relative uplift as the dependent variable. The sample in
regression (1) to (4) consists of 17 countries and 37 banks for the period 2004-2012. All country variables
were collected from Eurostat. The independent variables and their expected relation  to  the dependent
variable are described in Table 2. We report coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at country
level (in parentheses) of fixed effects regressions with dummies for periods 2004-2006, 2007-2009 and
2010-2012  (omitted).

                                                          Relative rating uplift

Variable                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

Size                          -0.115**           -0.0945*           -0.119***           -0.107*
                             (0.0439)           (0.0485)           (0.0339)           (0.0508)
Debt to GDP                -0.349***           -0.371**           -0.496***           -0.344**
                              (0.104)            (0.160)           (0.152)           (0.118)
Gov. bond yield              -1.389***          -1.461***          -2.253***          -1.249***
                              (0.260)            (0.234)           (0.671)           (0.310)
Gov. reserves                  -0.438             -0.619             -1.185             -1.170
                              (0.813)            (0.906)           (0.692)           (0.709)
Rate of inflation                                 -2.843**
                                                     (1.147)
Market growth                                              0.138            0.131*
                                                                  (0.0857)           (0.0738)
Unemployment                                             1.033
                                                                         (0.617)
Exchange  rate                                                -0.697**
                                                                          (0.309)
Real GDP  growth                             0.134            -1.718*
                                                   (0.640)            (0.974)
GDP per capita                                                1.46e-05
                                                                             (1.13e-05)
Unemployment  (t-1)                                                                    -1.489*
                                                                                              (0.784)
Exchange  rate  (t-1)                                                                  -0.757**
                                                                                              (0.308)
Real GDP growth  (t-1)                                                                 -1.658**
                                                                                              (0.636)
GDP per capita  (t-1)                                                                 1.80e-05**
                                                                                                  (7.85e-06)
Period 1                     -0.418***          -0.432***          -0.446***          -0.335***
                             (0.0624)           (0.0640)          (0.0691)          (0.0760)
Period 2                   0.0708**           0.0580            0.0387           0.128***
                             (0.0316)           (0.0493)          (0.0441)          (0.0365)
Constant                  2.240***          2.082***          2.074***          1.831**
                              (0.533)            (0.617)            (0.573)            (0.750)

Observations                 318              285             238             271
Number of bank2              37              37              35              35
Adjusted R-squared            0.607             0.618             0.683             0.678
                                 Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                         39
                                       Table 8
                                    Robustness tests
The table provides regression results for the robustness test performed. In regression (1)  perform the
same regression as in (4) in Table 7, but  we replace the  fiscal  variables  Debt to GDP, Gov. bond yield
and Gov. reserves  with Moody’s government rating, as an alternative measure  for the  government’s
ability to raise funds.  In regression (2) we perform the same regression as (4) in Table 7, but with all
variables winsorized at the 5 % level (2,5% in each tail). We report coefficients and robust standard
errors clustered at country level (in parentheses) of fixed effects regressions with dummies for periods
2004-2006, 2007-2009 and 2010-2012  (omitted).

                                                               Relative rating uplift

           Variables                         (1)                            (2)

Government rating                       0.0245***
                                               (0.00596)
Size                                        -0.142**                          -0.0604
                                            (0.0526)                        (0.0594)
Debt to  GDP                                                       -0.215
                                                                                      (0.128)
Gov. bond yield                                                            -2.536**
                                                                                      (0.878)
Gov. reserves                                                                -1.252
                                                                                      (1.198)
Market growth                          0.180***                      0.160***
                                            (0.0573)                        (0.0504)
Unemployment  (t-1)                            -0.899                            -1.886**
                                             (0.599)                         (0.882)
Exchange rate  (t-1)                            -0.700**                          -0.826***
                                              (0.277)                         (0.250)
Real GDP growth  (t-1)                        -1.548**                           -1.464**
                                             (0.529)                         (0.581)
GDP per capita  (t-1)                        2.50e-05***                        1.91e-05**
                                                 (5.77e-06)                         (8.84e-06)
Period 1                                   -0.284***                        -0.298***
                                            (0.0627)                        (0.0752)
Period 2                                0.169***                      0.149***
                                            (0.0312)                        (0.0348)
Constant                                 1.229                         1.168
                                              (0.702)                         (0.895)

Observations                              271                          271
Number of bank2                          35                          35
Adjusted R-squared                          0.683                          0.700
                                 Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                         40
                                  Table  9
                               Calculation of variables
The table provides the calculation of the variables  that were constructed by us. All variables
not in this list were gathered as is from their respective source.

                                                 𝐿𝑇𝐶𝑅 − 𝐵𝐹𝑆𝑅
                          𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑓𝑡  =
                                             20 − 𝐵𝐹𝑆𝑅

                                 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒  =  ln  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

                                                         ∆𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘  𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥
                    𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ  =
                                                           𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘  𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥!!!

                                        41
                                  Figure 1
        The development of the relative uplift over the sample period

  50%

  40%



  30%


Average relative uplift20%



  10%

   2004           2006           2008           2010           2012
                                    Year

                                    42