   Stockholm School of Economics

            B.Sc. Thesis in Finance
                  Spring 2013

    An Equal Risk Contribution
   Portfolio Approach Using VIX
              Futures

          Rickard Gunnvald         Andreas Lagerqvist
     B22344@student.hhs.se   B22287@student.hhs.se

                              Tutor:
                      Kathryn Kaminski
                       September 12, 2013

                               Abstract

As an eect of the unusually volatile nancial markets the past few years, new asset allo-
cation strategies such as the equal risk contribution (ERC) approach has been developed.
This report examines the eect on portfolio performance of adding VIX Futures contracts
to an ERC portfolio consisting of positions in long-term government bonds and S&P 500
equities. The investigation is conducted through simulations using a model based on
data from 2004-2008, and is supplemented by a study of the tail event in 2008-2009.
The results suggest that the inclusion of VIX Futures positions substantially improves
portfolio performance in terms of Sharpe ratio, and is also shown to remain signicant
when adjusting for transaction costs and diversication eects. Thus, investors and asset
managers using the ERC approach could benet from adding VIX Futures positions to
their portfolios.
Acknowledgement

We would like to thank our tutor Kathryn Kaminski for valuable input and en-
couragement. Furthermore, we are thankful to Stefan Bergsten at Sarissa Asset
Management and Daniel Eskilsson and Philip Hansen at J.P. Morgan for insightful
comments.

        Rickard Gunnvald and Andreas Lagerqvist

                                   1
Contents

1 Introduction 4

2 Theory 7
   2.1 Asset Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
         2.1.1 Equal Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
         2.1.2 Minimum Variance Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         2.1.3 Most Diversied Portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         2.1.4 Equal Risk Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   2.2 Performance Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   2.3 VIX and VIX Futures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   2.4 Mathematical Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         2.4.1 Stochastic Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

3 Methodology 17
   3.1 Stochastic Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   3.2 Limitations and Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
         3.2.1 Turnover and Transaction Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   3.3 Simulation in Matlab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
         3.3.1 Allocation of Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
         3.3.2 Rebalancing Decision Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   3.4 Performance on Hist. Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   3.5 Portfolio Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

                                   2
CONTENTS CONTENTS

Results 31

4 Results 31
   4.1 Simulated Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
   4.2 Predetermined Rebalancing Freq. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
         4.2.1 Transaction Costs Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
         4.2.2 Robustness of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   4.3 Test of Performance on Hist. Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

5 Discussion 39
   5.1 Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
   5.2 Implications and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
   5.3 Suggestions for Further Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

Appendices 43

A Results - Graphs 43

B Results - Tables 46

C Mathematics 49
   C.1 Short on Arbitrage Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
   C.2 VIX Index Calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

D Matlab Code 51
   D.1 Main Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
   D.2 Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
   D.3 Function Files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
         D.3.1 Futuresprices.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
        D.3.2 Fun.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
         D.3.3 optFUN.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
         D.3.4 constraints.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
        D.3.5 constraintsWO.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
         D.3.6 b.m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

                                   3
Chapter 1

Introduction

During the past decade, the nancial markets have been unusually volatile. As
a result, investors have started to rethink their asset allocation strategies. Alter-
native approaches based on volatility exposure, such as risk parity or equal risk
contribution (ERC), have exhibited good past performance and become increas-
ingly popular [19]. An ERC portfolio typically consists of dierent asset classes,
such as Developed Equity, Emerging Equity, Commodities, REITs (Real Estate
Investment Trust) and Treasuries. These portfolios usually have large bond posi-
tions (or similar), and leverage is often used to increase return. Higher leverage
might increase the exposure to tail risk, and during times of economic downturns
or prolonged economic crises investors may nd it hard to get a sucient yield on
bonds.
         A natural hedge for equity portfolios is positions in volatility because of
their negative correlation. One such alternative is long positions in VIX Futures,
which are Futures contracts written on the VIX Index; the implied volatility of
S&P 500. The index generally responds with a fast and strong upward reaction to
bad market news, and Futures are used to access the movements since the index
itself is not traded and there is no underlying asset or replicating portfolio. A key to
capitalize on these reactions is to actively manage the position, since VIX Futures
are prone to fall very sharply when market conditions improve. Furthermore, these
characteristics make the VIX Index hard to predict.
        An interesting question is if introducing VIX Futures as an asset class

                                   4
                                    CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

in an equal risk contribution portfolio increases the overall portfolio performance.
Contributing factors could be that a well-managed VIX position has positive hedg-
ing eects and the fact that the VIX Index has a oor. In practice the oor is
greater than zero, which suggests that holding a VIX position in good times does
not have to give large negative returns if the position is entered at a suciently low
level. Moreover, the underlying intuition behind the ERC approach is to maintain
equal risk (volatility) shares between all assets. That is, lower the exposure to an
asset class as the volatility in the asset increases and vice versa. E.g. the rapid
response in VIX Futures to bad market news is characterised by increasing Futures
prices and spiking volatility, and thus an ERC investor should decrease the VIX
position. This might be a method to capitalize on the VIX's movements, since
the relative position in VIX Futures is lowered over the whole volatility spike and
invested in e.g. S&P that most likely turned down at the same time. The purpose
of this paper is to investigate if ERC investors could benet from entering a VIX
Futures position using simulations.
        The simulations are based on stochastic representations of the S&P 500
Index, VIX Futures contracts, long term government bonds and a roll over equal
risk contribution reallocation decision rule. Using dierent rebalancing frequencies
ranging from daily to yearly, a large sample of portfolio values over one year is
generated. From this, the returns and other performance metrics such as the
Sharpe ratio are calculated. To investigate VIX's impact, accessed through rolled
over Futures positions, two portfolios are compared. The rst consisting only
of a S&P 500 position and government bonds, while the second includes VIX
Futures as well. In collaboration with a calibrated model by Zhu and Lian (2012),
the portfolio simulations starts at a hypothetical July 11, 2008 and terminates
one year later, using simulated data. For reference, the corresponding portfolio
performance using real data will be examined.
        Literature on the benets of adding VIX Futures positions to an equal
risk contribution portfolio is limited, and to our knowledge this paper is the rst
to examine this approach. The fact that VIX Index products were introduced in
2004 and that the equal risk contribution asset allocation was rst considered in the
aftermath of the 2008 nancial crisis might contribute to the absence of previous
studies. Nevertheless, Black (2006) has shown that adding small positions in VIX

                                   5
                                    CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

Index products would eliminate hedge funds' higher-moment risks while keeping
equity returns and bond-like risks. Moreover, Maillard et al (2009) conclude that
an equal risk portfolio strategy would be a good trade-o between a minimum
variance portfolio and an equal weights portfolio in terms of absolute level of risk,
risk budgeting and diversication.
        This paper shows that adding VIX Futures to an ERC portfolio consisting
of S&P 500 and government bonds substantially increases portfolio performance.
Sharpe ratios based on yearly average returns increases within a range of 30 % to
128 % (corresponding to a range between 0.09 and 0.40) for rebalancing frequencies
spanning from annually to daily, respectively. The results also suggest that higher
Sharpe ratios can be achieved by rebalancing the porfolio including VIX Futures
more frequently using the ERC allocation rule, and that VIX Futures have hedging
benets during tail events. A statistical test of the dierence between Sharpe
ratios for the portfolio including VIX and the portfolio without VIX shows that
the results hold signicantly. A further examination concludes that this still is
true when eects due to transaction costs and diversication are accounted for.
        As an implication, the results suggest that investors could benet from
adding VIX Futures to an ERC portfolio.

                                   6
Chapter 2

Theory and Previous Studies

In this chapter, the theoretical framework and previous studies will be presented.
This includes a historical review of dierent asset allocation decision rules, with
the equal risk contribution as one of the most recent suggestions. Performance
measures to be used in the portfolio evaluation in this report and some charac-
teristics of VIX Index products as investment assets are stated. Finally, a brief
mathematical background on stochastic modelling of assets is conferred.

2.1 Asset Allocation

There is a wide consensus in the nancial markets that strategic asset allocation
is important for overall portfolio performance. Asset allocation is based on the
fundamental idea that dierent types of asset classes perform dierently across
dierent types of economic and market conditions. Given that asset classes are
not perfectly correlated, the investor can diversify a portfolio to remove asset-
specic/idiosyncratic risk. The asset allocation should also take into account an
investor's specic risk preferences, time horizon or other goals.

2.1.1 Equal Weights

This asset allocation strategy is perhaps the most basic one and is often termed
"the 1/N heuristic". The investor simply puts equal capital weights on the dierent
assets and rebalances when appropriate (given transaction costs etc.). On the

                                   7
2.1. ASSET ALLOCATION CHAPTER 2. THEORY

positive side, it is so simple that almost anyone can do it. The dicult part for an
ordinary investor might be nding a suitable rebalancing rule/frequency. On the
negative side, this method has not taken into account any information regarding
the individual assets' characteristics; return, volatility and correlation with other
assets. This means that the portfolio probably is not well-diversied and therefore
the investor takes on risk that he or she is not paid for.

2.1.2 Minimum Variance Portfolio

The Minimum Variance Portfolio approach was introduced by Harry Markovitz
in a famous article published 1952 in the Journal of Finance. Using historical
data, the average returns and the covariances between the assets are calculated,
and the Ecient Frontier is constructed by xing an expected return under the
condition that variance should be minimized. Given a risk-free return the investor
can choose portfolios along the Capital Allocation Line at any desired level of risk.
        An advantage of this method is that it accounts for the individual assets'
mutual correlations and assigns weights to minimize portfolio variance, and hence
risk. On the negative side, investment decisions are taken based on historical data,
and past performance is not a guarantee for similar future results.

2.1.3 Most Diversied Portfolio

The Most Diversied Portfolio (MDP) was introduced by Choueifety and Coignard
(2008) and builds upon a measure called the Diversication Ratio (DR). The
DR is dened as the ratio of the portfolio's weighted average volatility to the
portfolio's overall volatility. Since assets are not perfectly correlated, this ratio
will typically be greater than one. Thus, the DR measures the diversication
gained by holding non-perfectly correlated assets. By maximizing this measure,
the Most Diversied Portfolio is obtained. Maximizing the measure implies that
the individual assets have as high volatility but as low correlation as possible,
conditional on the maximization of the quotient.
        The measure experiences critique since the authors want to maximize the
distance between two dierent volatility measures of the same portfolio. As Lee
(2010) points out, the weighted average volatility of the portfolio is not a measure

                                   8
2.1. ASSET ALLOCATION CHAPTER 2. THEORY

that really exists in the real world, whilst the portfolio's overall volatility clearly
is a real world property. More specic, the weighted average implies that there
is no diversication at all, which of course is not true in reality. The lack of an
underlying economic theory, or an underlying utility function of the DR, makes it
a bit unclear to why investors should maximize this measure. Also, for the MDP
to end up on the ecient frontier, all assets must have identical Sharpe ratios.
The assets are typically not required to be identically correlated, but the lack of
this assumption at the ecient frontier implies arbitrage opportunities. However,
when assets are identically correlated, it can be shown that the MDP and ERC
portfolios are the same [14].

2.1.4 Equal Risk Contribution

In a Risk Contribution (RC) portfolio an investor determines asset class weights
based on their contribution to portfolio risk (volatility). In the special case where
the investor wants the assets to contribute equally much to the portfolio risk, an
asset allocation approach known as risk parity or equal risk contribution (ERC) is
obtained. Equal risk contribution has over the past decade gained attention since
it has shown to outperform several classical types of asset allocation strategies [19].
        One of the reasons that the ERC approach emerged was that in the stan-
dard institutional portfolio consisting of 60 % equity and 40 % bonds/xed income,
the equity part stands for over 90 % of the risk [19]. This, combined with the fact
that e.g. a minimum variance approach is based on forecasts of future returns
from historical data give rise to a lack of robustness that the ERC approach seems
to mitigate [16]. However, the underlying economic theory supporting an ERC
approach is somewhat vague. E.g. that all assets must be identically correlated
and have identical Sharpe ratios for the portfolio to end up on the ecient frontier
[14].

Recent Views on ERC

As the equal risk contribution approach has become increasingly popular and
caught the attention of both academics and the nancial industry, some studies
have explored it in further detail. Romahi and Santiago (2012) have investigated

                                   9
2.1. ASSET ALLOCATION CHAPTER 2. THEORY

data in various time periods from 1927 to the present day, and suggest that a
factor premium risk parity approach outperforms the traditional ERC approach.
The idea behind the risk factor approach is to use risk factors (and their premia)
instead of asset classes dened in a more traditional way (commodities, equities
etc.). The factors are e.g. small cap premium, momentum, REITs and merger
arbitrage. One concern with traditional equal risk contribution is the increasing
correlation between asset classes. Remember that for the ERC portfolio to be on
the ecient frontier, one would like the asset correlation to be zero (or identical).
Romahi and Santiago (2012) show that the rolling correlation between risk factors
are much lower (less than 25%) when compared to traditional asset classes (about
80%), mitigating this concern. A concern regarding the risk factor approach is that
some of the risk factors might be dicult to capture and/or illiquid for investors
to access. Another problem is that much of the benets are lost if the investor
does not have mandate to use leverage or short sell. Nevertheless, according to
Romahi and Santiago, the market is moving in a direction that makes the risk
factors more liquid, and that a long-only risk factor approach still would be more
benecial than a traditional equal risk contribution approach [19].
         As mentioned above, equal risk contribution is a special case of a risk con-
tribution portfolio. Lee (2010) sees it as a starting point for an investor without
a clear view of the markets. This approach is also taken further in the article by
Rappoport and Nottebohm (2012). Their conclusion is that an equal risk contri-
bution approach has performed well during the recent periods of great uncertainty,
but that equal risk shares is meaningless as an objective in itself. They argue that
if an investor knows that a certain asset will have a return of 8 %, it would be wise
not to ignore it. But if the investor is a bit uncertain, then he or she might tone
down his or her reliance on this forecast. Given that an investor is very uncertain
about the forcast, it might be wise to ignore it. Rappoport and Nottebohm (2012)
argue that this is exactly what the risk parity/equal risk contribution approach
does, and hence consider it to be a starting point, just as Lee (2010).
         The question is of course whether an ERC portfolio will be protable in the
future. To take into account the investor's level of uncertainty in the asset weight
assessment, Rappoport and Nottebohm (2012) suggest a "Forecast Uncertainty
Hedge" rule. The method "is a hybrid of a number of asset allocation proposals

                                   10
2.2. PERFORMANCE STATISTICS CHAPTER 2. THEORY

that have appeared in the nance literature over the last twenty years" [18] and is
out of scope for this report. However, according to their simulations, this extension
of equal risk contribution has outperformed traditional ERC in 70 % of the cases.

2.2 Performance Statistics

By rational economic reasoning, it is obvious that investors seek high returns on
investments and simultaneously prefer to take on an as low risk as possible. In basic
portfolio theory, the risk is often measured as the volatility (standard deviation)
of the portfolio returns, and a fundamental relationship is the trade o between
return and volatility. Already in 1966, William Sharpe presented a theoretical
measure that relates the excess return with its volatility. This was later called the
Sharpe ratio (SR) and is dened by:

                                  E[R] − rf
                     SR = √                          (2.1)
                                   V ar(R − rf )

where R is the return of the portfolio and rf the risk-free rate. In this report,
rf is assumed to be constant and hence vanishes from the denominator. One of
the objectives of this report is to measure the performance of dierent investment
portfolios in terms of the Sharpe ratio. To be able to make appropriate statis-
tical inferences, further assumptions has to be made on the distribution of the
returns. Following the approach by Lo (2002), assuming independent and iden-
tically distributed (i.i.d) returns (which would be the case for the returns of the
simulated portfolios in this report), one can show that the standard errors (SE) of
the estimates of the SR is given by:
                    √(     )
                                                1    2
                          SE(SR̂   ) =     1 +  SR̂                           (2.2)
                                            2

        The i.i.d. assumptions gives an asymptotic normal distribution, which
could be used to test for signicant dierences in Sharpe ratios. Moreover, for
completeness and as investigation of the tails of the distribution of returns, worst
drawdown and the highest return is also considered as performance statistics.

                                   11
2.3. VIX AND VIX FUTURES CHAPTER 2. THEORY

2.3 VIX and VIX Futures

On the Chicago Board Option Exchange, contracts on the Volatility Index (ticker:
VIX) have been traded since March 26, 2004. The VIX is based on averaging
weighted prices on put and call options traded on the S&P 500 Index for a large
range of strike prices, see Appendix C.2 for the exact calculation. Therefore, the
VIX Index is the level of volatility implied by option prices and is regarded as a
measure of expected future market volatility. Thus, taking VIX positions is often
regarded as a pure volatility exposure on the S&P 500 Index.
         Historically, VIX is negatively correlated with the S&P 500 Index (correla-
tion coecient about −0.8). This suggests a diversication benet when including
VIX products in an investment portfolio [5]. A study performed by Black (2006)
suggests that an inclusion of a small position in VIX Index products as a part of
a hedge fund investment portfolio would be preferable. It would eliminate some
parts of the higher-moment risks (e.g. skewness and kurtosis) while keeping a
desirable portfolio with equity returns and bond-like risks. One objective of this
report is to investigate if this, in some manner (e.g. in terms of Sharpe ratio), could
be transferred to hold for equity and bond positions in an equal risk contribution
portfolio.
        One concern often stated when investing in VIX Index products is that
there are no underlying assets traded. Consequently, one could not replicate the
performance of the index. Therefore, contracts written on the VIX Index are
only settled with cash ows at time of maturity. Futures contracts are traded in
terms of the volatility (not in $) and a change of a 0.01 tick changes the balance
on the margin account with $10 [4]. The initial margin for a contract is $5,500.
VIX Futures contracts are often characterized by the property that contracts with
longer maturity time are more expensive.

                                   12
2.4. MATHEMATICAL THEORY CHAPTER 2. THEORY

2.4 Mathematical Theory

In this section, the crucial mathematical properties of stochastic processes used
in the simulations in this report are presented. The theory regarding Wiener
Processes and the Geometric Brownian Motion is the most fundamental building
blocks to get the stochastic representations needed for simulations (and pricing).
For more technical details on arbitrage-free pricing see Appendix C.

2.4.1 Stochastic Processes

Stochastic processes are fundamental in mathematical nance since they can be
used to model e.g. bonds and stocks. Representations of stochastic processes is
also required to be able to analytically calculate arbitrage-free prices of nancial
derivatives (contingent claims). The classical example is the mathematical deriva-
tion of the well-known Black-Scholes-Merton formula. In this theory, asset prices
are described as continuous time stochastic processes, using diusion processes
and stochastic dierential equations (SDEs).
        A stochastic process X is a diusion if its local dynamics can be approx-
imated by a stochastic representation of the following type:

   {
        X(t + ∆t) − X(t) = μ(t, X(t))∆t + σ(t, X(t))(W (t + ∆t) − W (t))
       X(0) = x0

where x0 is a constant, μ and σ are deterministic functions and W is a Wiener
process. Making the increments innitesimal, i.e.letting ∆t → dt, yields the SDE:
          {
                     dX(t) = μ(t, X(t))dt + σ(t, X(t))dW (t)
                  X(0) = x0
where μ is called the drift term and σ is called the diusion term.

                                   13
2.4. MATHEMATICAL THEORY CHAPTER 2. THEORY

Wiener Processes

The choice of Wiener processes as the driving random component in many SDEs
is based on the good properties for analytical calculations, inherited from the
Normal distribution. Informally, a Wiener process's non-overlaping increments
are independent. This is of course a convenient when it is desirable to add pure
randomness to some other process. As seen in condition 3 below, every time
increment of a Wiener process has a normal distribution, with expected value
zero and variance linearly increasing with the length of the time interval. It is
reasonable that a large sample of processes that essentially are "random walks"
will have an increased variance when the time considered increases. Formally, a
stochastic process W is called a Wiener process if the following conditions hold:

  1. W (0) = 0

  2. The process W has independent increments, i.e if r < s ≤ t < u, then
     W (u) − W (t) and W (s) − W (r) are independent stochastic variables.

  3. For s < t the stochastic variable W (t) − W (s) has a Normal distribution
     N (0, t − s).

   4. W has continuous trajectories. (P-a.s.)

                                  2                                           2
Note: The notation N (μ, σ ) refers to mean μ and variance σ . P-a.s. means
almost surely convergent.

                                   14
2.4. MATHEMATICAL THEORY CHAPTER 2. THEORY

        One trajectory of a Wiener process is visualized below:

Figure 2.1: Graph of a Wiener process with dynamics σdW (t) with σ = 0.1 over 1
              year.

Geometric Brownian Motion

Another fundamental part of asset pricing and modelling is stochastic processes
that follow a geometric Brownian motion (GBM). The GBM is a type of SDE and
has the dynamics:
              {
                         dXt = αtXtdt + σtXtdWt
                        X(0) = x0

The solution to this stochastic dierential equation is given by (see [1]):
                {(     )             }
                                      1  2
             Xt = x0 · exp   αt −  σt  (t − 0) + σt(Wt − W0)           (2.3)
                                2

                                   15
2.4. MATHEMATICAL THEORY CHAPTER 2. THEORY

Using the properties of Wiener processes, we know that

                      Zt = (Wt − W0) ∈ N (0, t − 0)

hence the GBM follows a log-normal distribution which is one of the key assump-
tions in the famous Black-Scholes-Merton pricing formula. One simulation of a
stock price given by a GBM is presented in Figure 2.2.
        In the simulations in this report, a GBM-approach with both stochastic
drift and stochastic diusion term will be used. For more information, see Ch. 3.

Figure 2.2: Graph of a geometric Brownian motion with dynamics dSt = αStdt +
            σStdWt, where α = 0.2 and σ = 0.1 over 1 year. The green line is the
             solution to the corresponding ODE with dynamics dSt = αStdt.

                                   16
Chapter 3

Methodology

The approach used to investigate equal risk contribution portfolios' performance
is based on simulations and statistical examination of the generated outcomes. To
simulate the dierent assets that are included in the portfolios, a joint model of
the assets' dynamics is needed. The building blocks used are stochastic repre-
sentations of S&P 500 equities, VIX Futures contracts and long term government
bonds. Simulations are made using the stochastic representations together with a
rebalancing rule that allocates capital in accordance with the ERC theory.
        For dierent rebalancing frequencies, yearly returns of the portfolios are
generated and the performance statistics presented in Sec. 2.2 are calculated. The
models used to simulate these investment assets will be presented in this chapter.
Moreover, necessary limitations and simplications are stated as well as the tech-
nicalities of asset allocation and rebalancing. Lastly, a method to investigate the
performance of these portfolios on actual data will be considered.

3.1 Stochastic Modelling

To allow for an integrated simulation of the assets in the equal risk contribution
approach a comprehensive model for the asset prices is needed. The model for
stocks and VIX Futures used is a simplied version of the more general presentation
in Zhu and Lian (2012). As in their approach, let the stocks St describe the S&P
500 Index and Vt be the stochastic diusion component. Under the objective

                                   17
3.1. STOCHASTIC MODELLING CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

probability measure P these are assumed to have the following dynamics:
         {             √
                                                   S
                   dSt = St(rt + γ)dt + St  VtdWt  , S0 = s0
                                  √    V                   (3.1)
                   dVt = κ(θ − Vt)dt + σV  VtdWt  , V0 = v0

where rt is the spot interest rate, γ the equity premium and κ, θ and σV are,
respectively, the mean-reverting speed parameter, the long-term mean and the
                                              S         V
variance coecient of the diusion Vt, and dWt  and dWt  are two standard Wiener
processes under P with correlation ρ. This implies that the S&P 500 Index is
described as a geometric Brownian motion with a stochastic diusion term, and
that the diusion term is a mean-reverting stochastic process. Mean-reverting
meaning that the diusion term uctuates around, in this case, θ. Following the
standard approach in arbitrage theory, the dynamics could be expressed under the
risk-neutral martingale measure Q as:
        {         √
                                           S
                  dSt = Strtdt + St  VtdWt,Q   , S0 = s0
                                   √    V                  (3.2)
                 dVt = κQ(θQ − Vt)dt + σV  VtdWt,Q   , V0 = v0

where ηV = κQ − κ is the volatility risk premium and σV , ρ and κθ are preserved
under the (Girsanov) measure transformation from P to Q. From this, Duan and
Yeh (2007) have shown that an explicit formula for the VIX Index is given by:

                                             2
                               V IXt = (aVt + b) (3.3)

where 
                                       −κQ τ¯
                       1 − e
                           a =          , τ¯ = 30/365
                                 κQ τ¯                                (3.4)
            
                         b = θQ(1 − a)
        Using this and the standard approach for pricing Futures contracts, Zhu
and Lian (2012) have shown that the VIX Futures price at time t is given by:

                                      (          2   )
                                               −sb            V IXt − b
                                   ∫ ∞ 1 − e  f  −sa; t, τ,
                Q             1                          a
 F (t, T, V IXt) = E  [V IXT |Ft] = √                      1.5 ds
                                2  π  0                s
                                                                                  (3.5)

                                   18
3.1. STOCHASTIC MODELLING CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

where T is the maturity time of the VIX Futures contract, τ = T − t time to
maturity and:
                                                C(φ,τ )+D(φ,τ )Vt
                            f (φ; t, τ, Vt) = e                                    (3.6)

with              (             )
                                                         2
                       −2κθ       σV φ  −κQτ
                C(φ, τ ) =      ln  1 +     (e    − 1)
                      2
                       σV        2κQ
                                                                                  (3.7)
         
                         2κQφ
                 D(φ, τ ) = 2            2   κ τ
                          σ φ + (2κ  − σ φ)e Q
                                V        Q     V

Hence, solving the system of stochastic dierential equations (3.1) and calculating
the integral (3.5) gives the values for the S&P 500 and Futures prices on VIX.
        Furthermore, to be able to use this approach a specication of the short
rate rt is needed. In the literature, there exists a large number of dierent short
rate models. A fairly general alternative is the Hull-White model (3.8), which ts
theoretical bond prices to the observed yield curve. The dynamics under the risk
neutral probability measure Q is given by:

                                                               r
                      drt = (Θ(t) − ar˜ t) + σdWt,Q   , r0 = ˜r0 (3.8)

where Θ(t) is a deterministic function of time to be specied by the observed
                                                                   r
forward yield curve, a˜ and σ are constants and W t is a Q-Wiener process (at this
point with no restrictions).
        Hull and White (1990) have shown that this model yields the zero coupon
bond prices p(t, T ) at time t maturing at time T as:
             ∗          [                  2                                ]
             p (0, T )               ∗        σ   2            −2˜at
  p(t, T ) =  ∗      exp  B(t, T )f  (0, t) −   B (t, T )(1 − e   ) − B(t, T )r(t)
            p (0, t)                      4˜a
                                                                                  (3.9)
          ∗                                                                ∗              ∗
where f  (0, t) is the observed t-forward rate at time zero, p (0, t) and p (0, T )
the observed zero coupon bond prices at time zero with maturity time t and T
respectively, and with:
                                         1 [     −a˜(T −t)]
                         B(t, T ) =   1 − e                          (3.10)
                                 a˜

                                   19
3.2. LIMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

Using the notation in Björk (2009), it can be shown that:

                                         ∗             ′             ∗
                    Θ(t) = f T (0, t) + g (t) + ˜a (f  (0, t) + g(t)) (3.11)

where the subscript T indicates partial derivative with respect to the time to
maturity and:
                                                 2
                                     σ   2
                                g(t) =    B (0, t) (3.12)
                                      2
Moreover, a useful relationship for calculating bond prices from the forward rate
curve is given by:
                                                        ∗
                              ∗           ∂ ln(p (0, T ))
                         f  (0, T ) = −                                (3.13)
                                       ∂T
The consequences of adjoining this model to the specication in (3.1) will be
examined in Sec. 3.2.
        Consequently, the approach chosen to model stocks, bonds and VIX Fu-
tures prices consists of the solution to the stochastic dierential equation (3.1)
for S&P 500, the values of the integrals in (3.5) and the bond prices given by
(3.9). The model uses the parameters: γ, s0, κ, θ, σV , v0, ηV ,τ¯ , a˜, σ, r˜0 and the
                ∗
yield curve f  (0, T ) to determine the variables: St, F (t, T, V IXt) and p(t, T ) as
functions of t and T .

3.2 Limitations and Assumptions

The model for the S&P 500 Index and the Futures prices on VIX found in Zhu
and Lian (2012) used and presented in this report is already a simplication of the
most general model presented in their paper using e.g. stochastic jump processes in
both the underlying and the diusion term. A more general model is out of scope
for this paper, and the simplication is justied by Zhu and Lian's conclusion that
this model yields a sucient and reasonable t with the historical data on VIX
Futures prices. The model in this report limits the VIX Index modelling, which
in practice is characterized by volatility spikes which often are modelled by jump
processes. However, since the equal risk contribution portfolio consists of Futures
on the VIX Index rather than VIX Index positions directly, the model serves the
desired purpose of usage.

                                   20
3.2. LIMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

        Further simplications used in this report regard model parameter esti-
mations. As suggested and performed by Zhu and Lian (2012), the solution to the
system of stochastic dierential equations (3.1), (3.3) and Futures prices (3.5) is
tted to historical data on the S&P 500 and the VIX Index using Markov chain
Monte-Carlo simulation and parameter estimation. Since the scope of this report
is focused on asset allocation in portfolio management rather than mathematical
model estimation, the estimates found in Zhu and Lian (2012) is used and shown
in Table 3.1. These parameters are estimated from daily close levels on S&P 500
and VIX as well as daily VIX Futures settlement prices over the period March 26,
2004 to July 11, 2008. The date March 26, 2004 is when the trading with VIX
Futures started and July 11, 2008 is presumably chosen as to match with the time
frame of their research.
        Moreover exclusion lters are used, e.g. removal of Futures with less
than ve days to maturity and Futures with less than 200 contracts traded to
avoid liquidity-related biases. One implication for this report of choosing the
parameters in Table 3.1 rather than up-to-date estimations is that the results of
the simulations regarding rebalancing frequency can be compared to the actual
market performance for the time period July 12, 2008 and onwards. Moreover,
choosing this period of time for parameter estimation seems rather benecial in
the sense that the markets were fairly stable during this period, as could be seen
in Figure 3.1. I.e. the conclusions made from these simulations could be said to
hold in a more general setting than if post 2008 nancial crisis parameters are
used, since these would be biased on a market suering from distress. In addition,
using parameters from a stable market period to examine the performance using
actual data from a crisis would give an indication on the portfolio performance in
tail events. This is further examined in Section 3.4.

Table 3.1: Estimates of model parameters from Zhu and Lian (2012). The table re-
            ports annualized means and standard deviations within parentheses for each
            estimator.

                    θ κ σV ηV ρ
                   0.0444 2.2680 0.3856 -2.0160 -0.7533
                  (0.0071) (0.2520) (0.0504) (0.5040) (0.0231)

                                   21
3.2. LIMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

Figure 3.1: Historical data on S&P 500, VIX Index and 10 year government zero coupon
             bonds from March 26, 2004 to July 11, 2008.

                                   22
3.2. LIMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

        Extending the model used by Zhu and Lian (2012) with the Hull-White
short rate model in a general setting generates a model examined by Grzelak,
Ooseterlee and van Weeren (1990), with correlations among all the driving Wiener
processes. In that approach, it can be shown that there does not exist ane
solutions, which means that e.g. the bond prices could not be calculated using
equation (3.9), and more sophisticated pricing formulas are necessary. In the
scope of the simulations in this report, and as a rst approximation, an ane
term structure is considered. The consequence of this simplication is that the
short rate will be modelled independently of the processes described in (3.2). One
should also note that the bond positions are assumed to be in terms of zero coupon
bonds with face value $1. The zero coupon bond is a theoretical construction that
is not traded in the bond market. However, the zero coupon bond yields could
easily be derived from actual government (coupon) bonds and vice versa. Zero
coupon bonds are thus used in this report for transparency.
        Moreover, a corresponding simplication regarding parameters estimation
for the short rate model is used. If an explicit calibration is to be made, either
caplet or swaption prices could be used. The estimates to be used in this report are
values that are frequently used in simulations in the literature, e.g. by Schulmerich
(2010), and are shown in Table 3.2.

Table 3.2: Estimates of short rate model parameters by Schulmerich (2010). The table
            reports annualized means.

                                  σ a˜
                                      0.01 0.02

        The initial parameters and the equity premium have to be stated or es-
timated. The initial values s0, v0 and r˜0 are taken from S&P 500 Index value at
July 11, 2008, Zhu and Lian's report and U.S. Department of the Treasury yield
curve from July 11, 2008 (by linear extrapolation) respectively. The equity pre-
mium γ is taken from the research of Graham and Harvey (2008). Moreover, VIX0
is adjusted to the data above. All values are shown in Table 3.3, and the U.S.
Department of the Treasury forward rates on July 11, 2008 are shown in Table
3.4.

                                   23
3.2. LIMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

Table 3.3: Initial parameters and the equity risk premium γ. The table reports annu-
             alized values.

                         s0 v0 r˜0 γ VIX0
                      1239.49 0.0225 0.0126 0.037 0.22

Table 3.4: Forward rates quoted by the U.S. Department of the Treasury on July 11,
            2008.

 Maturity 1 m 3 m 6 m 1 y 2 y 3 y 5 y 7 y 10 y
           1.38% 1.62% 2.02% 2.30% 2.59% 2.88% 3.27% 3.55% 3.96%

        Furthermore, the parameters are assumed to be xed during the simula-
tions. In practice, an ERC investor would update the parameters gradually as
time passes by. This would require parameter estimation and is thus out of the
scope of this report. Moreover, the simulations are on a one year horizon (252
trading days) due to the non-updated parameters, since longer time periods would
require higher model and estimation accuracy.
        The time to maturity of the Futures contracts and the bonds simulated
in this report uses a roll over simplication, i.e. the Futures contracts to be
traded are assumed to always have a maturity time of three months and the long-
term government bonds are equally assumed to have a maturity of 10 years. A
maturity time of three months for the Futures is used since a short maturity is
preferred due to higher VIX Index dependence in pricing, and a shorter maturity
time would not be transferable to real life investment decisions since Futures with
shorter maturities are also experiencing liquidity related eects. In practice, the
settlement of the VIX Futures is thirty days prior to the maturity of S&P 500
options. Thus, the assumption of Futures with maturity time of three months
gives a dierence in time to maturity compared to real Futures of at most two
weeks, and on average no dierence.
        Long term government bonds are used to match the return prole of an
equal risk contribution investor, i.e. increase both expected returns and risk ex-
posure. Furthermore, some simplications regarding the margin account for the

                                   24
3.3. SIMULATION IN MATLAB CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

Futures contracts are used. There is no interest gained or paid and the investor
does not get any margin calls. The implication is that there is a little less return
in the simulated portfolio including VIX Futures than what it should be. This is
because either a small return is given due to interest on the margin account, or
that the investor believes that a higher return could be achieved by using lever-
age and investing the "margin account money" elsewhere. In practice, the terms
of these accounts vary among investors, and it is easily adapted to the model if
desired.

3.2.1 Turnover and Transaction Costs

Another simplication used is regarding transaction costs, which at a rst approx-
imation are ignored. The reason is mainly for simplicity of the results presented in
this report. Moreover, the transaction costs vary over time and is dierent among
investors. An investor interested in this approach could add his or her transaction
costs into the simulation.
        For robustness, a review of the dierence in transaction costs between
portfolios with and without VIX Futures positions, the total net reallocation of
each simulation is calculated and shown (in average for each rebalancing frequency)
in Ch. 4. The denition of net total reallocation (turnover) used is the sum of the
absolute change in each portfolio weight for each reallocation over the whole year of
investment. From this, an estimate of the eect on portfolio performance from the
total aggregated transaction costs can be calculated. In Ch. 4, a transaction cost
of 0.05 percent is assumed, and the impact on the dierent portfolios is calculated.
This does not take care of the eect of continuously settling the transaction costs
and thus the eect of compounding, which for these purposes can be considered
to be negligible.

3.3 Simulation in Matlab

The Matlab-simulation implements the models stated in Sec. 3.1 with parameters
from Sec. 3.2 using time-discretization with equal time-steps corresponding to
                                                                        S        V
daily values. The Wiener increments are normally distributed, with W   and W

                                   25
3.3. SIMULATION IN MATLAB CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

                                                   r
correlated by ρ and independent of W  . Modelling is preferably performed under
the objective measure P , but for uniqueness the short rate model must be simulated
under the risk-neutral measure Q. Note that the trajectories of r used in e.g. (3.1)
is the risk-neutral values, hence the modelling will be consistent. The log-return
of the S&P 500 is modelled in analogue with Zhu and Lian (2012), and denoted
Yt = ln(St/St−1). The term arising from the diusion could be neglected when
applying Itô's formula.
       The discretization used with time-increments ∆t is given by:
                  √ √
                                               S
            Yt+1 = (rt + γ)∆t +   Vt  ∆tZt , S0 = s0
                       √ √
                                                          V
               Vt+1 = Vt + κ(θ − Vt)∆t + σV  Vt  ∆tZt , V0 = v0       (3.14)
                      √
                                                                       r
               rt+1 = rt + (Θ(t) − ar˜ t) ∆t + σ  ∆tZt , r0 = ˜r0

         S    V        r                                           S        V
where Zt , Zt and Zt are standard normal distributed and Zt and Zt have cor-
relation ρ. Subsequently, the Futures prices are calculated using the numerical
integration function quadgk and the bond prices are calculated using (3.9). More-
over, a total of 1000 simulations of each trajectory is used. The number 1000
is chosen as a trade-o between precision (size of standard errors of estimates),
needed computational power and for easy reference. As could be seen in Ch. 4, the
precision is satisfactory for the purposes of this report. I.e. the precision is enough
to conclude that the estimates of the portfolios' Sharpe ratios are signicantly
dierent when including VIX Futures positions.

3.3.1 Allocation of Capital

With the dierent trajectories simulated for the S&P 500, the VIX Futures and
the bonds, the asset allocation will be according to an equal risk contribution
approach. Using the methodology presented by Maillard et. al. (2009), the
capital will be allocated based on volatilities and correlations as risk measures.
This gives an allocation rule for the weights wS&P , wV IX and wbond in form of a
minimization problem. The desired allocation is such that wi(Σ · w)i = wj (Σ · w)j
for all i, j = S&P, VIX, bond and where Σ is the covariance matrix between the
assets' returns. This implies that all assets contribute equally to the total portfolio
risk.

                                   26
3.3. SIMULATION IN MATLAB CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

        The optimization problem to be solved in order to get portfolio weights
could be written as:
      ∑ ∑             2
       min   i   j (wi(Σ · w)i − wj (Σ · w)j ) , i, j = S&P, VIX, bond
           ∑                                (3.15)
       subject to   i wi = 1, wi ≥ 0

                                 T
where w = (wS&P , wV IX , wbond)  represents the vector of portfolio weights. The
optimization constraints is interpreted as that no short-selling is allowed, that all
the weights should sum up to one means that the portfolio is unlevered. By inspec-
tion, the objective function equals zero only if the desired allocation is fullled.
The covariance matrix Σ has to be estimated using historical data, which in the
context of this report is done by using previous values in the simulated trajectories.
The chosen backward time is set to seven days, as a trade-o between sample-size
and importance of historic events. A larger sample will give a higher accuracy on
the estimates, while the importance of past events will be present for a longer time
when more data points are used.
         According to Maillard et. al. (2009), the intuitive allocation problem
presented in equation (3.15) could be rewritten as a convex optimization problem
with a unique solution, which is why the rewritten version is used in the simulations
made in this report. The optimization problem could then be formulated as:
            √
                      min   yT Σy
                     ∑                      (3.16)
                         subject to   i ln(yi) ≥ 0, yi ≥ 0
where y is the un-normalized analogue of w. Consequently, the portfolio weights
are given by:
                                  yi
                   wi = ∑   where i = S&P, VIX, bond (3.17)
                                     i yi
         Furthermore, the initial capital is assumed to be $1, 000, 000 and given the
weights of the allocation, the number of positions in each asset can be determined.
The size of initial investment is irrelevant for this study, but is important if real
costs (such as a lower bound in dollars of a transaction cost) are implemented.
The initial value is easily changed to a chosen number in the Matlab-code. For
S&P 500 and the government bonds, the number of positions is simply determined
as the value of total allocation divided by the price of one position in S&P 500 and

                                   27
3.4. PERFORMANCE ON HIST. DATA CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

in bonds respectively. For the Futures contracts, the allocation is determined in
terms of the initial margin for one contract. In particular, the number of Futures
contracts held is the amount allocated to VIX Futures divided by the initial margin.
This rule is plausible since it would not require any further assumptions on the
terms of the margin account, as described in Sec. 3.2.

3.3.2 Rebalancing Decision Rule

The rule for rebalancing is simply a xed rebalancing frequency, based on a roll over
strategy. With Σ̂   estimated from returns over the past seven time points, equation
(3.16) is used to assign weights between the asset classes in the portfolio. In this
report daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, semi-annually and annually rebalancing
frequencies are investigated. A roll over strategy means that for each time of
rebalancing, an updated covariance matrix is used to calculate the new weights.
This yields that a calibration of the model is needed for the rst seven days,
which is realized by starting the simulations seven days before the capital is rstly
allocated.

3.4 Performance on Historical Data

Using the same approach as in Sec. 3.3.2 and Sec. 3.3.1, the performance of the
equal risk contribution portfolio could be examined on historical data from July
11, 2008 to July 10, 2009. The data used is the actual values of the S&P 500
Index, the zero coupon bond prices calculated from the forward rate curve and
VIX Futures with 2.5 to 3.5 months to maturity (uniformly distributed). Note
that since it is assumed that there always exists Futures maturing in three months
in the simulations, the maturity for the actual data is chosen as close to three
months as possible. The realizations could be seen in Figure 3.2. Another note on
the performance on historical data is that there is only one realization, hence the
only measure that is meaningful is the returns of the dierent portfolios. E.g. the
Sharpe ratio would be undened since the variance of one observation is zero.

                                   28
3.4. PERFORMANCE ON HIST. DATA CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

Figure 3.2: Graphs showing the actual outcome of S&P 500, VIX Index, 3-month VIX
             Futures and 10-year U.S. government zero coupon bond price during the
              time period 11 July, 2008 - 10 July, 2009.

                                   29
3.5. PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

3.5 Portfolio Performance

Given the simulations of the portfolios with and without VIX Futures positions
for dierent rebalancing frequencies, the performance statistics presented in Sec.
2.2 are calculated. The simulation generates the yearly return of each of the 1000
portfolios with and without VIX Futures, respectively. The arithmetical mean
is used to estimate the average yearly return and the square root of the sample
variance estimates the annualized volatility of returns. Moreover, the risk-free rate
used to calculate the Sharpe ratio is 2.25%, which was the 1-year U.S. government
bond rate at 10-11 July, 2008. The 1-year risk-free rate is chosen because of the
1-year horizon on the investments. The Sharpe ratios' sensitivity to the risk-free
rate is examined in Sec. 4.2. The other portfolio statistics follow immediately
from the realization of the simulations.
        Examining performance using real data from July 11, 2008 to July 10, 2009
could be regarded as a study of ERC performance when including VIX Futures
during a tail event, and is more of supplemental character. However, the reason
for not looking at real data from the years following 2009 is that the estimation of
the model parameters should be considerably skewed (outdated) when taking the
nancial crisis into account. The comparability would therefore be lost.

                                   30
Chapter 4

Results

In this chapter, the results from the Matlab simulations are presented, with
some details deferred to Appendix A and Appendix B. The chapter is divided
into a rst part showing a (partial) realization of the simulations, followed by
performance statistics for portfolios with and without VIX Futures positions for
dierent rebalancing frequencies. Finally, the roll over equal risk contribution
portfolios' performance on historical data is presented.

4.1 Simulated Processes

Performing simulations using the code presented in Appendix D gives trajectories
for the evolution of the S&P 500 Index, the VIX Index, VIX Futures maturing in
three months and 10-year zero coupon bond prices over one year starting from a
hypothetical July 11, 2008. As stated in Ch. 3, 1000 simulations are used for each
rebalancing frequency. In Figure 4.1, ve realizations of the simulations are shown
to get the reader an overview of the realized processes used to allocate capital with
the equal risk contribution approach.

                                   31
4.1. SIMULATED PROCESSES CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

Figure 4.1: Graphs showing an example of 5 simulated S&P 500 processes, VIX pro-
             cesses, VIX Futures processes and bond price processes. Parameters are as
              stated in Ch. 3.

                                   32
4.2. PREDETERMINED REBALANCING FREQ. CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

4.2 Predetermined Rebalancing Frequency

In this section, the performance statistics of the simulated portfolios with and
without VIX Futures positions are presented for dierent roll over rebalancing
frequencies. Simulations are performed in accordance with the approach presented
in Ch. 3. Table 4.1 shows the performance statistics for portfolios including
allocation to VIX Futures, while Table 4.2 is without VIX Futures positions. The
asset allocation weights are presented in Table B.1 and Table B.2 in Appendix B.

Table 4.1: One year performance parameters for equal risk weights unlevered portfo-
            lio including VIX Futures, predetermined rebalancing frequency. Based on
             yearly return of 1000 simulations.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Avg yearly return 7.82% 7.08% 6.70% 6.63% 6.13% 5.50%
 Annualized vol of ret 7.67% 7.62% 7.82% 8.02% 8.26% 8.42%
 Sharpe ratio 0.73 0.63 0.57 0.55 0.47 0.39
 SE(Sharpe ratio) 0.036 0.035 0.034 0.034 0.033 0.033
 Worst drawdown -15.47% -14.59% -14.45% -18.06% -20.66% -33.20%
 Highest return 31.32% 30.18% 30.73% 31.92% 30.81% 33.69%
 Skewness 0.06 0.10 0.09 -0.11 -0.14 -0.16
 Kurtosis 3.16 3.06 2.95 2.94 2.96 3.64

Table 4.2: One year performance parameters for equal risk weights unlevered portfolio
            without VIX Futures, predetermined rebalancing frequency. Based on yearly
            return of 1000 simulations.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Avg yearly return 4.85% 4.91% 4.92% 5.06% 5.10% 4.99%
 Annualized vol of ret 8.03% 8.00% 8.13% 8.49% 8.72% 9.15%
 Sharpe ratio 0.32 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.33 0.30
 SE(Sharpe ratio) 0.032 0.033 0.033 0.033 0.033 0.032
 Worst drawdown -21.08% -20.38% -17.59% -21.33% -19.46% -40.16%
 Highest return 31.95% 31.07% 28.48% 28.46% 30.17% 32.00%
 Skewness -0.02 0.01 0.02 -0.13 -0.17 -0.28
 Kurtosis 3.02 2.98 2.77 2.80 2.89 3.73

                                   33
4.2. PREDETERMINED REBALANCING FREQ. CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

        A comparison between the performance of the portfolios with and without
VIX Futures positions shows that an inclusion of VIX Futures seems credible. For
all rebalancing frequencies considered, the ERC portfolio including VIX Futures
has more preferable performance statistics. In particular, the average yearly return
is higher and the annualized volatility of return is lower consistently when including
VIX Futures contracts. In turn, this results in a higher Sharpe ratio. Moreover, the
worst drawdown is less negative when using VIX Futures apart from rebalancing
at a semi-annual basis and the highest yearly returns are fairly equal between the
two portfolios. In addition, for a normal distribution, the skewness is zero and the
kurtosis equals three. By construction of the simulated asset classes using Wiener
processes this is expected to hold for the returns, and is veried in Table 4.1 and
Table 4.2.
        Using the normal properties of the asymptotic distribution of the Sharpe
ratio gives a possibility to perform a hypothesis testing of the null hypothesis
H0: "the Sharpe ratio with VIX Futures is less than or equal to the Sharpe ratio
without VIX Futures" against the alternative hypothesis H1: "the Sharpe ratio
with VIX Futures position is higher than without VIX Futures positions". Forming
the dierence between the Sharpe ratios with VIX Futures SRV IX and without
VIX Futures SRW O gives again a normal distributed variable. The variance of
                                                                  2                 2
this variable has an upper bound given by SE(SRV IX ) + SE(SRW O) , since
the covariance between the Sharpe ratios is positive. Under H0, this yields the
test variable zobs for the null hypothesis H0: SRV IX − SRW 0 ≤ 0 against H1:
SRV IX − SRW 0 > 0 given by:

                               SR̂   V IX − SR̂   W 0 − 0
                 zobs = √                                    (4.1)
                             SE( SR̂      )2 + SE(SR̂      )2
                                        V IX              W O
         The values of the test statistics and the corresponding p-values calculated
from the fact that the asymptotic distribution of the test variable is standard
normal is given by Table 4.3

                                   34
4.2. PREDETERMINED REBALANCING FREQ. CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

Table 4.3: Values of test variables zobs and corresponding p-values for test of the null
            hypothesis H0: "the Share ratio with VIX Futures is less than or equal to
             the Sharpe ratio without VIX Futures" against H1: "the Sharpe ratio with
            VIX Futures positions is higher than without VIX Futures positions".

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 zobs 8.51 6.23 5.07 4.64 3.00 1.96
                            −10     −10     −7     −6     −3
 p-value <10      2·10       2·10       2·10          1·10          0.025

        As seen in Table 4.3, the null hypothesis is rejected in favour of the al-
ternative hypothesis. I.e. the Sharpe ratio of the portfolio including VIX Futures
position is signicantly higher than the Sharpe ratio of the portfolio without VIX
Futures contracts.

4.2.1 Transaction Costs Estimation

In this section, an estimate of the eect of including transaction costs when re-
balancing the portfolios is examined. In Table 4.4 and Table 4.5, the total yearly
rebalancing turnover is presented for the portfolios containing VIX Futures con-
tracts and the portfolios without VIX Futures contracts respectively.

Table 4.4: One year average reallocation as a multiple of initial capital for equal risk
            weights unlevered portfolio including VIX Futures, predetermined rebalanc-
            ing frequency. Standard deviation within parenthesis. Based on yearly re-
            turn of 1000 simulations.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 S&P 500 10.19 4.67 1.44 0.44 0.17 -
                           (1.07) (0.71) (0.40) (0.21) (0.11) -
 Government bonds 10.28 4.81 1.49 0.46 0.17 -
                           (1.00) (0.71) (0.41) (0.21) (0.11) -
 VIX Futures 1.14 0.47 0.13 0.04 0.02 -
                           (0.16) (0.08) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) -

                                   35
4.2. PREDETERMINED REBALANCING FREQ. CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

Table 4.5: One year average reallocation as a multiple of initial capital for equal risk
            weights unlevered portfolio without VIX Futures, predetermined rebalancing
            frequency. Standard deviation within parenthesis. Based on yearly return
             of 1000 simulations.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 S&P 500 8.65 4.08 1.30 0.42 0.17 -
                           (0.87) (0.62) (0.36) (0.20) (0.11) -
 Government bonds 8.65 4.08 1.30 0.42 0.17 -
                           (0.87) (0.62) (0.36) (0.20) (0.11) -

        Using the approach in Sec. 3.2.1, in particular the assumption that the
transaction cost is a fraction of the total transaction amount (0.05 percent) and
that it is the same for all assets, the aggregated transaction cost is the sum of the
turnovers of all assets multiplied by the transaction cost brokerage. This yields
the following eect on returns and Sharpe ratios:

Table 4.6: Estimated eect on average yearly return and Sharpe ratio of portfolios with
            and without VIX Futures position when including transaction costs.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Avg yearly ret w VIX -1.08% -0.49% -0.15% -0.05% -0.02% -
 Sharpe ratio w VIX -0.14 -0.06 -0.02 -0.01 -0.00 -
 Avg yearly ret no VIX -0.87% -0.41% -0.13% -0.04% -0.02% -
 Sharpe ratio no VIX -0.11 -0.05 -0.02 -0.01 -0.00 -

         As seen in Table 4.6, the inclusion of transaction cost has a slightly larger
impact on the portfolios with VIX Futures positions than the portfolios without
VIX Futures.

4.2.2 Robustness of Results

The robustness of the portfolio performance is based on the stability of the simu-
lation outcomes. In this report this regards returns, standard deviations of returns
and the risk-free rate. Thus, ideally all parameters in the simulations should be
tweaked to obtain robust results. However, the assumption of not updating the

                                   36
4.2. PREDETERMINED REBALANCING FREQ. CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

parameters gradually might be of higher importance. If this method is used in
reality, the parameters may be updated perhaps every night or every week. This
would mitigate the need for tweaking, and therefore a study of changes of the input
parameters is disregarded. Nevertheless, one idea of how this could be done is by
adding white noise terms to the parameters with variance based on the standard
errors of the parameter estimation.
        The parameter that could be changed without tweaking the simulations is
the risk-free rate used in the calculation of the Sharpe ratio. As could be seen in
Figure 4.2, the portfolio including VIX Futures has a higher Sharpe ratio than the
portfolio without VIX Futures positions for a wide range of risk-free rates. Since
the lines are almost parallel, they are practically equally sensitive to changes in
the risk-free rate. The graph only shows the sensitivity based on the 1-year daily
rebalance performance, but the same analogy holds for all rebalance frequencies.

Figure 4.2: Graph showing how the Sharpe ratio of the dierent portfolios with daily
              rebalancing depend on the risk-free rate.

                                   37
4.3. TEST OF PERFORMANCE ON HIST. DATA CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

4.3 Test of Performance on Historical Data

Lastly, an equal risk contribution capital allocation approach applied to the actual
performance of the dierent asset classes starting from July 11, 2008 and one year
forward is considered. The results are shown in Table 4.7. The reason why only
yearly returns are stated is because one time series can be considered as a single
data point. As seen in the table, the yearly return is higher when including VIX
Futures for all rebalancing frequencies considered. The changes between positive
and negative returns are due to the timing of the allocation of capital.

Table 4.7: One year performance parameters for equal risk weights unlevered portfolio,
            predetermined rebalance frequency. Based on actual daily data during the
             period 11 July, 2008 - 10 July, 2009.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Ret with VIX Fut 8.75% -0.88% 8.46% 4.09% -0.10% -1.88%
 Ret without VIX Fut 0.58% -2.33% 0.26% -0.62% -4.73% -5.05%

                                   38
Chapter 5

Discussion

The ndings and results presented in Ch. 4 is analyzed in this chapter. Firstly, a
thorough examination and interpretation of the results is performed. Thereafter,
implications and conclusions of this study are reported. Finally, some suggestions
for further studies are presented.

5.1 Interpretation of Results

The results in Ch. 4 demonstrate the benets of including VIX Futures positions in
the portfolios considered. The main result is the relatively higher annual returns
and lower annualized volatilities for the VIX portfolio, yielding higher Sharpe
ratios. The dierence in Sharpe ratios holds for a wide range of risk-free rates
as shown in Figure 4.2. Moreover, by forming the dierences between the Sharpe
ratios and testing the null hypothesis H0: "the Sharpe ratio with VIX Futures is less
than or equal to the Sharpe ratio without VIX Futures" against H1: "the Sharpe
ratio with VIX Futures position is higher than without VIX Futures positions",
the VIX portfolio is shown to have a higher Sharpe ratio with p-values ranging
       −10      −7
from 10    to 10   for daily to monthly rebalances and 0.025 at yearly rebalancing
frequencies. Therefore, the conclusion that including VIX Futures yields a higher
Sharpe ratio could be said to be statistically signicant.
        In Sec. 4.2.1, transaction costs were examined to investigate if the pre-
vious conclusions would turn ambiguous under less restricted assumptions. Natu-

                                   39
5.1. INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION

rally, the calculations show that the returns and Sharpe ratios are lowered when a
transaction cost is introduced. The important part, though, is that they also show
that the relative dierence in transaction cost is so small that it does not aect
the interpretation that including VIX Futures increases the portfolio performance.
Hence the conclusion drawn in the previous paragraph remains reliable.
        A further note is the impact of the simplications made in regards to mar-
gin accounts. As mentioned, the negligence of interest rate results in a somewhat
lower return for the portfolio including VIX Futures. If an investor could receive
an interest rate of, say, 2 % and the average allocation to VIX Futures (see Ap-
pendix B) is roughly 2 %, then the impact is a lowered return of 0.04 % annually.
Including this eect would slightly increase the Sharpe ratio of the VIX portfolio.
        The results on historical data again show that the portfolio including VIX
Futures clearly outperforms the portfolio without VIX Futures for all rebalancing
frequencies. As year 2008-2009 can be regarded as a tail event, the results show
the hedging benets from including VIX in a portfolio. This can be seen by
comparing the average return of the VIX portfolio with the average return of the
portfolio without VIX, for both simulations and historical data. Across rebalancing
frequencies, the average return of the VIX portfolio on historical data was 5.06
% higher than the portfolio without, compared to the corresponding gure of
1.67 % for the simulations. Hence, this suggests that the eect of including VIX
Futures is more benecial when extreme events such as the crisis in 2008-2009
occur. Note however that the returns for weekly rebalance is considerably lower
than for monthly and daily, which breaks a pattern of returns decreasing with
rebalancing frequency. This is due to unlucky market timing, since the weekly
rebalances contains all the rebalancing points used in monthly rebalancing, and a
subset of the 20 % of the points used in daily rebalancing.
        A noteworthy result is how the Sharpe ratio depends on reallocation fre-
quency when VIX Futures is added. As can be seen in Ch. 4, the Sharpe ratio
increases with rebalancing frequency for the VIX portfolio but is relatively con-
stant for the portfolio consisting of only S&P 500 and government bonds. There
is still an increase in Sharpe ratio with rebalancing frequency for the VIX port-
folio when transaction costs are added. This shows the importance of an actively
managed portfolio when VIX is included in the ERC approach.

                                   40
5.2. IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION

        If an investor holds a well-diversied portfolio (which could be assumed
to hold approximately in real life examples), the diversication benet of adding
another asset class should be zero. Since the considered portfolios contains two
and three asset classes respectively, an important discussion is to try to estimate
to what extent the benets are purely attributable to diversication. Logically, the
VIX Index and thereby VIX Futures should not have a positive expected return, in
fact it should be costly to hold. Therefore, it should be safe to say that the expected
return of VIX Futures is at least not larger than the expected return of a bond
investment, or the expected return of S&P 500. Since the same amount is invested
in both portfolios, no extra expected return should be gained from including the
VIX Futures. Hence, the benets from diversication should be in the form of (at
best) the same return, but with lower volatility. For diversication purposes, the
asset added should ideally be negatively correlated with the portfolio, which it is.
An upper limit of the diversication benet is thus the total decrease in volatility,
roughly 0.40 %. This will have an impact on the Sharpe ratios of at most 0.03,
which is not enough to alter the interpretation that including VIX Futures have a
signicant positive eect on portfolio performance.

5.2 Implications and Conclusions

The economic interpretation and conclusion of the results is that: Including VIX
Futures as an asset class in an equal risk contribution portfolio consisting of
S&P 500 and government bonds substantially enhances the portfolio performance.
Based on yearly returns, this study shows that the Sharpe ratio when including
VIX Futures increases within a range of 30 % to 128% (corresponding to a range
between 0.09 and 0.40) for rebalancing frequencies spanning from annually to daily,
respectively. The conclusion holds signicantly when eects from transaction costs
and diversication benets are accounted for.
        The conclusion that VIX Futures increases the portfolio performance is
also shown to be true when historical data of the corresponding period is examined.
The study on historical data suggests that inclusion of VIX Futures has hedging
benets when tail events occur.
        The practical implication is therefore that investors and asset managers

                                   41
5.3. SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDIES CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION

using the equal risk contribution approach could benet from including VIX Fu-
tures as an asset class in their portfolio.

5.3 Suggestions for Further Studies

An extension of this analysis is to build models and include other types of asset
classes that could be relevant for investors using an equal risk contribution ap-
proach. Another highly relevant extension is to examine how often the parameters
are needed to be re-estimated to better capture the movements of the market, and
then run new simulations with these updated parameters.
        A further extension is to investigate some of the new views on ERC, e.g.
the "Forecast Uncertainty Hedge" rule, and examine what impact VIX Futures
could have on these approaches. One rst step would be to simply add VIX
Futures and see how the portfolio performance changes. The forecast uncertainty
approach also requires development of a new rebalancing rule depending on the
assessed uncertainty in the investments considered. Thus, a second step could be to
investigate what role the VIX Index and VIX Futures could have in a reallocation
or forecast rule, as it is an instrument indicating the implied market volatility in
the near future.

                                   42
Appendix A

Results - Graphs

For reference, histograms over average annual returns for dierent rebalancing
frequencies are presented below. Each histogram is based on 1000 data points,
and performance statistics on every simulation can be found in Chapter 4.2.
        For each specic rebalancing frequency both a portfolio including VIX
Futures and without VIX Futures was simulated simultaneously. This means that
they have the same underlying 1000 processes of S&P 500, government bonds and
VIX Futures.

                                   43
                                 APPENDIX A. RESULTS - GRAPHS

        (a) Daily rebalance incl. VIX (b) Weekly rebalance incl. VIX

       (c) Monthly rebalance incl. VIX (d) Quarterly rebalance incl. VIX

     (e) Semi-annual rebalance incl. VIX (f ) Annual rebalance incl. VIX

Figure A.1: Histogram over returns for S&P 500, government bond and VIX Futures
               portfolio using 1000 simulations, initial value $ 1 million.

                                   44
                                 APPENDIX A. RESULTS - GRAPHS

       (a) Daily rebalance without VIX (b) Weekly rebalance without VIX

     (c) Monthly rebalance without VIX (d) Quarterly rebalance without VIX

    (e) Semi-annual rebalance without VIX (f ) Annual rebalance without VIX

Figure A.2: Histogram over returns for S&P and government bond portfolio using 1000
               simulations, initial value $ 1 million.
                                   45
Appendix B

Results - Tables

In this part, weight statistics of the dierent assets for both portfolios with and
without allocation to VIX Futures are shown. In Table B.1, the minimum, average
and maximum allocation of the average position taken during each investment year
is presented for S&P 500, VIX Futures and 10 year government bonds. Likewise,
Table B.2 regards the portfolios when investing in S&P 500 and government bonds
only. Moreover, Table B.3 and Table B.4 show the corresponding weights when
historical data is used instead of simulated data.

                                   46
                                  APPENDIX B. RESULTS - TABLES

Table B.1: Yearly weight data for equal risk weights unlevered portfolio including VIX
            Futures, predetermined rebalancing frequency. Based on yearly return of
             1000 simulations.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Min w S&P 18.12% 19.32% 19.49% 16.53% 13.77% 8.06%
 Avg w S&P 34.55% 34.60% 34.92% 35.60% 36.59% 37.46%
 Max w S&P 54.19% 55.33% 55.82% 64.11% 67.14% 72.71%
 Min w VIX Fut 1.83% 1.79% 1.52% -0.81% 0.54% 0.28%
 Avg w VIX Fut 2.54% 2.50% 2.32% 1.96% 1.55% 1.05%
 Max w VIX Fut 3.57% 3.64% 3.65% 4.41% 3.69% 3.30%
 Min w Bonds 42.02% 41.82% 40.90% 33.75% 31.48% 26.20%
 Avg w Bonds 62.91% 62.90% 62.77% 62.44% 61.86% 61.49%
 Max w Bonds 79.31% 78.35% 78.70% 81.46% 84.66% 90.64%

Table B.2: Yearly weight data for equal risk weights unlevered portfolio without VIX
            Futures, predetermined rebalancing frequency. Based on yearly return of
             1000 simulations.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Min w S&P 19.39% 20.09% 20.40% 18.93% 16.51% 12.72%
 Avg w S&P 36.42% 36.48% 36.85% 37.44% 38.42% 39.87%
 Max w S&P 58.96% 58.47% 58.24% 63.51% 70.22% 71.72%
 Min w Bonds 41.04% 41.53% 41.76% 36.49% 29.78% 28.28%
 Avg w Bonds 63.58% 63.52% 63.15% 62.56% 61.58% 60.13%
 Max w Bonds 80.61% 79.91% 79.60% 81.07% 83.49% 87.28%

                                   47
                                  APPENDIX B. RESULTS - TABLES

Table B.3: Daily weight data for equal risk weights unlevered portfolio including VIX
            Futures, predetermined rebalancing frequency. Based on actual daily data
             during the period 11 July, 2008 - 10 July, 2009.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Min w S&P 7.01% 10.17% 11.35% 11.35% 23.96% -
 Avg w S&P 27.57% 27.54% 27.67% 26.65% 31.58% 35.39%
 Max w S&P 53.85% 49.67% 38.12% 36.31% 36.31% -
 Min w VIX Fut 1.04% 1.15% 1.43% 1.43% 1.43% -
 Avg w VIX Fut 3.57% 3.58% 3.59% 2.29% 2.19% 2.58%
 Max w VIX Fut 8.40% 7.53% 5.70% 2.61% 2.61% -
 Min w Bonds 41.31% 45.60% 57.29% 61.08% 61.08% -
 Avg w Bonds 68.87% 68.88% 68.73% 71.05% 66.23% 62.03%
 Max w Bonds 91.62% 88.03% 86.06% 86.05% 74.61% -

Table B.4: Daily weight data for equal risk weights unlevered portfolio without VIX
            Futures, predetermined rebalancing frequency. Based on actual daily data
             during the period 11 July, 2008 - 10 July, 2009.

 Rebalancing Frequency Daily Weekly Monthly Quarterly Semi-annually Annually
 Min w S&P 9.85% 9.85% 11.32% 11.32% 23.75% -
 Avg w S&P 28.18% 28.38% 29.12% 25.42% 30.04% 33.18%
 Max w S&P 58.97% 57.86% 40.08% 33.78% 33.78% -
 Min w Bonds 41.03% 42.14% 59.92% 66.22% 66.22% -
 Avg w Bonds 71.82% 71.62% 70.88% 74.58% 69.96% 66.82%
 Max w Bonds 90.15% 90.50% 88.68% 88.68% 76.25% -

                                   48
Appendix C

Mathematics

In this part, more details of the fundamental mathematics are presented. Moreover,
a technical note about the calculation of the VIX Index is given.

C.1 Short on Arbitrage Theory

In nancial mathematics; probability theory in general and martingale theory
in particular is crucial for the understanding of how to determine arbitrage-free
prices of nancial derivatives (contingent claims). Using martingale theory, e.g.
as in Björk (2009), one can show that:

In order to avoid arbitrage, the contingent claim X maturing at time T must be
priced at time t according to the formula:
                                          [     ∣   ]
                                Q   X  ∣
                       Π(t; X) = S0(t)E         ∣ Ft                    (C.1)
                                            S (T )∣
                                                         0

where Q is a martingale measure for [S0, S1, .., SN ], with S0 as the numeraire.

        Especially, one can choose the money market account (the bank account)
B(t) or some stock traded in the market, say S1(t), as numeraire. Informally, the
numeraire is a way to quote the prices. Ft is called a ltration, and can basically
be thought of as the information at hand at time t. I.e. the time t price of the

                                   49
C.2. VIX INDEX CALCULATION APPENDIX C. MATHEMATICS

derivative with payo X at time T is dependent on the market information known
at time t.
        Another crucial part of the pricing of contingent claims is probability
measures. In practice one observes the real world, which in probability theory
is called the subjective probability measure P . However, in pricing formula (C.1)
with S0(t) = B(t) one calculates under the probability measure Q, which is referred
to as the risk-neutral martingale measure. This is because Q is formed by removing
the market price of risk from the subjective probability measure P . Informally,
Q assigns zero probability to the same events as P (is equivalent) and has the
characteristic that "one prefer more to less" (there is no free lunch with vanishing
risk).

C.2 VIX Index Calculation

As Stated by the CBOE [5], the calculation of the VIX Index is based on prices of
options written on S&P 500 stocks. The formula used is given by:
           √
                    √                    [      ]2
               √ 2 ∑ ∆Ki        1  F
            VIX = 100√         eRT Q(K ) −       − 1          (C.2)
                                                       2             i
                      T    Ki           T  K0
                                                          i
where T is the time to maturity, F the forward index level derived from index
option prices, K0 the rst strike price below F , Ki the strike price of the i:th
out-of-the-money option, ∆Ki the interval between strike prices, R the risk-free
interest rate and Q(Ki) the midpoint of the bid-ask spread for each option with
strike Ki. For a further description of how to calculate the variables consult the
white paper by CBOE [5].

                                   50
Appendix D

Matlab Code

In this chapter, the Matlab code used in the simulations in the report is presented.

D.1 Main Program - parameters.m

This program runs the simulations and calculates the rebalances.

clear,clc
warning off;

% Parameters from Zhu & Lian SV−model
global theta kappa sigmav etav rho
theta=0.0444;
kappa=2.2680;
sigmav=0.3856;
etav=−2.016;
rho=−0.7533;

%Parameters for short rate model
global ahat sigmar
ahat=0.02;
sigmar=0.01;

                                   51
D.1. MAIN PROGRAM APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

% Time parameters
T=1;
n=252; % Trading days on a year

% Initial conditions
SP0=1239.49;%July 11,2008
VIX0=0.22;% A reasonable starting point for the ...
   considered time period
vol0=0.0225; % −"−

% Stock parameters
gamma=0.037; %Gramham and Harvey
r0=0.0126;

% Yield curve July 11, 2008
maturity=[0 1/12 1/4 .5 1 2 3 5 7 10 20 30];
yield = [r0 0.0138 0.0162 0.0202 0.023 0.0259 0.0288 ...
   0.0327 0.0355 0.0396 ...
             0.0457 0.0453];

finalValuesVIX = [];
finalValuesWO = [];
reallocVIX = zeros(3,nrsims);
reallocWO = zeros(2,nrsims);
wavgVIX = [];
wavgWO = [];
for simulationnr=1:nrsims
    simulationnr
    % Simulate S&P 500, VIX−Futures prices and bond prices
    [t,SP,SPr,VIX,Futures,Bonds]= ...

     simulateSPaVIX(SP0,VIX0,gamma,r0,vol0,maturity,yield,T,n);

                                   52
D.1. MAIN PROGRAM APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

    % Allocations
     wVIX = [];
     wWO = [];

     % Risk Parity allocation
     Futret = zeros(1,n);
     Bondret = zeros(1,n);
    for i=2:length(t)
        Futret(i−1) = ...
          (Futures(i)−Futures(i−1))*100*1000/5500;
         %100 for right price, 1000 multiplier, 5500 ...
            initial margin
       Bondret(i−1) = (Bonds(i)−Bonds(i−1))/Bonds(i−1);
    end

     % Length of time interval for estimation of ...
        covariance matrix
     estParam = 7;

    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
     %%%% With VIX %%%%
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

     % First week is for calibration
     estimates = [SPr(1:estParam); Futret(1:estParam); ...
       Bondret(1:estParam)]';
    global estSigma
     estSigma = cov(estimates);

     % Finding the weight for the risk parity portfolio
     w0=[0.4 0.2 0.7];

     w = fmincon(@optFUN,w0,[],[],[],[],[],[],@constraints);

                                   53
D.1. MAIN PROGRAM APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

     w = w/sum(w);

     wVIX = [wVIX w'];

     % Initial Capital
     V = 1000000;

     % Stock allocation
    nrStocks=V*w(1)/SP(estParam);

    % Futures specificatoions
     initialMargin = 5500;
     nrFutures = V*w(2)/initialMargin;
     oldFuturesPrice = Futures(estParam);

     % Bond allocation = V(3)
     nrBonds = V*w(3)/Bonds(estParam);

    % Rolling−over rebalancing
     rebalancefq = 1;
     reallocloopVIX = zeros(3,1);

    for j=estParam+1:rebalancefq:length(t)−1
        estimates = [SPr(j−estParam:j); ...
          Futret(j−estParam:j); ...
           Bondret(j−estParam:j)]';
         global estSigma
         estSigma = cov(estimates);

         % Time j value
         V = nrStocks*SP(j)+((Futures(j) ...
          −*100*nrFutures*1000+w(2)*V)+nrBonds*Bonds(j);
         % *1000 for Futures contract since $10/tick

                                   54
D.1. MAIN PROGRAM APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

         oldFuturesPrice = Futures(j);

         % Finding the weight for the risk parity portfolio
        w0=w;

         w = fmincon(@optFUN,w0,[],[],[],[],[],[],@constraints);

         w = w/sum(w);

         % Measuring average reallocation
        reallocloopVIX = reallocloopVIX + abs(w0−w)';

         wVIX = [wVIX w'];

         % Rebalancing
         nrStocks = w(1)*V/SP(j);
         nrFutures = w(2)*V/initialMargin;
         nrBonds = w(3)*V/Bonds(j);
    end

    V = nrStocks*SP(length(t))+((Futures(length(t))− ...
        oldFuturesPrice)*100*nrFutures*1000+w(2)*V)+...
        nrBonds*Bonds(length(t));

     % Final Value without transaction costs
     finalValuesVIX = [finalValuesVIX V];
     wavgVIX = [wavgVIX [mean(wVIX(1,:)) ...
        mean(wVIX(2,:)) mean(wVIX(3,:))]'];
    reallocVIX(:,simulationnr) = reallocloopVIX;

                                   55
D.1. MAIN PROGRAM APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
     %%%% Without VIX %%%%
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
     % First week is for calibration
     estimates = [SPr(1:estParam); Bondret(1:estParam)]';
    global estSigma
     estSigma = cov(estimates);

     % Finding the weight for the risk parity portfolio
    w0=[0.4 0.7];

     w = fmincon(@optFUN,w0,[],[],[],[],[],[],@constraintsWO);

     w = w/sum(w);

     reallocloopWO = zeros(2,1);
     wWO = [wWO w'];

     % Initial Capital
     V = 1000000; % Initial capital

     % Stock allocation
    nrStocks=V*w(1)/SP(estParam);

    % Bond allocation
     nrBonds = V*w(2)/Bonds(estParam);

    for j=estParam+1:rebalancefq:length(t)−1
        estimates = [SPr(j−estParam:j); ...
          Bondret(j−estParam:j)]';
         global estSigma
         estSigma = cov(estimates);

                                   56
D.1. MAIN PROGRAM APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

         % Time j value (no leverage)
         V = nrStocks*SP(j)+nrBonds*Bonds(j);

         % Finding the weight for the risk parity portfolio
        w0=w;

         w = fmincon(@optFUN,w0,[],[],[],[],[],[],@constraintsWO);

         w = w/sum(w);

        reallocloopWO = reallocloopWO + abs(w0−w)';
         wWO = [wWO w'];

         % Rebalancing
         nrStocks = w(1)*V/SP(j);
         nrBonds = w(2)*V/Bonds(j);
    end

    V = nrStocks*SP(length(t))+nrBonds*Bonds(length(t));

     % Final Value without transaction costs
     finalValuesWO = [finalValuesWO V];
     wavgWO = [wavgWO [mean(wWO(1,:)) mean(wWO(2,:))]'];
    reallocWO(:,simulationnr) = reallocloopWO;
end

% Plotting histrograms over the final values
figure(1);
edges=min(min(finalValuesVIX),min(finalValuesWO)):...
0.01*e+06:max(max(finalValuesVIX),max(finalValuesWO));
ans = histc(finalValuesVIX, edges);
bar(edges, ans)
xlabel('Final Value')

                                   57
D.2. SIMULATIONS APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

ylabel('Frequency')

figure(2);
edges=min(min(finalValuesVIX),min(finalValuesWO)):...
    0.01*e+06:max(max(finalValuesVIX),max(finalValuesWO));
ans = histc(finalValuesWO, edges);
bar(edges, ans)
xlabel('Final Value')
ylabel('Frequency')

% Calculating Sharpe Ratio
rf = 0.0225;
(mean(finalValuesVIX/1000000−1)−rf)/std(finalValuesVIX/1000000−1)
(mean(finalValuesWO/1000000−1)−rf)/std(finalValuesWO/1000000−1)

D.2 Simulations - simulateSPaVIX.m

This program is called to simulate the stochastic processes of VIX Futures, S&P
500 and 10 year Government bonds.

function[t,SP,SPr,VIX,Futures,bonds] = ...
    simulateSPaVIX(SP0,VIX0,gamma,r0,Vol0,yieldmaturity,yield,T,n)
global theta kappa sigmav etav rho ahat sigmar
global a b kappaQ thetaQ tau

%Parameters
kappaQ=etav+kappa;
thetaQ=kappa*theta/kappaQ;
tau=30/365;
a=(1−exp(−kappaQ*tau))/(kappaQ*tau);
b=thetaQ*(1−a);

                                   58
D.2. SIMULATIONS APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

% Time parameters
dt = T/n;
t = dt * [0:n];

% Setting up variables
lSPr = zeros(1,n+1); %S&P returns
SP = zeros(1,n+1); %S&P value
SP(1)=SP0;
lSPr(1) = 0;

VIX = zeros(1,n+1);
VIX(1) = VIX0;

Vol = zeros(1,n+1);
Vol(1) = Vol0;

r = zeros(1,n+1);
r(1) = r0;

% Generate Wiener increments, first row S&P and second ...
   row volatility V
dW = zeros(2,n+1);
covar=[1 rho; rho 1];
for i = 1:n+1;
   dW(1:2,i) = mvnrnd(zeros(2,1),covar)*sqrt(dt);
end

% Generate Wiener increments for short rate
dWr = zeros(2,n+1);
for i = 1:n+1;
   dWr(i) = randn*sqrt(dt);
end

                                   59
D.2. SIMULATIONS APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

% Calculate forward rates curve using linear ...
   interpolation, using 10 years
% for long−term government bonds
simMat = 10; % 10 years maturity time
simMatN = simMat/dt;
obsbonds = zeros(1,simMatN);
time = [0:dt:simMat];

% Calculate forward rates curve using linear interpolation
fwdrate = zeros(1,simMatN+1);
for i = 1:simMatN+1;
   fwdrate(i) = interp1(yieldmaturity,yield,time(i));
end

% Approximate the derivative of the forward rate ...
   curve, (only 1 year needed)
fwdrateT = zeros(2,n+1);
for i = 2:n;
   fwdrateT(i) = (fwdrate(i+1)−fwdrate(i−1))/(2*dt);
end

% Calculation of log(S&P−returns) and VIX
for i = 2:n+1;
  Theta=fwdrateT(i−1)+sigmar^2*B(0,t(i−1))...
     *exp(ahat*t(i−1))+ahat*(fwdrate(i−1)+sigmar^2...
     *(B(0,t(i−1)))^2/2);
  r(i)=r(i−1)+(Theta − ahat*r(i−1))*dt+sigmar*dWr(i−1);
  Vol(i)=abs(Vol(i−1)+kappa*(theta−Vol(i−1))*dt+...
     sigmav*sqrt(Vol(i−1))*dW(2,i−1));
  lSPr(i)=(r(i−1)+gamma)*dt+sqrt(Vol(i−1))*dW(1,i−1);
  VIX(i)=sqrt(a*Vol(i)+b);
end

                                   60
D.2. SIMULATIONS APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

% Converting S&P returns to values
SPr=exp(lSPr);
SP(1)= SP0;
for i = 2:n+1
     SP(i)=SP(i−1)*SPr(i);
end
SPr=SPr−1;

% Calculation of observed long−term government bond ...
   prices, maturing in 10
% years
for i = 1:simMatN
    obsbonds(i)=exp(−trapz(time(i:length(time)),...
    fwdrate(i:length(fwdrate))));
end
obsbonds(length(obsbonds))=1;

% Calculation of simulated bond prices
bonds = zeros(1,n+1);
for i=1:length(t)
   bonds(i) = ...
     (obsbonds(1)/obsbonds(simMatN−i))*exp(B(t(i),simMat)...
   *fwdrate(i)−(sigmar^2/(4*ahat))*(B(t(i),simMat))^2...
   *(1−exp(−2*ahat*t(i)))−B(t(i),simMat)*r(i));
end

% Calculation of Futures prices F(t,T,VIXt)
Futures=[];
for i=1:length(t)
     timeToM = 3/12;

     Futures = [Futures FuturesPrice(timeToM,VIX(i))'];

                                   61
D.3. FUNCTION FILES APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

%times 100 to get VIX−futures prices as quoted at CBOE
end

D.3 Function Files

In this section, short les are collected which are used to alleviate the coding of
the other programs.

D.3.1 Futuresprices.m

This program calculates the Futures price of a VIX contract.

function out=FuturesPrice(timeToMIn,VIX0in);
global timeToM VIXt

% Parameters
VIXt=VIX0in;

% Calculation of Futures Price
out=[];
for i=1:length(timeToMIn)
    timeToM=timeToMIn(i);

     out = [out 1/(2*sqrt(pi))*quadgk(@fun,0,inf)];

end

                                   62
D.3. FUNCTION FILES APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

D.3.2 Fun.m

This program calculates the integrand of the Futures price integral.

function output = fun(x)
global theta kappa sigmav
global a b kappaQ
global timeToM VIXt

% Calculation of Integrand of Futures Price
C=(−2*kappa*theta/(sigmav^2))*log(1+sigmav^2*(−x*a)...
*(exp(−kappaQ*timeToM)−1)/(2*kappaQ));
D=2*kappaQ*(−x*a)./(sigmav^2...
*(−x*a)+(2*kappaQ−sigmav^2*(−x*a))*exp(kappaQ*timeToM));
f=exp(C+D*(VIXt^2−b)/a);
output=(1−exp(−x*b).*f)./(x.^1.5);

D.3.3 optFUN.m

This is the function that is minimized when allocation capital according to an
equal risk contribution approach.

function out=optFUN(win)
global estSigma
out = sqrt(win*estSigma*win');

                                   63
D.3. FUNCTION FILES APPENDIX D. MATLAB CODE

D.3.4 constraints.m

This is the constraints used when optimizing the equal risk contribution portfolio
including VIX Futures.

function [out, eq]=constraints(win)
out=[−(log(win(1))+log(win(2))+log(win(3)));
    −win(1); −win(2); −win(3)];
eq=[];

D.3.5 constraintsWO.m

This is the constraints used when optimizing the equal risk contribution portfolio
not including VIX Futures.

function [out, eq]=constraintsWO(win)
out=[−(log(win(1))+log(win(2)));
    −win(1); −win(2)];
eq=[];

D.3.6 b.m

This function is called when calculating the 10 year government bond prices.

function output = B(t,T)
global ahat
output = (1/ahat)*(1−exp(−ahat*(T−t)));

                                   64
References

[1] T. Björk, 2009, Arbitrage Theory in Continuous Time, 3rd edition, Oxford
   Univ. Press, Oxford.

[2] K. Black, 2006, Improving Hedge Fund Risk Exposures by Hedging Equity Mar-
   ket Volatility, or How the VIX Ate My Kurtosis, Journal of Trading, Vol 1,
   No.2, 6-15

[3] Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Historical Data, 10-year
   U.S. Government Securities, available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/
   releases/h15/data.htm, accessed April 13, 2013.

[4] Chicago Board Option Exchange, CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) Futures, avail-
   able at http://cfe.cboe.com/Products/Spec_VIX.aspx, accessed April 14,
   2013.

[5] Chicago Board Option Exchange, the CBOE Volatility Index - VIX, available
   at http://www.cboe.com/micro/vix/vixwhite.pdf, accessed April 14, 2013.

[6] Chicago Board Options Exchange, VIX Historical Price Data, available
   at http://www.cboe.com/micro/vix/historical.aspx, accessed April 15,
   2013.

[7] Chicago Board Options Exchange, VX - CBOE S&P 500 Volatility Index (VIX)
   Futures Price and Volume Detail, available at http://cfe.cboe.com/Data/
   HistoricalData.aspx, accessed April 13, 2013.

[8] Y. Choueifaty, T. Froidure and J. Reynier, 2013, Properties of the Most Diver-
    sied Portfolio, Journal of Investment Strategies, Vol 2, No.2, 49-70

[9] J. Duan and C. Yeh, 2007, Jump and Volatility Risk Premiums Implied by VIX,
   Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol 23, 2232-2244

                                   65
REFERENCES REFERENCES

[10] Federal Reserve Bank of St.Louis, S&P500 Stock Price Index (SP500),
   available at http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/SP500/
   downloaddata, accessed April 13, 2013.

[11] J.R. Graham and C.R. Harvey, 2008, Equity Risk Premium in 2008: Evidence
   from the Global CFO Outlook Survey, Corporate Finance: Valuation, Capital
   Budgeting & Investment Policy eJournal, Vol. 07

[12] L.A. Grzelak, C.W. Oosterlee and S. van Weeren, 1990, Extension of Stochas-
    tic Volatility Equity Models with Hull-White Interest Rate Process, Quantita-
    tive, Vol 12, No.1, 89-105

[13] J. Hull and A. White, 1990, Pricing Interest-Rate-Derivative Securities, Re-
    view of Financial Studies, Vol 3, 573-592

[14] W. Lee, 2010, Risk-Based Asset Allocation: A New Answer to An Old Ques-
    tion?, Journal of Portfolio Management, Vol 37, No. 4, 11-28

[15] A. Lo, 2002, The Statistics of Sharpe Ratios, Financial Analysts Journal, Vol
    58, No. 4, 36-52

[16] S. Maillard, T. Roncalli and J. Teiletche, 2009, On the Properties of Equally-
   Weighted Risk Contributions Portfolios, available at http://papers.ssrn.
   com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1271972, accessed April 3, 2013.

[17] H. Markovitz, 1952, Portfolio Selection, Journal of Portfolio Management, Vol
    7, No.1, 77-91

[18] P. Rappoport and N. Nottebohm, J.P. Morgan Asset Management, 2012,
   Improving on Risk Parity, available at http://www.jpmorganinstitutional.
   com/directdoc/jpmorgan/am/ia/documents/improving_on_risk_full_
   report, accessed April 3, 2013.

[19] Y. Romahi and K.S. Santiago, J.P. Morgan Asset Manage-
    ment, 2012, Diversication  still the only free lunch?, avail-
   able at http://am.jpmorgan.co.uk/institutional/_documents/
    jpmam-25021-diversification-still-the-only-free-lunch.pdf, ac-
    cessed April 3, 2013.

[20] M. Schulmerich, 2010, Real Option Valuation: The Importance of Interest
   Rate Modelling in Theory and Practice, 2nd edition, Springer Verlag, New
   York

[21] W. Sharpe, 1966, Mutual Fund Performance, The Journal of Business, Vol
   39, No.1, 119-138

                                   66
REFERENCES REFERENCES

[22] U.S. Department of the Treasury, Daily Treasury Yield Curve Rates, avail-
   able at http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/
   interest-rates/Pages/TextView.aspx?data=yield, accessed April 3, 2013.

[23] S.P. Zhu and G.H. Lian, 2012, An Analytical Formula for VIX Futures and
    Its Applications, the Journal of Futures Markets, Vol. 32, No.2, 166-190

                                   67