 The effect of the Swedish mortgage cap on house prices depending on the
                             loan-to-value ratio:

                     A regional study within Sweden

                        Victor Ahlin* and Mathias Magnusson**

                                    Bachelor Thesis
                           Stockholm School of Economics
                                 Department of Finance
                                   Tutor: Peter Englund

Abstract

This research aims to study the effect from the introduction of the Swedish mortgage cap in
October 2010 on regional house prices in Sweden depending on the loan-to-value ratio. We
study the house prices in regions around the introduction of the mortgage cap through a
difference-in-difference analysis. Our theory is that the credit-restrictive mortgage cap has
had a more negative price effect in regions with the higher loan-to-value ratios. This we base
on basic demand mechanisms and the fact that previous theory suggests that credit-easing
standards lead to higher house prices, which is why we believe the opposite is also true.
Regionally we look at the greater Stockholm-, Gothenburg- , Malmö-area and the rest of
Sweden. Our initial belief is that the big city regions have the highest loan-to-value ratios and
thus have experienced a more negative price effect. We find evidence for our theory that a
higher loan-to-value ratio has led to a more negative effect from the mortgage cap on the
house prices. However, opposite to our expectations, the rest of Sweden has the higher loan-
to-value ratio and is the region that has experienced a larger negative house price effect
following the introduction of the mortgage cap.

Key words: Mortgage cap, regional house prices, loan-to-value ratio, difference-in-difference

* 22327@student.hhs.se ** 22318@student.hhs.se

                                                                                1
Table of Contents

1. Acknowledgments .......................................................................................................................... 3
2. Introduction and previous literature ........................................................................................... 4
   2.1 Introduction ................................................................................................................................... 4
   2.2 Previous literature........................................................................................................................ 10
3. Data ............................................................................................................................................... 14
   3.1 House price data .......................................................................................................................... 14
   3.2 Data on new loans ....................................................................................................................... 15
4. Methodology................................................................................................................................. 17
5. Results........................................................................................................................................... 22
   5.1 Regional findings and differences ............................................................................................... 22
   5.2 Empirical results .......................................................................................................................... 24
      5.2.1 Descriptive statistics ............................................................................................................. 24
     5.2.2 Regression results ................................................................................................................. 25
   5.3 Discussion of results .................................................................................................................... 28
6. Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 30
7. References .................................................................................................................................... 32
   7.1 Written references: Journals, papers and articles ........................................................................ 32
   7.2 Electronic references ................................................................................................................... 34
8. Appendix ...................................................................................................................................... 35
   8.1 Figures ......................................................................................................................................... 35
   8.2 Tables and graphs ........................................................................................................................ 40

                                                                                2
1. Acknowledgments

First and foremost, we would like to thank our tutor, Peter Englund, Professor at the
Department of Finance at the Stockholm School of Economics, for valuable inputs and
great enthusiasm for our topic. Also we want to thank Finansinspektionen for making this
research possible. Naturally, all possible mistakes and inaccuracies are our own.

                                                                             3
   2. Introduction and previous literature

2.1 Introduction
The European debt crisis has spread like a fire around the Mediterranean Sea, starting with
Greece and now most recently the vacation paradise Cyprus was hit by the flames. Southern
Europe has been grappling with austerity and sinking into a state of a staggering economic
                                                                  1
engine as recently described by various media channels . Politicians sit behind closed doors
trying to figure out a solution to how companies and more specifically banks are going to get
a grip of their massive amounts of debts to be able to stay afloat. This concept also goes for
people, whose debt levels have been increasing significantly much due to the easing of credit
standards.
  However far away Sweden might seem from the trouble, however safe we might feel here
in Sweden, the facts tell a different story. The Swedish population’s debt-levels have
increased a lot, from under 90 percent debt-to-income in 1996 to 170 percent in January 2011,
which is depicted by Johansson et al. (2011) in a report on behalf of the central bank of
                          2
Sweden (Riksbanken) . This is also underlined by Johannes Holmberg at the statistical
institute SCB (2012). Even more interesting, or frightening, is that according to the credit
authority BKN (2011), the share of housing mortgage loans out of total loans in Sweden has
been the fastest growing compared to a lot of other developed economies. The debts relating
to house purchases have risen tremendously from 1995 to 2010 (BKN, 2011). Holmberg also
describes this (SCB, 2012), and says that in December 2011, housing related loans constituted
80 percent of the debt of the Swedish population, showcasing a massive growth in housing
                                         3
related loans. Figure 1 in the appendix shows a large percentage increase (compared to the
previous year) in housing related loans in the 2000s, and a slightly smaller increase in recent
years.
   This sort of horror scenario makes it extra interesting to isolate a research to the Swedish
mortgage loan market since it obviously makes out an important part of the increased debt
levels of the Swedish population. Like the politicians who try to put out the fire in the
Mediterranean region, the financial supervisory authorities try to prevent people from getting
too indebted. An example of an action to stop the soaring debt levels and create economic
stability is the introduction of the Swedish mortgage cap. The mortgage cap implies an 85
percent maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, i.e. amount of the purchase price of the house

1
  http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-17/debt-bubble-born-of-easy-cash-prompts-swedish-rule-review.html, viewed 5 April 2013
2
 Will be referred to as Riksbanken
3
 All figures and tables are shown in the appendix.
                                                                                4
that can be financed with loans. The Swedish mortgage cap was introduced by the Swedish
                                     4
financial supervisory authority (FI) in October 2010.
  A lot of earlier literature and research circle around how the easing of credit standards has
effects on debt-levels, consumption and house prices. The introduction of the Swedish
mortgage cap can instead be viewed as a new regulation or restriction of credit standards,
which means that studying it will be an adventure along a road less traveled. The mortgage
cap is not really a new law or regulation, but rather a new guideline or recommendation that
the banks should follow when issuing new loans. Before the mortgage cap there were no such
guidelines. However, there is for example still possible to buy a house and finance it with
                                                                                        5
over 85 percent loan (“blancolån”), but those situations have become less common and the
mortgage cap is clearly setting the norm for new loans.
   The starting point of our research will be to study whether there are regional differences
within Sweden when it comes to debt-levels in the shape of LTV-ratios, and then see if there
is a connection with the regional house price developments. For the regions, we have divided
Sweden into the greater Stockholm-, Gothenburg- and Malmö-area, and compare it to the rest
of Sweden. This we do because Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö are the three biggest
regions in Sweden. Also, to be able to get more clear differences in the LTV-ratios, we cannot
have too many regions which would mean too few house purchases to represent a region, and
also mean a more diffuse and hard-to-motivate division of Sweden into regions. We have used
SCBs definition of which counties in our data to put in the regions that we compare. Factors
looked at on a regional level are LTV-ratio, volume of housing related loans, debt-level in
general (debt-to-income), what people have left for non-housing consumption after paying
housing related costs and “blancolån”. There are many factors to close in on to determine
what should be seen as measures of risk. By risk we mean being exposed to loan related
problems such as not being able to pay the interest, or personal default.
  We have chosen to specifically look at the mortgage cap’s effect on house prices in
different regions in Sweden with different LTV-ratios. This is because the research has to
have a niche, and more importantly, the idea of the mortgage cap is to restrict the loan-to-
value ratio. The effect on house prices is interesting for us to study for several reasons.
   Firstly, house prices are interesting because the Swedish house prices have risen steadily
until sometime in 2011, when a decline occurred (Mäklarstatistik (2013)), suggesting that
there might be an effect from the introduction of the mortgage cap in late 2010. This can be

4
 Will be referred to as FI (Finansinspektionen).
5
 http://www.fi.se/Tillsyn/Rapporter/Rapporter/Listan/Den-svenska-bolanemarknaden1/, last viewed 9 May 2013
                                                                                5
                                                                                      6
seen in figure 2, where the monthly price development is shown for small houses and in
                                                                                                     7
figure 3, where the monthly price development is shown for co-operative apartments . Even
though these two types of houses do not show the exact same price development every year,
the long term trend is similar and both the figures show a decline in the previously steadily
rising house prices in 2011, after the introduction of the mortgage cap in late 2010. In this
research we will focus on the small house prices because as can be seen in figure 2 and 3, the
price development is smoother over time while it is more volatile for co-operative apartments
suggesting that it might be more difficult to pin-point what affects co-operative apartment
prices. Also, there seems to have been a larger and clearer dip following the introduction of
the mortgage cap in late 2010 for small house prices compared to co-operative apartment
prices. Additionally, the share of co-operative apartments is low outside the big city regions.
Finally and most importantly, the biggest and most clear difference in regional LTV-ratios is
when you look at small house purchases. Therefore, we think by focusing on small houses we
will get better results.We are of course aware of that there might be other factors that have
also affected the house price development around the introduction of the mortgage cap, which
is why we plan on using relevant control variables in our research. Whatever effect on house
prices we find that we related to the mortgage cap in our research, we are aware of that the
mortgage cap might be one of several factors contributing to the house price development.
  Secondly, the relative house price development has consequences on the households in the
different regions depending on the other regional-level factors mentioned above. Therefore
the other factors mentioned will also be an important stepping stone to be able to draw
potential conclusions about regional risk in Sweden. For instance, if households in some
region tend to have a high percentage of “blancolån” or for instance little left to live for after
paying their housing related costs, and there has been a more negative house price effect in
the period we study following the introduction of the mortgage cap, that region might be
considered to have high risk.
  This main focus of this research will therefore be to study how the house prices in Sweden
have reacted to the introduction of the mortgage cap depending on the LTV-ratio. We study
the question whether the mortgage cap has had a different impact on the house prices in the
different regions in Sweden with different LTV-ratios. Using regional and micro-level data on
house prices and LTV-ratios, we examine the relative price movements of the houses with
different LTV-ratios. We compare big city regions to the rest of Sweden and when it comes to

6
 Swedish: Småhus (villor, radhus och kedjehus)
7
 Swedish: Bostadsrätter
                                                                                6
LTV-ratios our initial belief was that the LTV-ratio is higher in big city areas like the
Stockholm-area compared to more rural parts of Sweden. First of all this is the typical picture
                                        8                                                      9
that various media channels paint , which Magnus Karlsson at FI also indicated . Our initial
belief was also strengthened because FI’s report on the Swedish housing and mortgage market
(2013) indicates that the big city areas have the highest percentage of the volume of loans
paid out, and highest average amount in Swedish kronor (SEK) of loan paid out. This is also
shown in the data file from FI that we have worked with. The fact that the big city areas have
the highest amount of loans in Swedish kronor led us to believe that the LTV-ratio would then
also be higher in the big city areas.
   However, the results showed us that the reality is actually the other way around. The LTV-
ratio, especially for small houses, is higher in the rest of Sweden compared to the Stockholm-,
Gothenburg and Malmö-area.
   Our hypothesis is that house prices are affected more negatively if the LTV-ratio is higher.
This is because as found in previous literature and theory presented in the next section, a
higher possibility to take on loans due to for instance easing the credit standards leads to
higher prices. We therefore believe the opposite is also true: if the possibility to take on debt
is prevented due to a restriction of credit standards, demand for loans and the number of house
purchases are held back and prices will be negatively affected. We hypothesize that prices are
relatively more negatively affected if the LTV-ratio is higher. The mechanism is basically that
if the LTV is higher, the demand for loans in relation to the purchase price is higher. If a cap
is introduced on how much loans you can finance your house purchase with, the demand will
be held back. This would have a negative impact on the house prices.
   We started working on our research right after FI released their third extensive research on
the Swedish housing and mortgage market in March 2013. We were able to get a contact at FI
early on, which means that our research is based on new and unique micro-level data on LTV-
ratios for Swedish households. Therefore this is the first research being done using this data
after FI’s own report, which further motivated our choice of subject.
   Previous research on the effects of the mortgage cap on house prices is scarce. There is
some research, for instance by Albertsson and Åsberg (2012), that studies the impact in
general of the mortgage cap on Swedish house price growth and tries to compare Sweden to
Norway or Denmark where a mortgage cap was not simultaneously introduced. We on the

8
 Hellekant, J., Unik Statistik avslöjar var bolånen är störst. SVD Näringsliv 8 May 2013.
9
  Meeting with Magnus Karlsson at FI, 26 March 2013

                                                                                7
other hand compare house prices and LTV-ratios within the Swedish borders which brings
certain stability to the research from a macroeconomic perspective, i.e. one might expect that
the same macro-factors affect the Swedish housing market. Previous research on the effects of
the mortgage cap has compared the Swedish housing market to for instance the Norwegian
and Danish housing market, which leaves a substantially higher risk for endogeneity
problems, i.e. that the explanatory variables are correlated to the error term where some
explanatory factors might be hidden, known as omitted variable bias. The different housing
markets risk being exposed to different shocks, isolated to the market of the specific
countries. The Danish housing market has for instance experienced a strange development,
                             10
with sky-rocketing debts  . In Denmark 56 percent of the loans are not amortized by the
borrowers, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has recently encouraged Denmark to
                                                    11
take control over these loans and debt levels  . Also, as indicated by Finocchiaro et al. (2011),
it can be misleading to treat the mortgage and housing markets as homogeneous across
nations. Finocchiaro et al. (2011) mean that there are important general differences between
nations when it comes to these markets, making an across-the-border comparison very
difficult to interpret. Therefore, we think a comparison within Sweden could yield better
results.
  Furthermore, the American housing bubble in 2006-2007, by many described as the
triggering factor to the recent financial crisis, has contributed vastly to extensive research on
the impact of easing credit standards on housing prices, consumer debt etc. Interesting is that
the literature and research done on the influence of making credit standards more restrictive is
more limited. Therefore, a study on this, certainly restrictive, credit initiative introduced by FI
would contribute to a less adventured area of research which is an important advantage that
motivated us to do this study.
  When it comes to our results, we have performed difference-in-difference regressions with
several specifications and all regressions yield results that show the expected coefficient in the
diff-in-diff estimator, i.e. showing a relative negative effect from the mortgage cap in the rest
of Sweden compared to the large city regions. This diff-in-diff effect is displayed in graph 1.
The effect of the diff-in-diff estimator for the mortgage cap and the mortgage cap variable
combined gives us a net negative effect for the rest of the country in most of the regressions.
This in comparison to the larger cities, where the recommendation of a mortgage cap does not
seem to have had any negative price effect, and where the regions instead seem to have

10
  http://www.svd.se/naringsliv/branscher/bank-och-fastighet/nordea-under-press-i-danmark_7470570.svd, viewed 2013-03-23.
11
  http://www.di.se/artiklar/2013/4/3/imf-stoppa-amorteringsfria-lan/, viewed 2013-04-04.
                                                                                8
experienced an ambiguous and often insignificant effect in prices after the introduction of the
mortgage cap despite the fact that the number of loans above 85 percent LTV-ratio
(“blancolån”) have dropped.
   Regarding our different regression specifications, the individual house purchase
observation regressions, as well as the mean house price regressions show similar results,
using the same explanatory variables. In nearly all cases, the additional control variables get
the expected coefficient directions, which additionally cement the results. As it is a dual diff-
in-diff, due to the potentially high impact of the change of property taxation, the estimators
for the property tax and the diff-in-diff estimator for the property tax take the expected signs.
  We argue that a probable reason for our findings is based on basic demand factors. The
demand-side is closely connected to the introduction of the mortgage cap. The rest of Sweden
with the higher LTV-ratio suggests a high demand of loan in relation to the purchase price of
the house. A cap on the LTV-ratio therefore holds back the demand for loans and a
subsequent house purchase to a larger extent in the rest of Sweden, leading to a relatively
more negative house price effect. Also, the rest of Sweden has more people who are over the
85 percent mortgage cap limit, i.e. have taken “blancolån”. This results in a higher number of
people not being able to finance their house purchases after the recommendation has been
implemented. This is because if a potential house buyer belongs to the group who would
previously buy a house with more than 85 percent LTV, that possibility might have
disappeared.
   Whereas the results are highly statistically significant, it is not necessarily exogenous, even
though theory would support these ideas. Regardless, it is probable that the price effect has
been different in the rest of Sweden compared to the large city regions. Furthermore, the
results are based on the assumption that the LTV-ratios have been different in the regions over
a period of time, which is at least partly supported over the last few years.

                                                                                9
2.2 Previous literature
In the 2013 report on the Swedish housing and mortgage market, FI presents that two thirds of
the Swedish population live in small houses or co-operative apartments. Housing mortgage
loans and other housing related loans constitute as much as 85 percent of the total lending to
the Swedish population. Therefore, one can believe that a structural change on the Swedish
mortgage market would influence the households’ way of living when it comes to housing as
well as other consumption, which motivates our research.
  FI describes how the debt-levels of the Swedish households increased in line with the house
prices between 1995 until 2007, and a research by Peter Englund on behalf of Riksbanken
shows a 144 percent increase in real Swedish house prices between 1995 and 2010. Also, the
LTV-ratio in Sweden rose between 2000 and 2009. A too high LTV-ratio creates a serious
vulnerability because if the price of the home would decrease and the loan-takers, or house
owners, simultaneously have to sell the house, they end up with a high debt that will not be
covered by the money they get from selling the house. This mechanism is further underlined
by Duca et al. (2010). To prevent a deteriorating mortgage market, like the one leading to a
massive house bubble in the United States in 2006-2007, FI decided to introduce a credit
restriction, the Swedish mortgage cap on 1 October 2010, regulating that new housing
mortgage loans are not allowed to exceed 85 percent of the market value of the house: a
maximum LTV-ratio of 85 percent. Restricting the possibility to take on debt is supposed a
margin of safety for the household, making them better prepared for sudden drops in prices of
their houses (FI, 2013). The importance of this safety is also underlined by Abraham and
Hendershott in their 1996 description of the dynamics of house price models.
   The effect of the mortgage cap on the LTV-ratio is clear according to FI (2013), the trend
of steadily rising LTV-ratios in Sweden has been stopped which can be seen in figure 4, and a
big amount of new loans has a LTV-ratio of exactly 85 percent.
  Furthermore, Englund’s extensive research presents what factors that can explain the
development of house prices. The research depicts for instance the real prices in different
regions in Sweden (Englund, 2011). As can be seen in figure 5 which shows real price index
for small houses (originally from SCB), the big city prices in real terms are in 2010 two and a
half times the 1980 price levels. The real prices in the more rural, less populated areas have
barely increased at all. Englund explains this difference with the population growth and the
importance of the price of land in relation to the house price, which both are higher in the big
city areas.
   As stated earlier, we believe that there is a high likelihood that the same macro-factors

                                                                               10
affect the entire Swedish housing market. However, the trend shown in Englund’s paper
somewhat depicts that there might be interesting differences in the Swedish housing market
on a regional level which further motivates our research. This is also confirmed by
Mäklarstatistik (2013), where differences in the price developments in the regions that they
present research on are emphasized. The big regions Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö are
compared and the price developments are not the same. Also, Mäklarstatistik (2013) describes
that within the bigger regions they compare, there are differences in the price development.
   Englund depicts how credit restrictions can give fluctuations in the house prices, in the
short run, moving the prices away from the fundamental long run trend. We think that the
mortgage cap might have this effect, because if looking at the Swedish house prices they have
increased a lot in general over the last 20 years. However, after the mortgage cap was
introduced the Swedish house prices in general seem to have fallen somewhat in early 2011
after the mortgage cap was introduced in late 2010, to now be back again on an increasing
path again (Mäklarstatistik (2013)).
  Englund continues with that there are only a few econometric house pricing models that
take a change in the access to loans into account. However, Duca et al. (2010) use a measure
of the average LTV-ratio for first time home buyers as a variable in the regression equation.
Their findings are that if the LTV-ratio increases, i.e. people pay a higher fraction of the
house purchase using a loan, then the house price increases. They find that an increase in the
LTV-ratio on 10 percent leads to a price increase on houses of between 8 and 11 percent.
Therefore, one might believe that the opposite could also be true: that if the LTV-ratio
decreases following a restriction such as a mortgage cap, then the house price would decrease.
  Duca et al. (2010) base their paper mainly on the American market, and take a standpoint in
the latest housing bubble. Mortgage innovations lead to a weakening of credit standards
contributing to the build-up and bursting of the American housing bubble. Again, this is an
analysis of how the easing of credit standard affects housing prices. Our research will take the
opposite direction – studying the effect of a credit restriction. However, Duca et al. (2010) do
state that if the U.S., like other countries such as England and Denmark, would have restricted
the LTV-levels by removing the tax deductibility of mortgage interest, the house price boom
could have maybe been prevented, i.e. they imply that a credit restriction could lead to a
decrease in house prices.
  Even though most literature on the housing and mortgage market is studying what happens
when credit standards are eased, there are a few good papers on the opposite situation, i.e.
when credit standards are restricted. One example is our previous finance teacher Ulf von

                                                                               11
Lilienfeld-Toal who in collaboration with Dilip Mookherjee (2011) has done a research on a
reform in the United States that had a restrictive effect on credit standards. They found that
this reform actually had a preventing effect on the house price increases in the United States,
which is in line with our belief that the mortgage cap has affected house prices negatively.
Also, Benito (2006) shows in a research on the UK housing market, evidence that households
having high leverage (expressed in loan-to-value-ratio) will raise the sensitivity of house
prices to a credit change such as a down-payment constraint or some other shock. This is also
in line with our hypothesis that the regions with the higher LTV-ratios are more negatively
affected by a credit constraint in the shape of the Swedish mortgage cap.
   Duca et al. (2010) further describe how models on house pricing are not complete,
meaning that the models often omit variables where credit standards have an effect on asset
prices. Basic U.S. house price models that did not control for shifts in credit standards broke
down during the U.S. house bubble (Duca et al., 2009c). Von Peter (2009) also underlines
how interactions of asset prices, loan losses, and defaults can lead to crises. In the U.S.
market, financial innovations increased the liquidity of housing wealth, by reducing the need
of collateral constraints – a kind of opposite mortgage cap. This fueled a sharp house price
rise in the early 2000s. However, they mean that this effect is not necessarily what would
happen in other countries: it is important to recognize how financial innovations can affect
house prices and how the impact differs across countries. Ahearn et al. (2005) and Girouard et
al. (2006) describe that there are significant cross country differences in house price trends
and effects from credit standard changes. This motivates our decision to look on the effects
within Sweden, and not compare Sweden to other countries, to avoid endogeneity problems.
  Regarding LTV-ratios, Duca et al. (2010) depict how subprime mortgages, loans with very
high LTV, took over the U.S. market in 2000-2006. The average LTV was as high as
94percent in 2006 (Credit Suisse, 2007). Subprime lending simply means lending to people
who would not normally qualify for a house loan due to trouble maintaining the repayment
schedule. However, the idea is that the asset (the house) that people borrow money for to buy
is expected to increase in value so that people can take on new loans to pay back the old
loans. The subprime loans are characterized by high interest rates and low collateral (high
LTV-ratio).
   The rise in the LTV-levels is related to easing of credit standards fueled by new financial
products (DiMartino and Duca, 2007). Furthermore, Duca et al. (2010) underline the
relationship between credit standards and demand for houses, in turn related to the house price
development. This relates to the basic theoretical demand mechanisms being an important

                                                                               12
reason for our theory. As stated earlier there is a lack of models that adjust for credit access
and changes in credit standards. However, for instance Meen (2001) or Muellbauer and
Murphy (2008) actually present a house price model adjusting for credit availability. They use
a certain variable to adjust for mortgage credit standards: the variable is negatively related to
mortgage credit standards for first-time home buyers reflecting for instance caps on the LTV-
ratio, which is what the Swedish mortgage cap is an example of. They explicitly state that
easier credit standards raise the demand and raise the house prices, but the implication is that
more restrictive standards should lower the house prices. This is what we examine, and our
initial belief is that the prices are relatively more negatively affected if the LTV-ratio is higher
to start with. As further described in our methodology part, we will therefore group the
households based on regional LTV-ratios, where the introduction of the mortgage cap should
have a larger effect on the group where the LTV-ratio is higher.
   However, as depicted by Duca et al. (2010) there has been very little testing on the models
including variables for credit standards. That alone motivates our research. Two exceptions
are Duca et al. (2009c) and Cameron et al. (2006), but both these look at the effect from
easing the credit standards. This further motivates our choice of subject, to focus on a credit
restriction.

                                                                               13
   3. Data

3.1 House price data
To begin with, we received from our former finance teacher Timotheos Mavropoulos a data
file with times series data on house purchase prices in Sweden from 2005 until 2012. The file
consists of about 80 percent of all house purchase prices on small houses. The file contains
around 300000 observations and except for regional prices on houses, the house purchase
price data file contains extensive information and numbers on the characteristics of each
house purchased, for instance the size of the house (living area), lot size in square meters and
number of rooms. These factors or characteristics variables are important not to neglect as
they might affect the price of the house and the LTV-ratio, also indicated by for instance
                           12
Magnus Karlsson at FI  . The house purchase prices and the variables showing the
                                                                                                          13
characteristics of the houses purchased are originally from the Swedish real estate agency
and from Valueguard, and the division into regions is based on the real estate register of the
                                    14
Swedish land surveying office  .
     We made some adjustments for noise in the price data file. Therefore we adjusted the
house purchase price data for missing values and negative values. Due to missing
observations for control variables we also dropped the price observations from before 2006.
We also ran several types of regression specifications, i.e. using house prices on many levels
as our dependent variable to be able to see if we get similar results. When running the
regressions we chose as stated to use a sample of individual prices. Additionally, we
converted the house purchase observations to monthly mean values and ran the same
regressions, as well as running regressions again using SCB’s price index. Similar results in
all regression specifications should indicate a certain robustness of the results.

12
  Meeting with Magnus Karlsson at FI, 26 March 2013
13
  Swedish: Mäklarsamfundet
14
  Swedish: Lantmäteriet
                                                                               14
3.2 Data on new loans
The data file from FI was used in their latest report on the Swedish housing and mortgage
market (FI, 2013). As this data is not publically available, and FI are not as concerned about
the house price impact we believe that our research can provide some additional insight.
  The data file from FI contains a sample of a big amount of new loans paid out on a
household level, i.e. on a micro-level. The sample consists of all new housing related loans
                                                 th                   th                              th
that have been issued between August 28  to September 4  2012, and September 26  to
           rd
October 3  2012, i.e. both for co-operative apartments and small houses, but also for other
types of housing such as holiday housing. The definition from FI’s report of the new loans is
loans issued “strictly to new borrowers”, but that also includes current borrowers who have
increased the LTV on the house loan by more than 50 percent compared to their previous loan
(FI, 2013). The sample originally consisted of 27000 loans, but observations that had not
increased the LTV by more than 50 percent were cleared away to decrease the risk to include
so-called additional loans that have really been used to finance some additional purchase such
as a car, boat or renovations (FI, 2013). It maybe would have been most interesting just to
look at the first-time-buyers of homes since they are arguably the ones most affected by the
mortgage cap when trying to find a house since they for instance cannot use profits on an
earlier sold house to finance the 15 percent cash collateral needed on the loan for a new house
to get below the maximum 85 percent LTV. It has not been possible to make out the first-
time-buyers in the sample and therefore new loans to first-time-buyers are basically included
in the sample along with all new loans under the definition from FI.
   In total, the cleared sample consists of a little above 18000 observations, of which almost
10000 are small house observations. All observations have additional micro-level information
on first of all the for us very interesting LTV-ratio which is calculated as the relation between
total housing related debt of the household to the market value of the house. To be able to take
into account the size of the individual house loans and adjust for the size of the mortgage
market, we used a volume weighted LTV-ratio in our analysis.
   Furthermore, the total volume of housing related loans is described in the data. Additionally
the regional general debt-level, calculated as total debt of the household to total income of the
household is provided. Interesting from a housing perspective might also be what people have
left for non-housing consumption after paying housing related costs, which we also look at on
a regional level. The regional share of house purchases financed with more than 85 percent
loan (amount of “blancolån”) is also included in our analysis. There are more variables in the
data, which we chose not to look further into as their relevance was questionable for our

                                                                               15
research. The data is divided on a regional basis, in this case into Swedish counties. We
aggregate the counties into larger regions: the larger Stockholm-, Gothenburg- and Malmö-
area, and the rest of Sweden, and show findings for these regions.
   Since we are looking at the impact on house prices using time series data on the prices, but
do not have access to LTV-ratios from before the time that the mortgage cap was introduced,
we had to make the assumption that the regions with high (low) LTV-ratios today also had
high (low) LTV-ratios before the mortgage cap was introduced. This we consulted FI on and
they thought that it was a reasonable assumption to consider the LTV-ratios to be in a similar
relation to each other regionally in the data for 2012 as for the whole time series we look at. If
looking at figure 4, we also see that the LTV-ratio for new loans has had a smoothly
increasing trend in previous years prior to the introduction of the mortgage cap, suggesting in
line with our assumption that there have not been any major swings in the LTV-ratios
between different regions in Sweden.
   Furthermore, as stated earlier in this section the FI data file contains loans for both small
houses and co-operative apartments, meaning that we separate these types of houses and focus
on small houses. The difference in the LTV-ratios is as earlier stated most distinctive when
looking at small houses.
  Eventual sample bias could be an issue, both from the variation in the houses bought in
different periods, as well as the selection. To handle these problems we both test extra control
variables in the individual observation regression, to see if the results are still robust. In the
variation of house purchases between different periods of the year we assume that it follows a
similar pattern each year. The comparison to the price index regression could be seen as an
additional robustness test.

                                                                               16
   4. Methodology

We look at the relative house price development between house purchases with high LTV-
ratios and houses with low LTV-ratios. The difference in house prices before and after the
mortgage cap was introduced in October 2010 will be studied, which naturally leads us
towards using the difference-in-difference (diff-in-diff) methodology. The diff-in-diff
methodology was first used by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card in 1985 where they looked at the
effect on earnings from having a trainee program versus not having a trainee program. The so-
called treatment group was the one where the trainee program was used because that is where
they expected the biggest effect, while the so-called control group was the group without a
trainee program. Then the relative earnings development was compared, i.e. they looked at the
difference between earnings before the trainee program and compared that to the difference
between earnings after the trainee program was introduced. As described by von Lilienfeld-
              15
Toal (2012)  , the diff-in-diff methodology can be used to assess the effectiveness of a certain
policy with little risk for endogeneity problems if used carefully.
  The general set-up is the following diff-in-diff regression:

You then let T be the treatment group and C denote the control group. The dummy variable
dT equals 1 if the observation belongs to the treatment group, the dummy variable d2 is a time
dummy: d2 equals 1 if time is after the policy change. The diff-in-diff estimator of the general
diff-in-diff regression equation,  is given as:

15
  Lecture notes course 642:Fundamentals in Corporate Finance, Ulf von Lilienfeld-Toal, fall 2012
                                                                               17
The specification of our diff-in-diff regression equation is as follows:

 , =  +  + _ + _ + _
             + __ +  !"#! , +   + $%
              + &" _'(ℎ, + !*!! + +,

The specification of our diff-in-diff estimators can be found in the following steps:

Treatment before mortgage cap: , =  +  +  + ℎ  " ,, 

Treatment after mortgage cap:
, =  +  +  +  +  +  + ℎ  " ,, 

Control before mortgage cap: , =  +  + ℎ  " ,, 

Control after the mortgage cap: , =  +  +  + ℎ  " ,, 

Diff-in-diff estimator = (Treatment after – Treatment before) – (Control after – Control
before) = - +  + . − -. =  + 

Our dependent variable (, ) in the diff-in-diff regression will be the house price in
observation i at time t, and we show several regressions looking at both the fixed purchase
price for the individual observations and house prices on an mean level as the dependent
variable. We also provide a regression on an index level for robustness. If we look at
individual house purchase prices, we have also tested to adjust the regressions for factors that
are related to the houses themselves. These are factors such as the area of the house and
housing lot area.
  The variable Cap depicts the policy change of our diff-in-diff regression, which equals 1 if
after the introduction of the mortgage cap on 1 October 2010. Treatment group variable
Rest_SWE equals 1 if the observations belong to the treatment group. Our treatment group
will be the regions with houses with higher LTV-ratio because that is where we expect the
biggest impact on the house prices from the change (the introduction of mortgage cap). This
we expect because as found in previous literature, a higher possibility to take on loans due to
for instance easing the credit standards leads to higher house prices. We therefore believe the

                                                                               18
opposite is also true as previously mentioned: if the possibility to take on debt is prevented
due to a restriction of credit standards, prices will be negatively affected. This mechanism was
for instance found by von Lilienfeld-Toal and Mookherjee (2011). We therefore also believe
prices are relatively more negatively affected if the LTV-ratio is high, than if the LTV-ratio
was low in the first place. The control group will consequently be the regions with houses
with lower LTV-ratio. The rest of Sweden has a higher LTV-ratio than the big city regions.
This trend is clear when it comes to small houses, shown in figure 6.1. In figure 6.2 we see the
LTV-ratios for co-operative apartments where the Malmö-area is an exception. Since we
focus on small houses, the rest of Sweden will be our treatment group which will be compared
with control group Stockholm, Gothenburg or Malmö.
  The variable CapRest_SWE is our most important interaction variable depicting if the
observations are both after the mortgage cap was introduced and in the treatment group.
Through the diff-in-diff estimator, coefficient , we then compare the price difference after
the change with the initial price difference before the change, and look if the difference
changed. Since we expect there to be a relatively more negative effect from the mortgage cap
on the treatment group, we believe the diff-in-diff estimator will be negative.
  We are well aware of that the mortgage cap is one of many factors that might have
influenced the house price development during the recent years. So we have to try to as well
as possible isolate the effect from the mortgage cap. Therefore we have to use other variables
in the diff-in-diff regression equation to adjust for other factors and avoid endogeneity
problems.
   When it comes to these other variables, so-called control variables, for instance Vitner and
Iqbal (2009) suggest that the job growth rate is a factor that contributes to house bubbles and
especially the increase of subprime loans past due rate, i.e. debts not paid when due or even in
the process of foreclosure. If the job growth was high as in 2002 to 2005, the past due rate on
subprime loans would fall as the economy recovered and house prices increased. Therefore,
we included the variable  !"#! , for region i at time t, as a replacement apt for our
regression specification.
   Furthermore, an even more important variable according to Duca et al. (2010) is the interest
rates, which fell in the early 2000s boosting the subprime lending and house price increase. It
is argued by Leamer (2007) and Taylor (2007) how cuts in the U.S. short-term real interest
rates to zero in 2003-2004 by the Federal Reserve fueled the subprime bubble. It is also
explicitly described how when the interest rates rose in 2006, the house prices started to fall
which made the bubble burst. Therefore, we also include in the regression equation a variable

                                                                               19
that adjusts for the interest rate levels through the variable   .The interest rate we use
is the mortgage interest rate on new loans for house purchases from 2006 until today retrieved
from Riksbanken, aggregated for entire Sweden at time t. The importance of the interest rate
was recently described in the Swedish newspaper Dagens Industri, where the author Henrik
                                                                                                     16
Mitelman depicts his view on how low interest rates fuel the increase in house prices  .
   Leamer (2007) also states that “housing is the business cycle”, i.e. it is described that you
might want to adjust for the general business cycle when looking at house prices because
house prices simply tend to follow the business cycle. Also, Holmberg (SCB, 2012) describes
that the house price development has followed the general consumer prices quite well in the
1980s and 1990s, even though the house prices have been increasing a lot more than
consumer prices in the 2000s. Therefore we include the Swedish GDP development at time t
as a control variable through the variable $% . However, since we have individual house
purchase price observations and not a growth measure as our dependent variable, we use a
GDP-index normalized to the first quarter of 2005.
  As described earlier, the population growth which is higher in the big city areas, can have an
impact on the house price development and explain regional differences (Englund, 2011),
which is also emphasized by Holmberg (SCB, 2012). Therefore we include a control variable
for the regional population growth through the variable " _'(ℎ, , adjusting for
the population growth in region i at time t in the regression equation. The specification of this
variable is not perfect for our regressions, but alternatives are hard to come by.
   Furthermore, we have to take into account the fact that other big events related to the
housing market might have taken place during the years we study, which possibly have
impacted the housing prices. One event connected to the housing market during the years we
                                                                                                         st
study is the change in the taxation of real estate in Sweden, introduced on January 1  2008.
Before the change of the real estate taxation, this tax was a state tax proportional to the
               17
taxation value  of the house. This tax was then replaced by a community charge, a sort of fee
that is proportional to the taxation value of the house up to a rather low limit and fixed in SEK
above the limit. Recently there was a statement from the European Union commission that the
current Swedish real estate taxation, which by many is concerned a relief compared to the
earlier real estate taxation, combined with low interest rates could fuel an increase in Swedish
                                       18
household debt and house prices  . We adjust for the event when the real estate taxation was

16
  Mitelman H., Dagens Industri, last viewed April 9 2013
17
  Taxation value: the taxable part of the market value of the house
18
   http://www.svd.se/naringsliv/branscher/bank-och-fastighet/eu-kommissionen-sverige-har-makroekonomiska-obalanser_8074826.svd, last
viewed April 12 2013
                                                                               20
                           st
changed on January 1  2008 in our regression equation through the variable _, which
equals 1 if after the change in real estate taxation. Because of this we will get a second
interaction variable through the variable __ which shows if the
observations are both after the change in real estate taxation and in the treatment group.
  Additionally, we have adjusted for time-fixed effects through our time-dummy variables,
which takes care of general time effects from year to year, common to all regions. We adjust
for regional fixed effects taking into account possible region-specific factors affecting the
house prices there. Last in the regression equation is the error-term +, , which is idiosyncratic,
i.e. includes observation specific risk over time. Finally, we also use robust regressions to
adjust for heteroskedasticity, i.e. adjust for the risk that the variance of the error-term is non-
constant over time.

                                                                               21
   5. Results

5.1 Regional findings and differences
Using the data file from FI to reach a volume weighted LTV-ratio we first calculated the
average housing related debt of the observations for the different regions: the Stockholm-area,
Gothenburg-area, Malmö-area and the rest of Sweden. This is shown in figure 7, where we
see that for small houses the big city areas have higher house related debts compared to the
rest of Sweden, which is in line with our expectations. We see in figure 8 the total debt in
relation to income, i.e. not only debt related to housing. The result is similar to the result for
housing related debt and both these results are in line with media descriptions and our own
expectations that it is the big city regions that have the highest debt-levels.
  Continuing on how we reached the volume weighted LTV-ratio, we divided the individual
house loan by the average housing related debt for the region of the house loan, and then
multiplied with the original LTV to reach the volume weighted LTV. The average volume
weighted LTV-ratio for all house purchases in our sample from FI, for all regions, is 0.71.
This includes small houses, co-operative apartments and other house purchases such as
holiday houses. This means that on average 71 percent of the house purchase is financed with
debt. Figure 6.1 shows the average volume weighted LTV for the regions for small houses,
where it is actually found that the rest of Sweden has a higher LTV-ratio compared to
especially the Stockholm-area and the Gothenburg-area, but also to the Malmö-area. This is
the opposite of what we had expected. However, if looking at the total sample and the report
from FI (2013) the Malmö-area shows the highest LTV-ratio while the Stockholm-area and
Gothenburg-area still shows a lower LTV-compared to the rest of Sweden. If looking at the
LTV-ratios for co-operative apartments (figure 6.2), which are higher in general, we see why
the volume weighted LTV-ratio for the total sample, which FI presents, is higher for the
Malmö-area.
  Moving on with the characteristics for the regions and looking at house purchases made
with more than 85 percent debt (“blancolån”), we see in figure 9 that the rest of Sweden has
the significantly highest percentage of “blancolån” compared to especially the Stockholm-
area. This means that if looking at the percentage of “blancolån” we would have made a
similar regional division as we do when looking at regional LTV-ratios. The difference when
it comes to these types of loans is also clearer than it is for LTV-ratios. This “blancolån”-
percentage is calculated as the regional amount of “blancolån” divided by the total amount of
loans for the region. This to capture the share of house purchases in each region financed with

                                                                               22
more than 85 percent loans. When it comes to what people who have purchased small houses
during the period have left in SEK per month for non-housing consumption after paying
housing related costs, the rest of Sweden has the lowest amount while especially the
Stockholm-area has the highest amount left per month. This is shown in figure 10.

                                                                               23
5.2 Empirical results
Table 1 shows summary statistics for the individual house price data set, and table 2 shows
summary statistics for the mean data set. Table 3 with panels A, B and C are for the
regressions showing the results for the individual house price, mean and price index data set
respectively.

5.2.1 Descriptive statistics
The descriptive statistics show the average prices, and the values for the control variables for
the whole data set, and as well for the pre mortgage cap period and post mortgage cap period.
In table 1 we see the real mean values for the prices from the individual house price
observations, showing an average price of 2.04 million SEK for the whole data set, where the
big city regions have an average price of 3.20 million SEK and the rest of the country 1.43
million SEK. On average the prices rose from 1.97 million to 2.21 million SEK from the pre
mortgage cap to the post mortgage cap period. Comparing the two different groups, the big
city regions saw the mean price rising 411 480 SEK (a 13.35 percent increase), whereas the
increase was only 135 231 SEK (9.71percent) in the rest of the country.
   Looking at the control variables, we see the same mortgage interest rates taken on a
monthly basis and indexed GDP taken on yearly basis, as they have been retrieved on a
national level. The regional unemployment and population growth are on a regional basis
though: the bigger city regions separately between the three of them, and the rest of the
country being another region. The population growth (yearly data) has a much lower mean
value in all time periods in the rest of the country, and the same is true of the regional
unemployment (quarterly data), i.e. it is lower in the rest of the country compared to the
aggregate of the big city regions.
   The mean data statistics in table 2 are not as interesting to look at for mean values, as they
would be aggregated twice and not weighted properly (one observation for each of the four
regions per month). However, it shows that this works for lowering the variation between the
periods. It must be taken into account that the prices in the set for the whole of Sweden and
the bigger cities encompass many regions, which would make the minimum and maximum
values larger than what might seem intuitive, but it is still true that there is quite a lot of
seasonal variation.

                                                                               24
5.2.2 Regression results
The first regressions are run on the individual observations as our data set, shown in table 3,
panel A. Regressions vary from naive ones on the left hand side, to more complicated ones on
the right hand side. In all specifications the regressions show similar results, with the diff-in-
diff coefficients showing results with the same sign: negative, which we expected. However
the other explanatory variables vary a little more. The additional explained value shows that
even a regression on an individual basis can partly be explained by macro factors, with the
                        2
explained variation, R varying from 0.32 to 0.34 without house characteristics added, and
0.49 with them added in regression (7). On top of this, most regressions show statistically
significant results, with the diff-in-diff estimators being of highly significant statistical value.
                                                                  2
The regional fixed effects yield results with far lower R .
   The same expected coefficients are given in the results in the mean value regressions (table
3, panel B), but with slightly different values. Results are still statistically significant,
especially for the difference-in-difference estimator being significant at a 1 percent level in all
                                        2
cases. The explained variation, R , is a lot higher in the mean regressions, mostly due to
taking away a lot of the variation coming from individual house characteristics, and the other
                                                                                       2
factors affecting individual house purchases. Without regional fixed effects, the R ranges
from 0.8 in the most naive regression, to 0.94 with the control variables, and from 0.60 to 0.71
with regional fixed effects.
  Even at the simplest level, with only the mortgage cap variable Cap together with the diff-
in-diff estimator the results are showing mostly expected results. The cap shows a large
positive effect for the bigger city regions, whereas the diff-in-diff estimator for the other parts
of the country is negative, but still resulting to a net positive effect on prices in the rest of the
country. The fact that the effect is positive in all parts of the country can be attributed to the
generally higher price level after the introduction of the mortgage cap due to the time trend,
and the mortgage cap variable being endogenous and taking up that effect at the simplest-
level regression. This regression result can be seen in both panel A and B of table 3, as
regression (1).
   The addition of the property tax variable (and the diff-in-diff estimator for it) and time
fixed effects on a yearly basis, in regression (3) of both panel A and B of table 3, add some
explanatory power, and adjusts the coefficient of the mortgage cap. It also adds some
inconsistency between the individual observation and the mean regressions: a large difference
is shown in the values of the mortgage cap variable and the property tax variable (but not in
the diff-in-diff estimator). In the case of the mean regression the mortgage cap effect for the

                                                                               25
bigger city regions is statistically insignificant, which would be more in line with our
expectations of the effect. However, this still yields a total net negative price effect for the rest
of the country. The property tax variable shows that the prices rose all over the country, which
is along the lines with our expectations: the net present value of the house rises when there are
less negative cash flows in the future, which should result in a higher price.
  When adding the control variables regional unemployment, the mortgage interest rate,
GDP-growth and population growth, we get even more statistically significant results and
more of the variation in prices is explained. This can be seen in regression (4) in both panel A
and B of table 3. The mortgage cap coefficient and the treatment diff-in-diff estimator are still
of the same signs as previously, but with a much larger effect, especially in the case of the
                                                                        2
diff-in-diff of the rest of the country. The mean regression has an R of 0.95, and shows a
large negative net effect of the mortgage cap in the rest of the country, indicating both actual
lower prices in that area and that there is a large treatment effect, which could be considered
economically significant as well. The control variables are all of the expected signs, and with
high statistical significance. The regional unemployment variable is negative, which signifies
a lower aggregate demand during periods of higher unemployment. The mortgage rate
variable coefficient is negative as well, which could theoretically be explained with a lower
NPV of the house investment, due to higher negative cash flows in the future to pay the
higher interests. However this is a bit problematic due to the correlation between “good”
times and higher interest rates. The indexed GDP variable partly solves that problem by
explaining the positive price effects in “good” times, i.e. people get more money when the
economy grows. The population growth variable coefficient is positive as well, and is the
result of more people needing somewhere to live, which translates into higher prices. It might
be surprising that the macro variables have significant results even in the case of the
individual observation regression, which most likely due to a general price trend existing that
is correlated with these control variables.
   Graph 1 displays the diff-in-diff regression (4) in panel B of table 3 (mean values): the
constant and the mortgage cap variable as the bigger city region line, and adding the rest of
Sweden and the diff-in-diff estimator gives us the line for the rest of Sweden. The treatment
effect as seen in graph 1 is quite clear. However this does not take into account the other
control variables and should not be seen as the true mean prices, but rather as the effect of the
mortgage cap solely.
   The regional fixed effects regressions, regressions (5) and (6) in both panel A and B of
table 3, still yield good results for the diff-in-diff estimator, but are somewhat problematic and

                                                                               26
                     2
give us a lower R , and less significant control variable results. This is likely related to our
regional set-up, with the rest of the country being a single region even though it can range
from the smallest communities to some relatively big cities. While it is still a good sign that
the mortgage cap in the rest of the country gives us a negative net effect, it is probably not a
very good estimate of the actual effect.
   When adding house characteristic variables, regression (7) in panel A, e.g. area and housing
lot area, we get quite a bit of explanatory value in the individual level regression with the
individual observations. The effect of the diff-in-diff estimator for the mortgage cap and the
mortgage cap variable combined gives us a net negative effect for the rest of Sweden, with the
diff-in-diff estimator showing economic significance, due to its large negative value.
However, the characteristic variables are problematic, and the exogeneity is doubtful.
Considering that the housing lot area coefficient sign is negative, that variable probably
describes the effect of where the house is located more than anything else, i.e. the further
away from a city a house is, the more probable it is that it has a larger lot area. In the case of
living area, the coefficient is highly significant, but it still does not tell us very much about the
actual price of a square meter, which could possibly be partly fixed by adding interaction
variables for the area combined with the region that the house is in. The problem of getting a
highly significant positive mortgage cap effect might be related to these issues.
   In panel C of table 3 we see a simple regression of SCB’s price index, with time fixed
effects, as well as the mortgage cap variable and the diff-in-diff estimator, yielding results
which are in line with the rest of our regressions.

                                                                               27
5.3 Discussion of results
The most important topics for discussion of the regression results are statistical significance
(or lack of significance), exogeneity and economic significance. The fact that several different
regression specifications, with highly significant values, show a treatment effect should be
taken as a sign that it is probable that the effect of the mortgage cap differs between the larger
city regions and the rest of Sweden, even to the point of being economically significant.
Whether it is due to the fact that the average LTV-ratio is higher in the rest of the country, or
to the fact that there were more people taking “blancolån”, or some other reason, is still to be
discussed as that has not been explored in our research. However, theory supports the idea
that an introduction of a credit-restrictive mortgage cap would have a larger effect in areas
with either high LTV-ratio or high share of “blancolån” due to basic demand mechanisms.
   The significance of what the control variables explained is also an important factor, which
varied far more in the different regression specifications. While the control variables were not
necessarily perfectly chosen, they seem to be explaining quite a bit of the variation in prices,
at least at an aggregate level, either directly or indirectly.
  A problem with the mean level regression, or any regression not including the house
characteristics, is that there is variation between the houses sold in the different periods. In
general it follows a similar growth to actual price indices, while having a larger monthly
variation. Different types of houses might be bought at different times during the year, which
would result in a smaller part of the prices being explained by our explanatory variables, but
during a long time period these variations will most likely to a large extent cancel out and not
cause unusable regression results.
   The room for improvements might mostly lie in a better regression specification,
especially when it comes to the regions. This is a result of using easily available data, which
results in large samples, but not perfect data. As shown in the report by FI (2013), there are
relatively big cities in Sweden such as Uppsala, which are not counted as one of the three
biggest city-regions. These cities might have more in common with the big city regions,
despite being part of the rest of the country in our regression specification. One of the main
reasons for our choice of regression specification is the fact that it is problematic to find data
on certain explanatory variables for these other large cities, e.g. unemployment would have to
be based on statistically insignificant data.
  Another problem is the time horizons for the explanatory variables. The mean regressions
are run on a monthly basis, whereas many explanatory variables are not on a monthly basis.
The unemployment variable is on a quarterly basis, the GDP growth variable is on a yearly

                                                                               28
basis, while the lending interest rate is on a monthly basis. Connected to this problem is the
possible use of additional, or better, control variables. Our choice of control variables has
empirical support, but is still far from perfect.
   Another problem that has not been addressed is the one of serial correlation. The prices in
the mean regression, and even to a degree in the individual observation regression, are
correlated with past prices. In difference-in-difference regressions this might cause particular
problems, as the standard deviation of the treatment effect might be understated, as well as the
standard deviations of some of the control variables. Therefore it cannot be said with certainty
that all effects with t-values close to 2 are statistically significant. This is described by
Bertrand et al. (2004). However, as the treatment effect had a t-value far over 2 and being
highly significant in nearly all our regressions, as well as tests with lagged variables not
showing a big impact on the other variables, this is not as worrisome. While we still believe
that these effects are significant, the significance might be overstated and the results might not
always be as significant as shown in the regression results.
   Regardless of this, there seems to be an economically and statistically significant effect of
the mortgage cap that differs between the big city regions and the rest of the country on the
prices of small houses.

                                                                               29
   6. Conclusion

Our results show evidence for our theory that a higher LTV-ratio has led to a relatively more
negative house price reaction following the introduction of the mortgage cap. However, the
reality seems to be the opposite of our initial belief of the big city regions having higher debt-
levels, which is often the picture painted by media. However, the media picture only holds
true when it comes to the loan volume in SEK. We find that the rest of Sweden has the higher
LTV-ratio compared to the big city-areas in Sweden and is the region that has experienced the
relatively more negative house price reaction.
   Since it is the LTV-ratio that is restricted to 85 percent following the introduction of the
mortgage cap, we have used the LTV-ratio as a starting point to determine how we run our
regressions. It can be misleading just to look at debt levels in SEK, because if the purchase
price of the house is higher, the debt level (in SEK) will naturally be higher. Even though not
perfect, the LTV-ratio captures both loan value (L) and purchase price (V) of the house.
   We believe that our findings of a larger negative effect in the rest of Sweden can be partly
explained by basic demand mechanics. If a cap is introduced on how much loans you can
finance your house purchase with, the demand for loans and a subsequent house purchase will
be held back, this to a larger extent in the rest of Sweden compared to the big city-regions due
to different LTV-ratios. This has a negative effect on the house prices, which would otherwise
be fueled by demand factors. Also, the rest of Sweden has more people who are over the 85
percent mortgage cap limit, i.e. have taken “blancolån”. This results in a higher number of
people not being able to finance their house purchases after the recommendation has been
implemented. This is because the possibility to buy a house with more than 85 percent LTV
might have disappeared for a potential buyer who would have done so previously before the
introduction of the mortgage cap.
   The idea of the mortgage cap is good because restricting the possibility to take on debt in
relation to the house purchase value creates a margin of safety for the household, making
them better prepared for sudden drops in prices of their houses. However, our research shows
that there might have been some spill-over effects from the introduction of the mortgage cap,
for instance a negative house price reaction in the rest of Sweden compared to the big city
regions, which was not a goal in itself of the introduction of the mortgage cap.
   Even though our results are solid, there might be other factors that play a part in the price
development that we showcase. We have pointed out that basic demand is a factor to why the
prices have reacted relatively more negatively if the LTV-ratio or the share of house

                                                                               30
purchases being financed with more than 85 percent loans is higher. The demand side is
therefore closely connected to the introduction of the mortgage cap. However, the supply of
houses might be a factor not specifically connected to the introduction of the mortgage cap,
which we suggest further research to dig deeper in. Examples of supply side factors could be
slower turnover of the houses driven by the supply side, as well as the possibility to rent out
the house instead of selling it in the big city regions, causing the prices to not drop as much.
   Also, the supply of banks or more specifically the ability to get a bank loan in big cities
versus the rest of Sweden might be a factor. It is reasonable to believe that there is a higher
availability of loans, or a higher supply of banks in the big cities. The lower possibility to get
a loan at the local bank in the rest of Sweden might lead to that the demand for a loan to buy a
new house is not satisfied, and prices are not able to increase as much compared to the big
city areas. Furthermore, the liquidity of houses in the different regions could be an influence.
That is if houses can be sold fast or not in the market to a fair price. It is most likely the case
that the rest of Sweden has less liquid houses. If you have trouble selling your house and
maybe have to do a “fire sale” of the house, the cost of selling the house would be higher,
implying a lower price, due to problems finding a buyer in the rest of Sweden. It is surprising
that the LTV is higher in the rest of Sweden, being the less liquid region and having a higher
risk for varying house values.
     For further research it might be worth looking into the effect on price development of the
mortgage cap, instead of only the difference in price effects between the regions. This could
possibly require more comprehensive data, and some additional time as only two and a half
years have gone since the introduction of the mortgage cap. In the case of regulations, other
factors than restricting the LTV-ratio might be worthy of considering to hinder risky house
purchases. An example would be restrictions on debt-to-income, which could possibly be
more effective in the big city regions.
   We can finally conclude that regardless of what factors other than the introduction of the
mortgage cap might have influenced the house prices, our research shows significant evidence
that the mortgage cap had an influence too. We think our research creates some important
discussion about not only debt related risk and what measures to look at, but also what other
effects, such as a negative house price effect, a credit restriction might have.

                                                                               31
   7. References

7.1 Written references: Journals, papers and articles

Abraham, J., Hendershott, P., 1996. Bubbles in metropolitan housing markets. Journal of
Housing Research 7, 191-207.

Ahearn, A. G., Ammer, J., Doyle, B. M., Kole, L.S., Martin, R.F., 2005. House prices and
monetary policy: a cross-country study. International Finance Discussion Paper No. 841,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Albertsson, S., Åsberg, J., 2012. The Swedish Housing Mortgage Reform’s Impact On
House Prices: A study of the development of Scandinavian house prices following the 85
percent mortgage cap in Sweden. Stockholm School of Economics

Ashenfelter O., Card D., 1985. Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to Estimate the
Effect of Training Programs. The Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 67 No. 4, 648-660.

Benito, A., 2006. The down-payment constraint and UK housing market: Does the theory fit
the facts?. Journal of Housing Economics Vol. 15 Issue 1, 1-20.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How Much Should We Trust Differences-
in-Differences Estimates?. Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2004, Vol. 119 Issue 1,
249-275.

BKN, 2011. Hushållens skuldsättning i spåren av finanskrisen – En internationell jämförelse,
2011.

Cameron, G., Muellbauer, J., Murphy A., 2006. Was there a british house price bubble?
Evidence from a regional panel. CEPR discussion paper no. 5619.

Credit Suisse, 2007. Mortgage quality du jour: underestimated no more, March 13, 2007.

Dimartino, D., Duca, J.V., 2007. The rise and fall of subprime mortgages. Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas Economic Letter, November,
http://dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2007/el0711.pdf.

Dimartino, D., Duca J.V., Rosenblum, H., 2007. From complacency to crisis: financial risk-
                           st
taking in the early 21  century, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter, December,
http://dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2007/el0712.pdf.

Duca J. V., Muellbauer J., and Murphy A., 2010. Housing markets and the financial crisis
of 2007-2009: Lessons for the furure. Journal of Financial Stability 6, 203-217.

Duca, J. V., Johnson, K.B., Muellbauer J., 2009c. Time Series Estimates of U.S. Mortgage
Constraints and Regional Home Supply. Mimeo, Oxford University.

                                                                               32
Englund, P., 2011. Svenska huspriser i ett internationellt perspektiv., On behalf of
Riksbanken’s research on risks on the Swedish housing market, 2011.

Finansinspektionen, 2013. Den svenska bolånemarknaden 2013, March 7, 2013.
http://www.fi.se/upload/43_Utredningar/20_Rapporter/2013/bolan_2013_2.pdf

Finocchiaro, D., Nilsson, C., Nyberg, D., and Soultanaeva A., 2011. Hushållens
skuldsättning, bostadspriserna och makroekonomin: en genomgång av litteraturen., On behalf
of Riksbanken’s research on risks on the Swedish housing market, 2011.

Girouard, N., Kennedy, M., van den Nord, P., Andre, C., 2006. Recent house price
developments. OECD Economics Department working papers, no. 279.

Hellekant, J., Unik Statistik avslöjar var bolånen är störst. SVD Näringsliv 8 May 2013.

Holmberg, J. 2012. Den svenska bolånemarknaden, SCB Nr 2012:69, 24 May 2012
http://www.scb.se/Pages/Article____333926.aspx

Johansson, J., Lagerwall B., and Lundvall H., 2011. Större andel rörliga bolån – hur
påverkas penningpolitikens genomslag?, On behalf of Riksbanken’s research on risks on the
Swedish housing market, 2011.

Leamer, E. E., 2007. Housing is the business cycle. In: Housing, housing finance, and
monetary policy, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 30-September 1, 2007, pp. 149-233.

Lewin, B., 2009. Efter Skattereformen – En genomgång av svensk skattepolitik 1992-2009.
Underlagsrapport till Riksrevisionen, 8 December 2009

Lilienfeld-Toal, U. von, and Mookherjee D., 2011. How did the US Housing Slump Begin?
The Role of the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform, Stockholm School of Economics, January 13 2011.

Lilienfeld-Toal, U. Lecture in course 642: Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, the
Stockholm School of Economics, fall 2012.

Meen, G., 2001. Modeling Spatial Housing Markets: Theory, Analysis and Policy. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 2001.

Mitelman, H., 2013. Lars E O Svenssons nya kläder. Dagens Industri, April 9 2013

Muellbauer, J., Murphy, A., 2008. Housing markets and the economy: the assessment.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24 (1), 1-33.

Mäklarstatistik, 2012. Trendbrott under 2011.
http://www.svenskfast.se/Templates/Page____8721.aspx

Mäklarstatistik, 2013. Mäklarstatistik t.o.m. februari 2013. Stockholm, March 14 2013.
http://www.maklarstatistik.se/foerklaring-till-statistik/foerdjupad-statistik---mars-2013.aspx

                                                                               33
Taylor, J. B., 2007. Housing and monetary policy, paper presented at Housing, Housing
Finance, and Monetary Policy Symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, Jackson Hole, WY, 30 August-1 September.

Vitner, M., Iqbal, A., 2009. What drives consumer delinquency rates? Wachovia Economics
Group Special Commentary, June 18, http://www.fxstreet.com/fundamental/analysis-
reports/special-commentary/2009-06-19.html.

von Peter, G., 2009. Asset prices and banking distress: a macroeconomic approach. Journal
of Financial Stability 5, 298-319.

7.2 Electronic references

http://www.svd.se/naringsliv/branscher/bank-och-fastighet/nordea-under-press-i-
danmark_7470570.svd, last viewed 23 March 2013

http://www.di.se/artiklar/2013/4/3/imf-stoppa-amorteringsfria-lan/, last viewed on April 4
2013

http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-17/debt-bubble-born-of-easy-cash-prompts-
swedish-rule-review.html, last viewed 5 April 2013

http://www.svd.se/naringsliv/branscher/bank-och-fastighet/eu-kommissionen-sverige-har-
makroekonomiska-obalanser_8074826.svd, last viewed April 12 2013

                                                                               34
   8. Appendix

8.1 Figures
Figure 1: Percentage change in housing related loans compared to previous year. The top line
shows co-operative apartments, the bottom line small houses and the middle line total housing
related loans.

                                                                               35
Figure 2: Monthly Swedish house price development (K/T: Purchase price divided by taxation
value) for small houses.

Figure 3: Monthly Swedish house price development (price per square meter) for co-operative
apartments.

                                                                               36
Figure 4: The LTV-ratio for new loans

Figure 5: Real price development (index) for small houses in different regions in Sweden

                                                                               37
Figure 6.1: Regional volume weighted LTV-ratios for small houses

Figure 6.2: Regional volume weighted LTV-ratios for co-operative apartments

Figure 7: Regional debt (in SEK) related to housing for small houses

                                                                               38
Figure 8: Regional average total debt-to-income for small houses

Figure 9: Regional percentage of “blancolån” for small houses

Figure 10: Regional amount (SEK) left to live for after paying housing related costs for small
house buyers

                                                                               39
8.2 Tables and graphs

Graph 1

This graph displays a graphical illustration of the difference-in-difference regression (4) from Table 3, Panel B,
with the event date, the mortgage cap introduction, being month 0. The Big City Regions is composed of the
constant, as well as the Cap starting from the event date, while the Rest of Sweden is composed by the constant
and Rest_Swe, as well as the Cap and the difference-in-difference estimator, CapRest_Swe, from the event date.
This does not represent the true mean price values, as the effects of the control variables are not included, but
should only be taken as an indicator of the effect of the mortgage cap.

                                                                               40
           Max     5,81  1,81     Max     5,81  1,81     Max  8,405,81  0,36
                  13,00                    13,00
                        141,01                  141,01                  141,01

                                                                                  41
           Min  6,005,04  0,24     Min  6,005,04  0,96     Min  6,805,04  0,24
                3 390 26 500 000          3 390 26 500 000          8 500 21 600 000
                        128,07                  128,07                  128,07

                  1,340,224,180,57            2,000,224,190,35            0,590,224,170,06

      Post CapStd. Dev.1 669 319              Std. Dev.1 846 659              Std. Dev.1 059 479

                  8,045,47  0,69            8,635,46  1,41            7,735,47  0,30
           Mean      134,9671 739Mean      135,0224 794Mean      134,9346 945
                2 207 804                 3 493 844                 1 528 581


           Max     7,14  1,91     Max     7,14  1,91     Max  9,607,14  0,40
                  12,20                    12,20
                        129,03                  129,03                  129,03

           Min  4,703,10  0,33     Min  4,703,10  0,89     Min  5,303,10  0,33
                8 000 37 500 000                                   8 000 26 000 000
                        107,31         25 000 37 500 000107,31                   107,31



                  1,541,215,970,57            1,841,205,980,31            1,351,215,960,03
                                                                914 723
      Pre CapStd. Dev.1 416 916              Std. Dev.1 550 495              Std. Dev.

                  7,294,86  0,75            7,434,83  1,50            7,234,88  0,36
          Mean      119,48     Mean      119,5458 576Mean      119,46
                              172 714                                          114 138
                1 966 179                 3 082 364                 1 393 350


           Max     7,14  1,91     Max     7,14  1,91     Max  9,607,14  0,40
                  13,00                    13,00
                        141,01                  141,01                  141,01

           Min  4,703,10  0,24     Min  4,703,10  0,89     Min  5,303,10  0,24
                3 390 37 500 000          3 390 37 500 000          8 000 26 000 000
                        107,31                  107,31                  107,31

       1,521,068,940,57           1,961,058,970,32           1,201,068,930,05
       All                                                            961 132
             Std. Dev.1 499 450              Std. Dev.1 654 870              Std. Dev.

                  7,515,04  0,73            7,795,02  1,47            7,375,05  0,34
          Mean      124,03     Mean      124,1483 370Mean      123,97
                              244 453                                          161 083
                2 037 088                 3 204 737                 1 432 761








Table 1: Statistics for individual house purchase observations                    This table presents summary statistics for the data set on individual house purchase observations from year 2006 to 2012. With all observations on the left hand side, the pre-mortgage cap data in the middle and post-mortgage cap on the right hand side, and the regions going from top to bottom. Data presented are mean values, standard deviation,minimum values and maximum values, as well as number of house purchases.


           SwedenPriceRegional Unemployment RateMortgage Interest RateIndexed GDPPopulation GrowthObservationsBig City RegionsPriceRegional Unemployment RateMortgage Interest RateIndex GDPPopulation GrowthObservationsRest of the CountryPriceRegional Unemployment RateMortgage Interest RateIndex GDPPopulation GrowthObservations
            Max     5,81  1,81     Max     5,81  1,81     Max  8,405,81  0,36
                   13,00                    13,00
                         141,01                  141,01                  141,01
               4 210 618               4 210 618                1 631 080                                42

            Min  6,005,04  0,24     Min  6,005,04  0,96     Min  6,805,04  0,24
                        128,07                  128,07                  128,07
                1 399 226                 2 683 852                 1 399 226

                   1,940,234,380,52            2,080,234,380,34            0,580,234,440,06
                                                                 64 428
                868 323                  439 742
       Post CapStd. Dev.                 Std. Dev.                 Std. Dev.

                                                 81                    27
                   8,865,47  1,05108         9,245,47  1,29            7,715,47  0,31
           Mean      134,92     Mean      134,92     Mean      134,92
                2 865 321                 3 313 564                 1 520 592


            Max     7,14  1,91     Max     7,14  1,91     Max  9,607,14  0,40
                   12,20                    12,20
                        129,03                  129,03                  129,03
                4 011 370                 4 011 370                 1 581 975

            Min  4,703,10  0,33     Min  4,703,10  0,89     Min  5,303,10  0,33
                        107,31                  107,31                  107,31
                1 150 292                 2 169 526                 1 150 292


                   1,821,21  0,56            1,911,215,980,31            1,351,226,010,03
                756 946  5,9716         401 547                  107 860
       Pre CapStd. Dev.                 Std. Dev.                 Std. Dev.

                                                                        57
                   7,794,85  1,20228         7,984,85  1,48171         7,244,85  0,36
           Mean      119,10     Mean      119,10     Mean      119,10
                2 545 160                 2 931 327                 1 386 661


            Max     7,14  1,91     Max     7,14  1,91     Max  9,607,14  0,40
                   13,00                    13,00
                        141,01                  141,01                  141,01
                4 210 618                 4 210 618                 1 631 080

            Min  4,703,10  0,24     Min  4,703,10  0,89     Min  5,303,10  0,24
                        107,31                  107,31                  107,31
                1 150 292                 2 169 526                 1 150 292

        1,921,059,220,55           2,051,059,220,33           1,181,059,260,05
       All       807 154                  450 370                  114 496
             Std. Dev.                 Std. Dev.                 Std. Dev.

                                                                       84
                   8,145,05  1,15336         8,385,05  1,42252         7,395,05  0,34
           Mean      124,19     Mean      124,19     Mean      124,19
                2 648 069                 3 054 188                 1 429 710







Table 2: Statistics for mean value observations                                                 This table presents summary statistics for the data set on mean house purchase observations from the three big city regions and the rest of the country from year 2006 to 2012.With all observations on the left hand side, the pre-mortgage cap data in the middle and post-mortgage cap on the right hand side, and the regions going from top to bottom.Data presented are mean values, standard deviation, minimum values and maximum values, as well as number of observations. Each month for each of the four regions areconsidered an observation


            SwedenPriceRegional Unemployment RateMortgage Interest RateIndexed GDPPopulation GrowthObservationsBig City RegionsPriceRegional Unemployment RateMortgage Interest RateIndex GDPPopulation GrowthObservationsRest of the CountryPriceRegional Unemployment RateMortgage Interest RateIndex GDPPopulation GrowthObservations
       Table 3: Regression results

             Panel A: Individual house price observations

                           (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
                         price price price price price price price
Rest_SWE -1689014*** -1749910*** -1747028*** -1020879*** -1006420***
                            (0) (0) (0) (0) (0)
Cap 411480.4*** 286457*** 161669.3*** 199705.3*** 187453.9** 122838.2 195297.4***
                       (8.4e-208) (1.07e-83) (6.42e-14) (1.06e-15) (.0018807) (.2170054) (1.97e-19)
CapRest_SWE -276248.7*** -215353.2*** -218254.4*** -379848.3*** -240563.2** -252185** -364393.2***
                       (5.02e-81) (3.29e-41) (2.21e-42) (4.7e-124) (.0013159) (.0011134) (8.6e-153)
Prop_tax -284435.9*** -96045.56*** -152578.8*** -153042.2* -77989.65 -166481.9***
                                     (9.5e-112) (2.08e-11) (5.53e-15) (.0175313) (.4012042) (5.43e-23)
Prop_taxRest_SWE 136514.8*** 131497.2*** -23074.52 113316.9 98573.84 -23945.33*
                                     (2.95e-23) (7.21e-22) (.0927319) (.0511338) (.0908097) (.0426507)
Unemployment -94972.23*** 13793.1 9524.628 -105117.8***
                                                                  (9.1e-271) (.6620673) (.718749) (0)
Interest -91314.91*** -19801.05 -7998.225 -96488.81***
                                                                 (3.75e-33) (.5802307) (.7766727) (1.50e-47)
GDP 8162.153*** 12295.7 7139.734** 6761.643***
                                                                 (3.43e-46) (.0527543) (.0071556) (1.79e-41)
Population_growth 589298.5*** 270764.7 321182.9* 511998.2***
                                                                 (5.5e-230) (.1663804) (.0499689) (2.4e-247)
Living area 15069.87***
                                                                                                                                    (0)
Lot area -3.915736*
                                                                                                            (.0239745)
Constant 3082364*** 3207387*** 3117086*** 2382474*** 326573.9 867417 809219.6***
                           (0) (0) (0) (2.9e-132) (.6169158) (.0706828) (1.65e-21)
R2 .3203237 .3235637 .3262628 .3415863 .0184985 .0205839 .4938209
N 244453 244453 244453 244453 244453 244453 244453
Time FE No No Yearly Yearly No Yearly Yearly
FE No No No No Regional Regional No

* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
             P-value in parentheses.

        These tables present the OLS regressions run with different specifications using individual observations in Panel
        A and mean value observations in Panel B. For each explanatory variable the coefficient on price is presented, as
                                                                                      2
        well as the P-value in parenthesis. For every regression the R , number of observations, inclusion of time fixed
         effects and regional fixed effects are presented at the bottom. Panel C presents an additional regression on an
       index from SCB.

                                                                                     43
        Panel B: Mean values

                                   (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
                                price price price price price price
(mean) Rest_SWE -1544666*** -1593419*** -1593419*** -1141769***
                              (9.0e-145) (5.9e-120) (1.3e-121) (2.81e-54)
(mean) Cap 382237.1*** 269615.8*** 40885.76 69156.91 209232* 17852.18
                             (1.45e-10) (.0000302) (.7298809) (.4266594) (.032955) (.8587794)
(mean) CapRest_SWE -248305.6*** -199552.2** -199552.2** -416738.8*** -261873.5** -279797.4**
                             (.0000544) (.0027988) (.0027166) (2.78e-16) (.0015998) (.001685)
(mean) Prop_tax -267475.6*** -351859.5* -527263.6*** -110911.6* -542939.9*
                                           (4.96e-06) (.0115962) (2.75e-07) (.0157689) (.0193248)
(mean) Prop_taxRest_SWE 115789.4 115789.4* -20648.02 73028.08 58638.86
                                           (.059411) (.0497781) (.6641736) (.2345626) (.2983901)
(mean) Unemployment -127033.9*** -18358.24 -13160.57
                                                                        (6.19e-59) (.6631738) (.605515)
(mean) Interest -100980.2** -72866.07 -40510.59
                                                                       (.0023207) (.1377307) (.0952451)
(mean) GDP 7914.596*** 14910.49* 7756.566*
                                                                       (.0008508) (.0269289) (.0263037)
(mean) Population_growth 433269.5*** 218456.4 335793.1*
                                                                       (1.82e-21) (.1766626) (.0120499)
Constant 2931327*** 3043948*** 3264021*** 3361527*** 1042293 1847697*
                             (5.0e-243) (8.3e-209) (6.03e-79) (1.07e-19) (.3223439) (.021437)
R2 .8000474 .8151763 .8356885 .9470742 .5962165 .7042046
N 336 336 336 336 336 336
Time FE No No Yearly Yearly No Yearly
FE No No No No Regional Regional

* p<0.05, ** p<0.01,
*** p<0.001.
P-value in parentheses.

                                                                                     44
Panel C: Price indices

                                 (1)
                          price index
 (mean) Rest_SWE -177.5614***
                          (2.87e-46)
 (mean) Cap 13.5078
                        (.5133514)
 (mean) CapRest_SWE -20.03119*
                        (.0309807)
 Constant 728.6404***
                          (3.88e-58)
 r2 .8849457
N 112
 Time FE Yearly
 FE No

 * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
P-value in parentheses.

                                                                              45