The Stockholm School of Economics
Department of Finance
Bachelor Thesis
Spring 2013

             Unconventional Stock Market Predictors

      And the Unstable Performance of Traditional Stock Market Predictors

         Daniel Hniopek 22108@student.hhs.se

         Abstract
          Stock market predictability is a contradictory topic within research in
          finance. Despite the fact that numerous articles presenting evidence on
          stock market predictability have been published in the last two decades,
         Goyal and Welch (2008) argue that most previously suggested models
         have performed poorly out-of-sample during the last 35 years or so. I
          confirm these results, and highlight the years around the IT-bubble as a
          particularly problematic period for traditionally used predictors.
         Furthermore, I have in this paper examined the performance of some
         unconventional predictors which measure aspects such as investor
         sentiment, consumer confidence, development in the manufacturing
          sector, and early indications of business cycle fluctuations. Analyzing the
          period of 1978-2010 in search of predictive ability of 1-month, 1-year,
          and 5-year returns I find that the unconventional predictors in general
          provide better results both in-sample and out-of-sample, compared to the
         traditional predictors. Two particular variables stand out – a leading
          indicator of the business cycle and a consumer confidence index.

Keywords: Predictive regressions, Stock returns, Investor sentiment, Consumer confidence,
Leading indicators

Tutor: Francesco Sangiorgi
Date: May 15, 2013
Table of Contents

1. Introduction 3

2. Literature Review 5
   2.1 Traditional predictors ..................................................................................................... 5
   2.2 Unconventional predictors .............................................................................................. 6

3. Data sources, data construction and data description 7
    3.1 Publication lags............................................................................................................. 10

4. Method 11
   4.1 Estimation periods ........................................................................................................ 11
   4.2 In-sample tests .............................................................................................................. 12
        4.2.1 Limitations of in-sample testing ......................................................................... 12
   4.3 Out-of-sample tests ....................................................................................................... 13
   4.4 Overlapping observations ............................................................................................. 14

5. Results 15
   5.1 In-sample results ........................................................................................................... 16
        5.1.1 In-sample, traditional predictors ......................................................................... 16
        5.1.2 In-sample, unconventional predictors ................................................................. 18
   5.2 Out-of-sample results ................................................................................................... 18
        5.2.1 Out-of-sample, traditional predictors .................................................................. 19
        5.2.2 Out-of-sample, unconventional predictors .......................................................... 19
   5.3 Further discussion ......................................................................................................... 20

6. Implications and conclusions 22
   6.1 Future research ............................................................................................................. 24

7. References 25
   7.1 Website Data Sources ................................................................................................... 27

8. Appendix 28

                                     2
1. Introduction
Stock market predictability is a well-researched topic although the implications of this
research are difficult to interpret. Early exploration of the subject dates back to 1920, where
Dow (1920) examined dividend yields in a paper that is well-cited in the literature on stock
market predictability. The dividend yield is still today one of the most well-tested variables
where evidence supporting the possibility of successful forecasting have been found in for
example Fama and French (1988) and Hodrick (1992) among others. The list of other
variables where there is evidence of predictive ability can be made long, and includes
measures such as earnings yields (Campbell and Shiller, 1988), the book-to-market ratio
(Pontiff and Schall, 1998), the short-term interest rate and inflation (Fama and Schwert,
1977), the consumption-wealth ratio (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), and the share of equity
issues in total new equity and debt issues (Baker and Wurgler, 2000).
            The theories behind why stock returns may be predictable can mainly be
attributed either to rational explanations or to ideas of investor irrationality. The rational view
suggests that the equity risk premium varies over time, for example due to time-varying risk
aversion (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). The tested variables then predict returns simply
because they capture information about the equity risk premium or the risk aversion. The
irrational view relies instead on the assumption that some investors are irrational which
creates systematic mispricings that are not fully eliminated due to limits to arbitrage (Shleifer
and Vishny, 1997). The underlying causes may be different types of biases related to
information processing (e.g. extrapolation bias or overconfidence) or decision-making biases
(for example that decisions seem to be affected by how choices are framed, or different
variants of mental accounting whereby certain decisions may be mentally segregated from
each other and treated in irrational ways). The resulting under- or overpricing may then be
predicted by using these variables as means of determining when the stock market deviates
from what is normal.
             That stock market prediction actually works at all has been questioned however.
Data mining is a possibility that should always be considered when a large amount of
variables are tested, or even when consulting past research for guidance on which variables to
choose (Foster et al., 1997). Some of the variables, mainly those where information about
stock prices are included in the regressor, have also been criticized since changes in prices
will affect both the predictor variable and the predicted return, violating the OLS assumption
of independence at all leads and lags (Lewellen, 2004). Put more generally, the slope

                                     3
coefficient will be biased if the predictor variable is endogenous in the system that generates
returns (Nelson and Kim, 1993). Many of the predictors are also highly persistent over time,
which can cause econometric problems. More recent critique of the evidence of stock market
predictability can be found in Goyal and Welch (2008) which examines the out-of-sample
performance of a large range of previously suggested predictors, concluding that most models
seem unstable and have performed poorly during the last 35 years or so.
             The purpose of this paper is mainly to test some unconventional predictors in
search of more reliable performance, especially during the last decades, than what has been
recorded previously. I have however included (yet another) analysis of the performance of
some traditional stock market predictors, even though this analysis should be viewed more as
means of creating a comparable base from where to evaluate and discuss the performance of
the unconventional predictors. This paper will inevitably deal with the question of whether or
not stock market returns are predictable, although it should not be seen as an addition to the
econometric debate on the subject. There are other articles using more advanced econometric
techniques, such as Goyal and Welch (2008) or Campbell and Thompson (2008).
              In total, I have tested six traditional predictor variables and five unconventional
ones. The traditional variables consist of the dividend yield, the share of equity issues in total
new equity and debt issues, and four variations of earnings yields. The unconventional
variables on the other hand measure aspects such as investor sentiment, consumer confidence,
development in the manufacturing sector, and early indications of business cycle fluctuations.
All variables are tested with respect to how well they predict excess returns one month, one
year and five years into the future, using monthly data. The problem of overlapping
observations that is created when using this approach is corrected for using two alternative
methods. In the first method I will use the Newey-West heteroskedasticity and autocovariance
consistent (HAC) estimator, and in the second method I will instead rescale the OLS standard
error as suggested by Harri and Brorsen (2009). All variables are tested during the period
1978-2010. In addition to that the traditional variables have also been tested during the period
1938-2010, mainly because data availability allows it. Furthermore, all variables have been
tested both in-sample and out-of-sample, where the out-of-sample test is based on a set of
rolling regressions with an expanding window, designed so that each forecast is made using
only data that was available at the time in which the forecast was made.
              During the later period (1978-2010), which is the main period of interest in this
study, the tests show that there are predictor variables with significant forecasting power in-
sample for all tested forecasting lengths. Interestingly, the performance of the unconventional

                                     4
predictors is better than that of the traditional predictors, both in terms of the number of
significant models and in terms of having the models with the strongest significance. Out-of-
sample, performance drops drastically however, with only one single variable being
significant, and only when forecasting five-year returns. Again, this variable turned out to be
one of the unconventional predictors, namely a measure of consumer confidence. These
findings suggest that there are measures such as consumer confidence and other leading
indicators that should be considered as possible substitutes or complements to the more
commonly used models.

2. Literature Review

2.1 Traditional predictors
The previous literature on traditional predictors goes hand in hand with the academic debate
on stock market predictability, to which the reader has already been introduced in Section 1.
As described, this question is still not resolved and is very much a current topic of research in
finance. Reviewing the most recent research of the subject, the influential paper by Goyal and
Welch (2008), which criticized out-of-sample performance, introduced an important challenge
from where researchers now try to find methods of improving the performance of previous
models. Campbell and Thompson (2008) for example argue that the out-of-sample
performance of predictive regressions can be substantially improved by imposing weak
restrictions on the regressions. They explore two alternative restrictions – that the regression
coefficient has the theoretically expected sign, and that the fitted value of the equity risk
premium is positive – and conclude that both restrictions improve performance. Ferreira and
Santa-Clara (2011) use a fundamentally different approach where three components of stock
market returns – the dividend yield, the earnings growth and the price-earnings ratio growth –
are instead forecasted independently. They argue that this approach produces better out-of-
sample results compared to using the historical mean as the best estimate of future returns,
and that these results are economically significant.
             Cochrane (2008) uses another line of reasoning by referring to the present value
relationship. If both price growth and dividend growth are unpredictable, dividend yield must
be constant. Since this does not hold, one of dividend growth or price growth must be
predictable. Cochrane concludes that the absence of dividend growth predictability is strong
evidence that stock market price growth is instead predictable.

                                     5
             As already mentioned however, the main purpose of this paper will not be to
settle the question of stock market predictability by improving on previous models, but
instead to look at the predictive performance of new variables.

2.2 Unconventional predictors
In this paper “unconventional” will be the title for variables such as investor sentiment,
consumer confidence and other leading indicators. Overall the research on these types of
stock market predictors is patchy, and consists mainly of papers where the authors have
examined the performance of one particular variable. This makes the relative performance
between different variables hard to evaluate, since different authors use different methods.
The amount of high quality papers is also substantially lower, with the exception of research
on investor sentiment which has become a popular topic in the wake of behavioral finance.
            A main problem concerning unconventional predictors is that there are no
universal definitions of them, and no consensus on how to measure them. This is especially
apparent when it comes to investor sentiment, which can be measured both directly using
surveys or, as popular in previous research, using different proxies such as the level of
discounts on closed-end funds, or net mutual fund redemptions. Brown and Cliff (2004)
investigate a range of commonly used sentiment measures and conclude that many proxies for
sentiment are however strongly correlated with survey-based measures of sentiment. They
however find little evidence that investor sentiment can predict short-term stock market
returns. Neal and Wheatley (1998) on the other hand test three common proxies for investor
sentiment and find that two of them predict the size premium, which is the difference in return
between small and large firms. Baker and Wurgler (2006) achieves similar results by creating
a composite sentiment index based on six different proxies for investor sentiment and finding
that when sentiment is low, subsequent returns are relatively high for certain groups of stocks,
such as small stocks, extreme growth stocks and distressed stocks.
             Even though consumer confidence and its relationship to the level of household
spending have been thoroughly examined, its connection to the stock market is less
researched. As with investor sentiment, measurement is a problem and there are several
different survey-based indices of consumer sentiment. The most well-established indices that
have been studied in previous research are the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan
Index of Consumer Sentiment and The Conference Board Consumer Confidence Index, which
monitor the same population (American households) but ask different questions. Fisher and
Statman (2003) test both these measures for predictive ability of one, six and twelve months’

                                     6
return, and find a negative relationship between consumer confidence and subsequent returns.
The results were only significant for both indices when examining six-month returns, and the
index by University of Michigan generally performed better than the one from The
Conference Board. Kalotay et al. (2007) on the other hand tested the predictive ability of
three-month returns of consumer confidence as measured by University of Michigan, but
found no stand-alone predictive ability.
             The last group of unconventional variables consists of leading indicators which
are normally designed to help predict GDP and provide early signals of business cycle turning
points. Not surprisingly, previous literature is mainly focused on finding new predictors of
GDP and evaluating whether or not established indicators actually manage to provide reliable
forecasts of GDP. Research on the link between leading indicators and stock market returns is
virtually inexistent. Umstead (1977) examines data of the Leading Composite Index that was
published by the Department of Commerce (today The Conference Board Leading Economic
Index). Analyzing quarterly data between 1948 and 1974 using an out-of-sample approach
where the model parameters are estimated in the first half of the period and tested in the
second, Umstead finds that the leading indicator does predict stock market returns. The
conclusion is that the stock market appears to be overvalued during economic expansions and
undervalued during contractions – an inefficiency that is interpreted as being related to how
information about the business cycle unfolds over time, and how the stock market use this
information. It should however be noted that the composition of the index has been changed
since then, possibly rendering Umstead’s findings not only out-of-date but also irrelevant.

3. Data sources, data construction and data description
The study will be conducted using monthly observations, and all return figures are expressed
in terms of monthly percentages unless stated otherwise. All website data sources are
provided in Section 7.1 for the convenience of anyone who wishes to reproduce or extend my
work.

Stock returns: the value-weighted return for S&P 500 including distributions, extracted from
The Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).

Stock prices: monthly averages of daily closing prices for the S&P 500 adjusted to real values
using CPI. The data are from Robert Shiller of Yale University, and can be retrieved from his
webpage.

                                     7
Risk-free interest rate: the 10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (GS10), expressed as a
monthly percentage. The data are from Robert Shiller’s webpage.

Excess return: Stock returns – Risk-free interest rates.

Earnings: real earnings for S&P 500, where linear interpolation is used to estimate monthly
earnings between the quarterly reports. The data are from Robert Shiller’s webpage.

Dividends: real dividends for S&P 500, where linear interpolation is used to estimate monthly
dividends between the quarterly reports. The data are from Robert Shiller’s webpage.

Earnings yield (E_P): earnings divided by stock prices.

Multiyear earnings yields (EX_P): moving average of earnings using X years of past data,
divided by stock prices.

Dividend yield (D_P): dividends divided by stock prices.

Percent equity issuing (eq_is): a measure that is proposed by Baker and Wurgler (2000) and is
calculated as the amount of equity issuing divided by the sum of equity issuing plus debt
issuing. The reason for including this particular variable is that it is one of few measures that
seems to exhibit some forecasting potential even out-of-sample, according to Goyal and
Welch (2008). Data up to April 2008 are from Jeffrey Wurgler of New York University Stern
School of Business, and can be retrieved from his webpage. I have gathered the rest of the
data from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and their statistical release
New Security Issues, U.S. Corporations (1.46), which is issued monthly.

Investor sentiment (SENT): an index based on the common variation in six proxies for
sentiment: the closed-end fund discount, NYSE share turnover, the number of IPOs, the
average first-day returns on IPOs, the equity share in new issues, and the dividend premium.
The data was constructed and used in Baker-Wurgler (2006) and Baker-Wurgler (2007). It
should however be noted that the time series has been constructed by standardizing the
coefficients for each sentiment proxy over the period 1962-2005. This means that all

                                     8
observations inherently contain information that was not available until after 2005, making a
true out-of-sample test impossible to perform. The data are again from Jeffrey Wurgler’s
webpage.

The Conference Board Consumer Confidence Index (CCI): The Conference Board is an
independent, nonprofit business membership and research association founded in 1916. They
have conducted a consumer confidence survey on a monthly basis since 1977 using consistent
definitions and questions since its inception. Respondents are asked to appraise present
business conditions and employment conditions, and state their expectations regarding future
business conditions, employment conditions and personal income. The horizon of the
forward-looking questions is six months. The survey is directed towards residential
households in the United States, which are first stratified geographically before selecting a
random sample that ultimately leads to a sample size of approximately 3000 completed
questionnaires. The data can be acquired from The Conference Board.

Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Index of Consumer Sentiment (ICS): the Surveys of
Consumers has been conducted by University of Michigan since 1946, initially once each
quarter. Since 1978, the survey is performed monthly by talking to 500 individuals selected
randomly from the contiguous United States. The survey asks both for an evaluation of
present conditions and for expectations of future conditions, and cover the respondents’
personal finances, future buying plans, and their assessment of business conditions. The index
is normally used as an indicator of the future economy, and it is included as a component in
the OECD Composite Leading Indicators. A subset of the index is also included as one of ten
components in The Conference Board Leading Economic Index (originally the Leading
Composite Index, compiled and published by the U.S. Department of Commerce). The data
are made available at the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) database at Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis with six months delay. More recent data are issued monthly by
Thomson Reuters and can be accessed from their history of press releases related to this
index.

Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI): the PMI is a composite index based on data from the
manufacturing sector of: new orders, production, employment, supplier deliveries, and
inventories. The data are published monthly by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM),
which is a nonprofit association founded in 1915 that provides education and research

                                     9
information to enhance the performance of procurement and supply chain management of
practitioners and their organizations worldwide.

OECD Composite Leading Indicators, normalized (CLI): the Composite Leading Indicators
(CLI) for USA is published by the OECD and is based on: the number of dwellings started,
the net new orders for durable goods, share prices (NYSE), the Index of Consumer Sentiment,
weekly hours of work in manufacturing, Purchasing Managers’ Index and finally interest rates
spreads. The Index of Consumer Sentiment and Purchasing Managers’ Index that are included
in CLI are the exact same components which I will also investigate individually, as mentioned
above. In order to isolate cyclical patterns, all historical data of CLI are revised once a month
as soon as new data are published. The revisions are rather small but still make true out-of-
                                                                          1
sample testing impossible since the time series is altered ex post.  The data are from the
OECD.Stat Extracts.

3.1 Publication lags
A considerable drawback of using variables that are not based on quickly available financial
data is that such measures are often subject to noticeable publication lags. Publication lag is
here defined as being present when the release of information occurs after the month to which
the information actually relates. Percent equity issuing (eq_is) is subject to a publication lag
of around 20-30 days, and will therefore be lagged one month. The OECD Composite
Leading Indicators (CLI) has a publication lag of around 40 days, and will be lagged two
months. There are two reasons to correct for this. The first relates to the question of practical
usability – a measure may be attributable to whichever period in theory, but it is not possible
for an investor to use the information until it has been released. The second reason is that the
release of information may itself affect the stock market. The eventual short-term profit
associated with such an event is not what I am trying to catch in this paper. Still, even when
correcting for this problem, there is an element of error involved since publication lag times
may have varied over time. This type of information is however very hard to find.
              I will not address the question of publication lag for investor sentiment (SENT),
since it is not clear exactly how this issue is dealt with by Baker and Wurgler (2006) when
constructing the time series.

1
 The particular time series that I have been working with was extracted on March 13, 2013.
                                     10
4. Method

4.1 Estimation periods
There are two important criteria when choosing estimation period: the first is to have a sample
that is long enough to be representative of whatever the future may hold; the second is to have
a sample that consists of recent enough data to provide a view of the stock market that
coincides with how the market functions today. A sample that violates the first criteria could
be one that only covers a period with mainly positive and stable stock market development.
The second criteria is important since stock market prices are based on expectations that
change over time – simply learning that one strategy will make money could cause this
strategy to be utilized to such extent that the opportunity disappears. That means, in this
particular context, that measures that may have predicted future excess returns in the past may
no longer do so. Joining these two criteria into the selection of a single sample period is
difficult, since the two criteria to some extent are mutually exclusive – a period that only
consists of recent data will perhaps not be representative of the future. Using a longer period
on the other hand may instead produce misleading results if the behavior of the stock market
has changed significantly over time.
             Another issue that also relates to the subject of having a sample that well
describes reality concerns the Great Depression. Most available measures show extreme
observations especially during 1932 when the stock market hit rock bottom. One example is
percent equity issuing where extreme observations are recorded as late as 1934, with a few
values being about 5-10 times larger than any other values observed during the entire sample
(1926-2013). Thus, I decided to begin the analysis after the Great Depression, excluding both
the extreme downturn as well as the rapid climb during the subsequent years, and instead use
data from 1938 and onwards.
             Data availability, and the difference in the amount of historical data that is
available for the different measures, is also a problem. The data required to analyze earnings
yields, the dividend yield and percent equity issuing are available roughly from the beginning
of 1927 to the end of 2012. For some of the unconventional measures however, data is not
available until the beginning of 1978 and ends at the end of 2010. Analyzing some of the
measures using 75 years of data (1938-2012) and some using only 33 years of data (1978-
2010) would not give comparable results.
              Taking all these concerns into account, I decided to analyze the predictive power
of all measures for the period 1978-2010, henceforth mainly referred to as the later sample

                                     11
subset. In addition to that, the measures where a lot more data is available (the earnings
yields, the dividend yield and percent equity issuing) will also be analyzed for the period
1938-2010, henceforth mainly referred to as the full sample, to provide a long-run view on
stock market prediction. Still, any choice of estimation period is necessarily arbitrary and does
have the potential for a sample selection bias. Depending on the estimation period results can
vary a lot, which this paper will be an example of.

4.2 In-sample tests
All tested measures will be evaluated based on how well they predict the excess returns of
three different forecasting lengths – next period’s return (one month), next 12 periods’ return
                                                       2
(one year) and next 60 periods’ return (five years).  In other words, the following predictive
regressions will be run:

                                                                                                            ( 1 )

                                                                                                            ( 2 )

                                                                                                            ( 3 )

where xt is the tested predictor at time t.
             After having estimated a relationship between the tested variable xt and
subsequent excess returns, we can construct a time series of expected returns as predicted by
the model:

                                            ( ) ̂      ̂                                          ( 4 )

where q is the forecasting length, i.e. 1, 12 or 60. Described in other words, the expectation of
the future returns that will materialize during the forecasting horizon will be computed by
using the relationship between xt and subsequent returns, which is estimated in regression (1),
(2) or (3). Computing a time series of expected returns is useful, since it makes it possible to
directly compare the predicted returns against the realized returns.

4.2.1 Limitations of in-sample testing
Goyal and Welch (2008) argue that in-sample tests are mainly to be relied upon when the
underlying model is stable and well-specified. Under this assumption, in-sample tests are
more efficient, and can provide valuable information to a researcher who is confident in the

2
  Note that for 5-year returns, the analysis will only be extended up to 2007 since no more data are currently
available.
                                     12
underlying model specification but uncertain about the underlying model parameters. They
continue however by stressing the importance of out-of-sample tests as a diagnostic tool to
help determine whether a model actually is stable and well specified, or changing over time.
Given that their final conclusion was that there is reason to be highly skeptical about the
performance of many previously accepted predictors, especially during the last 35 years, in-
sample tests alone do not provide enough robustness to the analyses.

4.3 Out-of-sample tests
An out-of-sample test will give an assessment that to larger extent evaluates the performance
that an actual real-time investor would have been able to achieve. The expected return will be
calculated in the following way:

                                           ( ) ̂       ̂                                          ( 5 )

which is the same method used in (4) but with one adjustment, namely that ̂  and ̂  now have

a subscript for time. The model parameters will now be re-estimated each period using
                                                                          3
regression (1), (2) or (3), using only data that was available at time t.  In other words I will be
using a rolling regression technique with an expanding window, so that each forecast is made
using only data that was actually available at the time in which the forecast was made. Thus,
the investor will update his belief of the true model parameters as new data becomes
available. The estimates of expected returns will begin 11 years after the first observation, to
make sure that the earliest regressions contain enough data to provide reasonably reliable
              4
estimations.
             Since one regression is run each period, this method will provide time series of
                          2
β’s, t-statistics and R ’s. A final regression has to be run where the realized excess return is
regressed on the estimated excess return that was given by equation (5):

                                                                                                            ( 6 )

                                                                                                            ( 7 )

                                                                                                            ( 8 )

3
 Available data, in the case of regression (2) and (3), means that the regressions can only use observations up to
t-12 and t-60 respectively, since data for the left hand side, rt+12(12) and rt+60(60), are not known to a real-time
investor until 12 and 60 periods has passed.
4
 5 years are required due to the issue described in footnote 1. On top of that, the statistics package Stata requires
another 6 years of data to be able to perform regressions using the Newey-West estimator.
                                     13
These regression equations will be the out-of-sample equivalent to regressions (1), (2) and (3).
A major difference between the coefficients reported in the in-sample approach versus the
coefficients reported in the out-of-sample approach should however be noted. In the in-sample
approach, future excess return is regressed on the current value of the predictor variable. The
interpretation of a significant negative coefficient is thus that a high value of the variable
predicts lower returns in the future – but the variable can still effectively predict future excess
returns. In the out-of-sample approach however, future excess return is not regressed on the
value of the predictor variable but on the expected return that was predicted by the predictor
variable. The interpretation of a negative coefficient in this case is thus that the model actually
provided high estimates of expected returns when subsequent realized returns turned out to be
low, and vice versa.
             A fundamentally different method of testing out-of-sample performance is to
estimate the model parameters during one time period and test them in another time period.
Using this approach, the model parameters will remain stable over the testing period which
can of course have an impact on the results. I do however believe that the method I have
chosen provides a more realistic view that better describes how actual investors would use the
information.

4.4 Overlapping observations
It should be noted that the methods described in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3 will cause
observations of excess returns to overlap in those regressions where the forecasting length is
longer than one period, i.e. in-sample regression (2) and (3) and out-of-sample regression (7)
and (8). This gives rise to some econometric obstacles. Taking regression (2) as an example,
the left hand side will always consist of the 12 subsequent observations of excess returns
which means that two values following each other in time will always have 11 observations in
common. This overlap of observations creates a moving average (MA) error term (Hansen
and Hodrick, 1980). When errors are serially correlated, ordinary least squares (OLS) is no
longer the best linear unbiased estimator (BLUE) and the OLS standard errors and test
statistics are not valid (Wooldridge, 2008). Harri and Brorsen (2009) states a number of
various procedures that can be used overcome these problems, such as transforming the data
or the regression in different ways to eliminate the autocorrelation in the error term, or using
heteroskedasticity and autocovariance consistent (HAC) estimators. According to their
research, one of the most commonly used methods in published finance articles is to adjust for
autocorrelation using the HAC estimator based on Newey and West (1987). I will report

                                     14
Newey-West (henceforth NW) corrected standard errors where the lag has been selected to
match the level of overlap.
            Harri and Brorsen (2009) do however also criticize NW and claim that this
procedure can in some cases be very inefficient and provide too high t-statistics. Similar
critique is put forth by Goetzmann and Jorion (1993) and Valkanov (2003), where the latter
author instead proposes a rescaled standard error and t-statistic specifically designed for the
case when overlapping observations are faced in long-horizon regressions, as is the case here.
Harri and Brorsen (2009) evaluate several alternative rescaling methods suggested since
Valkanov (2003), and propose a minor change to previous literature by rescaling the OLS
standard errors by multiplying them with the following factor:

                                             √ ( 9 )

                                               √ ( ) ( 10 )

where k is the level of aggregation (i.e. 12 for 1-year returns and 60 for 5-year returns), n is
                       HB
the sample size and SE   is the resulting rescaled standard error according to Harri and
Brorsen (2009). This procedure will provide higher standard errors and lower t-statistics
compared to OLS for all scenarios that are considered in this paper, which is not surprising.
Furthermore, the rescaling factor will be larger when the level of aggregation is large
compared to the sample size. The t-statistics associated with these rescaled standard errors
will be reported, in addition to the NW corrected standard errors, for all regressions where
overlapping observations have been used.
             For in-sample regression (1) and out-of-sample regression (6) the forecasting
length is one month, which means that there are no overlapping observations. OLS estimates
will be used, but with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and t-statistics.

5. Results
All results are presented in Table 1 – Table 6. Some general results that can be seen when
comparing the results of the different tests are:

                                                     2
    It is clear that predictive power and R  normally increases with the forecasting
      horizon, as emphasized by Fama and French (1988). However, some measures do
        yield better results for shorter horizons than for longer horizons.

                                     15
    Only a fraction of the significant models for the full sample (1938-2010) produce
        reasonable, significant results during the later sample subset (1978-2010).
     Only a few of the in-sample significant models produce reasonable, significant out-of-
        sample results.
    HB generally provides higher t-statistics than NW when predicting 1-year returns and
       lower t-statistics than NW when predicting 5-year returns. I will mainly consider a
       variable to be significant only when demonstrating significant results for both
       methods.

These findings will be commented on in greater detail in the following paragraphs. The
presentation of the results will continue as follows. Section 5.1 will discuss the in-sample
results which are displayed in Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3. Section 5.2 will then discuss out-
of-sample performance which is presented in Table 4, Table 5 and Table 6. In Section 5.3 I
will further discuss the stability of the tested models, especially during 1978-2010.

5.1 In-sample results
Table 1 presents in-sample results when testing for predictive ability of 1-month returns.
Table 2 and Table 3 present in-sample results when for testing predictive ability of 1-year
returns and 5-year returns, respectively. Furthermore, Figure 8 – Figure 40 present scatterplots
of all in-sample estimations for all forecasting lengths, during the period 1978-2010 which is
the main period of interest.

5.1.1 In-sample, traditional predictors
All tested earnings yields and the dividend yield managed to demonstrate statistically
significant forecasting power for all forecasting lengths when analyzing the full sample of
1938-2010. During the later sample subset, only 5-year returns could be predicted with
reasonable accuracy, and only by the dividend yield. The predicted 5-year returns as estimated
by the dividend yield for the full sample are compared with the realized 5-year returns in
Figure 1.

                                     16
As can be seen, the predicted 5-year returns matches the returns that actually materialized
quite well up to 1990. After that, the forecasting power was very limited. This reflects a trend
that can be seen for all earnings yields as well, which explains why most variables
demonstrate very significant predictive results for the full sample but less so when only
analyzing the later period.
             Percent equity issuing (eq_is) managed to significantly predict 1-month returns
when analyzing the full sample. If the time series would not have been adjusted for
publication lag, these results would have been significant during 1978-2010 as well. Goyal
and Welch (2008) highlight the difference between using eq_is to study the fund-raising
behavior of firms or using it as a stock market predictor, and argue that in-sample
performance is more important in the first case while out-of-sample performance is more
important in the latter. Using a similar argument, I believe that publication lag adjustments
should of course not be made if the objective is to study the financing of corporations.
However, in a study on stock market prediction, the data should be adjusted according to the
information that is actually available to an investor. Thus, I find it strange that Goyal and
Welch (2008) have not corrected this measure for the publication lag, even though their work
clearly takes an investor perspective with stock market prediction as the main objective.
Despite using different methods, I am still able to reconcile my findings with the main
conclusion of Goyal and Welch (2008), which is that there is a negative relationship between
eq_is and subsequent returns, but that it would not have been possible to profit from this as an
external investor during the most recent 35 years or so. Goyal and Welch (2008) are however

                                     17
more optimistic about eq_is compared to many of the other traditional variables, which I find
little reason to be.

5.1.2 In-sample, unconventional predictors
For the unconventional predictors, there were a few different variables that displayed
significant forecasting power – Investor sentiment (SENT) for 1-month returns, the OECD
Composite Leading Indicators (CLI) for 1-month and 1-year returns, and The Conference
Board Consumer Confidence Index (CCI) for 5-year returns. CLI was the best in-sample
predictor for 1-month and 1-year returns out of all tested variables during the later sample
subset, and CCI was the best predictor for 5-year returns. Interestingly, the coefficients for all
these three variables – which inherently measure something positive in the economy – were
negative, indicating a clear contrarian pattern. Taking 5-year returns as an example realized
excess returns are on average lower when consumer confidence is high, as shown in Figure 2,
consistent with stock market overreaction and reversal. Figure 3 shows the corresponding
expected 5-year returns as estimated by CCI. A few other unconventional predictors were
significant as well, but only for one of the two methods of calculating the standard error.

5.2 Out-of-sample results
Table 4 presents out-of-sample results when testing for predictive ability of 1-month returns.
Table 5 and Table 6 present out-of-sample results when for testing predictive ability of 1-year
returns and 5-year returns, respectively. Scatterplots of the main period of 1978-2010 similar
to those presented for the in-sample results are not included in this report, since there was
only one significant variable during this period which is presented in Section 5.2.2.

                                     18
5.2.1 Out-of-sample, traditional predictors
Overall the out-of-sample results are far less impressive. However, if we begin by looking at
the full sample of 1938-2010, 2 out of 6 tested variables significantly predicted 1-month
returns, 4 out of 6 were successful in predicting 1-year returns, and 2 out of 6 variables
predicted 5-year returns. Moreover, the dividend yield was a common denominator in the
sense of being a statistically significant predictor for all tested forecasting lengths, which is
notable.
              For the later sample subset, all tested earnings yields and the dividend yield had
negative coefficients for all forecasting lengths. As explained in Section 4.3 on the out-of-
sample method, since the realized excess return is regressed on the predicted excess return, a
negative coefficient means that the predictor on average predicted high returns when
subsequent realized returns turned out to be low, and vice versa. This is however only partly
due to poor performance during the period – another contributing factor is how the out-of-
sample test is constructed, as will be discussed further in 6.3. Still, regardless of exactly how
the coefficients should be interpreted, it is clear that the performance was very poor during
later sample subset.

5.2.2 Out-of-sample, unconventional predictors
The out-of-sample performance for the unconventional predictors, which are only analyzed
during 1978-2010, is better than the performance of the traditional predictors during the same
period, but not a lot better. During this period there was actually only one significant variable
out of all tested measures, both traditional and unconventional, and that was yet again the 5-
year predictive power of The Conference Board Consumer Confidence Index (CCI) as shown
in Figure 4. It should be noted however that CCI was significant on the 1% level with a wide
margin when using Newey-West corrected standard errors, while barely being significant at
all at the 5% level when using corrected standard errors as suggested by Harri-Brorsen.

                                     19
While Figure 4 clearly shows the relationship between expected 5-year returns as estimated
by CCI and realized returns during the subsequent 5 years, Figure 5 reveals that the
magnitude in realized returns is poorly captured by the model. However, it is not reasonable
                                                                                                                2
to expect even 5-year returns to be predictable with too much accuracy out-of-sample. The R
of this regression is 0.2585 which is relatively high.
            The 1-month predictive ability of investor sentiment (SENT) suggested by
Baker and Wurgler (2006) was almost significant at the 5% level with a t-statistic of 1.47.
However, as mentioned in Section 3, this time series is constructed by assuming knowledge of
some ex post information, making a true out-of-sample test impossible to perform using this
data.

5.3 Further discussion
There is a very notable difference in performance between in-sample tests and out-of-sample
regressions. Considering all performed tests of all variables during all periods for all
forecasting lengths, there are 51 in-sample tests and 51 out-of-sample tests in total. Out of
these, 21 models are significant in-sample while only 8-9 models are significant out-of-
sample. Furthermore, when analyzing the later period of 1978-2010 most models actually
provide high out-of-sample estimates of expected returns when subsequent realized returns
are low, and vice versa. The out-of-sample test is designed to simulate the performance that
would be achieved if an investor would have used the model in real-time. In this case, the
investor will use all historical information available at time t when estimating the expected
return that is believed to materialize after time t, and more information will gradually become
available to the investor as we move forward in time. The main implication of this is that the
best estimate of the true model coefficients changes gradually over time. This of course causes
problems especially when the performance of the underlying model is unstable and when the

                                     20
sample size is small – two criteria that both are met when analyzing the period 1978-2010.
The 5-year predictive power of the dividend yield during this period is a good example of this
since performance was good and significant in-sample but negative when testing out-of-
sample. As seen in Figure 6, the difference between the predicted return in-sample and out-of-
sample is substantial. The reason is that the out-of-sample estimation of the true β varies from
near 0.4 when performing the regression in 1989 to roughly -0.1 when running the same
regression using all information available up to 2001. During the same time period, the t-
statistic of the regression drop from 4.16 to -1.05, as measured using Newey-West. How an
actual investor would behave when experiencing such a drop in significance is not clear.

As demonstrated previously, for example in Figure 1, performance is especially poor during
the build-up and bust of the IT-bubble. The reason why many traditional predictors, such as
earnings yields and the dividend yield, performed so poorly during this period is that the stock
market valued future growth prospects extremely high. This resulted in very low earnings
yields and dividend yields which caused these models to predict low future returns. What
actually happened though was that the stock market kept climbing for years, in exact opposite
of what was predicted by the models. Performance was poor for so long time that the best
estimates of the true underlying relationship changed substantially over time. These results are
shown in a more general way in Figure 7 by looking at how the t-statistics change over time.

                                     21
             Figure 7
             The graph shows how the predictive power changes over time as new information
              gradually becomes available to the investor. The plotted time series should not be
              confused with the actual out-of-sample results. The horizontal lines denote statistical
               significance at the 5% level.

The large t-statistics for the traditional predictors in the beginning of the sample is mainly due
to the exceptional performance in the starting sample, which is relatively small. Running the
regressions using data available up to 1995, some of the traditional predictors are still
significant. After 1995 performance drops substantially however and all traditional predictors
are insignificant for the remainder of the sample, even though performance gets better
towards the end of the sample. The main message is that the performance of all traditional
predictors is very unstable during this time frame, while there are unconventional predictors
that demonstrate significant results during almost the entire period despite new data gradually
becoming available to the investor. Looking at 1-month or 1-year returns provides a similar
picture of the performance of the traditional predictors during this period.

6. Implications and conclusions
The findings presented in this paper show that it is clear that stock market returns have been
possible to predict in the past, by using certain predictor variables. When analyzing data for
1938-2010 the dividend yield demonstrates significant forecasting ability for all tested
forecasting lengths, in-sample as well as out-of-sample. Several other variables also produce
significant results during this period.

                                     22
             The million dollar question is how to interpret the poor performance during
recent times, especially since 1990. I have demonstrated that the abrupt shifts in stock market
valuations related to the IT-bubble did hurt the performance of most predictors, and that
especially the traditional predictors performed poorly. The IT-bubble was different from
many other crises in the sense that it was created and driven primarily by stock market
speculation that was manifested through skyrocketing valuation multiples. This of course
affects traditional predictors such as earnings yields and the dividend yield to a larger extent,
since they are valuation based measures.
             If the IT-bubble is considered an exception in the history of stock markets, the
results from the analysis of the period 1938-2010 should probably be reliable even in the
future, meaning that predictions can be made with statistical significance for all forecasting
lengths tested in this paper by using the traditional predictors. Determining whether it can be
considered an exception or not is however beyond the scope of this paper, and considering
that traditional stock market predictors have performed poorly for more than 20 years, it may
be justified to consider using variables that have performed better in recent times.
              Out of the five unconventional predictors that were tested in this paper, only one
lacked forecasting power completely for the period 1978-2010 and that was the Purchasing
Managers’ Index (PMI). When examining the measure of investor sentiment suggested by
Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Baker and Wurgler (2007), I find similar results as they do
which confirm that low investor sentiment is followed by high subsequent returns, and vice
versa, when examining 1-month in-sample predictions. Among the most promising measures
are the Composite Leading Indicators (CLI) published by the OECD and the Consumer
Confidence Index (CCI) published by The Conference Board. CLI was the best in-sample
predictor of 1-year returns during this period out of all 11 variables that were tested, being
significant at the 1% level. CCI was the best in-sample predictor of 5-year returns, also being
significant at the 1% level and with a wide margin. The negative relationship between
consumer confidence and subsequent returns found in Fisher and Statman (2003) is present in
this study as well, although I find no predictive power of CCI on such short forecasting
horizons as 6 months. The 5-year predictive ability of CCI was also the only significant
variable out-of-sample during the later sample subset. Overall, these findings suggest that CLI
and CCI should be considered as being possible substitutes or complements to the more
commonly used models.

                                     23
6.1 Further research
Given the econometric difficulties surrounding the topic of stock market prediction, I
encourage further research on unconventional predictors. This study tries to answer the
question of whether stock returns are predictable by certain variables – one could however
instead examine performance relative to the alternative, which is to use the historical mean as
estimate of future returns. This is for example done in Goyal and Welch (2008) and Campbell
                                               2
and Thompson (2008), where cumulative R  relative to the historical mean is instead used as
the measure of out-of-sample performance.
             A related question which I have left unanswered is that of economic
significance, which could be investigated by looking at the certainty equivalent gains
associated with a trading strategy based on the optimal portfolio choice that is implied by
these models.
             Another potential direction is to explore the predictive performance of the
unconventional predictors on subgroups of stocks to see if the results differ between, for
example, growth stocks and value stocks or small-cap stocks and large-cap stocks. This seems
to be a more common approach in research on investor sentiment [see, e.g., Baker and
Wurgler (2006), Brown and Cliff (2004), Neal and Wheatley (1998), and Fisher and Statman
(2003)] but is less frequently applied in studies of other variables.

                                     24
7. References
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate
stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, Investor sentiment in the stock market, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 21, 129-151.

Brown, Gregory W., and Michael T. Cliff, 2004, Investor sentiment and the near-term stock
market, Journal of Empirical Finance 11, 1-27.

Campbell, John, and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205-251.

Campbell, John, and Robert Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends,
Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.

Campbell, John, and Samuel Thompson, 2008, Predicting excess stock returns out of sample:
Can anything beat the historical average?, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1509-1531.

Cochrane, John, 2008, The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability, Review of
Financial Studies 21, 1533-1575.

Dow, Charles, 1920, Scientific Stock Speculation (The Magazine of Wall Street, New York).

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.

Fama, Eugene, and G. William Schwert, 1977, Asset returns and inflation, Journal of
Financial Economics 5, 115-146.

Ferreira, Miguel, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2011, Forecasting stock market returns: The sum of
the parts is more than the whole, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 514-537.

Fisher, Kenneth, and Meir Statman, 2003, Consumer confidence and stock returns, Journal of
Portfolio Management 30, 115-127.

Foster, Douglas, Tom Smith, and Robert E. Whaley, 1997, Assessing goodness-of-fit of asset
                                                            2
pricing models: The distribution of the maximal R , Journal of Finance 52, 591-607.

Goetzmann, William, and Philippe Jorion, 1993, Testing the predictive power of dividend
yields, Journal of Finance 48, 663-679.

Goyal, Amit, and Ivo Welch, 2008, A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of
equity premium prediction, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1455-1508.

                                     25
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert J. Hodrick, 1980, Forward exchange rates as optimal
predictors of future spot rates: An econometric analysis, Journal of Political Economy 88,
829-853.

Harri, Ardian, and Wade B. Brorsen, 2009, The overlapping data problem, Quantitative and
Qualitative Analysis in Social Sciences 3, 78-115.

Hodrick, Robert J., 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures
for inference and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357-386.

Kalotay, Egon, Philip Gray, and Samantha Sin, 2007, Consumer expectations and short-
horizon return predictability, Journal of Banking & Finance 31, 3102-3124.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected
stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815-849.

Lewellen, Jonathan, 2004, Predicting returns with financial ratios, Journal of Financial
Economics 74, 209-235.

Neal, Robert, and Simon M. Wheatley, 1998, Do measures of investor sentiment predict
returns?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 523-547.

Nelson, Charles R., and Myung J. Kim, 1993, Predictable stock returns: The role of small
sample bias, Journal of Finance 48, 641-661.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-
708.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, and Lawrence Schall, 1998, Book-to-market ratios as predictors of market
returns, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 141-160.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
35-55.

Umstead, David A., 1977, Forecasting stock market prices, Journal of Finance 32, 427-441.

Valkanov, Rossen, 2003, Long-horizon regressions: Theoretical results and applications,
Journal of Financial Economics 68, 201-232.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2008, Introductory Econometrics (South-Western, Cengage
Learning)

                                     26
7.1 Website Data Sources
Robert Shiller’s webpage: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~shiller/data.htm

Jeffrey Wurgler’s webpage: http://people.stern.nyu.edu/jwurgler/

Federal Reserve System: http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/corpsecure/current.htm

The Conference Board: http://www.conference-board.org/data/

FRED: http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/UMCSENT/downloaddata

OECD.Stat Extracts: http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MEI_CLI#

ISM: http://www.ism.ws/ISMReport/content.cfm?ItemNumber=13339&navItemNumber=12958

                                     27
8. Appendix

 Table 1: In-sample regressions, predictive power for 1 period.
                         1938-2010 1978-2010
 Variable β (OLS) t-stat R-squared β (OLS) t-stat R-squared
 E_P 0.1075 2.06* 0.0052 0.0829 1.08 0.0034
 E1_P 0.1166 2.22* 0.0060 0.0596 0.82 0.0018
 E5_P 0.1235 2.25* 0.0054 0.0519 0.73 0.0014
 E10_P 0.1347 2.25* 0.0058 0.0712 0.98 0.0025
 D_P 0.2835 2.51** 0.0094 0.2026 1.19 0.0036
 eq_is -0.0314 -2.29* 0.0061 -0.0239 -1.26 0.0036
 PMI -0.0002 -0.56 0.0010
 ICS 0.0000 -0.21 0.0001
 CLI -0.0038 -2.14* 0.0121
 CCI -0.0001 -0.74 0.0018
 SENT -0.0056 -1.77* 0.0079

 Table 2: In-sample regressions, predictive power for 12 periods.
                             1938-2010 1978-2010
 Variable β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared
 E_P 0.1193 3.02** 3.25** 0.0715 0.0689 1.19 1.24 0.0246
 E1_P 0.1204 3.06** 3.36** 0.0716 0.0439 0.81 0.85 0.0102
 E5_P 0.1357 2.77** 3.13** 0.0728 0.0587 1.00 1.07 0.0185
 E10_P 0.1395 2.75** 3.11** 0.0696 0.0753 1.24 1.35 0.0295
 D_P 0.2786 3.33** 3.74** 0.1021 0.2163 1.53 1.69* 0.0438
 eq_is -0.0130 -1.47 -1.23 0.0117 -0.0067 -0.49 -0.42 0.0031
 PMI -0.0002 -0.79 -0.73 0.0073
 ICS 0.0000 -0.05 -0.05 0.0001
 CLI -0.0029 -2.32* -2.24* 0.0717
 CCI -0.0001 -0.79 -0.77 0.0104
 SENT -0.0043 -1.59 -1.70* 0.0483

 Table 3: In-sample regressions, predictive power for 60 periods.
                             1938-2007 1978-2007
 Variable β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared
 E_P 0.0971 2.96** 2.75** 0.2560 0.0484 1.40 0.97 0.0762
 E1_P 0.0941 2.76** 2.58** 0.2404 0.0459 1.32 0.91 0.0720
 E5_P 0.1002 2.67** 2.68** 0.2290 0.0592 1.83* 1.35 0.1299
 E10_P 0.1002 2.59** 2.60** 0.2061 0.0649 2.04* 1.50 0.1507
 D_P 0.2378 5.55** 4.52** 0.4184 0.1922 2.77** 1.93* 0.2343
 eq_is 0.0024 0.35 0.24 0.0023 0.0105 1.82* 0.82 0.0445
 PMI -0.0001 -1.41 -0.48 0.0232
 ICS -0.0002 -2.06* -1.28 0.1468
 CLI -0.0015 -2.82** -1.14 0.0998
 CCI -0.0001 -5.46** -2.88** 0.3477
 SENT 0.0000 -0.03 -0.02 0.0000

                                     28
Table 4: Out-of-sample regressions, predictive power for 1 period.
                        1949-2010 1989-2010
Variable β (OLS) t-stat R-squared β (OLS) t-stat R-squared
E_P 0.5935 1.12 0.0023 -0.6638 neg. 0.0010
E1_P 0.4911 1.40 0.0029 -1.9270 neg. 0.0062
E5_P 0.3541 1.20 0.0020 -1.7670 neg. 0.0052
E10_P 0.2154 0.72 0.0008 -1.3675 neg. 0.0044
D_P 0.7512 2.12* 0.0057 -1.1379 neg. 0.0038
eq_is 0.9507 2.25* 0.0064 0.5745 0.44 0.0010
PMI -0.8874 neg. 0.0043
ICS -2.9130 neg. 0.0137
CLI 0.7396 1.24 0.0048
CCI -0.7269 neg. 0.0031
SENT 2.7302 1.47 0.0124

Table 5: Out-of-sample regressions, predictive power for 12 periods.
                             1949-2010 1989-2010
Variable β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared
E_P 0.5914 2.28* 2.45** 0.0389 -1.7324 neg. neg. 0.0591
E1_P 0.4824 2.37** 2.60** 0.0372 -2.2014 neg. neg. 0.0846
E5_P 0.3530 1.85* 1.99* 0.0265 -1.6129 neg. neg. 0.0540
E10_P 0.2675 1.40 1.51 0.0153 -1.1414 neg. neg. 0.0414
D_P 0.7987 2.63** 2.94** 0.0530 -1.2201 neg. neg. 0.0541
eq_is 0.2926 0.52 0.49 0.0022 -1.1567 neg. neg. 0.0185
PMI -1.6040 neg. neg. 0.0608
ICS -2.4152 neg. neg. 0.0861
CLI 0.6505 0.64 0.68 0.0134
CCI -1.4304 neg. neg. 0.0357
SENT 0.7576 0.37 0.40 0.0031

Table 6: Out-of-sample regressions, predictive power for 60 periods.
                            1949-2007 1989-2007
Variable β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared β (OLS) t-stat (NW) t-stat (HB) R-squared
E_P 0.5450 1.69* 1.65* 0.1417 -1.7433 neg. neg. 0.1942
E1_P 0.5074 1.42 1.37 0.1079 -1.8203 neg. neg. 0.2302
E5_P 0.3948 1.47 1.41 0.0799 -0.9923 neg. neg. 0.1630
E10_P 0.3303 1.33 1.24 0.0578 -0.8772 neg. neg. 0.2085
D_P 0.7310 2.11* 2.04* 0.1912 -0.8867 neg. neg. 0.1429
eq_is 0.0856 0.16 0.16 0.0008 -2.2671 neg. neg. 0.1362
PMI -2.1209 neg. neg. 0.0687
ICS -1.4281 neg. neg. 0.0378
CLI 0.4961 0.53 0.29 0.0078
CCI 2.0802 2.95** 1.56 0.2585
SENT -3.8161 neg. neg. 0.3834

                                    29
    Figure 8 – Figure 13
 Forecasting length: 1 month
Estimation period: 1978-2010
Estimation method: in-sample

         30
   Figure 14 – Figure 18
 Forecasting length: 1 month
Estimation period: 1978-2010
Estimation method: in-sample

         31
   Figure 19 – Figure 24
  Forecasting length: 1 year
Estimation period: 1978-2010
Estimation method: in-sample

         32
   Figure 25 – Figure 29
  Forecasting length: 1 year
Estimation period: 1978-2010
Estimation method: in-sample

         33
   Figure 30 – Figure 35
  Forecasting length: 5 years
Estimation period: 1978-2007
Estimation method: in-sample

         34
   Figure 36 – Figure 40
  Forecasting length: 5 years
Estimation period: 1978-2007
Estimation method: in-sample

         35