  Strategies and Firm Performance during
     Implementation of Gender Quotas

         Empirical Findings from Norway

Mathilde Karlsson*

Abstract: Norway offered a natural experiment when the country introduced the gender quota law,
imposing a 40 % representation of each gender in the boards of public limited companies and
government owned enterprises. External shocks forcing to significant changes in board compositions
are rare, but both the Cadbury Committee in UK and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the US led to
increased board size. The same result was not to be found in Norway and the average board size was
practically constant. However; average board size alone does not reveal individual firms’ strategies
and the nature of the law implies that it may be more beneficial for small boards to add women
and increase board size, while other boards may take the opportunity to remove a
dysfunctional male director to comply with the law. This study investigates the strategies of
compliance and firm performance. The strategies are defined as active with fixed or decreased
board size, passive strategy with an increased number of directors equal to the number of
women added and a mixture of the two strategies. Firms that already had a 40%
representation of each gender are considered to have an equal strategy. Active was the most
common strategy followed by mixed, equal and passive. No significant relation between
strategies and firm performance was detected.

Key Words: Corporate Governance, Female Board Directors, Quota Law, Norway

Tutor: Prof. Clas Bergström

Presentation Date: May 26th 2014

* 22070@student.hhs.se
Contents
1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1
2. Corporate Governance and Gender Quota Law in Norway ................................................................ 5
   2.1. Corporate Governance in Norway................................................................................................ 5
   2.2. The Gender Quota Law................................................................................................................. 6
3. Theoretical Background....................................................................................................................... 7
   3.1. The Role of the Board and Board Size .......................................................................................... 7
   3.2. Women on Boards ........................................................................................................................ 8
   3.3. The Effects of the Gender Quota Law in Norway ....................................................................... 11
4. Hypothesis ......................................................................................................................................... 14
   4.1. Definition of the Strategies ........................................................................................................ 14
   4.2. Hypothesis 1 ............................................................................................................................... 15
   4.3. Hypothesis 2 ............................................................................................................................... 16
5. Data and Methodology...................................................................................................................... 17
   5.1. Data Gathering ........................................................................................................................... 17
   5.2. Methodology .............................................................................................................................. 19
      5.2.1. Proxy Variables .................................................................................................................... 19
      5.2.2. Hypotheses 1 ....................................................................................................................... 20
      5.2.3. Hypothesis 2 ........................................................................................................................ 22
6. Empirical Results ............................................................................................................................... 23
   6.1. Summary Statistics ..................................................................................................................... 23
   6.2. Statistical Tests ........................................................................................................................... 28
      6.2.1. Hypothesis 1 ........................................................................................................................ 28
      6.2.2. Hypothesis 2 ........................................................................................................................ 31
7. Implications and Conclusions ............................................................................................................ 35
References ............................................................................................................................................. 37
Appendix................................................................................................................................................ 39
1. Introduction
Diversity in corporate boards and in top management position is a topic that has received
remarkable amount of attention in politics, academia and in popular press. Despite the higher
participation of women in the work force, the fraction of female directors is only slowly
increasing in most European countries (European Commission, 2012). The exception is
Norway, which managed to reach the threshold of 40 % female board directors in corporate
boards in 2008. The Scandinavian country is an example of how an unexpected political
announcement in 2002 made by the minister of Trade and Industry, Ansgar Gabrielsen, led to
a new addition about gender representation in corporate boards in the Norwegian Corporate
Law. The voluntary quota required a minimum of 40% representation of each sex in the board
of directors of government owned enterprises and Public Limited Companies, PLC. Since the
majority of the companies did not comply with the voluntary quota, it became mandatory in
December 2005 with a two year transition period and the threat of liquidation for non-
compliance (Ministry of Children and Family Affairs, 2005). In January 2008, 77 public
limited companies received a letter from the Norwegian Business Register,
Brønnøysundregistrene, notifying them about the requirements and consequences of the law
and in April 2008, all the required corporations were in compliance with the law (Statistics
Norway, 2009). .
             The time after the implementation of the law has followed by discussions in
several countries, both inside and outside EU, about similar laws to promote diversity. The
European Commission proposed a new legislation in 2012 with the objective to obtain gender
balance, i.e. at least 40% of the under-represented sex in non-executive boards of public
limited companies with the exception of small and medium sized enterprises. The proposal
was the result of the slow progress of increased female participation in board of directors after
several years’ promotion of gender equality in decision-making positions in Europe.
However, the proposal lacks proper sanctions and every country will have to decide about the
consequences for non-compliance. Countries like Spain, France and the Netherlands have
already passed laws about gender quotas in non-executive boards, though there are no formal
sanctions for non-compliance or the law has a “comply or explain” approach. Countries like
Austria and Denmark are implementing quota laws for state-owned companies, and even
more countries are relying on self-regulation to increase the proportion of female directors
(European Commission, 2014).
             The gender quota law in Norway has not only inspired to similar regulations, but
also been subject to various studies and articles. The most extensive study of the quota law in

                                        1
Norway investigates the abnormal accumulated return on the day of Gabrielsen’s
announcement in 2002 as well as the long-term effect measured as Tobin’s Q. The study
found a negative effect, both on the day of Gabrielsen’s announcement and as a long-term
effect of the law (Ahern & Dittmar, 2012). The results are not controversial and another study
of the effect on firm value found a positive correlation for companies with low information
asymmetry and a negative effect on firm performance for firms with a high level of
information asymmetry (Nygaard, 2011). These contradictions are in line with other research
within the area of female directors’ impact on firm performance and inconsistent results of
diverse boards’ influence on firm value is the norm from both event studies on announcement
dates and long term effects measured as Tobin’s Q or ROA (Adams & Ferreira, 2009),
(Nielsen & Huse, 2010), (Carter, Simkins & Simpson, 2003), (Campbell & Vera, 2009).
             Previous research has mainly focused on the effects on firm value, the board
composition and the board characteristics as a consequence of the Norwegian quota or an
increased fraction of female directors in corporate boards in other countries. Few studies have
focused on the implementation and how different implementation strategies relate to firm
performance. A reason to the limited number of studies of the implementation phase may be
that only some handful events with similar external shocks that drastically require a different
board composition have taken place throughout the history. However, the Cadbury
Committee’s recommendations in UK and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in USA are exceptional
events that both led to an increase in average board size in respective country (Dahya,
McConnell & Travlos, 2002), (Linck, Netter & Yang, 2009). The Norwegian law did not lead
to the same change of board size. Dittmar and Ahern (2012) studied the average board size
from 2002 until 2009 and it stayed around 5.5 board members during the investigated period.
However, average board size does not reveal individual firm’s strategies to comply with the
law, but only that the aggregated sum stays more or less the same. A board of two women and
four men may for example find it more convenient to not replace an exiting male director to
comply with the law, since a board of five directors only needs two women meanwhile a
board of six to eight members needs at least three women. Another board consisting of only
three males may on the other hand find it more beneficial to add two women to the board.
Several similar situations could even out the calculation of average board size and on the
surface indicate a constant board size, while the truth is something else. A study of individual
firms’ strategies would therefore answer the question of how individual firms act to comply
with the new law and also contribute to the understanding of efficient board size and how the
market adjusts to external shocks. The study of individual firms’ strategies will bring a new

                                        2
perspective to the Norwegian quota law and the topic is also important to study now; in a time
when even more countries discuss legislations of similar quotas. By investigating the quota
from a strategic perspective, it is possible to gain insights of the compliance phase in order to
milder the consequences of the quota and help companies to be successful in a time of forced
changes. It is important to understand how the implementation worked and what strategies
were used to facilitate the implementation which can result in guidelines for further
implementations in other countries. This study is therefore important in order to bring light to
the various implementation strategies and their relation to firm performance.
            This study uses four different strategies when categorizing the companies;
active, passive, mixed and equal. The active strategy is when a company keeps the board size
constant or diminishing the board to comply with the quota’s requirements. It can be achieved
through substituting male directors for female or decrease the board size by removing male
directors until the firm is in compliance with the law. A passive strategy connote that the
board size increase with the number of women added. Mixed strategy is a mixture of the two
pure strategies and can be the case when the board size increase with less than the number of
women added. Another form of mixed strategy is when the board requires more than one year
to satisfy the law’s requirements and when the board uses an active strategy one of the years
and a passive strategy the other year. The forth strategy is added for the companies that have
more than 40% women on the board before the law was introduced. This strategy is called
Equal and is not a real strategy. The strategies are based on changes in board structure
between 2003 and 2008 and pure additions or removals of male directors are not considered in
the evaluation of different strategies. The division into different strategies facilitates the
understanding of what pre-quota differences in board composition drives the implementation
and the changes in board size and board composition after the quota. The division also creates
natural groups to study firm performance in a new way.
             The findings of the study imply that the active strategy was the most common
one, followed by mixed, equal and passive. The average fraction female directors were
distinctively different in 2002 for the various strategies. The equal strategy had the highest
proportion women followed by active, mixed and the passive strategy with zero women pre-
quota. However, there were no statistical significant relationship between the proportion of
women and an active strategy or between the fraction female directors and a passive strategy.
The equal strategy on the other hand have a positive correlation with the fraction of female
directors meanwhile the mixed strategy faces a negative relation between the strategy and the
fraction female directors before the quota. However, small firms are more likely to have a

                                        3
passive strategy and there is a negative correlation between passive strategy and board size.
The average board size was kept stable around 5.5 directors across all firms and the fraction
female directors across all companies increases from approximately 12% in year 2002 to 43%
in 2008, where it also stabilize for the following years.
             There are no indications that any specific strategy would lead to better firm
performance neither any statistical significant result promoting any strategy to increase firm
performance. Instead it seems like different companies may benefit from different strategies
depending on the pre-quota board characteristics. The summary statistics indicated distinctive
differences in board size and the proportion female directors across the various strategies and
could therefore support the possible explanation that the strategies are selected to maximize
firm value and that there is not a particular strategy that improve firm performance across all
firms due to their different pre-quota conditions. However, the sample of passive firms is
small consisting of only four companies and the total sample consisting of 56 companies is
also relatively small. The small sample may be another possible explanation of the lack of
significant results of selected strategies and firm performance. There are also more aspects
than board characteristics such as individual features of the directors, tenure and retention that
have not yet been studied in the light of the implementation and the strategies. A further
study of the strategies and the directors’ characteristics is therefore recommended and may
bring new insights to the gender quota law, implementation of the law and firm performance.
              The study does regardless of the result bring light to what different strategies the
boards may use to comply with a gender quota law. In a time when even more countries
discuss similar laws, it is definitely of great importance to have examples of previous events
and the different strategies can work as guidelines to shareholders in similar situations when
implementing a gender quota.
              The structure of the thesis is organized in sections. The first section will provide
an introduction to the characteristics of Norway and the Norwegian quota law. The following
section provides a presentation of previous research within the areas of corporate governance
and the role of the board, external shocks affecting the board composition as well as studies of
women on the boards. The second section will conclude with a segment about previous
research about the Norwegian gender quota. Section 4. Hypothesis will describe the
hypothesis and is followed by a unit describing the data and methodology. Later will follow a
section with the results and the last section will follow up with the conclusions of the study
and a critical discussion around the thesis and the research.

                                        4
2. Corporate Governance and Gender Quota Law in Norway

2.1. Corporate Governance in Norway
Norway has two different forms of limited liability stock incorporations, Allmennakseselskap,
ASA, and Aksjeselskap, AS. ASA is corresponding to public limited companies, PLC, with a
capital requirement of at least NOK 1 million. This form of incorporation is intended to have
many shareholders and the enterprises are often listed on stock exchanges. Aksjeselskap, AS,
is equal to private limited companies. They are usually smaller than ASA and the capital
requirement is only NOK 30,000. ASA and AS are subject to different sets of laws and
regulations due to the differences in size and ownership (Norwegian Business Register,
Brønnøysundregistrene, 2013). The gender quota law is for example only applicable to
Allmennakseselskap, ASA and government owned enterprises and not to Aksjeselskap, AS.
The law requires a representation of approximately 40% of each gender in the board of
directors and lead to liquidation for non-compliance. The details specify that a board with two
or three members needs both genders represented on the board. A board consisting of four or
five members should have at least two directors from each gender represented, board with six
to eight directors have a requirement of three directors of each sex, boards consisting of nine
directors must have at least four women on the board and even bigger boards are required to
have a minimum of 40% of each sex (Lov om allmennaksjeselskaper, 2013).
       Norway has a board structure with shareholder elected directors. The requirement is
that at least two of the directors are independent from the main shareholders and it is also
advisable that the majority of the directors are independent from the executive management of
the company since the board monitors the executive management and appoint the managers.
Executive personnel are excluded from the board of directors and it is therefore recommended
that the CEO neither belongs to the board. However, the CEO’s membership of the board is
subject to exceptions. The quota law is only applicable to the board of directors and not the
appointment of executive managers (Norwegian Corporate Governance Board, 2012).
       Directives and guidelines about the role of Norwegian boards can be found in The
Norwegian Code of Practice for Corporate Governance issued by the Norwegian Corporate
Governance Board. The board’s assignments are mainly activities of supervision and
monitoring nature. The activities include for example strategic planning and decision making
about the financial position and investments. The board is also ultimately responsible of the
executive management and should provide the managers with the necessary tools to
accomplish their commitments, but the board should also monitor the executives’

                                        5
performances. The board’s responsibilities could also include the creation of annual plans
with objectives, corporate strategies and guidelines for implementation, creating instructions
for the board’s work as well as instructions for the executive managers. Audit and
remuneration committees are also crucial part of the board’s responsibilities according to the
code (Norwegian Corporate Governance Board, 2012).

2.2. The Gender Quota Law
It took nearly ten years from the initial proposals of a gender quota for board of directors until
a 40% representation of women in corporate boards was achieved in Norway. Norwegian
politicians in Bondevik I Cabinet proposed new rules for gender representation in corporate
boards in a public hearing in October 1999. The proposal had several options and based on the
reactions to the different options, the Ministry of Children and Family Affairs together with
the Ministry of Justice composed a new proposal. This revised proposal was presented in a
hearing in July 2001 and these two events can be considered the first attempts towards what
later became the gender quota (Ministry of Children and Family Affairs, 2005).
             On February 22 2002, the Minister of Trade and Industry, Ansgar Gabrielsen,
made the unexpected announcement in the Norwegian newspaper Verdens Gang, about a new
legislation requiring at least 40% women in corporate boards (Verdens Gang, Feb 22 2002).
The announcement came as a shock for Norway and the Norwegian Industry and Mr
Gabrielsen spent the next coming months in close contact with the Norwegian business life
and its main organizations lobbying for the quota. The following preparations took almost two
years. In December 2003, a majority in the Norwegian Parliament voted for a change of the
Norwegian Corporate Law, including a new part about a voluntary quota requiring at least
40% of each gender represented in the board of directors of government owned enterprises
and public limited companies (Ministry of Children and Family Affairs, 2005).
             By July 2005, only 68 of 519 of the companies had complied with the voluntary
quota and the law became mandatory later that year. From December 2005, all state-owned
enterprises and public limited companies were required by law to have a minimum of 40%
women on the boards within the next two years or be forced to liquidation (Ministry of
Children and Family Affairs, 2005). In January 2008 most of the companies had complied
with the law and only 77 non-complying firms received a letter from the Norwegian Business
Register, Brønnøysundregistrene, advising them to comply and in April that year, all the
boards of government owned enterprises and public limited companies affected by the law
consisted of at least 40% women (Statistics Norway, 2009).

                                        6
3. Theoretical Background

3.1. The Role of the Board and Board Size
Previous research of the role of the board and the board structure is an extensive field where
different approaches and perspectives are used to answer the question of the board’s role and
the board’s impact on the company and firm performance. Davies (2000) uses the
principal/agent problem and company laws to investigate the role of the board. There exist
several principal/agent issues within a company and they can arise from the different
relationships between management, majority and minority shareholders or other stakeholders.
The problem between the board and the shareholders is that the board should work as an
extension of the shareholders and act according to the shareholders’ interests, not their own
interests. The board has therefore the important task to make decisions and advice executive
managers (supervision) and assure that the company and the executives are acting in line with
the shareholders’ opinions (monitoring). The division of the responsibilities of the board into
monitoring and supervision is also supported from the studies by Adams and Ferreira (2007)
and Raheja (2005).
             The board structure should be optimized for these tasks. However, not every
company has the same need of monitoring and supervision and different company
characteristics create special demands of the board of directors. Complex firms defined by
their large size, with diversified business units or high leverage are likely to require more
advising and also benefit from bigger boards with more outsiders meanwhile simpler firms
benefit from smaller boards. A study by Coles, Daniel and Naveem (2008) found that there is
a U-shaped relation between Tobin’s Q and board size, which implies that neither really small
nor really big boards are optimal. The U-shape is driven from the differences between simple
and complex firms. The study also found that R&D-intensive firms, where firm-specific
knowledge is valuable, tend to have a bigger proportion of insiders on the board (Coles,
Daniel & Naveem, 2008). A complementary study by Linch, Netter and Yang (2008)
investigates almost 7000 firms from 1990 to 2004. The results indicate that companies with
high growth opportunities, high R&D expenditures together with high stock return volatility
are more likely to have smaller and less independent board. The fraction of insiders is positive
correlated with the CEOs influence over the board and whether insiders have big
opportunities to extract benefits. Larger companies tend to have larger and more independent
boards. When the owners and the management team consist of the same persons, the board is
more likely to be small and less independent. The boards are however sensitive for external

                                        7
shocks, like new regulations or scandals. An example is how the Sarbanes-Oxley Act changed
the trend of diminishing board size for large firms in the opposite direction when the act was
introduced in 2002. Dahya, McConnell, and Travlos (2002) could not find any general
equilibrium theory for board structure from their study of the effect of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act. However, the theory that the board size and board composition is selected to maximize
utility explains why the board characteristics change after external shocks like new
regulations or scandals. The board tries to maximize value by changing different
characteristics and adapting to the new constraints. Consistent with the utility and shock
theory, Dahya, McConnell, and Travlos (2002) found how the board composition
dramatically changed as a consequence of the Cadbury committee recommendations and
Linck, Netter, and Yang (2009) had the same findings for the Sarbanes-Oxley Act case.
             The Cadbury committee’s recommendations consist of the advice of a
minimum of three outside directors among other requirements. The board size increased
significant after the committee’s recommendations and this was driven from the increase of
independent directors. Both the number and the fraction of outside directors increased after
the recommendations (Dahya, McConnell & Travlos, 2002). The Sarbanes-Oxley Act also
demands more independent directors on the board. Similar to the result in UK after the
Cadbury Committee’s recommendation, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act resulted in an increased
board size as well as increased number and a bigger fraction of independent directors. The
less independent boards before the Act naturally showed a bigger increase in independent
directors after the new requirements compared to boards with more independent directors
before the act. The findings indicate that the compliance with the recommendations was
implemented through adding outside directors instead of replacing inside directors. A possible
explanation to the strategy of increasing the board size may be that the insiders have special
knowledge or have served special needs on the board which therefore makes it difficult to
replace the insiders with outsiders. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act also increased the board’s work
load which may justify an increased board size (Linck, Netter & Yang, 2009). The
explanation of insiders’ valuable knowledge can neither be rejected as a valid explanation for
the Cadbury case (Dahya, McConnell & Travlos, 2002).

3.2. Women on Boards
Studies of board composition often include the impact of diversity and gender representation
on firm value. It is an extensive field with inconsistent findings where the results of the
studies indicate that women’s contribution to firm value may be positive, negative or neutral

                                        8
(Adams & Ferreira, 2009), (Rose, 2007), (Lückerath-Rovers, 2013) & (Carter, Simkins &
Simpson, 2003). However the research question of women’s impact on firm value and
performance is of an endogenous nature. Do women create better firm performance or do
better firms have easier to attract women to their boards? Are the better performing firms
more interested in diverse boards and actively appoint women? However, most studies are
consistent with one finding; that women are in minority in the board room (European
Commission, 2014) & (Catalyst, 2004).
           A study by Adams & Ferreira (2009) of S&P 500, S&P MidCap and S&P
SmallCap revealed that only 8.10% of the board directors were women in 1996. The same
number had slightly increased to 10.41% in 2003. The authors found differences between
companies with at least one woman on the board compared to firm without female directors.
The companies with at least on woman tended to be larger, have more business segments,
perform better in terms of ROA, but worse performance in terms of Tobin’s Q, have lower
volatility and larger boards compared to companies without any female directors. The study
tries to find the drivers of any potential differences in firm performance caused by diverse
boards through investigating possible differences in behavior or board composition between
diverse boards and gender homogenous boards. The results reveal that women are less likely
to experience attendance problems with 30% compared to men. This behavior tends to
influence the men in a more diverse board as well and the men have a 90% reduced risk of
attendance problems when there are women on the board. The effect is statistical significant
and controlled for several factors to exclude any peer effect of good acting friends or newly
appointed directors. Another result implies different trends in attending board committees
between men and women. The women attend committees in higher proportion than men. The
women were more likely to be found in committee functions as audit, nominating or corporate
governance meanwhile men have a higher probability of attending compensation committees.
These results could imply that increased female participation in decision making also increase
the monitoring. The study of gender diverse boards and firm valuation in terms of Tobin’s Q
and ROA indicates a negative relation between firm performance and female board directors
after controlling for board size, industry and endogeneity. The authors’ main conclusion is
that tough boards with more monitoring do not always increase firm value and hence the
negative correlation. Though, boards with week governance could enjoy better financial
performance from better monitoring resulting from having more women on the board.
            Another study, made in Norway, focused on female board participation and
value creating using the “Value creating board” database with survey answers from

                                        9
Norwegian CEOs in companies with 50 to 5,000 employees sampled in 2003 and with a
sample size of 234 returning questionnaires. The female directors’ impact on different board
characteristics was measured as board development activities and board strategic control.
Board development activities are the activities related to existence of instructions for the
board’s work, regular use of the instructions, the introduction of new board members, regular
board development programs and regular evaluation of the board. Board strategic control is
considering the topics related to the board’s involvement in decision making concerning firm
strategy in questions regarding corporate social responsibility, human resources, product
quality and healthy, environment and safety. The authors found empirical support for a
positive correlation between the ratio of female directors and board strategic control, a
positive correlation between the ratio of female directors and board development activities
and also a positive statistical significant correlation between board development activities and
board effectiveness in terms of strategic control. No significant relation could be proved for
the rate of female directors and an open debate, but a higher fraction of female directors tend
to decrease the level of conflicts within the board. However this study could not find any
overall performance differences between firms with high fraction of women on the board and
those with low fraction female directors, despite the differences in activities. A possible
explanation could be that the board performs multiple tasks simultaneously and women have
greater impact on some of the responsibilities, but not on others and it would therefore even
out the differences resulting in no difference in firm performance for companies with female
board directors (Nielsen & Huse, 2010).
             A study of board diversity and firm performance measured as Tobin’s Q in
Denmark between the years 1998 and 2001 could not detect any differences in the behavior of
male and female board directors neither did the study find any differences in firm
performance for companies with a higher fraction female directors. The authors provide the
socialization process as a possible explanation. The women adapt to the norms and behaviors
due to the small fraction of female directors (4%) as part of the socialization process and it is
therefore not possible to distinguish any differences in the behavior of male and female
directors in the Danish firms (Rose, 2007).
             Similar findings of the correlation between female directors and firm
performance was made by Lückerath-Rovers (2013) studying Dutch companies. The
Netherland’s have a similar structure for corporate governance as Denmark and a similar
fraction of female directors. The authors did neither find any statistical significant results for

                                       10
most of the performance measures, with the exception of ROE and diverse boards where a
statistical significant positive correlation was found.
             Carter, Simkins and Simpson (2003) investigated board diversity of American
companies and found a statistical significant positive relationship between firm value
measured as Tobin’s Q and the fraction of women or other minorities like Asians, Hispanic or
Afro Americans after controlling for firm size, industry and other corporate governance
measurements. The study also discovered that the fraction of women increase with increased
firm size and board size, but tends to decrease with bigger proportion of insiders on the board.
Two studies from Spain support the hypothesis that more women on the board lead to better
performance. A study of women’s impacts on firm performance found a statistical significant
positive correlation between the fraction of female directors and firm performance measured
as Tobin’s Q (Campbell & Vera, 2007) Another study from Spain investigates the market’s
response to the announcement of the appointment of female board directors. The result of the
event study reveals a positive response from the market with a positive accumulated abnormal
return around the announcement date (Campbell & Vera, 2009).
             The literature review of female directors’ impact on firm performance clearly
demonstrates the contradictions and the difficulties of the topic. The results of the previous
research of female board directors and firm performance can therefore not provide any
prediction of whether a quota will automatically benefit or harm the companies in the
legislating country.

3.3. The Effects of the Gender Quota Law in Norway
Several articles have already been published with inconsistent findings about the Norwegian
quota. One of the first, most quoted and most extensive research about the topic is “The
Changing of the Boards: The Impact on Firm Valuation of Mandated Female Board
Representation” by Kenneth R. Ahern and Amy K. Dittmar from 2012. Their study mainly
focuses on the consequences on firm valuation from the increased fraction of female directors.
The effect of the law is investigated for both short-term and long-term financial impact. The
short-term effect is studied through an event study at the announcement date of the law in
2002 and the findings show proofs of a statistical significant decrease in firm value for
Norwegian companies compared to American firms. The average stock return for firms
without any female director was – 3.54% and – 0.02% for firms with at least one female board
director compared to American indices. The average decrease across all Norwegian firms was
– 2.57%. The industry adjusted values indicates an even bigger decrease ranging from – 3.6%

                                       11
to – 4.3% and the results are robust controlling for industry, firm size or board size. The
second study of firm valuation tried to capture the accumulated long-term effect during the
implementation of the law. The firms are divided into two groups, where one group consists
of the firms without women on the board and the other group consists of firms with at least
one female representative in 2002. The long-term effect indicates that a 10% increase of
women on the board lead to an average decline of 0.19, equal to 12.4%, in Tobin’s Q from
2003 to 2009 with an average Tobin’s Q of 1.53 across all firms. The companies with at least
one female director in 2002 had a 0.26 statistical significant higher industry-adjusted Tobin’s
Q compared to firms without female directors the same year. The changes in firm value can
be considered a proof of that boards do apply influence on the firm and therefor the
company’s value. Since the law implies new constrains on the board composition, the market
reacts to the quota law. Firms with no women face greater constraints from the quota and are
therefore more restricted and more affected by the law. Some companies even opt for the exit
option and decided to delist and change corporate status to avoid the quota. The study found
that firms without female directors in 2002 have a higher probability of delisting from the
Oslo Stock Exchange compared to companies with at least one woman on the board. The
number of public limited companies demonstrates a decrease of more than 30% of the
companies in 2001 for the time period between 2001 and 2007, indicating that 30% of the
companies in 2001 changed corporate statues when the law was introduced.
             The study also found that the companies that did comply with the law kept the
average board size constant. The average board size was approximately 5.5 directors in 2001
and did slightly decrease to 5.32 in 2004. In 2006 it had increased to 5.60 members and stayed
around 5.60 until 2009 when it decreased to 5.29. Ahern and Dittmar (2012) argue that most
of the companies replaced male represents with women to comply with the quota and that is
the reason to the constant average board size around 5.5 directors. The board size can
therefore not explain the negative effect in firm performance. Instead, the authors test the
hypothesis that the negative effect on firm performance is the result from different
characteristics of the new female board members compared to the male directors. The quota
led to the appointment of younger women, with more higher-education, less CEO-experience
and higher probability of being non-executive managers compared to the retained male
directors. The entering women were about 8 years younger and only 31.2% of the women had
prior CEO-experience compared to the men where almost 70% of them had experience of
being a CEO. Wang and Kelan (2013) study the board characteristics pre-quota and post-
quota as part of their research of the quota’s effect on CEO appointment. The results of the

                                       12
differences between male and female directors are consistent with Ahern and Dittmar (2012)
regarding age, CEO experience, education and independence. Their result shows that women
tend to have an average age of 47 years while the men tend to be older with an average age of
almost 53 years. The women had on average more qualifications and more higher education
than the men and women were also more likely be independent compared to their male
counter parts.
             Ahern and Dittmar (2012) go even deeper in the search of an explanation to the
decrease in firm performance and investigate how the differences of the directors’
characteristics affect the firm’s behavior. The result indicates that the quota tends to lead to a
different behavior for the firm resulting in more acquisitions, increased firm size, increased
leverage and reduced cash holdings compared to the behavior before the quota. The
argumentation is that the board is usually involved in strategic topics regarding acquisitions as
well as financial policies and that these changes in behavior can be traced back to the change
in board composition. However the changes won’t necessary relate to the new female board
directors’ behavior or characteristics, but can as well be the result of a different behavior by
the retained male board directors.
             Nygaard (2011) investigates the quota’s effect on firm valuation from a
perspective based on information asymmetry and have a contradictory result of the effect on
firm value from the quota law compared to Ahern and Dittmar (2012). The author study the
law’s short-term effect in 2005 when the law was legislated and became mandatory as well as
the following long-term effect using Tobin’s Q. Firms with high information asymmetry were
harmed by the quota, since they benefit from having insiders on the board and the quota
heavily restrict the supply of inside directors since there is often a scarce resource with only a
limited number of women in top management positions that can act as insiders in the board of
directors. Nygaard found, on the other hand, that firms with low information asymmetry will
benefit from the quota. The new outside directors will most likely be efficient in supervision
and monitoring of the firm due to the low information asymmetry and the board can therefore
benefit from the female directors.
             The different results from the studies by Ahern and Dittmar (2012) and Nygaard
(2011) show that the Norwegian case is not an exception of inconsistent results from studies
of the relation between firm performance and female directors. However, the quota is also an
interesting experiment of spillover effect to female CEO and female board chair appointment.
Wang and Kelan (2013) find that the quota lead to more female CEOs and female board chair
appointments and that Norway is having the world’s highest rate of female directors after the

                                       13
introduction of the law. 0% of the Norwegian firms had a female CEO in 2005 but 5% of the
firms had a female CEO in 2007. The percentage of female board chairs had also a significant
increase from 0.001% in 2001, 5% in 2007 and 15% in 2008, while the male rate naturally
decreased during the same time. The quota effect also increased the probability of a female
CEO with 1.01% and a female board chair by 1.29%. The authors found that the probability
of a female CEO and a female board chair appointment is increased with a more experienced
board, more independent directors as well as higher educational background of the directors,
i. e. characteristics that many female directors tend to have post-quota. The authors did not
find any differences in competence and qualifications between the appointed female and male
chairmen. Another study concludes the opposite about female board chair appointment after
studying the years after the quota and interpreting the results differently. The conclusion is
that there is only a marginal effect of the appointment of female board chair and that the rate
keeps low and stable after the introduction of the quota due to the lack of women with the
right competences. However, the authors argue for that it is too early to see the consequences
of the quota law on CEO and board chair appointment and that it is only a matter of time until
the newly appointed female directors have developed the skills and can be appointed the
board chair (Seierstad & Opsahl, 2011)

4. Hypothesis

4.1. Definition of the Strategies
After outlining the most important theory and previous studies, only a few examples in history
like the Cadbury Committee and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act have forced to such dramatically
changes in board composition and acted as natural experiment as the Norwegian quota law.
The results after studying the shock of the Cadbury Committee and Sarbanes-Oxley Act
indicate increased board sizes in UK and US (Dahya, McConnell, and Travlos, 2002) &
(Linck, Netter, and Yang, 2009). However, the same result could not be found as a significant
trend studying the average board size from the implementation of the quota in Norway
according to the research by Ahern and Dittmar (2011). An issue with average board size is
that it does not indicate whether individual firms change the board size, only if the
accumulated sum is somewhat similar. A firm may, for example, downsize to comply with the
quota, since a board of six directors requires three women to comply with the law meanwhile
a board of five members only need two women. A board of six directors could therefor decide
to downsize and not replace an exiting male director when there already is two female

                                       14
directors on the board. Another board may however find it more appropriate to add one or
more women and increase the board size to comply with the law. This study will therefore
investigate individual firm’s strategies to comply with the law. The different strategies are
classified as active strategy, passive strategy and a mix of the pure strategies. The study also
has the option of fully compliance with the law before the announcement in 2002, which is
called Equal. The active strategy is when the board size is kept constant or even decrease
during the implementation. Equal is when a company complies with the law even before the
announcement in 2002 and is not a real strategy. The passive strategy is when the board size
increases with the number of women added. A mixed strategy is a mixture of the two pure
strategies, active and passive. It indicates that the board size will increase any time during the
implementation, but it will increase with less than the number of women added to the board or
be the case when the compliance takes more than one year and both the active and passive
strategy are used for different years. Table 1 summarizes the strategies.

The categorization is based on the compliance with the quota and does not consider any
potential adjustments before 2003 or after 2008. Any pure additions or removals of male
directors are not considered in the evaluation of different strategies.

Table I Definition of the different strategies of implementation.

Strategy Definition
Active The board size is kept constant or decrease during the implementation of the quota.
Equal The board was in compliance and stayed in compliance with the law before 2002.
Mixed The board size increase with less than the number of women added. A mix between the active
                 and passive strategy.
Passive The board size does increase with the same number of female directors added to the board.

4.2. Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 1(a): The active strategy is the most common strategy followed by a mixed
strategy.

This is based on the evidence of an almost constant average board size of around 5.5 directors
from the study by Ahern and Dittmar (2012). If the passive strategy would be the most
common, we would have seen a significant increase in average board size. The equal strategy
is neither likely due to the change from a voluntary quota to the mandatory law.

                                       15
Hypothesis 1(b): Firms selecting an active strategy are more likely to have a higher proportion
of women before the quota compared to companies selecting a mixed or passive strategy. The
time defined as before the quota is year 2002.

Companies with a higher fraction of female directors face fewer constraints from the law.
They should therefore have easier to comply with the quota and have less costs related to the
compliance. The active strategy could therefore maximize utility, keep an optimal board size
and lead to a new optimal board composition while the costs of complying with the law are
relatively low compared to other strategies for companies with a higher proportion of women
in 2002. Ahern and Dittmar (2012) also found that companies with a higher proportion of
female directors complied earlier with the law, which indicates that companies with a higher
proportion of women act actively to comply early with the law and make rational and
evaluated decisions instead of waiting until the last minute and have to rush into the a
decision only to comply with the law before the end of the transition period.

Hypothesis 1(c): Firms with small boards are more likely to use a passive strategy.

A passive strategy costs more for bigger boards than small boards. An only male board of six
directors needs four women to comply with the law, meanwhile a board of three male only
need two women added to the board to be in compliance with the law. The previous research
of board size indicated the U-shaped relation between financial performance and board size
(Coles, Daniel & Naveem, 2008). It is therefore not beneficial with neither too small nor too
big boards. The small board could hence benefit from the increased board size using a passive
strategy, while the board with an already optimal board size would be damaged by a passive
strategy increasing the board size.

4.3. Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 2:
      H0: There is no difference in firm performance between the different strategies.
       H1: There are differences in firm performance between the different strategies.

The previous research of female directors’ impact on firm performance is inconsistent.
However Ahern and Dittmar (2012) found a negative relation between firm performance and

                                       16
the female directors in Norway. The companies with lower proportion of women in 2002
faced more constraints from the quota and were therefore more financially damaged by the
law. That should imply that if hypothesis 1(b) is true and active firms have a higher
proportion of women in 2002, the active companies perform better than companies with a
mixed or passive strategy. Despite Ahern and Dittmar (2012) findings, the null hypothesis is
based on that the firms try to optimize their value and therefore select the strategy most
suitable for them. A small board would then benefit from a passive strategy, while a bigger
board is advised to keep the board size fixed. A more complex firm may on the other hand
benefit from inside directors with special knowledge and therefore need to increase the board
size when adding outside female directors to fulfil the requirements of the law.
             One could argue that better performing firms have easier to attract good women
and thus the better performing firms do not need to increase board size, but can exchange a
male director for a women due to their equal competences. The better performing firms would
then select an active strategy. It is therefore not that simple to avoid the endogenous nature
between diverse boards and firm performance, neither in a natural experiment as the
Norwegian case. Other possible explanations to a true alternative hypothesis could be that
firms with higher rate of women in 2002 face fewer constraints and can select a beneficial
active strategy at a low cost. It would be beneficial for these firms with an active strategy
since they can keep the board size constant and at the same time only undergo minor changes
in the board composition. The likelihood of finding one good matched female directors is
higher than finding two women and the compliance could also be implemented naturally at
the time of an exiting director. An active strategy could therefore imply fewer changes, less
costs and lead to better or constant performance of the board while firms with other strategies
face worse implementation and are harmed financially from the implementation itself.

5. Data and Methodology

5.1. Data Gathering
Data about board composition is from the Norwegian Business Register,
Brønnøysundregistrene, to where all the Norwegian companies need to report owner structure,
board composition and financial statements among others. The data for this study covers the
board composition from 2002 to 2010. The data contains information about the date of the
change in board composition, the names of board members from the reported date, the
directors’ board position, and the directors’ date of birth. The data also contains organization

                                       17
numbers, addresses to the companies as well as addresses and country codes to the directors.
In case of more than one board change update per year to the business register, the latest
reported change of board composition for the particular year is used. This implies there may
be inconsistence with the sample board and the board presented in the annual report if there is
a change in the beginning of a year.
       The data is complemented with gender from annual reports and Statistic Norway’s
First Names Database with a record of how many men and women have that particular first
name. International Securities Identification Number, ISIN and Global Industry Classification
Standards codes, GICS, are gathered from the website of the Oslo Stock Exchange, Oslo
Børs. Data about listening, delisting, name changes and mergers are also collected from the
Oslo Stock Exchange’s website.
       Financial Data is collected from Compustat using ISIN as identification. The variables
extracted from Compustat are revenue, total assets, EBITA, number of employees, long term
debts, short term debts and R&D expenditures. Annual market value at the end of each year is
on the other hand extracted from Thomson’s Datastream. All values are in Norwegian
Crowns.
             The list from the Norwegian Business Register, Brønnøysundregistrene,
contained 107 ASA companies from the beginning. Due to mergers, delisting, listings, name
changes and no data from the Oslo Stock Exchange, the final list contains only 56 public
limited companies listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange. The selection criteria have been strict
and companies are required to have available market data from year 2006 to be included in
the sample. Companies listed after 2006 are excluded due to the nature of the law and the
requirements of immediate compliance for ASA firms registered after 2006. Companies
delisted before 2008 are also excluded from the study due to the nature of the law and the risk
of avoidance from the law by delisting before 2008. No finance, banks or insurance
companies are included in the sample due to the nature of the finance industry and almost 30
companies belonging to the finance industry are removed.
             The time frame is from 2002 until 2010 to cover the time at the announcement
of the quota and the stabilization after the transition period. Employee representatives are
excluded from the sample since the law does not apply to employee elected directors.

                                       18
5.2. Methodology

5.2.1. Proxy Variables
Proxy variables are important in financial analysis since they represent a phenomenon that is
not represented by one sole variable. There are for example several proxy variables for firm
performance, but the main proxy variables used for firm performance are Tobin’s Q and
ROA. These are also common in previous research of the relation between diverse boards and
firm performance (Adams & Ferreira, 2009), (Rose, 2007), (Lückerath-Rovers, 2013),
(Carter, Simkins & Simpson, 2003).
             Tobin’s Q investigates the relationship between market value and assets and
evaluates the market’s belief in the company and how well it can create value from its assets
(White, Sondhi & Fried, 2003). ROA on the other hand is an accounting measure that
measures the return of invested capital before interest, tax and amortization. It captures the
operating profit and how well the company performs according to accounting standards.
Norway changed to IFRS accounting standards in 2005 and this may therefore have an impact
on the proxy. However, the benefits of using a second proxy for firm performance outweigh
the risk of any potential impact from the change in accounting standards, since the standards
apply to all firms. Table II summarizes the performance proxy varisables.

Table II Definition of performance proxy variables

Proxy Definition
Tobin’s Q Market value at end of year i / Book value of assets at the end of year i
ROA EBITA / Book value of assets at the end of year i

The proxy variables for firm size are revenue and numbers of employees. Revenue describes
one aspect of a firm’s size, the number of employees another. The number of employees is
industry dependent where some industries are more intensive in human resources than others.
Table III present the firm size proxy variables summarized in a table.

Table III Definition of firm size proxy variables

Proxy Definition
No Employees The number of employees reported in the annual report.
Revenue Total sales reported in the annual report.

                                       19
Complex firms are discussed by Coles, Daniel and Naveem (2008). Their findings indicate a
difference in optimal board size between simple and complex firms. Board size is one aspect
of how complex a company is. Coles, Daniel and Naveem (2008) also define R&D intensity
as a proxy variable for complexity. R&D intensity is measured as R&D expenditures divided
by book value of assets. Leverage and debt financing is another measure of complexity by
Coles, Daniel and Naveem (2008). They use total debt divided by book value of assets in their
definition of leverage to account for complexity. More complex firms have a higher ratio of
debts to assets and therefore a complex financing of its business. Table IV demonstrates the
proxy variables for complex firms.

Table IV Definition of complex firm proxy variables

Proxy Definition
R&D Intensity R&D Expenditures / Book Value of Assets
Leverage Total Debts / Book Value of Assets

5.2.2. Hypotheses 1
Hypotheses 1 are investigated through summary statistic and simpler regressions. Hypothesis
1(a) is studied through summary statistics of the number of observations per year and strategy.
No regression analysis was needed to find the most common strategy.
             Hypothesis 1(b) and 1(c) are answered through the use of a summary statistics
showing the average board size and proportion of women for each strategy covering the years
from 2002 to 2010. The hypotheses are also complemented with regressions to find out if
there are any statistical significant differences in the fraction of female directors for each
industry controlled for year 2002, both separately and the two years combined. The regression
is a simple OLS, ordinary least square, regression on the form:
                𝐹𝐹𝐷 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝛽3 ∗ 𝑚𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑 + 𝑢
where:
FFD = fraction of female directors
active = dummy variable for the active strategy; 1 if the company has an active strategy and 0
otherwise
passive = dummy variable for the passive strategy; 1 if the company has a passive strategy
and 0 otherwise
mixed = dummy variable for the mixed strategy; 1 if the company has a mixed strategy and 0
otherwise
u = error term

                                       20
A regression testing the relation between the fraction female directors on a strategy is also
used to investigate any possible relationship. The regression is a simple OLS on the form:
                                 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝐹𝐹𝐷 + 𝑢
where:
active = dummy variable for the active strategy; 1 if the company has an active strategy and 0
otherwise
FFD = fraction of female directors
u = error term

The regression reveals whether the fraction female directors have any impact on the
likelihood of an active strategy. The active strategy could also be substituted for the equal,
passive or mixed strategy in order to investigate any possible impact of the fraction female
director on any other strategy. This regression is also tested for the years before the quota, i.e.
2002 and 2003.

Hypothesis 1(c) is tested with a regression testing for the relation between board size and the
passive strategy. It is a simple OLS regression to test whether the board size has any impact
on the probability for a company to select a passive strategy. The OLS regression to test:
                                 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 + 𝑢
where:
passive = dummy variable for the passive strategy; 1 if the company has a passive strategy
and 0 otherwise
size = board size
u = error term

The regressions are also controlled for industry and firm size measured as revenue. The
control for industry and firm size are tested through using the above described OLS
regressions and adding a dummy variable for each industry and also a variable for firm size,
nothing else changed. This removes any potential affects related to any industry or the size of
the company. The regression could then look like:

                                       21
               𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 + 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 + 𝛽𝑖 ∗ 𝑖𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝑢
where:
passive = dummy variable for the passive strategy; 1 if the company has a passive strategy
and 0 otherwise
size = board size
revenue = revenue in millions NOK
iindustry = dummy variable generated for each industry; 1 if the company belongs to the
tested industry strategy and 0 otherwise
u = error term

5.2.3. Hypothesis 2
To test the relation between firm performance and the strategies, we have panel data, i.e.
several observations from the same source over several years. A simple OLS regression is
therefore not appropriate and we instead have a model that looks like:
                  𝑃 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝛽3 ∗ 𝑚𝑖𝑥 + 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡

where:
P = performance measured as either Tobin’s Q or ROA
active = dummy variable for the active strategy; 1 if the company has an active strategy and 0
otherwise
passive = dummy variable for the passive strategy; 1 if the company has a passive strategy
and 0 otherwise
mixed = dummy variable for the mixed strategy; 1 if the company has a mixed strategy and 0
otherwise
ai = firm specific effect which will be removed using a firm fixed effect estimation
uit = error term for firm i at time t

There are firm fixed effects in this model and using a fixed effect estimation, biases and other
unobserved factors can be avoided. It is also crucial to control the result from other factors.
The analysis will therefore test for industry, board size, FFD, revenue, R&Q intensity, year
dummies and other board and firm characteristics as for the OLS regression. The model can
therefore look like as follow:

                                       22
 𝑃 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑣𝑒 + 𝛽3 ∗ 𝑚𝑖𝑥 + 𝑎𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽𝑗 ∗ 𝑖𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦+ 𝛽𝑘 ∗ 𝑖𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟

where:
P = performance measured as either Tobin’s Q or ROA
active = dummy variable for the active strategy; 1 if the company has an active strategy and 0
otherwise
passive = dummy variable for the passive strategy; 1 if the company has a passive strategy
and 0 otherwise
mixed = dummy variable for the mixed strategy; 1 if the company has a mixed strategy and 0
otherwise
iindustry = dummy variable generated for each industry; 1 if the company belongs to the
tested industry strategy and 0 otherwise
iyear = dummy variable generated for each year; 1 if the observation belongs to the specified
year and 0 otherwise
ai = firm specific effect which will be removed using a firm fixed effect estimation
uit = error term for firm i at time t

Alternative control variables in the estimation could be board size, firm size, fraction female
directors, revenue or R&Q intensity. The various control variables are used to test for all
possible variables affecting the result and the estimation will become more accurate by adding
more explanatory variables as long as the control variables are not correlated.

6. Empirical Results

6.1. Summary Statistics
We start the investigation of the data with the summary statistics. We can notice that we have
a total of 466 observations of board size, women and fraction of female directors. The
observations come from our 56 different companies over the time period from 2002 to 2010.
The average board size among all companies and years is 5.46 directors and the result is
consistent with Ahern and Dittmar (2012). The board size range from three to eleven
members. The average number of women across all firms and years is 1.77 and the number of
women on the board ranges from zero to six women across all firms and years. We have 462
observations of Tobin’s Q and 491 observations of ROA. The average Tobin’s Q across all
companies and years is 1.22 and the average ROA is 0.05. The firms have an average of

                                       23
almost 4500 employees and an average revenue of 16 172 million NOK. Table V represent
these findings in a summary statistics table.
Table V Summary statistics. Size indicates board size. Women is the number of women on the board. FFD is the
abbreviation of fraction female directors. Q is Tobin’s Q and roa is the return of assets. Emp is the number of
employees. Rev is revenue in millions. Rd is the R&D intensity, i.e. R&D expenses divided by book value of
assets and leve is the leverage, total debts divided by book value of assets.

The next table shows the average size, average fraction female directors and frequency per
strategy and year. We can here see that the active strategy is the most popular one with 28
different companies that have used the strategy to implement the quota. The active strategy is
followed by the mixed strategy with 15 firms. Nine companies were equal before the
introduction of the quota. Only four firms had a passive strategy. This means that the first
hypothesis 1(a) is correct. The table also shows how average board size decreases for the
active firms, while the fraction of women increases from an average of 13.3% in 2002 to be in
compliance with the law with 42.2% in 2007 and stabilize around 42% for the following
years. The trend of a decreasing board size can also be seen for the equal firms. However, the
fraction female directors stay around 40% throughout the time period. The average board size
is more volatile for the mixed group, reaching a peak with an average of 6 board members in
2006. The mixed companies have a higher fraction of female directors in 2006 compared to
the active firms. The passive firms have the smallest boards and also the lowest proportion of
women in 2002. The average board size was 4 directors in 2002 and the passive firms had no
women on the boards before the law. The average board sized increased to 5.25 directors in
2008 and all the passive companies had also reached a 40% representation of women after the
introduction of the law. The average board size for all companies is around 5.5 directors with
a peak in 2006 with an average of 5.59 directors. Table VI demonstrates the findings in total.

                                       24
Table VI Average board size, fraction female directors and number of companies per strategy and year. The first value represents average board size, the second; average
fraction female directors and the last value represent the number of companies with that strategy for that year. The difference in number of companies depends on missing
data for a handful of companies in the earliest years.

                                                             25
Table VII Average board size, fraction female directors and number of companies per industry and year. The first value represents average board size, the
second; average fraction female directors and the last value represent the number of companies within the industry for that year. The difference in number
of companies depends on missing data for a handful of companies in the earliest years.

. table sector year, contents(mean size mean ffd freq ) row

                                                                    Year
                Sector 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Consumer Discretionary 8.5 8.5 8.5 6.66667 6.33333 5.66667 6 6 6
                         .3484849 .3939394 .4772727 .4292929 .4777778 .4444444 .5 .5 .5
                                 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3

      Consumer Staples 5.5 5.4 5.8 5.6 6.2 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.2
                         .0714286 .1371429 .2104762 .2857143 .3290476 .392381 .44 .4171429 .4457143
                                 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

                Energy 6 5.4 5.61538 5.5 5.78571 5.57143 5.64286 5.57143 5.5
                         .1130952 .1642857 .1483517 .207483 .325 .4346939 .4278912 .4204082 .4442177
                               13 13 14 14 14 14 14 14 14

           Health Care 6 5.66667 5.4 5.6 5.6 5.4 5.2 5 5.2
                         .1666667 .0666667 .1633333 .2733333 .3133333 .44 .46 .48 .412381
                                 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

                    IT 4.875 4.9 4.72727 5.16667 5.25 4.83333 5.08333 5.16667 5.08333
                              .05 .075 .0712121 .1208333 .2514881 .4076389 .4256945 .4349206 .4090278
                               11 11 12 12 12 12 12 12 12

              Industry 5.71429 5.1 5.3 5.36364 5.27273 5.54545 5.18182 4.90909 5.18182
                         .0680272 .1266667 .2 .2969697 .3554113 .4 .4181818 .4090909 .4363636
                               11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11

             Materials 5.33333 4.75 4.6 4.8 5.2 5.2 5.4 5.2 5.6
                         .1984127 .1571429 .2366667 .3466667 .46 .46 .4457143 .42 .4257143
                                 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

               Telecom 6 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 8
                               .5 .4285714 .4285714 .4285714 .4285714 .4285714 .375 .5 .375
                                 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

                 Total 5.69697 5.35556 5.40385 5.44643 5.58929 5.39286 5.44643 5.39286 5.46429
                          .118559 .1420058 .1759116 .2476152 .3366284 .4214498 .4339711 .4319728 .4325255
                               52 53 55 56 56 56 56 56 56
                                                             26
Table VII shows the average board size, fraction female directors and number of companies
per industry and year. Energy is the most common industry followed in decreasing order by
IT, Industry, Health Care, Consumer Staples, Materials, Consumer Discretionary and
Telecom. Consumer Discretionary has the biggest average board size with more than 6
directors and the other industries have an average board size around 5.5 directors across the
years.
             When testing an OLS regression for the different industries on one strategy at
the time, the result indicates that all industries but materials and telecommunications have a
significant positive coefficient for the active strategy. Health care and consumer discretionary
are the two industries with the highest probability of having an active strategy. Table VIII
shows the regression analysis of the different industries on the active strategy.

Table VIII Different industries’ likelihood of having an active strategy
active = dummy variable for the active strategy; 1 if the company has an active strategy and 0 otherwise ind =
Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary, cstaples =
Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

Similar regression analyses have been done for the other strategies too. All sectors but
telecommunication have a statistical significant negative coefficient for the equal strategy.
Materials is the only industry with a statistical significant positive result for the passive
strategy, while all other industries are showing insignificant results. This implies that the

                                       27
companies within materials are more likely to have a passive strategy compared to companies
in other industries. The result for the mixed strategy indicates that firms within Consumer
Staples and IT are more likely to have a mixed strategy, meanwhile the other industries show
statistical insignificant result. Tables of the regression analyses for the equal, mixed and
passive strategy are to be found in the appendix tables A-1 to A-4.

6.2. Statistical Tests

6.2.1. Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 1(b), that active firms have higher proportion women in 2002 than companies
selecting a mixed or passive strategy can be answered through the summary tables. The OLS
regression of the different strategies on the fraction female directors does strengthen this
finding, indicating that companies with an active strategy have on average 13 % women on
the board meanwhile the passive strategy have on average no women on the board and the
mixed strategy an average of 4 % women. Table IX presents the result from the regression
analysis of the strategy dummy variables on fraction female directors.

Table IX Regession of strategy-dummies on the fraction female directors for the year 2002.

The result is controlled for industries, board size and firm size and implies a robust result that
is still significant, though the control variables appear insignificant in the analyses. Table X
presents the result from the regression analysis of the strategy dummy variables on fraction
female directors with and without the industries as control variables. The result from the
regression analyses with other control variables are found in the appendix table A-5 and A-6.

                                       28
Table X Regression of strategy dummies on fraction female directors controlling for industry for year 2002.
ffd is the abbreviation of fraction female directors. ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat
=Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary, cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

                                       29
The regression of fraction female directors on the Active-dummy for year 2002 does not
indicate any significant relation. Neither is a correlation found for the fraction female
directors on the passive strategy in year 2002. A significant positive result is found for the
equal strategy meanwhile the mixed strategy face a significant negative coefficient for the
regression of fraction female directors on the mixed strategy. Table XI demonstrate the result
from the regression of fraction female directors on the equal strategy.

Table XI Regession of fraction female directors on the equal strategy.
ffd is the abbreviation of fraction female directors

An OLS regression of board size on the passive strategy is used to test hypothesis 1(c). The
result implies a statistical significant negative relation between the board size and the passive
strategy. So when the board size increases, the likelihood of a passive strategy decreases. The
hypothesis can therefore not be rejected. Table XII present the result of the regression analysis
of board size on the passive strategy.

                                       30
Table XII OLS regression of board size on the passive strategy.
Size = board size

Running a regression of the strategies on board size does not indicate any significant result. It
is therefore not possible to conclude that any specific strategy determine an exact board size.
The result is also tested for the control variables of industry with the same insignificant result.
Table XIII summarize the OLS regression of the strategies on board size. For the regression
table of the strategies on board size with and without control variables; see appendix A-7.

Table XIII OLS regression of the strategy dummies on board size.
Size = board size

6.2.2. Hypothesis 2
To test hypothesis 2 and the relation between the strategies and companies’ financial
performance, we run regressions with the panel data described in the methodology chapter.
The robust regression of strategy dummies on Tobin’s Q indicates a positive correlation

                                       31
between the active strategy and firm performance and equal strategy and firm performance,
where the active firms perform better. The results are statistically significant controlling for
the each year. This indicates that an active strategy has a higher average Tobin’s Q compared
to an equal strategy. Since the result is insignificant for the passive and mixed strategy, it is
difficult to draw any conclusions from the analysis about the passive and mixed strategy’s
impact on Tobin’s Q. Table XIV describes the result from the regression of the strategies
impact on Tobin’s Q.

Table XIV Regression of strategy dummies on Tobin’s Q controlling for industry.
yyear = dummy variable for each year

However, the result is not robust and statistical significant controlling for other variables such
as industry, firm size nor board size. Neither is the result statistical significant using a fixed
effect regression. The null hypothesis can therefore not be rejected for financial performance

                                       32
measured as Tobin’s Q. Table XV summarizes the insignificant result of the regression of the
strategies on Tobin’s Q controlling for industries.

Table XV Regression of strategy dummies on Tobin’s Q controlling for industry.
yyear = dummy variable for each year, ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials,
cdisk = Consumer Discretionary, cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

The same regressions are used to test firm performance measured as ROA. The result of the
first regression, testing the strategies on ROA controlling for each year indicates insignificant
results for all strategies but the active one, which has a negative impact on ROA. The result is
tested for robustness and statistical significance using industry, firm size and board size as
control variables and the result implies insignificant results for all strategies. Table XVI
presents the findings in detail from the regression analysis of the strategies on ROA. For the
regression analysis controlled for industry; see appendix table A-8.

                                       33
Table XVI Regression of strategy dummies on ROA
yyear = dummy variable for each year

The insignificant results are evident in the study of ROA as well as Tobin’s Q as a
measurement of firm performance. This implies that there are no strong relationships between
any of the strategies and firm performance. The null hypothesis can therefore not be rejected.
However, there are indications that the companies with an active strategy perform better in
terms of Tobin’s Q, but worse in terms of ROA compared to the average firms.

                                       34
7. Implications and Conclusions
The active strategy was the most popular for comply with the Norwegian quota. The mixed
strategy was the second most popular strategy. However, smaller boards tended to select a
passive quota and increase their board size with the implementation. This is consistent with
the theory of optimal board size and the passive firms may have seen the law as an
opportunity to improve corporate governance. The board size where kept fixed for the active
firms and almost constant for the companies selecting a mixed strategy. However, there was
an increase in average board size for the four passive firms.
              There are indications that the active strategy is correlated to better performance
in terms of Tobin’s Q, but worse performance measured as ROA. However, the result are not
statistical significant and robust and for most other strategies there are no significant evidence
of their effect on firm performance. A possible theory of the insignificant results is that every
firm choose strategy to maximize firm value and different strategies are thus beneficial for
different companies and there is not possible to find any relationship between a certain
strategy and improved firm performance. The summary statistics indicated distinctive
differences in board size and the proportion female directors across the various strategies and
could therefore support the possible explanation that the strategies are selected to maximize
firm value and that there is not a particular strategy that improve firm performance across all
firms due to their different pre-quota conditions. Another possible explanation could be the
relatively small sample size and a bigger sample could reveal any possible correlation
between the strategies and firm performance. The sample of passive firms is small consisting
of only four companies and the total sample consisting of 56 companies is also relatively
small. However the observations spans across nine years, but the almost 500 firm/year
observations are still relatively small for the passive strategy for example. The small sample
may therefore be another possible explanation of the lack of significant results of selected
strategies and firm performance.
            This study is beneficial for future shocks with new requirement of board
composition. It provides guidelines of how other companies have been acting and what were
characteristic for them. In a time when more governments put pressure on the industry to
become more equal, a study like this can help the shareholder to tackle the implementation
and prepare the implementation for the best results.
             This study is limited to a few aspects and mainly focused on the strategies as
explanatory variables and minor firm characteristics as control variables. Hence, a further step
would be to investigate trends among the board directors connected to the strategies. There

                                       35
are more aspects of board characteristics and individual features, like tenure, retention and
directors’ characteristics between the strategies to study to fully cover the implementation. A
further study of the strategies and the directors’ characteristics is therefore recommended and
may bring new insights about the gender quota law, implementation strategies and the relation
between implementation and firm performance.

                                       36
References
Adams, Renée B. & Ferreira, Daniel, 2007, A theory of friendly boards, The Journal of
Finance; 62(1); 217-250

Adams, Renée B. & Ferreira, Daniel, 2009, Women in the boardroom and their impact on
governance and performance, Journal of Financial Economics; 94; 291-309

Ahern, Kenneth R. & Dittmar, Amy K., 2012, The changing of the boards: the impact on firm
valuation of mandated female board presentation, The Quarterly Journal of Economics;
127(1); 137-197

Campbell, Kevin & Vera, Antonio M., 2008, Gender diversity in the boardroom and firm
financial performance, Journal of Business Etics; 83(3); 435-451

Campbell, Kevin & Vera, Antonio M., 2010, Female board appointments and firm valuation:
Short and long-term effects, Journal of Management Governance; 14; 37-59

Carter, David A., D´Souza, Frank, Simpkins, Betty J. & Simpson, W. Gary, 2010, The gender
and ethnic diversity of US boards and board committees and firm financial performance,
Corporate Governance; 18(5); 396-414

Carter, David A., Simpkins, Betty J. & Simpson, W. Gary, 2003, Corporate governance,
board diversity and firm value, The Financial Review; 38(1); 33-53

Catalyst, 2004, The bottom line: Connecting corporate performance and gender diversity

Coles, Jeffrey L., Daniel, Naveen D. & Naveem, Lalitha, 2008, Boards: Does one size fit all?,
Journal of Financial Economics; 87; 329-356

Davies, Paul L., 2000, The board of directors: Composition, Structure, Duties and Powers,
Company Law Reform in OECD Countries A Comparative Outlook of Current Trends

Dahya, Jay, McConnell, John J. & Travlos, Nickolaos G., 2002, The Cadburt Committee,
corporate performance, and top management turnover, The Journal of Finance; 11(1); 461-
483

Det Kongelige Barne- og Familiedepartementet, 2005, Follow-up to the package meeting of 9
to 10 November regarding representation of both sexes on company boards

European Commission, 2012, Women in economic decision-making in the EU: Progress
report

European Commission, 2014, Boosting equality between women and men in the EU > Key
actions and figures

Linck, James S., Netter, Jeffrey M & Yang, Tina, 2008; The determinants of board structure,
Journal of Financial Economics; 887; 308-328

                                       37
Linck, James S., Netter, Jeffrey M & Yang, Tina, 2009, The effects and unintended
consequences of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on the supply and demand for directors, The Review
of Financial Studies; 22(8); 3287-3328

Lov om allmennaksjeselskaper, 2013, LOV-1997-06-13-45

Lückerath-Rovers, Mijntje, 2013, Women on boards and firm performance, Journal of
Management Governance; 17; 491-509

Ministry of Children and Family Affairs, 2005, Rules regarding gender balance within boards
of Public Limited Companies, Press release

Nielsen, Sabina & Huse, Morten, 2010, The contribution of women on boards of directors:
Going beyond the surface, Corporate Governance; 18(2); 136-148

Norwegian Business Register, Brønnøysundregistrene, 2013,Reggisterenheten i Brønnøysund,
www.brreg.no

Norwegian Corporate Governance Board, 2012, The Norwegian code of practice for corporate
governance

Nygaard, Knut, 2011, Forced board changes: Evidence from Norway, NHH Department of
Economics Working Paper, 2011

Raheja, Charu G., 2005, Determinants of board size and composition: A theory of corporate
boards, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis; 40(2); 283-306

Rose, Caspar, 2007, Does female board representation influence firm performance? The
Danish evidence, Corporate Governance; 15(2); 404-413

Seierstad, Cathrine & Opsahl, Tore, 2011, For the few not the many? The effects of
affirmative action on presence, prominence, and social capital of women directors in Norway,
Scandinavian Journal of Management; 27; 44-54

Statistic Norway, 2009, Male-dominated boards

Verdens Gang, Feb 22 2002, Møkk lei Gutteklubben grei

Wang, Mingzhu & Kelan Elisabeth, 2013, The gender quota and female leadership: Effects of
the Norwegian gender quota on board chairs and CEOs, Journal of Business Etics; 117; 449-
466

White, Gerald I., Sondhi, Ashwinpaul C. & Fried, Dov, 2003, The analysis and use of
financial statements, Third Edition, New York: John Wiley & Sons

                                       38
Appendix

Table A-1 Different industries’ likelihood of having an active strategy
ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary,
cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

Table A-2 Different industries’ likelihood of having a mixed strategy
ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary,
cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication
Table A-3 Different industries’ likelihood of having a passive strategy
ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary,
cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

Table A-4 Different industries’ likelihood of having an equal strategy
ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary,
cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication
Table A-5 Regession of strategy-dummies on the fraction female directors controlled for industries for year
2002. ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer Discretionary,
cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

Table A-6 Regession of strategy-dummies on the fraction female directors controlled for board size and firm size
(revenue) for year 2002.
Table A-7 OLS regression of strategy dummies on board size controlling for industry.
size = board size, ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials, cdisk = Consumer
Discretionary, cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication

                                    .
Table A-8 Regression of strategy dummies on ROA controlling for industry.
yyear = dummy variable for each year, ind = Industry, en = Energy, it = IT, hc = Health Care, mat =Mmaterials,
cdisk = Consumer Discretionary, cstaples = Consumer Staples and tele = Telecommunication