 The Option Volume to Stock Volume Ratio, Market
           Efficiency and Future Returns

                                            ∗                          †
              Filip Demitz-Helin & Alexander Mahdi

                          May 19, 2014

                                 Bachelor Thesis
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                                 Abstract
   The study of the information value in options has for decades been at the centre of
   financial research. Recent findings indicate that informed investors prefer to use op-
   tions to trade on negative information, causing the option volume to stock volume ratio
   (O/S) to correlate negatively with future returns. Drawing from evidence on mispricing
   in illiquid markets, this study develops a multimarket model that incorporates price
   inefficiencies that arise from low levels of liquidity into the O/S framework. In the
   presence of short sale costs, the model predicts that O/S is more strongly negatively
   correlated with future returns for firms with low levels of liquidity compared to firms
    with high levels of liquidity. Using a large sample of cross-sectional and time-series data
   on US listed stocks and options, this study finds strong empirical support of the model’s
   prediction. We additionally derive a self-financing trading strategy that is based on our
   empirical results and find that the strategy generates weekly four-factor alphas of 0.53%
   and CARs of 230.31% during the 2002-2012 period. Thus, we conclude that the linkage
   between O/S, illiquidity and future stock performance is of high economic significance.

   Keywords: Return predictability, Option volume, Market efficiency, Informed investors,
   Liquidity

                                     1
   Thesis advisor: Jungsuk Han

∗
 22581@student.hhs.se
†
 22559@student.hhs.se
1
 We would like to thank Jungsuk Han for all the help and support in writing this thesis.
Contents

1 Introduction 1

2 Previous Literature 2
   2.1 The Role of Options in the Stock Price Discovery Process . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.2 The Relationship between Liquidity and Market Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . 4

3 A Model of Informed Trading 5
   3.1 The Original Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.2 Extension to the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.3 Derivation of Empirical Predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

4 Data 9

5 Variable Selection and Descriptions 10
   5.1 Option Volume to Stock Volume Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.2 Liquidity Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         5.2.1 Quoted Bid-Ask Spread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         5.2.2 Zero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
        5.2.3 Amihud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         5.2.4 Market Capitalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.3 Potential Measure Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

6 Methodology 14
   6.1 Verification of the O/S and Future Returns Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.2 Main Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.3 Robustness Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.4 Trading Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

7 Empirical Results 20
   7.1 Descriptive Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   7.2 O/S and Future Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   7.3 Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   7.4 Robustness Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
         7.4.1 Zero . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
        7.4.2 Amihud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
         7.4.3 Market Capitalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   7.5 Trading Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

8 Conclusion 27

References 30

A Appendix 32
1 Introduction

The question whether options contain information about future movements in the underlying
stock and thus aid in the stock price discovery process has extensively been debated within
the field of finance. Black & Scholes (1973) argue that options are redundant securities in
complete markets as they can easily be replicated by continuous trading in stocks and bonds,
implying that signals in the options market cannot lead prices in the stock market. However,
the simplified assumptions in the Black-Scholes framework do not necessarily hold in real
market settings. In a recent study, Johnson & So (2012),hereafter JS, develop a multimarket
asymmetric information model where the prevalence of short sale costs in the stock market
induce informed investors to primarily trade options for negative signals. The model implies
that option volumes contain information about future stock movements and JS empirically
find that the option volume to stock volume ratio (O/S) is indeed negatively correlated with
future returns. The result thus provides new evidence in support of the notion that options
have a significant role in the stock price discovery process.
   In our study, we build on JS’s findings by developing a multimarket model that jointly
incorporates O/S and price inefficiencies that arise from low levels of liquidity in the stock
market. In the presence of short sale costs, our model predicts that O/S is more strongly
negatively correlated with future returns for firms with low levels of liquidity compared to
firms with high levels of liquidity. The linkage between O/S, liquidity and future returns
is derived from research suggesting that informed investors are able to detect and take
advantage of price inefficiencies that arise in the stock market [17]. Since price deviations
from fundamental values are more prevalent on stocks that are less liquid [11] [28], we assert
that the fraction of informed investors trading in a stock and/or its corresponding options
will increase in stock illiquidity. Given that informed investors prefer to use options to trade
on negative information as suggested by JS, the implication is that O/S will be a stronger
negative predictor of future returns for firms with relatively illiquid stocks.
   To investigate the outlined prediction of our model, we estimate pooled OLS regressions
where weekly return data from a large sample of US stocks is regressed on O/S, liquidity and
an interaction variable between O/S and liquidity. We use the quoted spread, Amihud, Zero
and market capitalization as liquidity proxies and find empirical support for the theoretical
prediction of our multimarket model. Specifically, the result shows that O/S together with
low levels of stock liquidity have a statistically significant negative impact on future returns
when the quoted spread, Amihud and market capitalization are used as liquidity proxies. The
results are also robust across a variety of specifications and after controlling for firm and year
fixed effects. We argue that our empirical findings are economically significant by deriving

                                       1
a self-financing trading strategy that successfully exploits the relationship between O/S,
liquidity and future returns. Specifically, we construct an equally weighted portfolio that is
long stocks in the 1st vigintile and short stocks in the 20th vigintile of an interaction variable
that is based on O/S and quoted spread. The trading strategy generates a statistically
significant weekly four-factor alpha of 0.533% and yields cumulative abnormal returns that
are 61.05 percentage points higher than a similarly constructed strategy solely based on O/S
over a ten year period.
   This study thus sets out to both extend existing literature on the role of options in the
stock price discovery process and to provide novel evidence of the linkage between O/S,
liquidity and return predictability. To our knowledge, no existing empirical research has
explicitly incorporated the role of price inefficiencies that arise from low levels of liquidity
into the O/S framework in order to investigate the trading patterns of informed investors
and the implications for subsequent firm performance. The results from this study have two
main implications. First, our evidence suggests that informed investors are indeed able to
detect and profit from mispricing that arises from stock illiquidity by taking positions in
the options market. Second, our findings support the notion that options have a significant
role in the stock price discovery process and specifically also highlight how the information
content in options depend on levels of stock liquidity.
   The remainder of this study is organized as follows. In section 2, we review previous
literature regarding the role of options in the stock price discovery process and the rela-
tionship between liquidity and market efficiency. In section 3, we synthesize the theoretical
foundations into an extended version of JS’s multimarket model that serves as a basis for
our empirical predictions. We introduce the data in section 4 and describe our empirical
measures in section 5. The methodology used in this study is explained in section 6 and the
results of the empirical tests and the self-financing trading strategy is presented in section 7.
Finally, we discuss the results and implications of our study as well as emphasize potential
areas for future research in section 8.

2 Previous Literature

Our study is primarily related to two different topics within the field of finance. First, as
we examine the information value in relative option trading volumes, our study is connected
to previous literature concerning the role of options in the stock price discovery process.
Second, research investigating the links between liquidity and market efficiency is highly
relevant to our analysis, as an underlying assumption in our theoretical framework is that
price inefficiencies are more prevalent on illiquid stocks. We describe key findings in previous

                                       2
literature concerning both topics below.

2.1 The Role of Options in the Stock Price Discovery Process

To date, studies investigating the information value of options have primarily used two
different approaches. Studies using the first approach focus on examining whether option
prices lead stock prices or vice versa. These studies have provided considerable evidence in
favor of the notion that options contain significant information. Easley et al (1998) construct
a microstructure model where option markets become attractive to informed investors under
certain conditions and where option order flows contain information about fundamental value
and lead stock prices. Similarly, Pan & Poteshman (2006) demonstrate that the open-buy
put-call ratio can predict future stock movements and Anthony (1988) finds that trading in
call options lead stock trading by one day. Manaster & Rendleman (1982) reach a similar
conclusion as they find that option prices contain information that is not reflected in the
underlying for a period up to 24 hours. Chakravarty et al (2004) estimate that 17 percent
of the stock price discovery process can be attributable to option markets. However, a few
noteworthy studies have reached opposite conclusions. Muravyev et al (2013) argue that
options do not aid in the stock price discovery process as they find that option quotes adjust
themselves across the stock market and the options market in order to eliminate arbitrage
opportunities, whereas stock quotes do not. Their findings are supported by Chan et al
(2002) who present evidence that stock net-trade volume can predict option and stock quote
revisions as opposed to option net-trade volume.
   Studies using the second approach investigate the information content in options indi-
rectly. These studies examine the trading behavior of informed investors and their trading
preferences across the options and stock market. The notion is that the trading pattern of
informed investors has important implications for the linkage between options and stocks
as these investors possess information that may not be fully reflected in stock prices. For
instance, options may contain significant information if informed investors have a systematic
preference towards trading in the options market rather than in the stock market. Research
using this approach has given somewhat mixed results. On the one hand, Back (1992)
demonstrates that option markets are attractive due to lower capital requirements and the
embedded leverage in options. Biais & Hillion (1994) investigate an introduction of options
and argue that option securities increase the profits for informed investors across certain
orders of liquidity. Research also suggests that lower transaction costs in the options market
                                                                                                   2
and an absence of short sale restrictions can create preferences for trading options . On the

   2
    e.g. Diamond & Verrecchia (1987) and Mayhew, Atulya, & Kaldeep (1995)

                                       3
other hand, Kyle (1985) argues that profit maximizing informed traders try to camouflage
their trading activity, implying a preference towards trading in the stock market as stocks
generally are more liquid than options [30]. Admati & Pfleiderer (1988) reach a similar
conclusion as they find that informed investors attempting to conceal trading activity prefer
to trade in more liquid markets.

2.2 The Relationship between Liquidity and Market Efficiency

Our analysis also draws from recent studies describing the linkage between liquidity and
market efficiency. Chordia et al (2008) use the stock market’s capacity to absorb order im-
balances as a proxy for market efficiency and examine how this capacity differs across various
liquidity regimes. They measure liquidity in terms of bid-ask spreads and find that narrow
spreads have a consistent and positive effect on intraday market efficiency as they facilitate
arbitrage trading and increase the absorbing capacity of order imbalances in the market.
Their findings have been confirmed by Chung & Hrazdil (2010) who use a similar approach
with a larger sample of stocks and additionally demonstrate how the impact of liquidity
amplifies during periods when new information is released to the market. The existence of
a positive relationship between liquidity and market efficiency is also supported by Sadka &
Scherbina (2007) who find that less liquid stocks consistently tend to be overpriced in the
market. They show that a high degree of analyst dispersion creates information asymme-
tries in the market and induce market makers to increase trading costs by raising bid-ask
spreads, which has an adverse effect on market efficiency and give rise to mispricing. Sadka
& Scherbina also conclude that an increase in liquidity narrows no-arbitrage bounds and
facilitates the convergence of prices to fundamentals. Importantly for our analysis, findings
also indicate that informed investors are able to detect price inefficiencies that arise in the
stock market. For instance, Hayunga et al (2012) explore the trading behavior of investors in
option markets conditioned on price inefficiencies in the underlying stock. By investigating
violations of boundary conditions of American style options and the degree of dispersion
between options-implied stock prices and actual prices, they find that informed investors
consistently demonstrate an ability to not only detect mispricing in the stock market but
also take advantage of it by trading accordingly in the options market.

                                       4
3 A Model of Informed Trading

We present an extension to the model of informed trading in equity and options markets
originally developed by JS. Our extension relates to the linkage between liquidity, market
efficiency and the presence of traders with private information. As we shall see, the model
predicts that this linkage together with O/S can be exploited in order to more accurately
predict future returns compared to O/S alone. We will briefly explain the original model
and then turn to our extension and its implication for predicting future returns.

3.1 The Original Model

In the original model, investors trade sequentially with a risk-neutral market maker and if
they want to short sell equity they have to incur a short sale cost, ρ. Trades occur at t = 1
and are realized at t = 2, at which time the value of the stock is

                                  V˜ = μ + ˜ + ˜η (1)

where μ is the exogenous mean equity value, and ˜ and ˜η are normally distributed indepen-
dent shocks. A fraction of all investors, α, are informed and know beforehand the realization
of ˜ and consequently value the stock and options according to the formulas

                                 E( V˜ |˜ = ) = μ +  (2)
                             (  )    (  )
                               ˜                         
                        E( C|˜ = ) = Φ       + φ      ση (3)
                                          ση         ση
and                           (  )    (  )
                        ˜             −         
                      E( P |˜ = ) = −Φ       + φ      ση (4)
                                           ση          ση
respectively, where P˜ and C˜ are the put and call values at t = 2, Φ is the standard normal’s
cumulative distribution function and φ is the probability distribution function. Investors
can only trade in one type of asset and in equilibrium the informed investors have a strict
preference between the possible trades. The trading behaviour of informed investors can in
equilibrium be described as

                                       5
               
                          buy puts for  ≤ k1
               
                            sell stock for  ∈ (k , k )
                                               1  2
               
                             sell calls for  ∈ (k , k )
                                               2  3
                         f () =    make no trade for  ∈ (k3, k4)                       (5)
               
                             sell puts for  ∈ (k4, k5)
               
               
                             buy stock for  ∈ (k5, k6)
               
                                    buy calls for  > k6
where k1 − k6 represents distinct cut-off points related to the magnitude of the private
information. The fraction of uninformed investors, (1 − α), trade for other reasons, with
fractions q1, q2, q3, q4, q5 and q6 choosing to buy stock, sell stock, buy calls, sell calls, buy
                        ∑6
puts and sell puts, respectively, where    i=1 qi = 1.
   Given that uniformed investors are equally likely to buy and sell each asset, one of the
main empirical predictions of this model is that O/S is negatively correlated with future
stock returns. The reason is that informed traders prefer to use the options market as an
investment vehicle for trading on negative information due to the prevalence of short sale
costs in the stock market.

3.2 Extension to the Model

In our extension to the model we emphasize the circumstances under which informed in-
vestors are able to take advantage of their ability to detect mispricing in the stock market.
We model the fraction of informed investors trading in a stock and/or its corresponding
option as
                           α = ν + ω ∗ Quoted Spread (6)

where ν is the fraction of informed investors trading in a stock and/or an option with a
quoted spread of zero, Quoted Spread is a proxy for stock liquidity and ω is a positive variable
describing the relationship between the presence of informed investors and the quoted spread.
Notice that the model is not restricted to using the quoted spread as a proxy for liquidity and
we will incorporate a variety of proxies in our empirical testing of the model’s predictions.
The intuition behind the extension is related to evidence suggesting that price inefficiencies
are more prevalent on illiquid stocks [11] [28] and that informed investors are able to detect
and profit from these price inefficiencies [17]. Specifically, since there is more mispricing for
informed investors to detect and take advantage of on stocks that are illiquid, the fraction
of informed investors trading in a stock and/or an option will increase in illiquidity.

                                       6
  Empirical predictions:
  Thus, given that uninformed investors are equally likely to buy and sell each asset and
  that informed investors have a preference for trading on negative information in the
  options market, and that ω > 0, then

     1. O/S will be negatively correlated with future returns (from the original model)

     2. The fraction of informed investors trading in a stock and/or its corresponding op-
        tion will increase if the stock is illiquid

     3. The predictive power of O/S will be increasing in stock illiquidity

  In other words, a high O/S combined with a high level of stock illiquidity will correlate
  more negatively with future returns than O/S alone.

3.3 Derivation of Empirical Predictions

In order to show that an increase in the fraction of informed investors, α, trading in a stock
and/or option causes O/S to correlate more negatively with future returns in the presence
of short sale costs we first define VS = E( V˜ − μ|stock trade), VO = E( V˜ − μ|option trade)
and D ≡ VS − VO. Differentiating D with regard to ρ, we get
                                     6 (         )
                  ∂D   VS   VO  ∑  VS   VO  ∂ki
                       =    −    =        −        . (7)
                         ∂ρ    ∂ρ    ∂ρ         ∂ki   ∂ki   ∂ρ
                                                       i=1

From JS we additionally have that

                              ∂VS     φ(k1)
                                = α      (VS − k1) > 0 (8)
                                ∂k1       ps

                              ∂VS     φ(k2)
                                 = α      (k2 − VS ) < 0 (9)
                                ∂k2       ps
                             ∂VO     φ(k1)
                                = α      (k1 − VO) < 0 (10)
                                ∂k1       po
and
                             ∂VO     φ(k2)
                                = α      (VO − k2) > 0 (11)
                                ∂k2       po
where ps and po are the unconditional probabilities of a stock trade and an option trade

                                       7
occurring, respectively. Given the inequality signs in (8) through (11), we thus have that
               (        )     (        )
             ∂D    ∂VS   ∂VO  ∂k1    ∂VS   ∂VO  ∂k2   ∂D
              =     −         +     −         →    > 0 (12)
               ∂ρ     ∂k1    ∂k1   ∂ρ     ∂k2    ∂k2   ∂ρ    ∂ρ

since ∂k1/∂ρ > 0, ∂k2/∂ρ < 0, and ρ is not included in k3-k6.
   Now consider the effect on (12) that an increase in α will have. In the components of (12)
where α is present, i.e. (8) through (11), it shows up both directly and indirectly through
ps, po, VS and VO.
                                      3        4
   First, if we solely focus on ps  and po , notice that an increase in α can either increase
or decrease ps and po. However, note that the net change in α/ps and α/po as a result of
an increase in α will always be positive. The effect is thus that (8) and (11) becomes more
positive, and (9) and (10) becomes more negative, implying that the inequality in (12) will
be greater the higher the α.
                                                           5         6
   Second, consider how α affects (12) through VS   and VO . Notice that the positive net
change in α/ps and α/po as a result of an increase in α implies that both VS and VO are
increasing in α. However, the increases in VS and VO have zero net effect on (12). Specifically,
note that an increase in VS will make (8) less positive, and (9) more negative. An increase
in VO will similarly make (10) more negative, and (11) less positive. These effects will cancel
each other out in (12), thus leaving the inequality unchanged.
   As a result, we have that
                                                  ∗
                        ∂D   ∂D
                                    >    > 0 (13)
                               ∂ρ    ∂ρ
since (        )      (         )
                                                               ∗         ∗
                      ∂VS   ∂VO  ∂k1     ∂VS    ∂VO   ∂k1
                      −         <      −                       (14)
                        ∂k1    ∂k1   ∂ρ     ∂k1    ∂k1    ∂ρ

and (        )      (         )
                                                               ∗         ∗
                      ∂VS   ∂VO  ∂k2     ∂VS    ∂VO   ∂k2
                      −         <      −                       (15)
                        ∂k2    ∂k2   ∂ρ     ∂k2    ∂k2    ∂ρ

                                                       ∗
where the updated PDEs with a higher α, α , has been denoted with a star. This means
                                                                                                  ∗
that, since there is no net effect of changes in α through VS and VO on ∂D/∂ρ , we have
                                                                                                       ∗
that an increase in α/ps and α/ps as a result of an increase in α will increase ∂D/∂ρ .
   This implies that D ≡ E( V˜ |stock trade) − E( V˜ |option trade) is increasing in short sale
cost more sharply the higher the fraction of informed investors, and that the inequality

   3
    ps = (1 − α)(q1 + q2) + α(Φ(k2) − Φ(k1) + Φ(k6) − Φ(k5))
   4
    po = (1 − α)(q3 + q4 + q5 + q6) + α(Φ(k1) + Φ(k3) − Φ(k2) + Φ(k5) − Φ(k4) + 1 − Φ(k6))
   5
    VS = (α/ps)(φ(k1) − φ(k2) + φ(k5) − φ(k6))
   6
    VO = (α/po)(−φ(k1) + φ(k2) − φ(k3) + φ(k4) − φ(k5) + φ(k6))

                                       8
E( V˜ |option trade) ≤ E( V˜ |stock trade) is greater the higher the fraction of informed in-
vestors. The implication is that, given that the fraction of informed investors trading in a
stock and/or its corresponding option is higher if the stock is illiquid as described in section
3.2, the predictive power of O/S with regard to future returns is increasing in stock illiquid-
ity (and in short sale cost). In other words, the model predicts that O/S is more strongly
negatively correlated with future returns the more illiquid the stock.

4 Data

Our option data come from the Ivy DB OptionMetrics LLC database, which contains in-
formation on all US listed equity and index options. The data include the daily number of
traded put and call contracts as well as strike prices and times to expiration. We focus on
common stocks in our study and exclude indices, closed-end funds, exchange-traded funds,
Real Estate Investment Trusts and American Depositary Receipts. Our sample period cov-
ers all available data in OptionMetrics, spanning from June 1996 to August 2013. As JS,
we exclude firms with less than 25 call and 25 put contracts traded during a week in order
to lessen the impact of measurement issues related to option markets that suffer from low
liquidity. We do not distinguish options based on moneyness in our analysis. In order to
lower the impact of long-horizon hedgers and mechanical option trading related to rolling
forward contracts to the next maturity date, we also exclude options that matures within
                                                                           7
five days of the trade or more than thirty days after the trade .
   Our stock data come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), which
cover all common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq. The CRSP data consist of
daily prices, bid and ask prices, number of shares outstanding, and number of shares traded.
The data also contain stock returns, which have been adjusted for stock splits and dividends
are assumed to be reinvested on the ex-distribution date. Fama-French-Carhart factors are
taken from Kenneth French’s web site at Dartmouth. Our final dataset, consisting of the
intersection of the OptionMetrics and CRSP data, includes a total amount of 802,103 firm-
weeks. The average number of unique firms per year is 2,041 and the total number of unique
firms is 5,473.

   7
    See Johnson & So (2012)

                                       9
5 Variable Selection and Descriptions

Next, we present and define the key measures used in our empirical tests. We introduce
the O/S measure and describe the underlying theory of the liquidity proxies used in this
study: quoted bid-ask spread, Zero, Amihud and market capitalization. We also examine
the advantages and drawbacks of each proxy before proceeding with the analysis.

5.1 Option Volume to Stock Volume Ratio

The O/S measure is the ratio between option volume and stock volume for a given firm. We
calculate O/S for every firm-week in our sample as

                                                                                                      i
                                                 i    Option V olumet
                               O/St =               i                             (16)
                                                 Stock V olumet

                                       i
where Option V olumet is the sum of all daily traded put and call contracts that matures be-
                                                                                                                                                                 i
tween five and thirty days after the trade date for firm i in business week t and Stock V olumet
is the total number of shares traded for firm i in business week t.

5.2 Liquidity Measures

The concept of market liquidity and its underpinnings is rather elusive and arguably impos-
sible to capture in one single measure. Generally, liquidity measures are supposed to capture
one or more of the following characteristics of market liquidity [29]: i) tightness (transac-
tion costs), ii) immediacy (speed of execution), iii) depth (prevalence of abundant orders),
iv) breadth (volume size and price impact of orders) and v) resiliency (speed of correcting
order imbalances). In our study, we use quoted bid-ask spread, Zero, Amihud and market
capitalization as proxies for stock liquidity.

5.2.1 Quoted Bid-Ask Spread

The quoted spread is a common proxy for liquidity and it has been used widely in previous
        8
studies . The quoted spread captures transaction costs and is thus primarily a measure of
market tightness. A common rationale for using the quoted spread as a proxy for liquidity
is that it captures both explicit and implicit transaction costs [29]. Specifically, the quoted
spread reflects transaction costs related to i) order processing ii) asymmetric information,

   8
    See Sarr & Lybek (2002), Sadka & Scherbina (2007), & Chordia, Roll & Subrahmanyam (2008)

                                       10
iii) carrying inventory and iv) oligopolistic market structures. The quoted spread is defined:

                                 ∑n     i      i
                                         i    1     askhij,t − bidloj,t
                          Quoted Spreadt =                  i                            (17)
                                           n         askhij,t
                                                     j=1

                                      i
where Quoted Spreadt is the spread for firm i during week t, n ranges from 4 to 6 depending
                                                                                       i
on the number of trading days in a week, askhij,t is the highest ask price during day j in
                                                   i
week t for stock i and bidlowj,t is the lowest bid price for stock i on day j in week t. We use
the quoted spread as a proxy for liquidity in our main regression specifications.

5.2.2 Zero

The quoted bid and ask prices are not necessarily the prices at which trades occur. Trades
can occur within quoted spreads and Huang & Stoll (1996) argue that quoted spreads are
merely a starting point for negotiations. Petersen & Fialkowski (1994) demonstrate that
actual spreads paid by investors average only half the quoted spread on the NYSE. The
effective spread may be a more suitable proxy for liquidity in such a scenario, as it is based
on actual trading costs paid by a trader. Specifically, the effective spread is defined as

                                                                            i                     i                i
                        Ef f ective Spreadt = 2 ∗ |ln(P t ) − ln(Mt  )| (18)

               i                                                                                                       i
where P t is the actual execution price for a trade at time t and Mt  is the quoted midpoint
prevailing at the time of execution for stock i. Goyenko et al (2009), hereafter GHT, run
horseraces between various common proxies for the effective spread and conclude that the
Zero measure developed by Lesmond et al (1999) has a relatively high correlation with the
effective spread. The Zero measure is defined as

                                     i    N o. of days with zero returns
                       Zerot =                                                 (19)
                                      T rading days in week

                     i
where Zerot is firm i’s effective spread during week t. Thus, Zero is the proportion of days
with zero returns and has the advantage of only requiring time-series of daily stock returns
in order to be calculated. More specifically, Zero is an estimate of the effective transaction
costs for a marginal investor. The marginal investor will choose not to trade if he faces
transaction costs that are greater than the expected value from a trade, which in turn will
cause a return of zero. Thus, the logic behind the Zero measure is that the price of an illiquid
stock with higher transaction costs will move less frequently on average and have more days
of zero returns compared to more liquid stocks with lower transaction costs. We use Zero as
a second proxy for liquidity in our robustness specifications.

                                       11
5.2.3 Amihud

Another widely used proxy for liquidity is the Amihud measure developed by Amihud (2002).
The measure effectively captures liquidity aspects related to price impact and is thus pri-
                                             9
marily a measure of market breadth . Specifically, price impact refers to the stock price
decrease that follows a trader-initiated sell or the stock price increase that follows a trader-
initiated buy [6]. The degree of price movements depends on the market’s assessment of the
information value of the trade. The Amihud measure is defined as

                                                n                            i
                               1 ∑      1, 000, 000 ∗ |Rj,t|
                                                      i
                        Amihudt =                       i            i                     (20)
                                   n     Closing P ricej,t ∗ V olumej,t
                                           j=1

               i                                                                                                                     i                     i
where Rj,t is firm i’s stock return on day j in week t and Closing P ricej,t ∗ V olumej,t is
the dollar volume on day j in week t for firm i. Thus, Amihud can be interpreted as the
stock price impact per dollar of trading volume. The logic behind the measure stems from
Amihud & Mendelson (1986) who find that less liquid stocks on average carries an illiquidity
premium in terms of excess spread-adjusted returns. Thus, Amihud exploits the positive
relationship between return and illiquidity: a high return per dollar of trading volume is an
indicator of stock illiquidity and vice versa. We use Amihud as a third proxy for liquidity in
our robustness specifications.

5.2.4 Market Capitalization

Market capitalization has also been used as a proxy for liquidity in previous literature.
Amihud (2002) argues that firm size and liquidity are positively related since price impacts
and quoted spreads are smaller for stocks with a large market capitalization. Banz (1981),
Reinganum (1981) and Fama & French (1992) also find that expected stock returns on
average are lower for larger sized firms. This evidence supports the notion that firm size and
                                                                                                 10
liquidity are positively related, as the returns-illiquidity relationship is positive  . Market
capitalization is primarily as measure of depth and breadth and is calculated as

                                          n
                 1 ∑
                                                              i                                          i                                i
            M arket Capitalizationt =       Stock V olumej,t ∗ Closing P ricej,t (21)
                             n
                                                   i=1

where n is the number of trading days during a week. We use market capitalization as a
fourth proxy for liquidity in our robustness specifications.

   9
    See Goyenko, Holden & Trzcinka (2009)
  10
    See section 5.2.4

                                       12
5.3 Potential Measure Issues

Considering the elusiveness and complexity of liquidity, a word of caution concerning our
liquidity measures is necessary at this point. As previously stated, no single measure will
be able to capture all the underpinnings of liquidity and every measure carries certain pros
and cons. The quoted spread is appealing in the sense that it is easy to calculate and in
theory is supposed to capture several types of transaction costs. As described in section
5.2.2, however, trades do regularly occur within the quoted spread. A potential issue is
therefore that the quoted spread will be a biased proxy for liquidity, as it will consistently
understate the level of liquidity in the market. In this regard, Zero is is a more suitable
proxy for liquidity, as it is supposed to capture the effective spread.
   Zero is also appealing for its simplicity and accuracy; GHT find that the average monthly
time-series correlation based on an equally weighted portfolio over 156 months between Zero
and the effective spread is 0.874. Similar studies have shown that Zero is a more accurate
measure compared to peer proxies for liquidity [21]. However, GHT also find that Zero
performs somewhat worse compared to other liquidity proxies in the cross-section; they
estimate the average cross-sectional correlation based on individual firms between Zero and
the effective spread to be 0.427. Furthermore, the sample period in GHT stretches from
1993-2005 and it is therefore unclear whether the high correlation exists today. Another
potential issue with Zero that is specifically related to our analysis is that we are more likely
to observe nonzero returns for all days in our estimation periods, as our analysis is based
on firm-weeks rather than firm-months and firm-years as in Lesmond, Ogden & Trzcinka
(1999). This may result in a relatively low variable variation which in turn could cause more
unreliable regression estimates.
   Amihud has the advantage of being a widely recognized and credible proxy for price
impact. However, research indicates that Amihud has more merit over longer time horizons.
For instance, GHT show that monthly cross-sectional correlation between Amihud and a
5-minute price impact benchmark is only 0.516 (although the correlation is still higher than
all other measures tested against this benchmark). Finally, although firm size does have
some theoretical merit as a proxy for liquidity, it is arguably a very rough proxy that fails
to capture several important aspects of liquidity.

                                       13
6 Methodology

In this section, we describe the methodology used in our empirical tests. We begin by de-
scribing the regression specifications used to confirm the O/S results in JS and the then turn
to our primary tests where we incorporate the quoted spread into our specifications. Next,
we present our robustness tests where we include Zero, Amihud and market capitalization as
alternative proxies for liquidity. Finally, we introduce the methodology used to construct our
trading strategy, with the purpose of quantifying the economic significance of our findings.

6.1 Verification of the O/S and Future Returns Relationship

We begin by verifying the negative relationship between O/S and future returns. The veri-
fication serves the purpose of being a natural benchmark in our further empirical analysis.
Additionally, it is of interest to examine whether the return predictability has decreased since
JS’s findings, following a general increase in market efficiency. Similarly to JS, we transform
O/S into deciles and estimate the following regression for decile 1 and 10:

    p       f        p           mkt     f
  rt+1 − rt+1 = αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1 + t+1 (22)

         p
where rt+1 is the next week return of an equally weighted portfolio of stocks for each of the
                                                                                                     f
respective O/S deciles. The risk free rate for the corresponding week is denoted rt+1 and the
                           mkt
market return is denoted rt+1 . We additionally control for the Fama-French-Carhart factors,
where HM Lt+1, SM Bt+1 and U M Dt+1 corresponds to the weekly returns of high [book-to-
market-ratio] minus low, small [market capitalization] minus big, and high [momentum]
minus low strategy portfolios, respectively.
   We additionally estimate a version of (22) where we include O/S Decile as an explanatory
variable rather than estimating four-factor alphas for O/S Decile 1 and 10 separately. Thus
we regress

  i       f         i            mkt    f                                                                              i
rt+1 −rt+1 = αt+1 +β1(rt+1 −rt+1)+β2HM Lt+1 +β3SM Bt+1 +β4U M Dt+1 +O/S Decilet +t+1
                                                                                      (23)
                                 i                                                                                  i
where O/S Decilet is the decile transformed counterpart to O/St , and the remaining vari-
ables are defined as in (22).
   We also include a specification that is similar to (23), but where we use O/S rather than
O/S Decile as one of the explanatory variables. As theory suggests a negative relationship
between O/S and future returns, we expect O/S to have a negative and significant sign.
Similarly, we also expect the O/S Decile coefficient estimate in (23) to be negative, and the

                                       14
four-factor alpha of O/S Decile 10 to be smaller than the corresponding alpha of O/S Decile
1 in (22).

6.2 Main Tests

Next we turn to our main test, investigating the relationship between O/S, liquidity and
return predictability. We use the quoted spread as a proxy for liquidity in our main tests
and estimate a pooled OLS regression where we include an interaction term between the
quoted spread and O/S. Specifically, we estimate the following regression specification:

        i        f        i            mkt     f
    rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1
                                                                                      (24)
                                                                   i                 i                                                i
                + β5Quoted Spreadt + β6O/St + β7O/S ∗ Quoted Spreadt + t+1

                                       i                                                                                                              i
where Quoted Spreadt is the average quoted spread for stock i during week t, O/St is the
                                                                                                                                                     i
option to stock volume ratio for stock i during week t, and O/S ∗ Quoted Spreadt is the
                                            i                                     i
interaction between O/St and Quoted Spreadt. Remaining variables are defined as in (23).
We choose to make use of an interaction term to test our hypothesis as the interaction term
will be able to capture how the predictive power of O/S is dependent on stock liquidity. As
the predictions of our model suggest that O/S is more strongly negatively correlated with
future returns when stock liquidity levels are low, we expect that the coefficient estimate
of the interaction term will be negative and significant. To see this, note that the quoted
spread and stock liquidity is negatively related, meaning that a large quoted spread is an
indicator of low stock liquidity. For interpretation purposes and as a check for robustness,
we have also included a specification with decile transformed variables:

         i        f        i            mkt     f
     rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1

                                                                                  i                              i
                 + β5Quoted Spread Decilet + β6O/S Decilet                     (25)

                                                                                                           i
                  + β7O/S Decile ∗ Quoted Spread Decilet + t+1

                                                     i
where Quoted Spread Decilet is the decile transformed quoted spread for stock i during
                                    i
week t, O/S Decilet is the decile transformed O/S ratio for stock i during week t, and
                                                                   i                                                                                             i
O/S Decile ∗ Quoted Spread Decilet is interaction between the decile transformed O/St
                                    i
and Quoted Spreadt variables. Again, remaining variables are defined as in (23) and we
expect the coefficient estimate of the interaction term to be negative and significant.
   We additionally estimate one regression setup where the interaction term has been re-
placed by a dummy variable that indicates in which quoted spread decile and O/S decile the
stock is during any given week. This, again, makes the interpretation somewhat easier and

                                       15
also serves as a robustness check of the previous regressions. The regression specification
with the dummy variable is

     i        f        i            mkt     f
   rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1
                                                                                      (26)
                                                                             i                              i                            i
               + β5Quoted Spread Decilet + β6O/S Decilet + β7Dummy 1t + t+1

where the dummy variable is defined as
             {
                          1 if O/S Decile=10 and Quoted Spread Decile=10
         Dummy 1 =                                                    (27)
                          0 otherwise

   Thus, the dummy variable captures the combination of a high O/S ratio and low stock
liquidity, meaning that its coefficient estimate should be negative and significant if the pre-
diction of our model holds true. Finally, we estimated variants of specification (24) through
(26) where we additionally control for firm and year fixed effects. The fixed effect variant of
(24) is specified as

   i        f        i            mkt     f
 rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1

                                                              i                 i                                                i
             + β5Quoted Spreadt + β6O/St + β7O/S ∗ Quoted Spreadt + Yt + Xi + t+1
                                                                                      (28)

where Yt captures the year fixed effects, and Xi captures the firm fixed effects. The fixed
effects versions of (25) and (26) are similarly defined. By utilizing the fixed effects technique,
we are able to control for practically every firm and year characteristic. This gets us closer
to the statistical certainty of randomized experiments, and we are more likely to be able to
make a causal inference with regards to the effect of liquidity and O/S on future returns.

6.3 Robustness Tests

In this section, we describe the part of our analysis that includes Zero, Amihud and market
capitalization as alternative proxies for stock liquidity. This analysis is an integral part of our
study for two reasons. First, as these measures capture different characteristics of liquidity,
we find it interesting to investigate whether stock return predictability differs depending on
the underlying measure. Second, the alternative measures serve as robustness checks and
ensures the validity of our findings. As additional tests for robustness, we include separate
specifications where year and firm fixed effects are controlled for.
   First, we use Zero as a proxy for liquidity and estimate the corresponding regression to
(24):

                                       16
     i         f        i             mkt      f                                                                            i
  rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1 + β5Zerot

                                            i                              i
              + β6O/St + β7O/S ∗ Zerot + t+1
                                                                                      (29)

                     i                                                             i                                                         i                  i
where Zerot is defined as in (19), O/S ∗ Zerot is the interaction between O/St and Zerot,
and the remaining variables are defined as in (24).
   We additionally estimate regression specifications with Zero that corresponds to (25) and
                              i                  i
(26) where Zerot and O/St have been replaced by their decile transformed counterparts.
                                                                                           i                          i
Thus, we include the interaction term O/S Decilet ∗ Zero Decilet, and a dummy variable
that indicates whether or not a stock is in both the 10th O/S decile and the 10th Zero decile
during any given week. As both a high quoted spread and a high Zero are indicators of stock
illiquidity, we expect that the interaction terms and the dummy variable will be negative
and significant, just as in specification (24) through (26).
   Second, we use Amihud as a proxy for liquidity and estimate the corresponding regression
to (24):

  i         f        i             mkt      f                                                                                 i
rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1 + β5Amihudt

                                         i                                    i
             + β6O/St + β7O/S ∗ Amihudt + t+1
                                                                                      (30)

                           i                                                                   i                                                          i
where Amihudt is defined as in (20), O/S ∗ Amihudt is the interaction between O/St and
               i
Amihudt, and the remaining variables are defined as in (24). As with Zero, we also include
                                                                                                                            i                 i
the Amihud counterpart to specification (25) and (26), where Amihudt and O/St have been
decile transformed. Thus, we include a specification based on the interaction between the
decile transformed variables and a specification including a dummy variable that equals 1
if the stock is in both the 10th O/S decile and the 10th Amihud decile. Amihud has a
similar interpretation as the quoted spread and Zero, meaning that we expect the coefficient
estimates of the interaction terms and the dummy variable to be negative and significant.
   Third, we use market capitalization as a proxy for liquidity and estimate a regression
specification that is similar to (25):

         i        f        i            mkt     f
     rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1

                                                                                            i                              i
                 + β5Inv. M arket Cap. Quartilet + β6O/S Decilet                (31)

                                                                                                                     i
                  + β7O/S Decile ∗ Inv. M arket Cap. Quartilet + t+1

                                       17
                                                               i
where Inv. M arket Cap. Quartilet is the inverse of the quartile transformed market cap-
                                                                                                                                 i
italization for firm i during week t, O/S ∗ Inv. M arket Cap. Quartilet is the interaction
                                                                                                       i
term that is supposed to capture the way in which O/St ’s predictive power is dependent
on liquidity. Market capitalization is defined as in (21) and remaining variables are defined
as in (25). We also estimate a regression where the interaction term has been substituted
for a dummy that is defined correspondingly to (27). Notice that the market capitalization
quartiles have been inversed, so that firms in the higher quartiles are less liquid as they
have a lower market capitalization and vice versa. In other words, the interpretation of the
interaction term and the dummy variable is consistent with previous specifications and we
thus expect the coefficient estimates to be negative and significant.
   Finally, we also estimate fixed effects variants of most of our regression specifications
where Amihud and market capitalization are used as proxies for liquidity. Due to the low
                     11
variation in Zero  , we have chosen not to include it in the fixed effects regressions as the
within firm Zero variation would become even lower, resulting in unreliable estimates. The
fixed effects specifications are defined correspondingly to (28).

6.4 Trading Strategy

We additionally investigate whether our empirical findings can be used to construct a self-
financing trading strategy that is able to generate abnormal returns by exploiting the re-
lationship between O/S, stock liquidity and future returns. This investigation includes a
comparison to a trading strategy solely based on O/S (hereafter O/S strategy) and serves
two main purposes. First, it provides evidence on the economic significance of our empir-
ical results, which is especially important considering that the coefficient estimates of the
interaction terms and dummy variables in our regression specifications cannot be naturally
interpreted. Second, a comparison to the O/S strategy emphasizes the incremental return
predictability attributable to stock liquidity and thus highlights the relevance of our empir-
ical findings in relation to those in JS. Our trading strategy (hereafter liquidity strategy) is
based on the interaction term

                                                                    i                               i
                                  O/St ∗ Quoted Spreadt (32)

and the portfolio is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the 1st vigintile and short
an equally weighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile. This equally weighted portfolio

  11
    See section 5.4

                                       18
is rebalanced weekly and generates weekly returns of

                                                 n1             n20
                 1 ∑   1 ∑
                                        Liq.              1                20
                              rt =       ri,t −       rj,t (33)
                                   n1         n20
                                                 i=1             j=1

                                                                                                          1
where n1 and n20 are the number of stocks in vigintile 1 and vigintile 20, respectively, ri,t is
                                                                                            20
the weekly return on each of the i stocks in vigintile 1 during week t, and rj,t is the return
during week t for each of the j stocks in vigintile 20.
    We regress the weekly returns minus the risk free rate of our portfolio on the market risk
premium during the corresponding week in order to capture weekly portfolio alphas. We
also run a second regression where controls for Fama-French-Carhart factors are included.
Thus, the regression specifications are

                               Liq.     f        Liq.         mkt     f
                       rt+1 − rt+1 = αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + t+1 (34)

and

   Liq.     f        Liq.         mkt     f
  rt+1 − rt+1 = αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1 + t+1 (35)

         Liq.    f                                                                  mkt    f
where rt − rt is the weekly portfolio return over the risk free rate, (rt − rt ) is the weekly
market risk premium, and HM Lt, SM Bt and U M Dt are the Fama-French-Carhart factors
high-minus-low, small-minus-big, and momentum.
   Next, we compare the portfolio returns from the liquidity strategy to the returns from
an O/S strategy that is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the 1st vigintile and
short an equally weighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile of O/S. Thus, we estimate
the corresponding regressions to (34) and (35) with O/S strategy returns as the dependent
variable and compare the alpha of both portfolios. As an alternative comparison test, we
estimate a variant of regression (35) where we include a fifth factor that controls for the
excess returns from the O/S strategy:

        Liq.     f       Liq.         mkt     f
     rt+1 − rt+1 =αt+1 + β1(rt+1 − rt+1) + β2HM Lt+1 + β3SM Bt+1 + β4U M Dt+1
                         O/S                                                        (36)
                                          f
                  + β5(Rt+1 − rt+1) + t+1

         O/S   f
where Rt+1 −rt+1 is the excess return of the O/S strategy during week t+1, and the remaining
variable are defined as in (35). If the liquidity strategy is superior to the O/S strategy in
terms of generating abnormal returns, the constant (alpha) should be positive and significant.
    Finally, we test the persistence of the liquidity strategy by regressing weekly returns up

                                       19
to 12 weeks after the observation of O/S and quoted spread on the market risk premium and
Fama-French-Carhart factors. In this way, we obtain weekly strategy alphas on the 12 weeks
following each O/S and quoted spread observation. We expect that the information content
in O/S will be incorporated relatively quickly into stock prices and similarly that informed
investors will quickly eliminate arbitrage opportunities related to mispricing, causing the
strategy’s persistence to be short lived.

7 Empirical Results

The following section describes the results of the empirical tests concerning the linkage
between O/S, liquidity and stock return predictability. We begin by showing descriptive
statistics of the main variables used in our empirical tests. Next, we turn to the empirical
results of our main tests and of our robustness specifications as outlined is section 6. Finally,
we present the results of our trading strategy and illustrate the economic significance of our
empirical results.

7.1 Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents time-series averages of the cross-sectional statistics for the main variables in
our final dataset. The average O/S ratio is about 4.9%, implying that stock trading volume
is about 20 times larger than option trading volume in our sample. Calls are generally
more liquid than puts and call volume comprises roughly 62% of total option volume in
our dataset. Weekly stock trading volume varies considerably among firms, with a mean
of approximately 15.1 million traded stocks and with a minimum and maximum of 0 and
6,550 million, respectively. The average quoted spread is 4.2% and the average Zero is 1.6%.
Finally, the data consist of both small and large firms in terms of market capitalization, with
an average market cap of roughly USD 12 million and a minimum and maximum market
cap of USD 3 million and USD 657 billion, respectively.
   Table 2 shows yearly mean statistics for our key variables. Both stock and option trading
volume increased considerably in 1996-2009, but have decreased in the wake of the most
recent financial crisis. The average O/S ratio has increased slightly in recent years, peaking
in 2013 at 6.25%. Table 2 also shows that the average quoted spread, Zero and Amihud overall
increased considerably during 1996-2013, indicating a gradual increase in stock liquidity and
market efficiency. Also note that quoted spreads, Zero and Amihud are fairly volatile across
the years. The average quoted spread reached a low of 2.9% in 2013 and peaked at a high of
7.1% following the tech bubble burst in 2000. Amihud correlates to a large extent with the

                                       20
quoted spread, peaking in times of financial instability (2000, 2008) and when stock trading
in terms of volume is relatively low (1996-1999). Interestingly, the relationship between Zero
and the quoted spread appears to be negative, as average Zero was at a high (1.3%) in 2013
and at a low (0.73%) during the crisis in 2008.
   Panel A in Table 3 summarizes O/S as well as average liquidity and return characteristics
for each O/S decile in our sample. First, notice that O/S has a wide dispersion, ranging from
an average of roughly 0.28% in the lowest decile to 22.7% in the highest decile. Second, high
O/S firms tend to both have a higher market capitalization and higher weekly option volume
compared to low O/S firms. The average market capitalization of firms in O/S decile 10 is
approximately 2.5 times larger compared to O/S decile 1. Mean option volume has a high
dispersion, ranging from a low of 390 in decile 1 to a high of 37,316 in decile 10. Third, mean
weekly stock volume has a fairly low dispersion across the O/S deciles, ranging from roughly
11.4 million in decile 2 to 19.6 million in decile 9. Forth, the liquidity proxies do not seem
to correlate across the O/S deciles. The average quoted spread is fairly constant across all
O/S deciles, while Zero is highest in the lowest decile and consistently diminishes up to the
highest decile. In contrast, Amihud is lowest in the lowest O/S decile and gradually increases
up to the highest decile. Finally, notice that average next week returns are lower for firms in
the high O/S deciles compared to firms in the low O/S deciles. The average return in decile
10 is roughly 8 basis points, while the average return in decile 1 is 41 bp. This is consistent
with the results in JS and the theoretical model presented in section 3.1, as a high O/S ratio
is an indicator of negative private information and therefore should correlate negatively with
future returns.
   Panel B, C, D and E in Table 3 present next week return characteristics for the following
four interaction term deciles: O/S ∗Quoted Spread, O/S ∗Amihud, O/S ∗Inv. M arket Cap.
and O/S ∗ Zero. As the quoted spread is our primary proxy for liquidity and the trading
strategy is based on deciles of O/S ∗ Quoted Spread, Panel B is of particular interest.
As predicted by our model in section 3.2, Panel B indicates that future returns correlate
negatively with O/S ∗ Quoted Spread. Next week returns for firms in the lowest O/S ∗
Quoted Spread decile are roughly 26 bp on average, while they are only 6 bp on average for
firms in the highest decile. Somewhat similar patterns can be observed in panel C and D.
Firms in the lowest O/S ∗ Amihud decile earn an average next week return of approximately
19 bp, while the corresponding return for firms in the highest decile is 6 bp. Next week
returns for firms in the lowest O/S ∗ Inv. M arket Cap. decile is 23 bp on average and -3.5
bp in the highest decile. Notice, however, that the pattern in panel C and D is not as evident
as in panel B. For instance, firms in O/S ∗ Amihud decile 9 on average experience returns
that are 12 bp larger than firms in decile 1 and firms in O/S ∗ Inv. M arket Cap. decile 8

                                       21
earn average returns that are 13 bp larger than firms in decile 1. Finally, notice in Panel
E that the variation in O/S ∗ Zero across firms in our sample is so small that only two
deciles can be constructed. This potential issue with Zero was highlighted in section 5.4 and
Table 4 additionally shows that the percentage of firms with a Zero of 0 is 92.74% and the
cumulative percentage of firms with a Zero of ≤ 0.5 is 99.94%. In contrast to our prediction
and the statistics in Panel B-D, Panel E also reports that average returns for firms in the
lowest O/S ∗ Zero decile on average are lower than firms in the highest decile. Firms in the
lowest decile on average experience next week returns of 23 bp, compared to 35 bp for firms
in the highest decile.

7.2 O/S and Future Returns

The descriptive statistics in Table 3 largely indicate that there is a negative relationship
between O/S and future returns. We verify the relationship by running the pooled OLS
regressions outlined in section 6.1. The results are reported in Table 5. Column 1 and 2
show results for the subsample including firms in O/S decile 1 and 10, respectively. First
notice how the factor loadings on Fama-French-Carhart factors vary between O/S decile 1
and 10. Decile 1 has a statistically significant negative loading on the UMD factor, while
decile 10 has an UMD factor loading that is not statistically different from zero. Decile 10
has negative and significant loading on the HML factor, while decile 1 have not. Both decilies
have a positive and significant exposure to the SMB factor. Also, decile 1 seems to have a
somewhat smaller market exposure compared to decile 10, as the average slope coefficient of
the market risk factor for decile 1 and 10 is 1.147 and 1.290, respectively.
   Second, we see that the constant (alpha) for firms in O/S decile 1 is positive (0.00205)
and statistically significant (t-stat 6.06). The interpretation is that next week returns for
firms in the lowest decile have a Fama-French-Carhart adjusted alpha of 20.5 bp on average,
supporting JS conclusion that a O/S is negatively correlated to future returns. Third, notice
that the constant for firms in O/S decile 10 has the opposite sign (-0.00174) and is statistically
significant at the 0.1% level. Thus, firms in the highest O/S decile on average earn next week
alphas of -17.4 bp. This is also consistent with the results in JS, as a high O/S is an indicator
of negative private information. Finally, the effects in column 1 and 2 are also economically
significant; a weekly alpha of 20.5 bp and -17.4 bp corresponds to an annual alpha of 11.24%
and -8.66%, assuming annual compounding and 52 trading weeks.
    Column 3 presents the result across all O/S deciles. As expected, the coefficient estimate
for O/S decile is negative (0.000311) and statistically significant at the 0.1% level. The
interpretation is that an increase by one O/S decile on average lowers next week return with

                                       22
3.11 bp, corresponding to an annual rate of -1.62%. The result is thus consistent with the
ones obtained in column 1 and 2 and is also arguably economically significant. Column
4 reports the result of the test where O/S is used as an explanatory variable. Again, the
coefficient estimate is negative (-0.00660) and significant at all conventional levels. Note that
the interpretation of O/S is somewhat different, as it is expressed as a percentage rather than
divided into deciles. For instance, a ten percentage point increase in O/S corresponds to an
average next week return of -6.6 bp, or -3.43% on an annual basis. Additionally, the results
are qualitatively unchanged if we restrict the sample to only include later observations than
those included in JS’s empirical tests. We conclude that the results in JS are verified as all
specifications in Table 5 support the negative relationship between O/S and future returns.

7.3 Main Results

Having confirmed the previously established linkage between O/S and future returns, we
now turn to investigate return predictability conditioned on O/S and the quoted spread.
An overview of the results is presented in Table 6, where we also have included the O/S
decile result from column 3 in Table 5 as a benchmark. Column 2 shows the result of
specification (24), where the interaction term is defined as O/S ∗ Quoted Spread and the
control variables are O/S, Quoted Spread and Fama-French-Carhart factors. First, notice
that the sign of the interaction term is negative (-0.464) and statistically significant at the
0.1% level. This result supports the prediction of our theoretical model that a high O/S
combined with a low level of stock liquidity is a greater predictor of future returns than O/S
alone. As previously mentioned, the coefficient estimate of the interaction term does not
have a natural interpretation, but its negative sign indicates that informed investors indeed
are able to detect and take advantage of the higher frequency of mispricing on illiquid stocks.
Also note that the interpretation of O/S is different compared to previous specifications as
it is both included as a control variable and as a part of the interaction term. This explains
why O/S has become positive in column 2. In fact, we find that an increase in O/S is
correlated with a net decrease in future returns for illiquidity levels around, or higher than,
the mean. However, as quoted spread approaches zero, the negative relationship between
O/S and future returns diminishes which is consistent with our model predictions.
   Column 3 presents the result from specification (25), where we have divided O/S and
Quoted Spread into deciles and the interaction term is defined as O/S Decile∗Quoted Spread
Decile. Notice that the interaction term is negative (-0.000122) and significant with a t-stat
of (-8.52). Additionally, column 4 shows the result of the regression setup in (26), where
we have included a dummy variable that equals 1 if O/S decile=10 and Quoted Spread

                                       23
decile=10, and zero otherwise. The coefficient estimate of the dummy variable is negative
(-0.00758) and significant at the 0.1% level. Both results in column 3 and 4 are therefore
consistent with the predications of our model. Also notice that interaction term in all three
specifications is negative and significant at the 0.1% level.
    The result of the regression estimates where we have included additional controls for firm
and year fixed effects is reported in Table 7. Overall, the results are qualitatively unchanged.
The interaction term O/S ∗ Quoted Spread in column 1 is still significant at the 0.1% level
and the coefficient estimate is even more negative (-0.616). Likewise, the coefficient of the
interaction term O/S Decile∗Quoted Spread Decile in column 2 is more negative (-0.000159)
and significant at the 0.1% level. The coefficient of the dummy variable is marginally smaller
with firm and year fixed effects (-0.00733) but still significant at the 0.1% level.

7.4 Robustness Results

In this subsection, we present the results of our robustness tests where Zero, Amihud and
market capitalization have been used as proxies for liquidity.

7.4.1 Zero

The results obtained from the regressions where Zero has been used as a proxy for liquidity
is presented in Table 8. Notice that all three interaction terms in column 2-4 have negative
coefficient estimates, but only the decile based interaction Zero Decile∗O/S Decile reported
in column 3 is significant at the 10% level. In column 2, where Zero ∗ O/S has been used as
an interaction term, the coefficient estimate is -0.0290 but not significant at any conventional
levels (t-stat -1.25). Finally, column 4 shows the result of including the dummy variable that
equals 1 if Zero Decile=10 and O/S Decile=10, and zero otherwise. We see that the negative
coefficient estimate (-0.000860) of the dummy variable is not statistically significant (t-stat
-0.48). Thus, the Zero results are somewhat mixed. Although the interaction terms and
the dummy variable have the negative sign that our model predicts, only the decile based
interaction term is statistically significant. The mixed results should be thought of in the
context of the potential issues with Zero as described in section 5.4 and again highlighted in
section 7.1 and Table 4.

7.4.2 Amihud

Next, we present the empirical results from the specifications where Amihud has been used
as a proxy for liquidity. Column 2 in Table 9 shows the result from the specification in
(30), where the relationship between O/S and stock liquidity is captured by the interaction

                                       24
term O/S ∗ Amihud. Notice that the coefficient estimate of the interaction term is negative
(-0.335) and statistically significant at the 1% level. The coefficient from the regression
with decile transformed variables in column 3 where O/S Decile ∗ Amihud Decile has been
used as an interaction term is also negative (-0.000147) and significant at the 0.1% level.
Column 4 presents the result of the regression including a dummy variable and we see that
the coefficient estimate is negative and significant at all conventional levels. Overall, the
results of using Amihud as a proxy for liquidity are largely similar to those obtained when
using the quoted spread, and in line with the predictions of our model. This holds true
even after controlling for firm and year fixed effects, as is shown in column 1 and 2 in Table
11. The coefficient of the interaction term O/S ∗ Amihud in column 1 is more negative
(-1.245) when controlling for fixed effects and significant at the 0.1% level. The coefficient
of O/S Decile ∗ Amihud Decile is nearly identical (-0.000145) and significant at the 0.1%
level.

7.4.3 Market Capitalization

The empirical results from including market capitalization as a proxy for liquidity is reported
in Table 10. Column 2 presents the result from (31), where we have included the interaction
term Inv. M arket Cap. Quartile ∗ O/S Decile. Remember that the market capitalization
variable is inversed so that a high value is supposed to capture a low level of stock liquidity
and vice versa. The coefficient estimate of the interaction term is negative (-0.000395) and
significant at the 0.1% level. Similar results are obtained in column 3, where a dummy vari-
able that equals 1 if Inv. Market Cap. Quartile=4 and O/S Decile=10, and zero otherwise,
is included. The coefficient estimate of the dummy variable is -0.00628 and significant at
the 0.1% level. The results are qualitatively unchanged if additional controls for firm and
year fixed effects are included, as can be seen in column 3 and 4 in Table 11. Indeed, the
results obtained from using market capitalization as a proxy for liquidity is similar to those
obtained with the quoted spread and Amihud.

7.5 Trading Strategy

Having found statistically significant evidence that is consistent with the predictions of our
theoretical model, we next turn to the argument that our empirical findings are of economic
significance. Table 12 reports the results of our liquidity strategy that is based on the
interaction term O/S ∗ Quoted Spread as well as the benchmarking O/S strategy. Column
(1) and (2) show the O/S strategy’s weekly alphas and exposures to the market and Fama-
Franch-Carhart factors, respectively. In both columns, we notice a slight negative exposure

                                       25
to the market that is significant at the 10% level and 5% level, respectively. The O/S strategy
has a negative loading of -0.129 on the small-minus-big portfolio that is significant at the
10% level, as well as a highly statistically significant negative exposure to the momentum
portfolio with a coefficient estimate of -0.37. It has a positive exposure to the high-minus-low
factor of 0.463 and this coefficient estimate is also significant at all conventional levels. With
regards to the constant, which can be interpreted as the average weekly portfolio alpha, we
notice an average weekly CAPM alpha of 0.484% and a four-factor alpha of 0.499% that are
both statistically significant. Thus, we conclude that the O/S strategy generates abnormal
returns that are both economic and statistically significant, which is consistent we the results
obtained in Table 5.
   In column (3) and (4) we present the corresponding results of the liquidity strategy.
Notice that the strategy has a significantly more negative market exposure compared to
the O/S strategy, with a CAPM beta of -0.703 and a four-factor market beta of -0.538.
Additionally, we see in column (4) that the liquidity strategy has a more negative loading
on the small-minus-big factor, and a more positive loading on the high-minus-low factor. It
has has no statistically significant exposure to the momentum factor. Overall, the factor
loadings imply that the liquidity strategy is on average long large value stocks and short
smaller growth stocks. Also, the relatively large negative market exposure suggests that
the liquidity strategy is more volatile compared to the O/S strategy. More importantly, the
constants in column (3) and (4) indicate that the average weekly alpha generated by the
liquidity strategy is higher than the corresponding alphas for the O/S strategy. The CAPM
alpha and the four-factor alpha are 0.633% and 0.533%, respectively, and thus higher than
the alphas of 0.484% and 0.499% in column (1) and (2). Column (5) presents the results
of specification (36), where a fifth factor that controls for the excess returns generated by
the O/S strategy is included. Interestingly, we see that the liquidity strategy generates an
average weekly alpha of 0.184% that is significant at the 5% level even after controlling for
this additional factor. The result thus indicates that there is in fact a significant difference
between the alphas generated by the O/S based and liquidity based portfolios.
   Figure 1 plots yearly liquidity strategy returns alongside the strategy’s four-factor ex-
pected returns. Note that actual strategy returns are higher than the expected returns in
every year except 2008, and on average the difference between actual- and expected returns
is 22.41% per year. The figure clearly demonstrates the economic significance of our trading
strategy and the strong predictability of the interaction term O/S ∗ Quoted Spread. Fig-
ure 2 presents cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) of the liquidity strategy and the O/S
strategy over a 10 year period stretching from 2002 to 2012. Both strategies generate sub-
stantial CARs over the ten year period, but we also notice that the liquidity strategy’s CAR

                                       26
(230.31%) exceeds the O/S strategy’s CAR (169.61%) by approximately 61.05 percentage
points at the end of the period. Notice that we have not accounted for trading costs in
these calculations. However, this should not have a significant impact on the two strategies’
relative CARs since both strategies are equally trading intensive.
   Finally, we examine the longevity of the interaction term O/S ∗ Quoted Spread’s pre-
dictive power. Figure 3 shows weekly four-factor alphas, including 95% confidence intervals,
from the first 12 weeks following each O/S and quoted spread observation from week 0.
Interestingly, we find that the interaction term is a relatively long term predictor of future
returns, with statistically significant positive alphas at the 5% level for week 1, 2, 3 and 5.
The weekly alpha for the 4th week is statistically positive at the 10% level. Furthermore,
the alpha during the first week (0.533%) is considerably higher than the alphas in week
2 through 5, which average roughly 0.25%. In week 6 through 12 following the O/S and
quoted spread observation, the strategy does not generate alphas that are statistically dif-
ferent from zero. Table 13 also reports the persistence of weekly four-factor alphas by each
year in our sample. Notice that the predictive power has been rather consistent throughout
the years, with a majority of positive four-factor alphas in week 1 through 5. Interestingly,
the table also shows that four-factor alphas on average have been relatively large following
the financial crisis in 2008.

8 Conclusion

This study sets out to investigate the dependency of O/S’ relationship to future returns on
stock illiquidity. Building on previous research on mispricing and liquidity, we extend the
multimarket asymmetric information model originally developed by JS in order to explicitly
account for the relationship between the presence of informed investors and stock liquidity.
In doing so, we find an equilibrium in which O/S is negatively correlated with future returns,
and where the predictive power of O/S is increasing in stock illiquidity. We provide empirical
evidence that the predictions of our extended model hold true, as we find that the negative
correlation between O/S and next week returns is heavily dependent on stock illiquidity.
Specifically, the net effect on future returns of a change in O/S is more negative when a
stock is illiquid. The results are highly significant when quoted spread, Amihud and market
capitalization are used as proxies for stock liquidity, although Zero gives somewhat mixed
results. The findings are robust across a variety of regression specifications and also after
controlling for firm and year fixed effects.
   We additionally construct a trading strategy based on our empirical results in order to
quantify the economic significance of our findings. The strategy, which is based on O/S

                                       27
and stock liquidity, generates a weekly four-factor alpha of 0.533%, as well as cumulative
abnormal returns that exceed those of a corresponding strategy based solely on O/S by
61.05 percentage points over a 10 year period stretching from 2002-2012. This suggests that
the ability of informed investors to detect mispricing arising from low levels of liquidity in
the stock market is of such magnitude that a combined measure of O/S and stock liquidity
functions as a highly economically significant predictor of future returns. Additionally, we
find that the return predictability is relatively long-lived with statistically significant alphas
in the first five weeks after each O/S and liquidity observation, which implies that there
is inertia with regard to the time it takes for the market to incorporate the information
embedded in O/S and liquidity measures.
    The findings in this study provide important insights to existing literature related to the
O/S framework. The results in JS suggest that informed investors are able to profit on their
private information and that they have a preference for trading on negative information in
the options market, causing O/S to correlate negatively with future returns. We demonstrate
that this ability is increasing when considering stocks that are less liquid and thus priced less
efficiently, causing the stock return predictability of O/S to increase significantly in stock
illiquidity. Hence, our results provide evidence of the underpinnings of the O/S framework
and its critical linkage to stock liquidity. Our findings also contribute to the rather limited
existing literature concerning the trading behavior of informed investors, as our results indi-
cate that these investors are able to detect mispricing that arises from low levels of liquidity
in the stock market and profit on the mispricing by taking positions in the options market.
Finally, our findings support the notion that options have a significant role in the stock
price discovery process. We are able to confirm the result in JS, suggesting that O/S is a
strong predictor of future movements in the underlying stock. More importantly, our study
highlights the benefits of incorporating signals from both the options market and the stock
market when investigating the informational content in options. By explicitly integrating
stock liquidity into the O/S framework, we demonstrate that option volumes contain even
stronger signals about future stock prices compared to findings in previous literature.
    We also want to emphasize the limitations of our findings and highlight interest areas for
further research. First, as the data in OptionMetrics and CRSP solely covers US options
and stocks, the study considers the US market in isolation. In order to provide further
insights of the O/S framework and to validate the findings in our study, it would be of
interest to investigate if our results are applicable in a setting where international markets are
considered. Second, our empirical analysis covers a small sample of low-frequency liquidity
proxies developed in previous academic literature. Hence, research integrating a wider variety
and more sophisticated proxies into the O/S framework is necessary in order to further

                                       28
confirm the robustness of the O/S-liquidity relationship as well as draw additional conclusions
about the relationship’s underpinnings. For instance, research incorporating refined liquidity
measures based on high-frequency intraday data from Rule 605 or TAQ may provide fruitful
insights and also establish whether the return predictability of O/S and stock liquidity
is prevalent over shorter horizons. Finally and more broadly, it would be of interest to
investigate whether measures of stock liquidity could be successfully incorporated into other
frameworks concerning the linkage between the trading patterns of informed investors and
stock return predictability. As for the investigation in this paper, we conclude that the
results indeed suggest that there is a significant relationship between O/S, liquidity and
stock return predictability.

                                       29
References

 [1] Anat R Admati and Paul Pfleiderer. A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price
     variability. Review of Financial Studies, 1(1):3–40, 1988.

 [2] Yakov Amihud. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Jour-
     nal of Financial Markets, 5(1):31–56, 2002.

 [3] Yakov Amihud and Haim Mendelson. Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread. Journal of
    Financial Economics, 17(2):223–249, 1986.

 [4] Joseph H Anthony. The interrelation of stock and options market trading-volume data.
     The Journal of Finance, 43(4):949–964, 1988.

 [5] Rolf W Banz. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 9(1):3–18, 1981.

 [6] Hendrik Bessembinder and Herbert M Kaufman. A comparison of trade execution costs
     for NYSE and Nasdaq-listed stocks. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
     32(03):287–310, 1997.

 [7] Bruno Biais and Pierre Hillion. Insider and liquidity trading in stock and options
     markets. Review of Financial Studies, 7(4):743–780, 1994.

 [8] Fischer Black and Myron Scholes. The pricing of options and corporate liabilities. The
     Journal of Political Economy, pages 637–654, 1973.

 [9] Sugato Chakravarty, Huseyin Gulen, and Stewart Mayhew. Informed trading in stock
     and option markets. The Journal of Finance, 59(3):1235–1258, 2004.

[10] Kalok Chan, Y Peter Chung, and Wai-Ming Fong. The informational role of stock and
     option volume. Review of Financial Studies, 15(4):1049–1075, 2002.

[11] Tarun Chordia, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. Liquidity and market
     efficiency. Journal of Financial Economics, 87(2):249–268, 2008.

[12] Dennis Chung and Karel Hrazdil. Liquidity and market efficiency: A large sample study.
    Journal of Banking & Finance, 34(10):2346–2357, 2010.

[13] Douglas W Diamond and Robert E Verrecchia. Constraints on short-selling and asset
     price adjustment to private information. Journal of Financial Economics, 18(2):277–
     311, 1987.

[14] David Easley, Maureen O’hara, and Pulle Subrahmanya Srinivas. Option volume and
     stock prices: Evidence on where informed traders trade. The Journal of Finance,
     53(2):431–465, 1998.

[15] Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. The cross-section of expected stock returns.
     The Journal of Finance, 47(2):427–465, 1992.

                                       30
[16] Ruslan Y Goyenko, Craig W Holden, and Charles A Trzcinka. Do liquidity measures
     measure liquidity? Journal of Financial Economics, 92(2):153–181, 2009.

[17] Darren K Hayunga, Richard D Holowczak, Peter P Lung, and Takeshi Nishikawa.
     Derivatives traders reaction to mispricing in the underlying equity. Journal of Banking
    & Finance, 36(9):2438–2454, 2012.

[18] Roger D Huang and Hans R Stoll. Dealer versus auction markets: A paired compar-
     ison of execution costs on Nasdaq and the NYSE. Journal of Financial Economics,
     41(3):313–357, 1996.

[19] Travis L Johnson and Eric C So. The option to stock volume ratio and future returns.
     Journal of Financial Economics, 106(2):262–286, 2012.

[20] Albert S Kyle. Continuous auctions and insider trading. Econometrica: Journal of the
    Econometric Society, pages 1315–1335, 1985.

[21] David A Lesmond, Joseph P Ogden, and Charles A Trzcinka. A new estimate of trans-
     action costs. Review of Financial Studies, 12(5):1113–1141, 1999.

[22] Steven Manaster and Richard J Rendleman. Option prices as predictors of equilibrium
     stock prices. The Journal of Finance, 37(4):1043–1057, 1982.

[23] Stewart Mayhew, Atulya Sarin, and Kuldeep Shastri. The allocation of informed trading
     across related markets: An analysis of the impact of changes in equity-option margin
     requirements. The Journal of Finance, 50(5):1635–1653, 1995.

[24] Dmitriy Muravyev, Neil D Pearson, and John Paul Broussard. Is there price discovery
     in equity options? Journal of Financial Economics, 107(2):259–283, 2013.

[25] Jun Pan and Allen M Poteshman. The information in option volume for future stock
     prices. Review of Financial Studies, 19(3):871–908, 2006.

[26] Mitchell A Petersen and David Fialkowski. Posted versus effective spreads: Good prices
     or bad quotes? Journal of Financial Economics, 35(3):269–292, 1994.

[27] Marc R Reinganum. Misspecification of capital asset pricing: Empirical anomalies based
     on earnings’ yields and market values. Journal of Financial Economics, 9(1):19–46,
     1981.

[28] Ronnie Sadka and Anna Scherbina. Analyst disagreement, mispricing, and liquidity*.
     The Journal of Finance, 62(5):2367–2403, 2007.

[29] Abdourahmane Sarr and Tonny Lybek. Measuring liquidity in financial markets. 2002.

[30] Anand M Vijh. Liquidity of the CBOE equity options. The Journal of Finance,
     45(4):1157–1179, 1990.

                                       31
A Appendix

                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Main Variables

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics of the main variables in our empirical tests. The sample consists of
802,103 firm-weeks and the estimation period spans from 1996 through 2013. Firms with less than 25 call and
25 put contracts traded during a week are excluded, as well as options that matures within five days of the
trade date or more than thirty days after the trade date. In order to make put and call volume comparable
to stock volume, puts and calls have been adjusted for that they are traded in units of 100 shares. Put
volume, call volume, option volume and stock volume have also been scaled with a factor of 1,000. Market
capitalization is reported in USD million.

                    count mean min max sd skewness

                           i
   P ut V olumet 802,103 311.4 2.500 189,414.8 1,523.0 28.64
                            i
   Call V olumet 802,103 499.0 2.500 447,955.3 3,011.0 47.06
                                 i
   Option V olumet 802,103 810.4 5 462,348.1 4,136.5 31.70
                               i
   Stock V olumet 802,103 15,095.2 0 6,549,953.5 51,762.2 39.70
                             i
   M arket Cap.t 802,083 12,011.1 3.347 656,669 30,519.1 6.763
             i
   O/St 802,083 0.0485 0.0000290 91.68 0.145 327.3
                                i
   Quoted Spreadt 802,083 0.0417 0.000310 0.509 0.0271 2.214
              i
   Zerot 802,103 0.0163 0 1 0.0609 4.131
                    i
   Amihudt 802,082 0.00276 0 23.72 0.0365 493.8
   O/S ∗ Liquidity 802,083 0.00193 0.000000386 3.471 0.00548 323.2
   Zero ∗ O/S 802,083 0.000659 0 1.085 0.00552 49.09
   Amihud ∗ O/S 802,082 0.000154 0 11.79 0.0134 852.3
           i
   Rett 801,815 0.00272 -0.985 11 0.0898 3.812
     f
   rt 802,103 0.000462 0 0.00132 0.000414 0.281
     M kt
   Rt 802,103 0.00127 -0.151 0.152 0.0277 -0.313
   SM Bt 802,103 0.000498 -0.0913 0.0647 0.0140 -0.408
   HM Lt 802,103 0.000781 -0.0688 0.115 0.0155 0.786
   U M Dt 802,103 0.000967 -0.156 0.0838 0.0259 -1.163
  N 802,103

                                       32
                           Table 2: Descriptive Statistics by Year

Table 2 reports yearly mean statistics of the main variables in our empirical tests. The sample consists of
802,103 firm-weeks and the estimation period spans from 1996 through 2013. Firms with less than 25 call and
25 put contracts traded during a week are excluded, as well as options that matures within five days of the
trade date or more than thirty days after the trade date. In order to make put and call volume comparable
to stock volume, puts and calls have been adjusted for that they are traded in units of 100 shares. Put
volume, call volume, option volume and stock volume have also been scaled with a factor of 1,000. Market
capitalization is reported in USD million.

          Put Call Option Stock                      Quoted
                                         Market Cap. O/S          Zero Amihud
        Volume Volume Volume Volume Spread
 1996 80.41 159.4 239.8 4,409.5 7,746.6 0.0490 0.0422 0.0778 0.00469
 1997 100.4 194.0 294.4 5,016.0 9,096.1 0.0486 0.0421 0.0551 0.00453
 1998 104.2 209.2 313.3 6,120.7 11,137.5 0.0433 0.0481 0.0370 0.00492
 1999 116.7 263.3 380.0 7,783.7 14,106.1 0.0401 0.0531 0.0334 0.00443
 2000 157.2 314.6 471.8 10,537.1 14,366.6 0.0370 0.0709 0.0248 0.00441
 2001 205.7 306.3 512.0 14,768.2 13,430.3 0.0311 0.0591 0.0118 0.00391
 2002 203.9 270.9 474.8 15,216.5 11,650.9 0.0297 0.0501 0.00849 0.00300
 2003 195.7 328.1 523.8 13,818.4 11,549.5 0.0368 0.0353 0.0111 0.00226
 2004 220.3 363.4 583.8 12,553.9 12,043.7 0.0445 0.0318 0.0115 0.00166
 2005 230.1 401.7 631.8 12,229.0 12,494.2 0.0495 0.0287 0.0121 0.00143
 2006 282.0 463.9 746.0 12,699.6 12,046.1 0.0564 0.0301 0.0109 0.00148
 2007 354.4 523.1 877.5 14,582.6 12,616.2 0.0558 0.0324 0.00994 0.00193
 2008 527.1 641.1 1,168.2 20,581.5 10,396.2 0.0502 0.0582 0.00731 0.00330
 2009 530.2 814.8 1,345.0 24,554.1 8,919.0 0.0510 0.0469 0.00948 0.00280
 2010 403.9 747.5 1,151.4 22,398.4 11,220.3 0.0527 0.0332 0.0112 0.00176
 2011 428.1 728.5 1,156.6 19,209.0 12,074.8 0.0557 0.0367 0.00982 0.00258
 2012 445.4 723.1 1,168.5 17,597.5 13,720.9 0.0589 0.0314 0.0119 0.00240
 2013 444.7 706.5 1,151.2 15,918.4 15,327.7 0.0625 0.0286 0.0132 0.00190
 Total 311.4 499.0 810.4 15,095.2 12,011.1 0.0485 0.0417 0.0163 0.00276
 N 802103

                                       33
          ) and
              N                 N      N      N      N
                        802,083802,083802,083802,083802,082802,083802,083620,031    620,031    620,030    620,031    620,031

         Amihud
          ∗
                    10                         10        10        10        10
         O/S                0.2270.03920.0123                                         0.0035
                         16,527.13,731.6 0.0031718,158.10.000756   0.000648   0.000645
           ), (                                                                             -0.000350

                                                          .
                    9                          9         9         9         9
                         19,590.91,631.30.08360.04110.002630.013818,105.50.00208    0.00162    0.00312    0.00229

          Quoted Spread
          ∗
                      8                            8          8          8          8  .
         O/S            18,623.41,015.10.05440.04190.002970.015016,615.10.00241    0.00166    0.00285    0.00361


                                                          .
                    7                          7         7         7         7
                           643.90.03830.04260.0160
                         16,727.2   0.0028314,110.00.00133    0.00211    0.00308    0.00262


                                                          .
                    6                          6         6         6         6
                           413.3                                               Zero Decile
                        14,878.70.02770.04270.002940.016711,794.40.00199    0.00271Amihud Decile       0.00277    0.00238∗
                                                        ∗

                                      Quoted Spread Decile
                                            ∗                     Inv. M arket Cap. Decile           O/S
                                            O/S ∗        .
                     5                           5         5         5         5
                          269.60.02020.04280.0170   O/S
                         13,315.8   0.0029610,005.00.00225       0.00271    0.00218    0.00170
                                                           O/S


                                                          .
                    4                          4         4         4         4
                            174.40.01440.04250.01778,730.4
                         12,043.5   0.00292 0.00266    0.00364    0.00260    0.00302


                                                          .
                    3                          3         3         3         3
                            115.2 0.04200.01777,860.8
                  Panel A: Summary Statistics by O/S Decile11,607.30.009920.00271 0.00312    0.00322    0.00195    0.00214
                                                                   Panel E: Future Returns by
                                               Panel C: Future Returns by
Table 3: Descriptive Statistics by O/S and Interaction Deciles                                  .
                     2                       Panel B: Future Returns by2         2         2         2
                           70.40 0.04120.0180                         Panel D: Future Returns by
                         11,369.80.006200.002627,218.60.00371    0.00309    0.00209    0.00344


            ), respectively. Panel E reports mean next week returns for decile 1 and decile 10 of the interaction variable (O/S*Zero).
                    1                          1         1         1         1
                            39.02 0.04050.01847,510.6
                         16,270.50.002750.00185 0.00413    0.00259    0.00186    0.00229    0.00225






            Inv. M arket Cap
               ∗                          i +1t            i +1t            i +1t            i +1t
           /S
                    DecileStock VolumeOption VolumeO/SQuoted SpreadAmihudZeroMarket Cap.Ret    DecileRet    DecileRet    DecileRet    Decilemean
     Panel A in Table 3 reports mean statistics for our main variables by each O/S decile. Option volume has been adjusted for that puts and calls aretraded in units of 100 shares. Option volume and stock volume have also been scaled with a factor of 1,000. Market capitalization is reported in USDmillion. Panel B, C and D present mean next week returns by each decile of the interaction variables ((O

                                     34
                         Table 4: Distribution of the Zero Variable

Table 4 shows the distribution of the liquidity proxy Zero.The sample consists of 802,103 firm-weeks and the
estimation period spans from 1996 through 2013. Zero is defined as the proportion of days with zero returns
in each firm-week. Shown are frequencies, percentages and cumulative percentages.

                                                 Cumulative
                      Zero Frequency Percentage
                                                    Percentage
                      0 743,838 92.74 92.74
                      0.167 370 0.0461 92.78
                       0.200 47,026 5.863 98.64
                       0.250 6,098 0.760 99.41
                      0.333 77 0.00960 99.41
                       0.400 3,848 0.480 99.89
                      0.500 352 0.0439 99.94
                      0.600 417 0.0520 99.99
                      0.667 4 0.000499 99.99
                      0.750 34 0.00424 100.00
                      0.800 32 0.00399 100.00
                      1.000 7 0.000873 100
                      Total 802,103 100
                  N 802,103

                                       35
                    Table 5: Regression Analysis - O/S Confirmation

Table 5 presents regression results for O/S. Column (1) and (2) show results for the subsample including
firms in O/S decile 1 and O/S decile 10, respectively. Deciles are constructed at the end of each week and
firms with the highest O/S are located in decile 10 and firms with the lowest O/S are located in decile 1. All
specifications are regressed on the market risk premium as well as the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB,
HML and UMD. The sample period stretches from 1996 through 2013.

                                 (1) (2) (3) (4)
                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
           RM,t+1 − rf,t+1 1.147       1.290        1.293        1.293
                              (67.29) (83.47) (262.86) (262.85)

                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
           SM Bt+1 0.517       0.489        0.555        0.555
                               (15.84) (16.49) (59.00) (59.03)

                                                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
           HM Lt+1 0.0136 -0.250        -0.271        -0.271
                                (0.40) (-8.72) (-30.67) (-30.69)

                                        ∗∗∗                      ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
            U M Dt+1 -0.324        -0.0227 -0.152        -0.152
                               (-15.37) (-1.35) (-27.67) (-27.66)

                                  i                                                         ∗∗∗
            O/S Decilet -0.000311
                                                            (-9.28)

                       i                                                                                       ∗∗∗
           O/St -0.00660
                                                                           (-6.36)

                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
           Constant 0.00205     -0.00174      0.00212      0.000653
                                (6.06) (-5.95) (9.79) (5.99)
           Observations 48,187 73,122 620,027 620,027
              t statistics in parentheses
             ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
               p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                       36
                        Table 6: Regression Analysis - Main Tests

Table 6 reports regression results for the specifications including O/S and Quoted Spread. Column (1) is
identical to column (3) in Table 5 and serves as a benchmark. All specifications are regressed on the market
risk premium as well as the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB, HML and UMD. The sample period stretches
from 1996 through 2013 and includes 620,027 observations.

                                               (1) (2) (3) (4)
                                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1 1.293        1.293        1.292        1.293
                                           (262.86) (262.45) (262.44) (262.46)

                                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1 0.555        0.555        0.555         0.555
                                            (59.00) (59.00) (59.07) (59.02)

                                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1 -0.271        -0.271        -0.272        -0.272
                                             (-30.67) (-30.61) (-30.74) (-30.74)

                                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1 -0.152        -0.151        -0.152        -0.153
                                             (-27.67) (-27.57) (-27.70) (-27.74)

               i                                             ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 O/S Decilet -0.000311                  0.000335     -0.000281
                                              (-9.28) (5.79) (-8.51)

                        i                                                                    ∗∗∗
 Quoted Spreadt 0.0492
                                                             (5.54)

        i                                                                                     ∗∗
 O/St 0.00747
                                                             (2.99)

                                    i                                                       ∗∗∗
 (O/S ∗ Quoted Spread)t -0.464
                                                               (-4.62)

                             i                                                                    ∗∗∗
 Quoted Spread Decilet 0.000701      0.0000368
                                                                         (7.64) (0.93)

                                                         i                                                         ∗∗∗
 (O/S Decile ∗ Quoted Spread Decile)t -0.000122
                                                                             (-8.52)

                 i                                                                                                                     ∗∗∗
 Dummy 1t -0.00758
                                                                                            (-3.63)

                                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Constant 0.00212      -0.00114     -0.00157      0.00180
                                              (9.79) (-3.83) (-4.37) (7.62)
 Observations 620,027 620,027 620,027 620,027
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,    p < 0.001

                                       37
            Table 7: Firm and Year Fixed Effects Regressions - Quoted Spread

Table 7 presents results for the fixed effect regressions including O/S and Quoted Spread. All specifications
are regressed on the market risk premium as well as the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB, HML and UMD.
The sample period stretches from 1996 through 2013 and includes 620,027 observations.

                                                 (1)  (2)  (3)
                                                         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1    1.293       1.293        1.293
                                             (118.55)  (118.49)  (118.54)

                                                         ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1     0.559       0.555         0.554
                                              (31.37)  (31.21)  (31.16)

                                                          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1     -0.257       -0.265        -0.265
                                               (-10.39)  (-10.73)  (-10.74)

                                                          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1     -0.145       -0.150        -0.150
                                               (-15.32)  (-15.68)  (-15.71)

                        i                                             ∗∗∗
 Quoted Spreadt    0.124
                                           (11.74)

        i                                                               ∗
 O/St      0.00663
                                             (2.38)

                                    i                                 ∗∗∗
 (O/S ∗ Quoted Spread)t   -0.616
                                              (-5.15)

                               i                                                 ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
 Quoted Spread Decilet     0.00118      0.000297
                                                           (11.91)  (6.00)

                                                         i                                 ∗∗∗
 (O/S Decile ∗ Quoted Spread Decile)t   -0.000159
                                                         (-10.56)

                 i                                                                                            ∗∗∗
 Dummy 1t        -0.00733
                                                                          (-3.31)
 Observations     620,027  620,027  620,027
  t statistics in parentheses
 ∗           ∗∗           ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                       38
             Table 8: Robustness Tests - Alternative Liquidity Measures, pt. 1

Table 8 reports regression results for the specifications including O/S and Zero. Column (1) is identical to
column (3) in Table 5 and serves as a benchmark. Zero is defined as the proportion of days with zero returns
in each firm-week. All specifications are regressed on the market risk premium as well as the Fama-French-
Carhart factors SMB, HML and UMD. The sample period stretches from 1996 through 2013 and includes
620,027 observations.

                                      (1) (2) (3) (4)
                                             ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1  1.293        1.293        1.293        1.293
                                   (262.86) (262.87) (262.87) (262.87)

                                             ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1  0.555         0.555         0.555         0.555
                                    (59.00) (59.05) (59.01) (59.01)

                                              ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1  -0.271        -0.272        -0.271        -0.271
                                    (-30.67) (-30.70) (-30.68) (-30.68)

                                              ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1  -0.152        -0.153        -0.152         -0.152
                                    (-27.67) (-27.68) (-27.68) (-27.68)

                i                                  ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗             ∗∗∗
 O/S Decilet  -0.000311                   -0.000260     -0.000306
                                     (-9.28)  (-6.23) (-9.10)

         i                                                                      ∗∗
 Zerot   0.00683
                                                   (3.10)

        i                                                                      ∗∗∗
 O/St   -0.00628
                                                    (-5.95)

                          i
 (Zero ∗ O/S)t  -0.0290
                                                    (-1.25)

                 i                                                                        ∗
 Zero Decilet   0.000256      0.0000952
                                                                  (2.40) (1.91)

                                                    i
 (Zero Decile ∗ O/S Decile)t  -0.0000307
                                                                   (-1.72)

                    i
 Dummy 2t   -0.000860
                                                                                  (-0.48)

                                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
 Constant  0.00212      0.000558      0.00170      0.00194
                                     (9.79) (4.99) (6.35) (8.40)
 Observations  620,027 620,027 620,027 620,027
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗           ∗∗           ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                       39
             Table 9: Robustness Tests - Alternative Liquidity Measures, pt. 2

Table 9 presents regression results for the specifications including O/S and Amihud. Column (1) is identical
to column (3) in Table 5 and serves as a benchmark. All specifications are regressed on the market risk
premium as well as the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB, HML and UMD. The sample period stretches
from 1996 through 2013 and includes 620,027 observations.

                                         (1) (2) (3) (4)
                                                ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1 1.294        1.293        1.293        1.294
                                      (262.84) (262.90) (262.93) (262.89)

                                                ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1 0.554        0.555        0.555         0.555
                                       (58.96) (59.03) (58.99) (58.97)

                                                 ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1 -0.271        -0.270        -0.270        -0.271
                                       (-30.62) (-30.59) (-30.59) (-30.62)

                                                 ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1 -0.152        -0.151        -0.151         -0.152
                                       (-27.56) (-27.50) (-27.47) (-27.55)

                i                                      ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 O/S Decilet -0.000309                   0.000417     -0.000264
                                        (-9.22) (7.07) (-7.92)

              i                                                                    ∗∗
 Amihudt 0.181
                                                      (2.96)

        i                                                                           ∗∗∗
 O/St -0.00619
                                                       (-5.97)

                          i                                                        ∗∗
 (Amihud ∗ O/S)t -0.335
                                                       (-2.71)

                     i                                                                     ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 Amihud Decilet 0.000987      0.000133
                                                                    (9.87) (3.30)

                                               i                                                         ∗∗∗
 (Amihud Decile ∗ O/S Decile)t -0.000147
                                                                      (-9.84)

                 i                                                                                                           ∗∗∗
 Dummy 3t  -0.00830
                                                                                     (-4.58)

                                                  ∗∗∗           ∗∗          ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 Constant 0.00213      0.000368     -0.00286      0.00126
                                        (9.84) (2.71) (-7.07) (4.85)
 Observations 620,027 620,026 620,026 620,026
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                       40
            Table 10: Robustness Tests - Alternative Liquidity Measures, pt. 3

Table 10 reports regression results for the specifications including O/S and market capitalization. Column
(1) is identical to column (3) in Table 5 and serves as a benchmark. All specifications are regressed on the
market risk premium as well as the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB, HML and UMD. The sample period
stretches from 1996 through 2013 and includes 620,027 observations.

                                                      (1) (2) (3)
                                                               ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1  1.293        1.293        1.293
                                                  (262.86) (262.94) (262.91)

                                                               ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1  0.555         0.555         0.555
                                                    (59.00) (59.00) (59.00)

                                                               ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1  -0.271        -0.271        -0.271
                                                    (-30.67) (-30.64) (-30.67)

                                                               ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1  -0.152         -0.152         -0.152
                                                    (-27.67) (-27.58) (-27.65)

                i                                                     ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 O/S Decilet  -0.000311     0.000605     -0.000225
                                                     (-9.28) (8.71) (-6.84)

                                      i                                                   ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 (Inv. M arket Cap. Quartilet  0.00256       0.000399
                                                                  (10.84) (4.03)

                                                                 i                                      ∗∗∗
 (Inv. M arket Cap. Quartile ∗ O/S Decile)t -0.000395
                                                                   (-11.05)

                 i                                                                                                          ∗∗∗
 Dummy 4t  -0.00628
                                                                                    (-6.53)

                                                                ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗∗
 Constant  0.00212      -0.00385      0.000837
                                                     (9.79) (-8.39) (3.06)
 Observations  620,027 620,027 620,027
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                       41
            Table 11: Firm and Year Fixed Effects - Alternative Specifications

Table 11 presents results for the fixed effect regressions including O/S, Amihud and market capitalization.
All specifications are regressed on the market risk premium as well as the Fama-French-Carhart factors SMB,
HML and UMD. The sample period stretches from 1996 through 2013 and includes 620,027 observations.

                                         (1) (2) (3) (4)
                                                ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1 1.293        1.292        1.292        1.293
                                     (118.69) (118.60) (118.78) (118.79)

                                                ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1 0.554        0.557         0.555         0.554
                                      (31.07) (31.26) (31.15) (31.15)

                                                ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1 -0.264        -0.257        -0.261        -0.262
                                      (-10.75) (-10.45) (-10.69) (-10.71)

                                                ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1 -0.148        -0.145         -0.147         -0.147
                                      (-15.57) (-15.25) (-15.49) (-15.53)

              i                                               ∗∗∗
 Amihudt 0.635
                                       (6.31)

        i                                                      ∗∗∗
 O/St -0.00899
                                        (-6.86)

                          i                                   ∗∗∗
 (Amihud ∗ O/S)t -1.245
                                        (-6.15)

                        i                                                         ∗∗∗
 Amihud Decilet 0.00312
                                                   (25.75)

                i                                                     ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 O/S Decilet 0.000309      0.000643     -0.000353
                                                      (4.37) (7.50) (-8.62)

                                               i                                    ∗∗∗
 (Amihud Decile ∗ O/S Decile)t -0.000145
                                                       (-8.43)

                                      i                                                   ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
 (Inv. M arket Cap. Quartilet 0.00903       0.00662
                                                                  (28.36) (29.48)

 (Inv. M arket Cap. Quartile                                             ∗∗∗
                   i                                                           -0.000456
 ∗O/S Decile)t
                                                                   (-10.66)

                 i                                                                                                           ∗∗∗
 Dummy 4t  -0.00614
                                                                                     (-5.44)
 Observations 620,026 620,026 620,027 620,027
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001
                                       42
                       Table 12: Trading Strategy - Weekly alphas

Table 12 reports weekly alphas for the liquidity strategy and the O/S strategy.The liquidity
strategy is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the 1st vigintile and short an
equally weighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile of the interaction variable (O/S ∗
Quoted Spread). The O/S strategy is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the
1st vigintile and short an equally weighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile of O/S.
Column (1) and (2) shows weekly O/S strategy alphas and exposures to the market and
Fama-Franch-Carhart factors, respectively. Column (3) and (4) present the corresponding
results for the liquidity strategy. Column (5) shows weekly alpha for the liquidity strategy
after controlling for excess returns generated by the O/S strategy.

                              O/S     f                        Liquidity     f
                      Rt+1 − rt+1   Rt+1  − rt+1

                        (1)   (2)   (3)   (4)  (5)
                                               ∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 RM,t+1 − rf,t+1  -0.0787  -0.0848     -0.703      -0.538     -0.479
                      (-1.90)  (-2.15)  (-14.60)  (-12.40)  (-14.24)

                                                                           ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
 SM Bt+1     -0.129    -0.790      -0.699
                                    (-1.78)    (-9.89)  (-11.31)

                                             ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
 HM Lt+1    0.463                   0.927      0.603
                                    (6.70)    (12.18)  (9.99)

                                             ∗∗∗                        ∗∗∗
 U M Dt+1    -0.370                     0.0492  0.308
                                    (-8.72)    (1.05)  (8.17)

   O/S     f                                                                      ∗∗∗
 Rt+1 − rt+1         0.699
                                                                     (23.65)

                               ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗
 Constant  0.00484     0.00499     0.00633     0.00533     0.00184
                      (4.43)  (5.02)  (5.00)  (4.88)  (2.15)
 Observations  832  832  832  832  832
  t statistics in parentheses
 ∗           ∗∗           ∗∗∗
   p < 0.05,    p < 0.01,     p < 0.001

                                       43
                     12        12
                          -0.0622    -1.2990.1410.507-0.960-1.268-0.356-0.158-0.0597-0.2740.1410.285-0.0542-0.147-0.1660.8970.0689-0.773
                                                                        -0.00444


                     11        11
                          -0.0865    -1.0280.0663-1.094-0.454-0.311-0.0562-0.196-0.3070.110-0.217-0.0535-0.2480.0187-0.2590.5990.5490.428-0.106



                     10        10
                          -0.174     -1.752-1.7341.1580.8420.0647-1.168-0.360-0.9350.157-0.0563-0.386-0.1870.0584-0.02960.2310.06830.175
                                                                   0.00951



                     8         9
                          0.0767     -1.5880.287-0.5200.01671.0040.467-0.337-1.426-0.0530-0.278-0.3270.656-0.0160-0.07370.4050.1480.132
                                                             -0.00791

        ). Shown in Panel A are weekly four-factor alphas
                     8         8
                          -0.0406    -0.944-1.143-1.419-0.3170.626-0.0606-0.828-0.771-0.2850.300-0.349-0.01340.4780.7800.2310.4880.2690.388


                     7         7
                          -0.0738    -1.481-1.235-0.5930.224-0.6010.857-0.819-0.976-0.5240.0134-0.427-0.3100.8410.267-0.08830.3870.05720.437
       Quoted Spread
       ∗


      O/S          6         6
                          -0.0978    -1.679-0.603-0.5130.619-1.1960.0511-1.133-0.6300.696-0.0373-0.328-0.0291-0.1330.2230.4570.1980.357
                                                        -0.00785



                     5         5
                          0.286      -0.784-0.5410.7201.2530.4660.424 0.3330.6920.284-0.1020.125-0.1130.512-0.1860.4110.1790.395
                                                   0.00365


                     4         4
Table 13: Weekly four-factor alphas0.217         0.276 0.651 2.2770.5120.156 0.3250.127   0.4060.3030.5880.2690.246
                                      -0.363-0.0765-1.019     -0.566  -0.174-0.528

                  Panel A: Weekly alpha relative to O/S and quoted spread observation
                     3         3
                          0.286      -0.123-0.2280.3131.0680.9810.2850.396-0.0306-0.09730.1600.4790.190-0.1490.3290.3150.5470.1800.549
                              Panel B: Weekly alpha relative to O/S and quoted spread observation per year


                     2         2
                          0.325      -0.2790.432-0.2390.8120.6050.3780.1250.207-0.3380.5440.2570.387-0.01480.3450.7010.6930.2790.738


                     1         1
                         0.533         0.6960.7531.2900.1720.4430.472 0.3250.5090.3280.299 0.5830.8400.8730.1720.504865
                                     -0.389             -0.0929       0.0384




                      Weekly alpha199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013N
      Table 13 reports the persistence of the liquidity strategy that is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the 1st vigintile and short an equallyweighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile of the interaction variable (from the first 12 weeks following each O/S and quoted spread observation from week 0. The corresponding four-factor alphas are reported by year inPanel B. The sample period stretches from 1996 through 2013 and the weekly four-factor alphas are shown in percent.

                                   44
            Figure 1: Yearly Strategy Returns and Expected Strategy Returns

Figure 1 illustrates yearly returns of the liquidity strategy as well as the strategy’s four-
factor expected returns. The strategy is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the
1st vigintile and short an equally weighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile of the
interaction variable (O/S ∗ Quoted Spread). Returns are calculated as weekly compounded
returns and shown in percent. The comparison period stretches from 1997 through 2012.

                          100


                          50

                          Yearly Returns0


                         −50
                           97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12

                                         Strategy Returns Expected Strategy Returns

                                       45
       Figure 2: Cumulative Abnormal Returns for the Liqudity- and O/S Strategy

Figure 2 plots cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for the liquidity strategy and for the
O/S strategy. The liquidity strategy is long an equally weighted number of stocks in the
1st vigintile and short an equally weighted number of stocks in the 20th vigintile of the
interaction variable (O/S ∗ Quoted Spread). The O/S strategy is long an equally weighted
number of stocks in the 1st vigintile and short an equally weighted number of stocks in the
20th vigintile of O/S. CAR is calculated as the sum of weekly abnormal returns and shown
in percent. The comparison period stretches from 2002 through 2012.

                          300


                          200


                          100

                          0
                          Cummulative Abnormal Returns


                          −100
                         02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12
                                                            Year

                                                Liquidity Strategy O/S Strategy

                                       46
                           Figure 3: Weekly four-factor alphas

Figure 3 plots the persistence of the liquidity strategy that is long an equally weighted
number of stocks in the 1st vigintile and short an equally weighted number of stocks in the
20th vigintile of the interaction variable (O/S ∗ Quoted Spread). Shown are weekly four-
factor alphas, including 95% confidence intervals, from the first 12 weeks following each O/S
and quoted spread observation from week 0. Weekly four-factor alphas are shown in percent
and the sample period stretches from 1996 through 2013.

                          1


                                   .5


                          0
                           Weekly 4−Factor alphas

                              −.5
                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
                                            Weeks relative to O/S and Quoted Spread observation

                                       47