Control beyond warranted by the equity

Olivia Jansson  (22663)  and Inha Shylouskaya  (22445)

ABSTRACT

In this research we investigate the relationship between excess control and changes in asymmetric information
during quarterly and annual earnings announcements. The focus remains on controlling shareholders possessing
excess control within a dual-class share structure. We calculate changes in asymmetric information in an event
study performed upon quarterly and annual report announcements using relative bid-ask spreads. Excess bid-ask
spreads are calculated for three periods surrounding the announcement. Excess control is defined as the
difference between fractional holdings of company votes and capital. Further, the relationship is measured within
A-class and B-class shares respectively, taking into account four different investor categories. We also
specifically control for compliance with the Swedish Code of Corporate Governance. The sample constitutes all
companies listed on Nasdaq OMX Nordic during a five-year period form 2008 through 2012. Our results show
that excess control has a reducing effect on levels of asymmetric information as measured by excess bid-ask
spread in both A-class and B-class shares. When investigating the relationship within different ownership
categories, the results indicate that excess control only has a mitigating effect on bid-ask spreads if the
controlling shareholder is a founder family or non-family founder.
Table of contents

1. INTRODUCTION                                                        3
1.2 BACKGROUND INFORMATION                                                6
1.2.1 AGENCY THEORY                                                          6
1.2.2 ADVERSE SELECTION                                                         6
1.2.2 EXCESS CONTROL AND PRIVATE BENEFITS                                            6
1.8 THE DUAL CLASS SHAREHOLDER STRUCTURE TODAY                                  7
1.9 PURPOSE                                                              8
1.10 CONTRIBUTION                                                         8

2. EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK                                              9

3. HYPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT                                          11

4. DATA SAMPLING AND COLLECTION                                        12
4.1 POTENTIAL DATA BIAS AND ISSUES                                                  13
4.2 THE DEPENDENT VARIABLE                                                  14
4.3 THE EXPLANATORY VARIABLE                                                14
4.4 CONTROL VARIABLES                                                         15

5. METHODOLOGY                                                     16
5.1 EVENT STUDY                                                           16
5.2 PANEL METHODS                                                        17
5.3 REGRESSIONS                                                          17

6. RESULTS                                                              19
6.1 DESCRIPTIVES                                                         19
TABLE 2                                                                  19
TABLE 3                                                               19
TABLE 4                                                                  19
TABLE 7                                                                  20
TABLE 8                                                                  20
6.1 EVENT STUDY                                                           20
6.2 REGRESSIONS                                                          20
6.2.1 MULTIVARIATE REGRESSION ANALYSIS                                           20
6.2.2 INTERPRETATION                                                           20

7. DISCUSSION                                                               21

8. CONCLUSIONS                                                            23

9. VARIABLES                                                            24

10. APPENDIX                                                           26

11. REFERENCES                                                         50
1. Introduction
We examine the relationship between excess control possessed by a controlling shareholder
within a dual-class share structure and changes in asymmetric information in the market
around annual report announcements.  Prior research finds  that in most of Europe,
corporations typically have a controlling owner representing the founder  with a heavy
ownership stake in the firm (Shleifer & Vishny 1997).  In Sweden, large controlling
shareholders tend to have a larger stake invested in company votes relative company  capital.
In this paper, a controlling shareholder with a larger fraction of company votes relative the
fraction of company capital is referred to as a shareholder possessing excess control. These
shareholders also been termed controlling minority shareholders  (CMS), and the position of
excess control is usually derived through a dual-class share structure or other corporate
control enhancing instruments  (Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000).

Share classes constitute a common element in the composition of company ownership
structures, and are  the only means by which shares  can be  distributed differential voting
rights. In listed companies, share capital is allocated to individual shares through different
classes issued by the company. Allocated according to some certain share class, the investor is
distributed some class-specific shareholder right in the firm. The rights  distributed  distinguish
the different share classes constituting the company shareholder structure. Voting rights
allocate control and  appear to be one of the most prominent rights distributed through  shares
with a potential to be as valuable  to its investor  as the right to receive dividends (Zingales
1994).  The value of voting rights is derived from some unique private benefits perceived by
the shareholder, or through competition to acquire those votes.  In Sweden, the value of voting
stocks have been shown to constitute 6,5% of the value of common stock (Rydqvist 1987).

Previous studies investigating excess control frequently circulate the phenomenon  of
controlling shareholders power to expropriate non-controlling shareholders, with the most
extreme example being  Korean  chaebols  (Amihund & Lev 1981).  The complete discretion
over company control makes it possible for owner-managers of chaebols  to expropriate other
investors in the firm by investing the firm’s resources to maximize their welfare. In a more
normal approach, shareholders possessing excess control  are  limited to  perform  expropriation
activities only by the incentives not to engage  in minority expropriation or by legal
restrictions.  Engaging in minority expropriation controlling shareholders, controlling
shareholders free themselves from corporate governance mechanisms. Dealing with ways in
which suppliers of finance assure themselves return on their investment, the phenomenon of
excess control have come to be a great concern for corporate governance regulators. The
Swedish Corporate Governance board promotes good corporate governance in the interest of
shareholders and creates better  conditions for the supply of capital  (Swedish Corporate
                                                                                                       1
Governance Board).  The possibility to advance against the increasingly applied norm
originates from the possibility to own more company votes relative company capital. Voting
rights enhance control  through discretion over corporate decisions on shareholder meetings.

The votes make  it possible for controlling majority shareholders to influence strategic-  and
investment decision-making, through which they can maximize their own welfare if legal
protection is weak.  However, when legal systems are strong they have shown to be effective
against minority expropriation, and also in supporting matters of corporate governance.
Provided a well functioning legal enforcement on the Swedish market, as a suggestion
minority expropriation should not be a matter of concern to  minority  investors in the market

1
 Obligated for companies listed on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm and NGM Equity
(La Porta et al., 1998).  Despite evidence against  a  prospective  desire  of  controlling
                                                2
shareholders (Bergström & Rydqvist 1990a) to derive private benefits at the expense of
minority shareholders’ wealth, it appears as if there is a general distrust implemented in the
market towards controlling shareholders possessing excess control.  Applying the lemons
model  (Arkelöf 1970), this should create a rather difficult  catch 22 for a controlling
shareholder in a dual-class share structure turning to the equity market for risk capital
financing.  Given that minority shareholders don’t have as much discretion over corporate
decisions, they should protect themselves against  a bad investment, being expropriated by the
controlling shareholder, by offering a lower subscription  price. In order to obtain a low cost of
capital, the controlling shareholder  must  signal the value of the firm to its investors by owning
a large capital fraction (Jensen & Meckling 1976).  However,  a setting of equal vote-  and
capital fractions would undermine the positive effects of a dual-class share structure.  Further,
it has been suggested that the classical principal-agent problem applies to  the relationship
between  majority and minority shareholders with a dual class structure.  Rather than pure
expropriation such a relationship could as well constitute conflicts of interests  (Cronqvist &
Nilsson).  However, it does not matter for the amount of resources that investors are willing to
put up for financing if the conflicts of interests is in the form of expropriation or misallocation
of funds, in both situations the  investors will reduce the amount of capital for supply
(Shileifer & Vishny 1997).  What matters is that controlling shareholders’ agenda is
constrained, preventing inefficient decision-making  (Hart 1995).  Provided the Swedish
corporate governance regulation matters, we argue that the agenda of a controlling
shareholder possessing excess control is not just imposed with checks and balances on
behaviour, it should also be incentivised through the constitution of the principle of “comply
or explain” making it possible for outside  investors to judge the level of corporate governance
within a company against the norm of the Code.

As a result, we suggest that controlling shareholders within dual-class settings as of today
should be incentivised to enhance their decision-making behaviour in order to attract minority
shareholders as financiers. This implies that unless controlling shareholders are unable to
communicate their future prospects credibility to investors, excess control should be have a
mitigating impact on levels of asymmetric information in the market.  Liquidity measures have
previously been used as indicators of levels of asymmetric information, and in accordance to
several previous studies we turn to the bid-ask spread  (Yohn 1998; Kanagaretnam et al., 2007;
Jiang et al.,  2011).  In order to test and measure for  the prospective  relationship, we  believe an
appropriate time period for investigating the ability of  the controlling investor to  master
liquidity of the stock among (minority) investors in the firm  should be during  earnings
announcements.

The logic reasoning behind our approach is that for a relationship between majority and
minority shareholders to exist as a result of excess control, the ownership structures within
each share class should represent controlling shareholders possessing excess control and
minority shareholders, respectively. This means that controlling ownership should represent
high vote shares and minority ownership should make up low vote shares.  Provided that
controlling shareholders should possess better information about firm prospects, it is
suggested that they hold some superior information relative minority shareholders. This
should be reflected as increased bid-ask spreads during earnings announcement, indicating a
decrease in market liquidity (Kim & Verrecchia 1992).  In order to capture the ability of the
controlling shareholder to prevent the spreads to widen, we will derive excess bid-ask spreads

2
 Bergström and Rydqvist(1990a) showed that 48% of the companies investigated in 1986 held more  than 50% of both votes
and equity
conducting an event study  during  annual report  announcements  and measure the effect of
excess control on changes on excess spreads  (Gajewski & Bertrand 2013).  Since the effect on
the level of information asymmetry during earnings announcements have been shown to
sustain during periods surrounding announcement days,  we consider three event windows
(Yohn 1998).  Further, considering that the bid-ask spread is made up of the three components:
order processing costs, inventory holding costs and adverse selection costs, we control for  the
first two cost components  to solely account for changes in the adverse selection component
(Krinsky & Lee 1996).

Consistent with the underlying assumption of different ownership structures within each share
class, we perform an investigation for the suggested relationship between excess  control and
excess bid-ask spreads within each share class respectively.  Taking into account  that the
Swedish market  of controlling shareholders  is characterized by different owner categories
(Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000), we additionally perform test of the  relationship between excess
control and excess bid-ask spreads within four different investor categories of the respective
share class.  Finally,  since the Swedish Corporate Governance board was set up in 2005 and
made the Code of corporate governance applicable to all companies considered in this
research in 2008,  we  specifically employ a set of corporate governance related control
variables (Kanagaretnam et al., 2007).

Our findings reveal that excess control has a reducing impact on excess bid-ask spreads
around announcements of annual reports.  We find significant results for the relationship
within both high-  and low vote shares.  Consistent with the underlying reasoning about
different ownership structures within each share class,  it appears as if high  vote share holders
benefit from excess control before announcement, and that low vote shareholders benefit from
excess control on the day of announcement as well as during the days following the
announcement. Further, our test shows that founder-family owners is the only investor
category with effect on excess bid-ask spreads during announcement, and the relationship was
consistent throughout the whole event period. Finally, we find that board members have a
mitigating impact on excess bid-ask spreads within the high vote share class, and that
dependency of audit members have an increasing impact on excess bid-ask spreads  within
low vote shares  during earnings announcement.  The results may be explained with that
controlling owners benefit from insider information and as a result they take advantage of that
and execute trades before announcement. Further, they appear to value the presence of board
expertise considering their discretion over corporate decision-making.  Low vote shareholders
appear to benefit from the presence of excess control, but still suffer from less information
about firm prospects, protecting themselves against informed traders before announcement,
increasing the excess bid-ask spreads. Family owners may be more dependent upon minority
shareholders as a source of external financing relative other investor categories, explaining
why the results only reveal a relationship within that investor category.  Lastly, new
constitutions of corporate governance regulation appear to be of new concerns to  minority
shareholders.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the findings of previous
literature. Section 3 consists of the development of our testable hypotheses. Section 4 explains
data sampling and related issues. It also presents descriptive statistics. Section 5 presents
research methodology employed in the study. Section 6 shows our results. Section 7 provides
analysis and discussion.  Section 8 presents conclusions. Section 9 consists of  variables.
Section  10  consists of our  appendix and section 11  consists of our references.  Next follows a
review of  central concerns  related  to  a  dual-class share  structure  and some additional
background information:

1.2 Background information
Existing empirical research provides evidence  of  asymmetric information constituting a
ground for problems related to  agency theory an adverse selection on financial markets
related to ownership concentration as a result of deviations between company vote-  and cash
flow rights.  This study investigates information asymmetry using the bid-ask spread of a
particular stock and hypothesizes a negative association between excess control and excess
bid-ask spreads.

1.2.1 Agency Theory
The essence of agency theory  is concerned with two problems within agency relationships.
The first problem consists of the desire of different goals and the difficulty in verifying
actions performed by the agent. The second problem consists of that the principal and the
agent may prefer different actions as a result of different attitudes towards risk (Eisenhardt
1989). The problem of conflicting interests between the decision authorities of finance and
management  is usually related to that managerial investment decisions reflect personal
interests rather than interests of investors.  Substantial minority ownership stakes  have been
shown effective in overcoming  conflicts between managers and shareholders. They are
incentivised enough by their entitlement to the firm through a large ownership stake to collect
information and monitor the  management  (Healy & Palepu 2001; Bergström & Rydqvist
1991). Further, such an investment provides the shareholder with enough voting rights to put
pressure on the manager (Shleifer & Vishny 1997).  As a result, large shareholders have been
shown to  emphasize the agency problem with their general interest in profit maximization and
have enough voting rights to possess control over firm assets and have their interests
respected.  However, crucial for the large investor to be able to govern by exercising voting
rights is protection of the voting mechanism. This is usually only a concern if legal protection
is weak (Shleifer & Vishny 1997).  Further, corporate governance mechanisms have been
shown to effectively guide managers. The mechanisms relate to effective board work,
effective committees and active shareholders. This puts pressure on the managers to act in the
interests of its shareholders (Karamanou & Vafeas 2005).

1.2.2 Adverse selection
Another important concept associated with asymmetric information is  adverse selection. Due
to costs of dishonesty, the average value of goods tends to go down when the market is
characterized by asymmetric information (Arkelöf 1970).  The  most common example
capturing the essence of the problem is the market of used cars, where the buyers don’t know
if the car they will by is a good car or a lemon. The  seller has  a good idea about the quality of
the car, to which the buyer will protect himself by discounting its price.  We extend this
phenomenon to the stock market, and considering rationality among minority shareholders it
appears as if controlling shareholders possessing excess control face a great risk of discounts
to its equity capital when rising financing in the market place (Leland & Pyle 1977;  Jensen &
Meckling 1976).

1.2.2 Excess control and private benefits
In a position of excess control it is suggested that shareholders  are incentivised to derive
private benefits from control  (Shleifer & Vishny 1997).  Due to  its larger amount of  high vote
shares,  the shareholder derives benefits from control  by treating themselves preferentially at
the expense of other shareholders through their discretion  over corporate decision-making. As
a result the firm is exposed to inefficient investment behaviour revealing negative effects on
returns to capital investments.  For this reason, a shareholder possessing excess control is said
to be able to redistribute wealth between majority and minority shareholders. This is called
expropriation of minority shareholders  that  we have  provided  some  brief information about
above.  The negative effects on returns to capital  investment associated with excess control
have been shown to be associated with a lower  firm value and return on assets  (Cronqvist &
Nilsson 2000).  In addition to private benefits derived at a direct expense of minority
shareholders, it has been shown that some controlling shareholders derive private benefits
related to the position of control as such.  These kinds of benefits consist  of social prestige and
status  and also impose a negative effect on returns to capital investments as a result of
inefficient decision-making behaviour of the controlling shareholder  (Schöldström &
Wattsgård 2010).  This implies that the possibility to derive private benefits stems  from the
same setting of  excess control possessed by the controlling shareholder. However, the actual
factors associated with the inefficient  investment behaviour  have shown to  be related to
different characteristics the  specific shareholder in control. Family owners  are  associated  with
a lack of management skills and tend to hang on to their positions of control to long, implying
that the investment policy tend to become inefficient  (Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000; Carl
Oreland 2005).  Further, families are also associated with for desire of social prestige and
status related to the position of control. However, rather than due to lack of skills it is
suggested that control is prioritized over returns. This is reflected in an investment policy
where capital is retained rather than invested and new equity offerings are surrounded by
reluctance  (Schöldström & Wattsgård 2010).

1.8 The dual class shareholder structure today
As of today, we believe it is time to let go of discrepancies related to risks beared by minority
shareholders as of  dual share class structures. We argue that it is of greater concern for the
controlling shareholders, possessing excess control within the  structures,  to act in the interests
of potential capital investors to attract  financing.  Lately, previous findings have proposed and
recommended the importance of corporate governance. We discuss corporate governance
associated with excess control and the potential for the alternative approach of regulation to
overcome risks associated with excess control.

Provided that legal environments shape  the conditions  of  the possibility to derive  private
benefits of control  at a direct expense of minority shareholder wealth  (La Porta et al., 2000),
we suggest that the development of regulation and norms for a higher  level of corporate
governance should have a positive effect on private benefits that cannot be explicitly
forbidden. The example we find most prominent of potential for such improvement is “The
                                                   3
Swedish Code of Corporate Governance”  .  Companies whose shares are traded on Nasdaq
OMX Stockholm market and on NGM Equity market are obligated to apply he code.  The
Code constitutes  a norm for higher levels of corporate governance  and is made up of  a set of
recommendations. Related to the recommendations are disclosure requirements to be included
in a separate corporate governance report. However, companies are not required to obey to all
recommendations at all points in time. Through its “comply or explain” principle  companies
are allowed to deviate from the recommendations provided that they disclose an explanation
such an action, the reason for alternative approach and the details of a different setting. The
nature of the Code makes it possible for  minority shareholders  to  benchmark company
specific  level of corporate  governance against the norm as well as against each other. The
conditions should make minority shareholders  better  able to  evaluate the risks associated with
investments in listed firms, and have a positive effect on corporate transparency.  This should

3
 http://www.corporategovernanceboard.se/about-the-board, the board was set up during spring 2010
put some additional pressure on controlling shareholders  considering a potential competition
among controlling shareholders  to attract investors.
Further, along with the increased accessibility of stocks on the Swedish market, we argue that
controlling  shareholder should realize their dependency on minority shareholder as an
alternative source of external financing. In this sense, we propose an opposite view of the
previous hypothesis of risks born to minority shareholders in the presence of a controlling
shareholder possessing excess control. Rather, we argue that controlling shareholders should
be faced with a risk of competition in the process of attracting minority shareholders as
potential financiers. Further, we believe that  it is reasonable to expect that controlling
shareholders will make sound decisions as minority shareholders are able to turn their back
those companies who are not possessing  high enough  levels of corporate governance  desired
by the minority shareholder.
Looking into different categories of controlling shareholders, we also expect their
characteristics as owners to affect their incentives and applied strategies towards attracting
minority shareholders in the capital market.  Due to previous findings of family owners as
frequent controllers in dual-class share settings (Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000; Anderson et al.,
2009), we expect family owners to be more incentivised relative other shareholder categories
to attract minority shareholders as financiers.

Considering a prospective mutual dependency relationship between majority-  and minority
shareholders in a dual-class share structure, we raise the question if problems associated with
excess control should not be mitigated. Perhaps there is a chance that  forthcoming, the dual-
class share structure  eventually  will  constitute a rather optimal shareholder structure.

1.9 Purpose
The purpose of this research is to investigate if excess control possessed by a controlling
shareholder  in a dual-class share structure  affects  changes in levels of asymmetric information
during  quarterly and annual  earnings announcements.

1.10 Contribution
This research is the first attempt we know of that investigates the relationship between excess
control and excess bid-ask spreads during  earnings announcements, employed on dual-class
share structures. The study aims, however, at a rather different approach from previous
findings related to excess control possessed by controlling owners.
The contribution  involves a  clarification  of the  incentives of a controlling shareholder
possessing excess control, and the  effect  of those incentives on excess bid-ask spreads during
earnings announcement. This involves a better understanding for the risks (and benefits)
associated with investments in a dual-class structure in the presence of a controlling
shareholder possessing excess control.
Considering that high vote shares to a greater extent should be represented by controlling
shareholders and that low vote shares to a greater extent should represent minority investors,
we contribute with and investigation of the ability of controlling shareholders to master stock
liquidity under such kind of ownership concentrations within different share classes
throughout the same firm.  According to the  Leland-Pyle model previously mentioned,
mastering problems of stock liquidity taking into consideration the potential lemon problem
between controlling shareholders and minority shareholders in a dual class share structure
should be rather difficult. This stems from the fact that a controlling shareholder possessing
excess control has a larger fraction of company votes relative fraction of company capital.
Mastering stock liquidity with a smaller fraction of company capital should, according to the
model, be rather against the odds since minority shareholders take equity holdings of the
controlling shareholder as a signal for if  the  firm is a good or a bad firm, and a signal for if  the
value of its investment will be maximized.  Mastering stock liquidity in such a setting  also
means mastering  a matter of adverse selection considering that controlling shareholders may
have information about the firm that outside shareholders don’t have.
Investigating the relationship in the respective share class, we also contribute with an
understanding for ownership structure in a dual-class share setting, and  how the effect of
excess control on excess bid-ask spreads differs dependent  upon ownership structures in high
and low vote shares.
Taken together, the findings will allow us to conclude if the dual-class share model
constitutes a somewhat  optimal ownership structure  for both majority-  and minority
shareholders  in the sense that  it masters  several implications of  asymmetric information, great
risks  face by investors  with investments in the market.

The research  should also be of great concern to regulators  of  the Swedish Code of Corporate
Governance. We contribute with its  matter for shareholder value and functioning of a
financial system  in the presence of controlling shareholders possessing excess control within a
dual class-share structure.  We also contribute with the ability of controlling shareholders to
master these problems with current regulation. Further,  it  should  provide regulators and
investors with an understanding for  the functioning of current  minority shareholder  risk
protection  associated  with an investment in  a  dual-class share structure.  We should also
support the need for  good  corporate governance regulation  as an  alternative means to direct
legislation  within financial markets.

2. Empirical framework
Asymmetric information constitutes  some financial investment related issues, and most
commonly the problems are studied in the context of the principal-agent theorem.  Corporate
managers are the agents of shareholders, and  managers have incentives to cause their firms
grow beyond the optimal  size. Conflicts of interests  arise when the agent have interests that
deviate from  principal’s  interests, and to prevent such actions of agency costs  firms usually
issue debt to reduce cash flow available for spending at the discretion of managers (Jensen
1986).  Another concern related to agency theory is the problem of risk sharing. The principal
and the agent may have different risk preferences with implications for their risk attitudes,
and as a result they may prefer different actions (Eisenhardt 1989).
Asymmetric information can also be studied in the context of adverse selection, where
imbalances of power in transactions run a risk  of  creating  a market of lemons. The
phenomenon derives from difficulty of potential buyers to verify the quality of the  product
they are offered  (Akerlöf 1970).  The problem of lemons applies to the equity market as a
lower subscription price paid by minority shareholders to controlling shareholders  for
financing  (Jensen & Meckling 1976).  It has also been shown that problems of lemon  can be
overcome by large shareholdings.  In  a study of an  entrepreneur seeking capital  from  outsider
investors, the willingness of outside shareholders to pay for their share increased with the
personal investment stake by the entrepreneur (Leland & Pyle 1977).
In our study, focus remains on asymmetric information as such, and its relationship to excess
control in dual-class share holdings.

Associated with a dual-class share structure is commonly ownership  concentration.
Ownership concentration  has  been  shown to  influence the risks born to minority shareholders.
Anderson et al., (2009) investigated  concerns of ownership concentration  through divergences
in ownership versus control in the presence of founders and heirs. They  found that the level of
financial transparency  in such an ownership structure  is crucial  for firm performance, and that
firm  environments of less transparent nature are  related to worse firm performance.
Corporate transparency  has  been shown to be a great concern for investor protection  through
its preventing effects on agency costs between large shareholders and minority shareholders
(Lang et al., 2004) and  can be diminished through some restricted information flow on firm
activities.  The ownership structure has been shown to have an impact of voluntary
information disclosure practices.  Related to  concentrated ownership structures,  Jiang et al.,
(2009) found that  when concentration within certain ownership category is associated with
information asymmetry, corporate disclosure has a strong reducing impact on the perceived
levels of information asymmetry among investors.  Further,  Chen et al., (2007) found that
family  owners  influence such information disclosure practices to a larger extent relative other
investor categories.  It is also shown that voluntary information disclosures are important to
the perceived content and credibility of earnings announcement information.  Gajewski &
Quéré (2013) demonstrated that perceived credibility of the earnings information content
upon announcement  has  implications for changes in levels of information asymmetry.
Further,  disclosure of information to the public has been shown to increase  the demand for
firm securities  of large investors. This stems from the fact  that the liquidity of the firm
securities is positively affected by information disclosure. As a result of the increased demand
for securities, companies derive a lower cost of capital (Diamond & Verrecchia 1991).

Provided that voluntary information disclosure reduces  information asymmetry  associated
with ownership concentration (Jian et al., 2011),  information disclosure  activities should be of
great concern to minority investors.  However, while information disclosure policies tend to
remain a matter of individual corporate governance perceived at the firm level (Ajinkya et al,.
2005), a broader perspective on corporate governance shows that legal systems have an
impact on corporate governance practiced by individual firms. This stems from the fact that
firms have to adapt to the limitations of the legal systems that they operate within (La Porta et
al., 1998).  Rules within legal jurisdictions come from different sources and serve an important
matter of investor rights protection, especially considering shareholders as financiers of
different firms. Some of these rights include disclosure and accounting rules, and an efficient
enforcement of such investor rights are crucial to the functioning of external financing
mechanisms (La Porta et al., 2000).

Looking into the effect  of  excess control  possessed  in a dual-class share structure  on changes
in levels of information asymmetry around earnings announcement,  we approach  excess  bid-
ask spread.  Quoted bid-ask spreads are considered  to  constitute  three components: order-
processing costs, inventory holding costs and adverse selection costs.  The adverse selection
component varies  as a result of the implied information asymmetry among shareholders
around earnings announcement, and has been shown to increase significantly around earnings
announcement. Inventory holding costs and order processing costs on the other hand, has
been shown to decrease during the same periods. As a result, the net effect on the total bid-ask
spread from earnings announcement depends on which of these effects is more pronounced
(Krinsky & Lee 1996).  It has also been shown that in addition to the bid-ask spread’s adverse
selection component, the  size quotes reveal several market characteristics that that cannot be
inferred alone by the approach of the adverse selection component in the bid-ask spread  As a
result, quoted depths should be a better indicator of market liquidity relative bid-ask spreads
(Steven & Pradipkumar 1996).  However, approaching a measure of changes in the level of
information asymmetry, depth is considered to be an appropriate complement to the adverse
selection component of the bid-ask spreads (Dupot 2000; Gajewski & Quére 2013).  In order
to solely account for changes in the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread,
we control for inventory holding costs and order processing costs in our regressions.

Abnormal levels of  information asymmetry have  been shown  to persist some days around the
event of announcement.  In order to  better capture the entire  effect  from  excess control on
changes in levels  of asymmetric information, a  pre-disclosure  period well as a post-event
period  should be included  (Yohn 1998;  Atiase & Bamber 1993;  Krinsky & Lee 1996).
Previous research has also shown that the level of information asymmetry is associated with
the availability of public information. Common proxies  for  availability are firm size and the
number of analysts (Yohn 1998). The number of analysts have also been shown to reduce
information asymmetry associated with ownership concentration  (Buyn et al,. 2011). Further
associated to  changes in abnormal  levels  of information asymmetry  around  announcements  is
the quality of possessed corporate governance within a firm. Kanagaretnam et al., 2007
showed that firms with stronger corporate governance have smaller changes in information
asymmetry around quarterly earnings announcements.  The Swedish  board of corporate
governance makes attempts to increase levels of possessed corporate governance by listed
companies. They have issued a norm for good corporate governance known as “The Swedish
Code of Corporate Governance”. It is not required for listed  companies to apply the
recommendations in the norm, however aims at increasing the ambition level for performance
of corporate governance through its appliance in within companies.

Investors are protected by regulation through a variety of settings with rules stemming from
company, security, bankruptcy, takeover and competition laws (La Porta et al., 2000). In 2005
a new form of investor protection was developed, and by 2008 the recommendation applied to
all Swedish listed companies. It is known as the “The Swedish Code of Corporate
Governance” and was issued by the Swedish board of governance. It comprises an alternative
to Swedish legislation in the form of self-regulation through its comply or explain principle,
and puts pressure on listed companies to perform a higher ambition of corporate governance.
As the regulation of financial reports provides new and relevant information to investors
(Healy & Palepu 2001), the code suggests a potential improvement in  excess bid-ask spreads,
implying  positive effects on  level of asymmetric information.

3.  Hypotheses  development
Changes in the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread around earnings
announcements represent a risk of dealing with traders who possess superior information
(Krinsky &  Lee 1996).  As opposed to previous findings revealing that different classes of
ownership concentration is positively associated with bid-ask spreads (Jiang et al., 2011;
Buyn et al., 2011; Anderson et al., 2009), we hypnotize  that excess control possessed  in a
dual-class share structure has a reducing impact on excess bid-ask spreads around
announcements of annual reports.

Hypothesis  1:  There is a negative association between excess control possessed by
controlling shareholders within dual-class share structures and excess bid-ask spreads around
announcements  of  quarterly and  annual reports.

We hypothesize that excess control has a reducing impact on excess bid-ask spreads around
earnings announcement within both high-  and low vote share classes. However, the
hypothesis is conditioned on the ability of the controlling shareholder to communicate future
prospect credibility to minority shareholders  (Brennan & Kraus 1987). Provided evidence that
the extent of capital holdings have proved to signal the controlling shareholder’s willingness
to invest in the firm on his own behalf (Leland & Pyle 1977), this might be a difficult
approach considering that the controlling shareholders in this study are subject to a position of
excess control in which their stake in  equity is always smaller than their stake in company
votes.

Hypothesis  2:  The negative association between excess control possessed by controlling
shareholders within dual-class share structures and excess bid-ask spreads around
announcements of  quarterly and  annual reports holds for both high-  and low vote shares.

Further,  in disagreement with related literature providing evidence of family owners as a
frequent owner category deriving private benefits from control (Schöldström & Wattsgård
2010) with a  tendency to disclose less accurate information and possess poor management
skills (Chen et al., 2007; Carl Oreland 2005), we expect excess control to have a larger
reducing impact on excess bid-ask spreads around announcements of annual reports relative
other shareholder categories. Consistent with  other  previous findings revealing that family
owners tend to be frequent controllers in dual-class share settings (Cronqvist &  Nilsson 2000;
Anderson et al., 2009), we expect family owners to be more incentivised relative other
shareholder categories to attract minority shareholders as financiers.

Hypothesis 3:  The negative association between excess control possessed by controlling
shareholders within dual-class share structures and excess bid-ask spreads around
announcements of  quarterly and  annual reports is  larger  for family owners  relative other
owner categories.

Previous studies have shown that  firm possessing stronger corporate governance have smaller
changes in their bid-ask spreads around earnings announcements (Kanagaretnam et al., 2007).
In accordance with these findings we believe that the same reasoning holds for the firms
included in this research. However, the extent to which companies comply with the code is
subject to variation due to the principle of “comply or explain”. For this reason we find it
accurate  to  investigate  what  rules comprised by the Code  controlling-  and minority
shareholders find important in the respective share class. We have included control variables
capturing the effect of  board activity, board independence and board  structure.  As a result, we
expect significant results for the coefficients of those variables shareholders consider
constituting important attributes of  firm level  corporate governance.

Hypothesis 4:  Significant coefficients for  corporate governance related variables reflecting
important attributes of corporate governance  to shareholders within the respective share class.

Provided that shareholders possessing company influence do not have as much discretion over
corporate decision-making, they should not feel as big pressure to enhance their decision-
making not constituting the determining force of investment decisions. As  a result, excess
control possessed by influential shareholders should  make the overall enhancement of
corporate decision-making less efficient relative when only controlling shareholders possesses
excess control.

4. Data  sampling  and  collection
The study covers a five-year sample period from 2008 through 2012.  Data have been
collected from SIS Ägareservice AB  and Nasdaq OMX Nordic  for all companies listed on
Nasdaq during the defined sample period.  Ownership data is collected during the dates from
2007-12-31 through 2012-06-30 and consists  of the relative vote-  and capital fractions for the
20 largest  shareholders  in every firm.  In order to better account for changes in the ownership
structure throughout the fiscal year of companies included in the sample, we have chosen to
collect data on ownership structure on a semi-annual basis. This will allow for better
estimates of excess controlling owners at the time of announcement for every firm
considering differences in the respective fiscal year of the firms included.  Market data have
been collected for trading days during form 2008-01-01 through 2013-06-30.  The
announcement days of earnings reports pertaining to the respective fiscal years are lagging
behind, stretching out the period during which the  data needs to be collected.

Even if the initial communication  upon announcement sometimes is limited, it makes up a
good time to investigate investor reactions. It can most certainly be assumed that investors
anticipate all announcements beforehand, considering the common release of publications
dates within Swedish firms.  Transaction prices are available on a daily trading-date basis  and
the variables consist of closing  daily quote driven market prices.  It is suggested by Gajewski
& Quèré (2013) that intraday trading data would have been preferable for our study, however
due to the unavailability of intraday variables we apply closing day data.  The variables
collected  for the  each  share class are: bid-price, ask-price, closing-price, high-price, low-
price, average price, trading volume, trading turnover and the number of trades executed.
Further we collect information of  nine  board  variables  form company annual-  and corporate
governance reports  The variables collected for the board and the audit committee respectively
are: the number of meetings, the members, the number of members dependent on the
company and the number of members dependent on majority shareholders. The variables
represent some of the recommendations included in the Swedish Code of Corporate
Governance and have also been used in previous studies  (Kanagaretnam et a., 2007).
We have collected the dates of quarterly and annual earnings announcements from press and
computer networks. The number of analysts following each firm has been noted at  the time of
data collection and is used as a proxy for analyst following throughout the sample period.

Our study focus on dual-class shares as of high vote (A) shares and low vote (B) shares.  This
is the most commonly applies approach by Swedish companies.  However, in order to account
for the possibility of a different voting rights distribution through some other combination of
share classes relative the setting approached in this study, we have downloaded stock price
data within all share classes available. Due to the few number of companies using different
share classes, we have reclassified these classes according to their similarity with A-  and B-
        4
shares .

4.1 Potential data bias and issues
The main  concern with  our results in this study  relate to the  exclusion of factors in our data
set that potentially determines the variables we have collected on firm-level corporate
governance activities. Previous research finds that governance variables depend on firm-
specific factors  such as  policies of  managerial labour  or  corporate control. Other factors that
have been shown to  determine the extent to which firms engage in corporate governance
activities relates to characteristics of the environment in which the firm is operating, for
example volatility in the  operating environment and imposed regulation  (Demsetz & Lehn
1985).  This implies that our results regarding governance activities and its impact on levels of

4
 Swedbank high vote (A) shares reclassified into low vote (B) shares; Doro high vote (A) shares reclassified into low vote
(B) shares; Hufvudstaden high vote (C) shares reclassified into high vote (A) shares; Industrivärden low vote (C) shares
reclassified into low vote (B) shares
information asymmetry as measured by excess bid-ask spread could be endogenous. It has
also been found that firm-level corporate governance tend to remain unchanged over time.
This problematic interpretation of such findings concerning our study is that corporate
                        5
governance regulation could  have a strong explanatory power of the extent to which the
firms included in our data set employ governance  variables  serving as controlling  variables in
the  examination of a relationship between excess control and levels of information
asymmetry. Considering that we also make  one  hypothesis regarding the explanatory power
of the governance variables included  on excess bid-ask spreads, those variables may not have
as much statistical power as indicted by our results.

4.2 The dependent variable
In line with several studies,  we apply  the spread as a measure of the level of information
asymmetry around earnings announcements (Kanagaretnam et al., 2007; Gajewski & Quèré
2013).  Despite the fact that depth is more sensitive to information asymmetry than spread
(Dupont 2000), there is a general consensus on the spread as a  good proxy for information
asymmetry.

The spread  constitutes a measure of market liquidity, which makes it a good indicator of
potential inconsistencies in the levels  of information obtained by shareholders in the market.
According to the efficient market hypothesis, stock prices instantly incorporate all available
information. Investigating the effect of information release upon earnings announcement, it
should be of great concern the amount of public information released upon announcement as
well as the  extent of available corporate information on a general basis.  Using  the  excess bid-
ask spread as an indicator of the level of information asymmetry perceived by shareholders,
we would expect to see greater excess spreads when less corporate information is  being
announced.  The ask price represents the price at which the seller is willing to sell and the bid
price represents the price at which the buyer is willing to buy.  The daily bid-ask spread is
calculated as the difference between  the two.  The bid-ask spread is later used to calculate the
relative bid-ask spread.

                                 Bid–  Ask spread = Bid  -  Ask

                     Relative Bid-  Ask spread = Bid  –  Ask  /((Bid + Ask) / 2)

4.3 The explanatory variable
We  define  excess control as of shareholders possessing control within a firm.  It is not of our
concern  how the controlling fraction of votes is determined (Bergström & Rydqvist 1990a).
This means that the level of control is determined as of the fractional vote holding of every
investor  independent of relative class share holdings.  As a definition for control we impose a
minimum level on the fractional vote holding of  ≥  25%. However, a controlling shareholder
can either constitute several block holders or consist of an individual shareholder. Block
holders are investors  with a vote fraction of  ≥  5% classified into the same investor category.
The vote  fractions of block holders exceeding 5% are  summarized  within every investor
category.  It constitutes a controlling shareholder if the total vote fraction exceeds 25%.
Excess control is only calculated for firms with two share classes. In absence of a controlling
shareholder we account for the ownership structure as dispersed.

5
 The Swedish Code of Corporate Governance was made appliclable to all listed companies in 2008 and revised in 2010
Four different categories of  investor categories  are considered in this research. These are
family founder, non-family founder, corporation and financial institution (Schöldström &
Wattsgård 2010; Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000).  Due to the high presence of family owners
possessing company control in Swedish  listed firms, we find it necessary to take  into account
different investor categories in order to gain a deeper understanding  of  the effect of excess
control on information asymmetry. Previous findings on family owners as a rather distinctive
investor category relative other investor  categories in the position of excess control also
motivate  an ownership classification  (Oreland 2005; Chen et al., 2007).

4.4 Control variables
Taking into account the broadening application of the Swedish Code of Corporate
            6
governance when investigating levels of information asymmetry around earnings
announcements  is in line with  the rationale  that firms with higher levels of corporate
governance  possess  lower  levels of  information asymmetry. It is also a concern for
investigation of potential effects of this newly implemented form of regulation for
information asymmetry among listed companies.  We have structured the empirical analysis
based on nine explanatory variables rather than relying on a single variable representing
appliance. This should be an appropriate approach considering the principle of “comply or
explain”, enabling us to capture the degree of compliance with code recommendations among
different firms included in our data set.  The variables employed have previously been used to
capture board independence, board structure and board activity  (Kanagaretnam et al., 2007).

Due to the obligation of appliance and requirements of compliance disclosure, we believe that
the Code induce pressure on controlling shareholders to act in the favour of all shareholders in
the company, making it harder to derive all kinds of private benefits from control.  The
Swedish board of corporate governance constitutes a fairly new develop complement to
Swedish  legislation. The board was set up during spring 2005, and the Code  was  introduced
                                                            7
to major stock exchange listed companies in 2005 .  It  was  made  applicable to  all  companies
                                                                                                8
whose shares are traded on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm and NGM Equity  in 2008 . Further,  a
                                                           9
revised form of  the code  came into force in  2010 .  The code constitutes  a principle of  “comply
or explain”. This means that  firms  obligated  to comply with the code  are not required  to
comply with all rules  included.  Considering the distinguished nature of the rules in the Code,
and the fact that companies  may apply to the once they find suitable, we believe it is crucial to
take into account  the specific rules that certain companies with controlling shareholder
comply with.

In order to refine the changes in the spread to only illustrate changes in the adverse selection
component, we control for inventory holding costs and order processing costs. This is done by
including as control variables the number of trades, stock volatility, trading volume and the
stock price (Yohn 1998; Krinsky & Lee 1996).  The effect is further  neutralized  in accordance
with the setting of Gajewski & Quèré (2013) by measuring the relative abnormal bid-ask
spreads rather than as measured by a raw number. Stock volatility is calculated as the standard
deviation of stock returns, where stock returns also are calculated on closing prices. In order
to calculate excess bid-ask spreads we perform an event study explained in more detail later
on.

6
 http://www.corporategovernanceboard.se/about-the-board
7
 1st July 2005
8
  1st of July 2008  http://www.corporategovernanceboard.se/the-code
9
 1 st of February 2010
We employ additional control variables that  may affect  the bid-ask spread.  Previous studies
have found public information to be of great importance to the level of information
asymmetry possessed by a company  (Gajewski & Quèré 2013;  Anderson et al., 2009; Jiang et
al., 2011).  As a result, we control for the availability of public information in line with Yohn
(1998) by using as proxies firm size and the number of analysts following the firm. It has also
been shown that high vote shares tend to increase the concentration of the  ownership
structure. Analysts are associated with a decrease in levels of information asymmetry in
concentrated ownership structures (Jiang et al., 2011).  This  implies that including analysts as
a control variable not only proxies for information availability in general, it also controls for
information asymmetry due to ownership concentration.

5. Methodology
The method is made up of two parts.  In the  first part  of our  research  we perform  an event
study  to derive our dependent variables.  The dependent  variable consists  of excess bid-ask
spreads  in  A-  and  B-shares, calculated in three event windows around annual report
announcements. In the second part of our  method, we perform regressions to test for a causal
relationship between excess control and excess bid-ask spreads in  A-and  B-shares
respectively.

5.1  Event study
An event study relies on three initial assumptions (MacKinlay 1997). The event is anticipated
to consist of new, unanticipated information immediately incorporated into stock prices where
market participants are assumed to possess skills necessary to correctly interpret information
revealed from an event. Further, factors surrounding an event are  assumed to remain constant.
Earnings  announcements are publications through which investors update their information
about firm prospects, enabling them to make further interpretations about future firm
performance.  Conducting an  event study  we are able  to  assess  the impact of excess control
and corporate governance on changes in levels of asymmetric information reflected in the
changes excess bid-ask spreads around earnings announcements.

Considering the definition of excess control, vote fraction-capital fraction, we assume that
there is a high concentration of controlling owners within  A-  shares.  As a result we also
assume that minority shareholders  represent  a  larger part  of the ownership structure in  B-
shares.  Provided that controlling shareholders have greater discretion over corporate
decisions, we also expect them to possess a generally higher level of understanding for the
business performed. As a result these investors should be  process information upon
announcement faster relative low vote investors.  Further, being  involved in corporate
decisions to some larger extent  also implies that the information released upon announcement
should not  reveal much of news  to controlling shareholders.  This implies that the excess
spreads should be  lower  for  A-shares.

As a result, the event study is performed in order to derive differences in excess bid-ask
spreads observed within A- and B shares around earnings announcements. Aiming at
identifying the effect  of excess control on  levels of asymmetric information within different
share classes, the event study is a useful tool in measuring divergent reflections.

The event study is made up of one estimation window and three event windows surrounding
each and every announcement. Only trading days make up the relative days of the study. The
announcement date is defined as the day when the quarterly and annual reports are
announced. We do not consider the effects in separate  earnings announcements, rather we
look upon the impact on earnings announcements in general.

The estimation window is made up of the average quoted bid-ask spread during a period of 26
trading days prior every announcement date (t =  -26;  -1). The event windows make up the
announcement date, a pre-disclosure period (t =  -1) and a post-announcement period (t = +1;
+5). Provided that the release of information upon announcement is not incorporated by all
investors at the time of announcement, meaning that investors interpret information dependent
on their assessment skills leading to a lagging effect of excess bid-ask spreads (Yohn 1998;
Atiase & Bamber 1993;  Krinsky & Lee 1996), we should be better able to capture the effect
of excess control on excess bid-ask spreads by extending the event window to make up for a
post-event period covering 5 days  following announcement. The event windows constitute the
respective daily quoted bid-ask spreads.

An  excess  bid-ask  spread is calculated during the three event windows in both share classes
by subtracting the normal spread from the actual spread:

            Excess  bid-ask  spread pre-disclosure  t-1  = Actual spread  –  Benchmark
                 Excess bid-ask  spread  event  t  = Actual spread  –  Benchmark
          Excess bid-ask  spread post-event  t 1; 5= Mean (Actual spread  –  Benchmark)

5.2 Panel methods
The research question involves  following companies included in the sample over a five-year
period. This involves a risk of that other unobserved factors not included in the data set are
correlated with the included explanatory variables. These variables may not to be exactly
constant, but they might be roughly constant over the sample period.  For this reason we find it
useful to apply a fixed effects model in the regression analysis (Wooldridge 2009 p.457).
Further we test invariant factors running the F-test and for firm-specific time invariant
running the LaGrange multiplier (LM) test. The results revealed that the null hypothesis was
rejected in both tests, and in order to determine the appropriate model for our panel we  also
did a  Hausman test. Rejecting the null hypothesis means that  the fixed effects model is
preferable.  We also ran a robustness test. The corporate governance variables were replace
with a dummy variable for code appliance. Further, the proxy for company size was replace
with belongingness to small  cap,  mid cap or large cap on Nasdaq OMX Nordic. Results can
be found in the appendix.

5.3  Regressions
In line with the results of the  tests  performed on  our panel data structure, we perform  fixed
effects  regressions.  The regressions are performed separately for A-  and B share classes.
Separating the investigations should reveal some interpretation of the effect from excess
control on levels of asymmetric information within different share classes during earnings
announcement. Further, all regressions are performed  on  three  dependent variables derived in
the event study, representing the excess bid-ask spread in three periods around every
announcement.

Together, the regression analysis should reveal  implications  of excess control  for levels of
asymmetric information in different periods and to different extents during earnings
announcements in different share class categories.
 We begin by regressing the average excess  control  of controlling shareholders  on excess bid-
 ask spreads  derived in the event study  without  concern for specific ownership categories. In
 this way we aim  to establish  a general effect of excess control on levels of asymmetric
 information.  In a second step we perform separate regressions for  different  investor categories
 by deriving  excess control obtained by the largest controlling shareholder  within each investor
 category. The excess control is regressed  on  the  excess bid-ask spreads  derived in the event
 study. This should illustrate the different implications of excess control on levels of
 asymmetric information within different ownership categories.

The Fixed Effects regressions performed are:

Log  y yijtk  =  β +  β Excess_control25average  yijtk  +  β Closingprice  yijtk  +  β         (1-6)
               0      1                                      2                        3
Volume  yijtk  +  β4 Trades  yijtk  +  β5 Board_memb  yijtk   +  β6 Board_meet  yijtk   +  β7
Board_dep_c  yijtk  +  β8  Board_dep_ms  yijtk  +  β9  Board_committees  yijtk   +  β10
Audit_memb  yijtk   +  β11  Audit_meet  yijtk   +  β12  Audit_dep_c  yijtk   +  β13
Audit_dep_ms  yijtk   +  β14  Analysts  yijtk   +  β15  Company_size  yijtk  +  β16  Volatility
yijtk  +  αt +  εi

Log y yijtk =  β +  β Excess_25foundfam  yijtk  +  β Closingprice  yijtk  +  β Volume      (7-13)
              0      1                                 2                        3
yijtk  +  β4 Trades  yijtk  +  β5 Board_memb  yijtk   +  β6 Board_meet  yijtk   +  β7
Board_dep_c  yijtk  +  β8  Board_dep_ms  yijtk  +  β9  Board_committees  yijtk   +  β10
Audit_memb  yijtk   +  β11  Audit_meet  yijtk   +  β12  Audit_dep_c  yijtk   +  β13
Audit_dep_ms  yijtk   +  β14  Analysts  yijtk   +  β15  Company_size  yijtk  +  β16  Volatility
yijtk  +  αt +  εi
Log y yijtk =  β +  β Excess_25nonfoundfam  yijtk  +  β Closingprice  yijtk  +  β Volume   (14-20)
              0      1                                    2                        3
yijtk  +  β4 Trades  yijtk  +  β5 Board_memb  yijtk   +  β6 Board_meet  yijtk   +  β7
Board_dep_c  yijtk  +  β8  Board_dep_ms  yijtk  +  β9  Board_committees  yijtk   +  β10
Audit_memb  yijtk   +  β11  Audit_meet  yijtk   +  β12  Audit_dep_c  yijtk   +  β13
Audit_dep_ms  yijtk   +  β14  Analysts  yijtk   +  β15  Company_size  yijtk  +  β16  Volatility
yijtk  +  αt +  εi
Log y yijtk =  β +  β Excess_25corp  yijtk  +  β Closingprice  yijtk  +  β Volume  yijtk  +  (21-26)
              0      1                           2                        3
β4 Trades  yijtk  +  β5 Board_memb  yijtk   +  β6 Board_meet  yijtk   +  β7  Board_dep_c  yijtk
+  β8  Board_dep_ms  yijtk  +  β9  Board_committees  yijtk   +  β10  Audit_memb  yijtk   +  β11
Audit_meet  yijtk   +  β12  Audit_dep_c  yijtk   +  β13  Audit_dep_ms  yijtk   +  β14  Analysts
yijtk   +  β15  Company_size  yijtk  +  β16  Volatility  yijtk  +  αt +  εi
Log y yijtk =  β +  β Excess_25inst  yijtk  +  β Closingprice  yijtk  +  β Volume  yijtk  +   (26-30)
              0      1                           2                        3
β4 Trades  yijtk  +  β5 Board_memb  yijtk   +  β6 Board_meet  yijtk   +  β7  Board_dep_c  yijtk
+  β8  Board_dep_ms  yijtk  +  β9  Board_committees  yijtk   +  β10  Audit_memb  yijtk   +  β11
Audit_meet  yijtk   +  β12  Audit_dep_c  yijtk   +  β13  Audit_dep_ms  yijtk   +  β14  Analysts
yijtk   +  β15  Company_size  yijtk  +  β16  Volatility  yijtk  +  αt +  εi
y=  excess bid-ask spread
i=company
j=event window
t=year
k=share class

6. Results
The result section is structured into three parts. In the first part we present  the interpretations
to our  descriptives. In the second part we present the results from the event study.  In the  third
part we present the results from our regressions. At the end section we present the  results
form the  robustness test.

6.1  Descriptives
The tables  belonging to this part is placed in the appendix.

Table 1
Table one  reports  an overall view of the number of firms  included in the data sample that
distribute  their  shares through A-  and B classes.  Further, it illustrates how many of these
shares are traded on the stock exchange during the sample period of 2008 through 2012.  It
appears as if the number of shares within each share class is stable throughout the sample
                                                            10
period. As can be seen, almost all firms having B-shares  also trade these shares on the stock
exchange. However, A shares are not traded to the same great extent. This indicates that
controlling shareholders are concerned with their governance allowed by voting rights.

Table 2
The  results  in Table 2 report an overall view of transaction data for shares included in our
sample. It is further confirmed in line with Table 1 that the number of A-shares traded is
substantially lower than the number of  traded B-shares. This can be interpreted by looking at
the number of executed trades within each share class. Looking at the bid and ask within the
different share classes it is also shown that A-shares appear to possess a smaller spread than
B-shares. This is probably related to the larger number  of voting rights attached to A-shares
relative B-share shares.

Table 3
In table 3 we present the summary statistics of firm governance variables. As can be seen
there is a wide variation in the level of corporate governance practices across firms in the
sample.  Looking at the number of board meetings the variance among firms  appears to be
substantial.

Table 4
Table 4 presents  the  calculated excess control possessed by shareholders within the
companies included in the sample. Panel A reports for all shareholders with vote fractions  ≥
5% and  Panel B reports  for all vote fractions  ≥  25%. The results suggest that founder family
and non founder-family owner have the largest positions of excess control within the different
owner categories.

10
   Includes the companies whose different share classes are reclassified for the purpose of this study.
Table 7
Table 7 shows the regression results from the regression of average excess control possessed
by the largest shareholders in every firm around each announcement on excess bid-ask spread
in A-shares. The table displays a significant negative relationship between excess control and
excess bid-ask spreads upon the event.  However, the results do not show a significant
relationship pre announcement nor post announcement.
Further, we find that board committees and board meetings have a significant negative
relationship to excess bid-ask spread within A-shares. The regression on average excess bid-
ask spreads within B-shares is attached in the Appendix.

Table 8
Measuring the relationship between excess control and excess bid-ask spreads within different
ownership categories, the results still only shows also reveals that excess control has a
reducing impact on excess bid-ask spreads, but only if the controlling owner belongs to a
founder family-  or a non-founder family category. This is consistent with our hypothesis of a
stronger relationship between excess control and excess  bid-ask spread within family
categories. Looking at the governance variables the coefficients are pretty much in line with
the results from the regressions on the average excess control.

6.1 Event study
Table 5 reports the results from the event study. It shows the excess bid-ask spreads during
the announcement periods in A-  and B-share classes. The results are in line with previous
research findings investigating bid-ask spreads during earnings announcements. It appears as
if A-shareholders are better informed than B-shareholder. B-shareholders protect themselves
against trade by widening the spread pre-announcement (McNichols & Trueman 1994;
Demski & Feltman 1994). A-shareholders on the other hand appear to benefit from superior
information through their  higher stake of voting rights.

6.2 Regressions

6.2.1 Multivariate regression analysis
We have performed a multivariate regression analysis in order to study the impact of excess
control on levels of information asymmetry during earnings announcements.

6.2.2 Interpretation
Overall we interpret the evidence from controlling owners possessing excess control having a
mitigating impact on excess bid-ask spreads within both share classes to suggest that excess
control have a reducing effect on levels of information asymmetry around earnings
announcement. However, due to some inconsistencies in the level of information possessed
by shareholders in the different share classes, we suggest that A-shareholders are better
informed due to their higher voting stake and as a result larger discretion over company
prospects. Further, we also suggest that B-shareholders do not have the same benefit from
discretion over company prospects dur to a lower stake in company capital. As a result they
protect themselves against informed shareholders. This is reflected in the results from the
event study as a widening of the spread in B-share during pre announcement period.
Consistent with previous literature  better-informed  A-shareholders benefit from such their
superior information and execute trade before announcement. This is reflected in Table XX as
a higher number of executed trades within A-shares pre announcement, followed by a
substantial decline post announcement.  Further, the opposite holds for number of executed
trades within B-shares  that increases upon announcement.
7.  Discussion
In this research we investigated  the relationship between excess control and excess bid-ask
spreads around announcements of  quarterly and annual  reports in high-  and low vote shares
respectively. Consistent with our hypothesis, we have found that excess control has a
mitigating effect of excess bid-ask spreads in both share classes, implying that excess control
reduces the level of information asymmetry perceived by shareholders within the  respective
share class.

Provided that high vote owners possess higher vote fractions than low vote shareholders, one
would expect shareholder with more discretion over corporate decision-making to possess
more  information about firm prospects from which there is a possibility to benefit from
trading on superior information  (Krinsky & Lee 1996; Kim & Verrecchia 1992).  This is
supported by larger number of executed trades within high vote shares  pre announcement,
followed by a substantial decline upon announcement.  It  suggests that high vote shareholders
try to benefit form information-based trading  before information is released to the public,
trading against each other as well as against less informed shareholders in the low vote share
class. This is reflected  by a lack of a mitigating relationship between excess control and
excess bid-ask spreads  within high vote shares  pre announcement,  supported by such a
significant relationship upon announcement.  This is further  reflected  by an increase in excess
bid-ask spreads pre announcement within low vote shares. Minority shareholders widen the
spread as they  try to  protect themselves against trade with better-informed high vote
shareholders. However, the results do not  reveal support for any association of such a
situation  to  be associated with the presence of excess control. Rather, the significant negative
relationship between excess control and excess bid-ask spreads within low vote shares
controlled by a family owner  shows a reducing effect from such  an  ownership.  This  still
supports our reasoning about controlling shareholders possessing excess control to be
incentivised to act in the favour of minority shareholders. Such actions should stem from a
combination of increased corporate governance related pressure and the increased
accessibility of stock trading to individual investors, enhancing corporate transparency  and as
a result associated with excess control possessed by the present controlling shareholder.

Provided some disclosure requirements according to the Code for listed companies, minority
shareholders are able to benchmark the relative levels of corporate governance performed
among firms. This  should  make  it harder for controlling shareholders to derive private
benefits from its position of control  since it would be at  the expense of loosing providers of
capital. This holds since the disclosure requirements  should make it easier for minority
shareholders to detect such  inefficient  investment behaviour.  Further, provided that the Code
constitutes some recommendations to be applied by listed companies it also appears as if
family owners,  previously associated with lack of management skills and inability to perform
sound decisions (Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000; Carl Oreland 2005),  have been able to improve
their governance by aligning with the Code.

Further, as a suggestion,  family owner appears to be the investor category most concerned
with acting upon the  behaviour of minority shareholders  since there is no such relationship
among other investor categories.  This can be related to the fact that family owners probably
have been the most frequently associated investor category to risks of agency costs borne to
the minority shareholder. Further, provided the potential benefit of corporations or institutions
to have access to other sources of external financing from minority shareholders that family
owners don’t access, it appears as if family owners should be more concerned with attracting
minority shareholders and as a result act more on their behalf.  As a result, minority
shareholders within an ownership structure controlled by a family owner possessing excess
control should thus benefit rather them suffer form  the presence of such ownership enhancing
the liquidity of its investments with positive effects on shareholder value.  At the same time,
controlling shareholders should also benefit from the resulting situation. Provided the actions
in favour of the minority shareholder, increased information disclosure, enhanced investment
behaviour etc. the firm should appear as an attractive investment opportunity in the market.
As a result, the controlling shareholder should be able to  attract  cheap financing, decreasing
the firm’s cost of capital  (Diamond & Verrecchia 1991).

Making interpretations about the positive effects from increased practising of corporate
governance  related  activities by a firm,  controlling shareholders and minority shareholders in-
between in a  dual-class share structure, the results appear to reveal  additional,  different
inferences  for those practices on levels of information asymmetry  within the respective share
class.

Reviewing financial literature, the relationship between the audit committee and a reduction
of access bid-ask spreads within both high-  and low vote shares can be interpreted  with
agency theory. Provided that the audit committee serves  as an independent monitor, providing
recommendations about corporate  financing and dividend  policy (Klein 1998) the committee
also possess some discretion over corporate decision-making. The benefit of such presence to
a  controlling shareholder should  either constitute protection of his share wealth  or protection
of the  right to exercise governance through  its voting rights  (Shleifer & Vishny 1997).  Given
that a controlling owner holds a concentrated stake in the company, he should be concerned
about the value of his shares.  As a matter of discretion over company investment funds, the
objective role that  the  audit committee might provide the controlling shareholder with  is
welfare protection in addition to his own discretion, possessed  through a large stake in
company  votes.  However, previous findings have also revealed that the controlling
shareholder derives other benefits when entitled with a larger fraction of company votes
relative company capital (Schöldström & Wattsgård 2010).  The negative increasing effect of
excess-bid ask spreads from the presence of board activities within high vote shares can be
viewed as a support of those findings.  Given that the board decides upon  long-term  corporate
strategy, the controlling shareholder might not possess as leveraged position of control
through its large stake in company votes as desired, and as a result the ability to influence
over firm future prospects is limited.  This supports previous findings that  voting rights are
attributed some voting premium, enabling right to pursue control within a corporation
(Zingales 1994).  As  a suggestion,  if board activity conflicts the ability of the controlling
shareholder to govern the company by exercising his voting rights,  there is a potential risk
that the controlling shareholder discounts the premium and as a result the value of the voting
right (Fama & Jensen 1983). This means that the reluctance from limits to control,  as a result
of board presence and activity,  could be reflected as an increase in excess bid-ask spread.
Analysing board appearance impact on excess bid-ask spread within low vote share yields a
concern of board dependency  among  minority shareholders.  In Sweden, majority shareholders
                                                           11
are entitled with the right to elect board members  . Provided findings on conflicts of interests
between controlling shareholders and minority shareholders  (Cronqvist & Nilsson 2000), a
setting where controlling shareholders are able to influence the composition of board structure
could potentially  question the ability of the board work to ensure interests of all shareholders
of the company.  As a result it appears  as if the minority shareholder, despite its absence of
access to control through some substantial stake in  voting rights, they  don’t remain passive.
Rather, it appears as their ability to discount company equity is more prominent, considering
their  leveraged position as a financier among several companies in a  competitive  market
place.

8.  Conclusions
We have found that controlling shareholders possessing excess control appear to benefit from
their larger stake in voting rights. This  should be a to concern for minority shareholders as
reflected by a widening in the bid-ask spread of B-shares. However, our  results do  not reflect
that minority shareholders perceive higher levels of information asymmetry in the presence of
excess control. Rather, considering the results within controlling family ownership, excess
control is shown to have a reducing impact on excess bid-ask spreads in B-shares. We suggest
that this reaction among minority shareholders stems from that corporate governance
requirements imposed to controlling shareholders by the Code make it harder for controlling
shareholders to act in their own interests at the expense of minority shareholders. This should
enhance corporate transparency, which as a result should have positive effects on levels of
asymmetric information.  However, it appears as if investor protection remains a concern for
minority shareholders. The negative relationship between board dependency variables and
excess bid-ask spread within low vote shares suggests  that minority shareholders still are
concerned with controlling shareholders discretion over corporate decision-making. Provided
that  the audit committee remains an objective part of the company board, the negative
relationship between audit committee and  levels of asymmetric information within both share
classes suggests that the objective presence within corporate decision-making is valued by
both controlling shareholders and minority shareholders. As a result we believe that we have
found that corporate  governance improves corporate transparency, making it more difficult
for shareholders to derive private benefits from its position of excess control within the
company.  We also believe that the corporate transparency is enhanced by some incentives of
the  controlling shareholder to rely on minority as a source of financing. This is reflected in
our results, as controlling ownership possessed by family owners is the only significant
relationship revealing a mitigating impact of excess control en excess bid-ask spreads within
different ownership categories.

Performing this study our attempt has been to investigate if the means of excess control
possessed by a controlling shareholder affects levels of asymmetric information during
earnings announcements. Our research question  is  distinguished  from previous literature in
the sense that it investigates the phenomenon of excess control within two share classes. The
interpretation behind performing a research within a dual share class structure was to question
previous concerns about risks associated with excess control in the presence of the increased
practices of corporate governance.  We believe to have found that excess control has a
mitigating effect on levels of information asymmetry. However it is difficult to  make
inferences about the credibility of the provided that our results  does not  appear in a consistent
pattern.
9. Variables

Corporate_id: Company identifier
Date: Trading date
Semi_date: Date at which ownership information has been collected
Year:  Relative sample year
Investor_category: Defined as founder-family (1), non-founder family(2), corporation(3) or
institution(4)
Closingpric_A: Daily closing price of A shares
Volume_A: Daily trading volume of A shares
Turnover_A: Daily trading turnover of A  shares
Trades_A: Number of executed trades of A shares
Closingprice_B: Daily closing price of B shares
Volume_B: Daily trading volume of B shares
Turnover_B: Daily trading turnover of B shares
Trades_B: Number of executed trades B shares

Governance variables
Board_memb: Number of board members on company
Board_meet: Number of board meetings
Board_dep_c: Number of board members dependent on company
Board_dep_ms: Number of board members dependent on majority shareholders
Board_committes:  Number of board committees per company
Audit_memb: Number of audit members per company
Audit_meet: Number of audit meetings per company
Audit_dep_c: Number of audit members dependent on company
Audit_dep_ms: Number of audit members dependent on majority shareholders
Analysts: Number of analysts following the company
Highprice: Highest daily stock price B shares
Lowprice: Lowest daily stock price B shares
Highpricea: Highest daily stock price A shares
Lowpricea: Lowest daily stock price B shares
Largeap: Dummy variable =1 if Company has a market capitalisation above 1 billion euro
Midcap: Dummy variable =1 if Company has a market capitalisation above 150 million >1
billion euro
Smallcap: Dummy variable =1 if Company has a market capitalisation above 150 million euro
AB_classes: Companies with both A-  and B share classes
A_dummy_traded: Companies with A classes that are traded

Excess_control5average: Average excess control of all shareholders with a larger vote
fraction ≥5%
Excess_control5largest: Largest  calculated excess control of all shareholders with a vote
fraction ≥5%
Excess_avgfoundfam_5: Average excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5%
within the founder-family ownership category
Excess_avgnonfoundfam_5: Average excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5%
within the non-founder family ownership category
Excess_avgcorp_5: Average excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5% within
the corporation ownership category
Excess_avginst_5: Average excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5% within
the financial institution ownership category
Excess_maxfoundfam_5: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5%
within the founder-family ownership  category
Excess_maxnonfoundfam_5: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5%
within the non-founder family ownership category
Excess_maxcorp_5: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5% within
the corporation ownership category
Excess_maxinst_5: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥5% within
the institutional ownership category
Excess_control25average: Average calculated excess control of all shareholders with a vote
fraction ≥25%
Excess_control25largest: Largest calculated excess control of all shareholders with a vote
fraction ≥25%
Excess_25foundfam: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥25% within
the founder family ownership category
Excess_25nonfoundfam: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction ≥25%
within the non-founder family ownership category
Excess_25corp: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction  ≥25% within the
corporation ownership category
Excess_25inst: Largest excess control of shareholders with a vote fraction  ≥25% within the
financial institutional ownership category
Dispersed_control: Dummy variable =1 if there is no controlling shareholder with a vote
fraction ≥25%
Company_size: Proxy for market capitalization
Volatility_A: Standard deviation return on A shares
Volatility_B: Standard deviation of return on B shares
Event_Q1: Date of announcement quarterly report one
Event_Q2: Date of announcement quarterly report two
Event_Q3: Date of announcement quarterly report three
Event_Q4: Date of announcement quarterly report four
Event_AR: Date of announcement annual report
events_pre_A: excess bid-ask spread pre-disclosure period A shares
events_ev_A: excess bid-ask spread event period A shares
events_post_A: excess bid-ask spread post-event period A shares
events_pre_B: excess bid-ask spread pre-disclosure period B shares
events_ev_B: excess bid-ask spread event period B shares
events_post_B: excess bid-ask spread post-event period B shares
levents_pre_A: log of excess bid-ask spread pre-disclosure period A shares
levents_ev_A: log of excess event period A shares
levents_post_A: log of excess bid-ask spread post-event period A shares
levents_pre_B: log excess bid-ask spread pre-disclosure period B shares
levents_ev_B: log  of excess bid-ask spread event period B shares
levents_post_B: log of excess bid-ask spread post-event period B shares
10. Appendix

                                             &A&        &B&
    Share&   A&     B&   A&B&  Class&   Class&
    classes&  Class&& Class&& Class&& Traded&  Traded&
    2008     98     98    188     52      188
    2009     98     98    188     51      182
    2010     98     98    188     50      186
    2011     98     98    188     49      185
    2012     98     98    188     47      188
                                              Table&2&
                    Table 2 reports  descriptive statistics on the transaction data for
                  shares within A-  and B classes. It illustrates that B-shares  traded to a
                 much greater extent  than A-shares. This is reflected in the number of
                       executed trades, the trading volume and trading turnover.
              A-shares   Mean       sd          Max      Min  Count
               Bid        15.05        45.24        528.50    0.00  331400.00
               Ask       14.99        47.01        1000.00   0.00  331400.00
                Closing    15.96         47.35         550.00    0.00  331400.00
               High       120.57       72.70        550.00    3.21  36020.00
               Low       117.62       71.42        537.00    3.21  36020.00
               Trades     97.27        697.75       27834.00  0.00  331400.00
               Total      101373.02    904886.92    1.35e+08  0.00  331400.00
               Turnover  9327794.93   84468601.18  2.58e+10  0.00  331400.00
               Summary  statistics

              B-shares   Mean       sd          Max      Min  Count
               Bid        63.41        64.68        529.00    0.00  331400.00
               Ask       63.93        64.89        529.50    0.00  331400.00
                Closing    63.77         64.74         529.50    0.00  331400.00
               High       68.21        65.77        538.00    0.05  309071.00
               Low       66.38        64.33        525.00    0.04  309070.00
               Trades     540.71       1388.77      40778.00  0.00  331400.00
               Total      634840.09    3674193.59   7.95e+08  0.00  331400.00
               Turnover  42930625.92  1.57e+08     1.20e+10  0.00  331400.00
                                    Table&4&
    The$table$displays$excess$control$within$A$shareholders.$Panel$A$
  reports$excess$control$for$all$shareholders$with$a$vote$fraction$≥$5%.$
   Panel$B$reports$excess$control$for$all$controlling$shareholders$with$
                                vote$fractions$≥$25%.$
                 Panel$A$                      $$          $$         $$         $$
Excess$control$≥$5%$               mean$   max$     min$   sd$
Excess_control5$                   9.41$     50.40$   0.00$   10.87$
Excess_foundfam_5$               17.83$   50.40$   0.01$   12.14$
Excess_nonfoundfam_5$           10.29$   45.80$   0.02$   10.23$
Excess_corp_5$                     6.00$     30.90$   0.03$   7.58$
Excess_inst_5$                      3.01$     30.50$   0.04$   6.40$
$$                                                                                                       $$
Panel$B$                                  $$ $          $$ $          $$$        $$
Excess$control$≥$25%$              mean$   max$    min$   sd$
Excess_control25$                  1.45$     61.70$   0.00$   6.47$
Excess_control25la~t$              1.45$     61.70$   0.00$   6.47$
Excess_25foundfam$               26.09$   58.40$   0.20$   10.81$
Excess_25nonfoundfam$           25.54$   44.30$   2.80$   9.15$
Excess_25corp$                     17.19$   34.80$   1.10$   9.47$
Excess_25inst$                      14.58$   51.00$   2.40$   11.70$
                                  Table&3
TableK2KreportedKdescrptiveKstatisticsKonKtheKtransactionKdataKforKsharesKwithinK
A"KandKBKclassesKillustratesKthatKBKsharesKinKcontrastKtoKAKsharesKareKtradedKtoKaK
  muchKgreaterKextent.KThisKisKreflectedKinKtheKnumberKofKexecutedKtrades,KtheK
                    tradingKvolumeKandKtradingKturnover.K
A"shares     Mean       sd         Max        Min        Count
Bid         15.05       45.24       528.50      0.00        331400.00
Ask         14.99       47.01       1000.00     0.00        331400.00
Closing      15.96       47.35       550.00      0.00        331400.00
High        120.57      72.70       550.00      3.21        36020.00
Low        117.62      71.42       537.00      3.21        36020.00
Trades      97.27       697.75      27834.00    0.00        331400.00
Total        101373.02   904886.92   1.35e+08    0.00        331400.00
Turnover    9327794.93  84468601.182.58e+10    0.00        331400.00
Summary    statistics

B"shares     Mean       sd         Max        Min        Count
Bid         63.41       64.68       529.00      0.00        331400.00
Ask         63.93       64.89       529.50      0.00        331400.00
Closing      63.77       64.74       529.50      0.00        331400.00
High        68.21       65.77       538.00      0.05        309071.00
Low        66.38       64.33       525.00      0.04        309070.00
Trades      540.71      1388.77     40778.00    0.00        331400.00
Total        634840.09   3674193.59  7.95e+08    0.00        331400.00
Turnover    42930625.921.57e+08    1.20e+10    0.00        331400.00

                      Table-5
 The-numbers-represent-the-results-from-the-event-
 study.-Pane-A-reports-excess-bid"ask-spreads-for-A"
share-and-Panel-B-reports-excess-bid"ask-spreads-for-
 B"shares.-Negative-excess-spreads-are-reported-for-
  A-"shares-pre"-and-post-announcement-whereas-
 negative-excess-bid"ask-spreads-are-reported-upon-
       and-post-announcement-in-B-shares.
A"shares    mean      sd         max
Pre-Event    "0.0031     0.1680      1.9802
Event       "0.0010     0.1765      2.6289
Post-Event   0.4416      56.0450     1062.6337

B"shares    mean      sd         max
Pre-Event    0.0015      0.0551      1.9612
Event       "0.0000     0.0628      1.9931
Post-Event   "0.0083     9.2223      314.1464
                                               Table&6

A"Shares                                       B"shares
Family/Foundermean       sd          max        Family/Foundermean       sd          max
Pre/Event    "0.0027      0.1608      1.9802      Pre/Event    0.0011      0.0482      1.9472
Event       "0.0011      0.1709      2.6289      Event       0.0005      0.0569      1.9931
Post/Event   0.5035      56.9186     1062.6337   Post/Event   "0.0814      8.1919      225.5548

Non"Family/Foundermean       sd          max        Non"Family/Foundermean       sd          max
Pre/Event    "0.0030      0.1622      1.9802      Pre/Event    0.00         0.0560      1.9612
Event       "0.0010      0.1685      2.6289      Event       "0.00        0.0639      1.9931
Post/Event   0.4936      56.1426     1062.6337   Post/Event   "0.01        9.3729      314.1464

Corporation  mean       sd          max        Corporation  mean       sd          max
Pre/Event    "0.0025      0.1608      1.9595      Pre/Event    0.0009      0.0414      1.8871
Event       "0.0024      0.1691      2.0240      Event       0.0001      0.0552      1.9931
Post/Event   0.7932      57.8144     1062.6337   Post/Event   "0.0452      8.7572      225.5548

                                                           Table&7
Firm&Governance&variables
           Board&MembersBoard&MeetingsBoard&members&dependent&on&companyBoard&members&dependent&on&majority&shareholdersAudit&membersAudit&meetingsAudit&members&dependent&on&companyAudit&members&dependent&on&mBoard&committees
Mean              8        10         1         2         3         3         1         1         2
Max&              15         47         6         8         10         22         5         8         3
sd                2         4         1         2         2         3         1         1         1
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                     levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_control25average                -0.0128            0.0260             -0.0293
                                         (0.032)            (0.017)             (0.025)
Closingprice_A                         -0.0027            0.0020            -0.0052*
                                         (0.004)            (0.003)             (0.003)
Volume_A                           -0.0000            0.0000             0.0000
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                             0.0002            -0.0001             0.0001
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                         0.4162*           -0.0001            0.0738
                                         (0.217)            (0.116)             (0.179)
Board_meet                           -0.0058            0.0278             0.0346
                                         (0.073)            (0.051)             (0.065)
Board_dep_c                           -0.3790*            -0.2008             -0.0849
                                         (0.229)            (0.212)             (0.192)
Board_dep_ms                        0.0192            0.0879            0.2152
                                         (0.195)            (0.170)             (0.182)
Board_committees                      1.4214            -0.6686            1.9680*
                                         (1.131)            (0.445)             (1.131)
Audit_memb                          -0.0103            0.1956             0.1063
                                         (0.182)            (0.131)             (0.145)
Audit_meet                            0.0075            -0.0176             -0.1414
                                         (0.144)            (0.100)             (0.119)
Audit_dep_c                           -0.4375            0.0359             0.5722
                                         (0.724)            (0.324)             (0.358)
Audit_dep_ms                          0.2815            -0.0354            -0.0995
                                         (0.375)            (0.285)             (0.311)
Analysts                                                 -0.0260
                                                             (0.030)
Company_size                          0.1427           -0.4947***           -0.0456
                                         (0.441)            (0.178)             (0.206)
Volatility_A                        129.5633***        91.1250**        104.9114***
                                        (46.913)           (39.023)            (37.959)
Constant                              -15.2973           6.1271*            -3.0110
                                        (10.389)            (3.496)             (5.835)

Observations                          209              208               258
R-squared                           0.1034                             0.1083
Number of Corporate_id                  27               27                27
Adj. R-squared                                 .                     .                      .
                                  Standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                     levents_pre_B      levents_ev_B      levents_post_B

Excess_control25average                0.0001            0.0120             0.0140
                                         (0.013)            (0.016)             (0.013)
Closingprice_B                        -0.0040**           -0.0013             -0.0014
                                         (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
Volume_B                           0.0000            0.0000           0.0000**
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_B                              0.0000            -0.0000            -0.0001*
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                          0.0092            0.0736            -0.0721
                                         (0.062)            (0.064)             (0.057)
Board_meet                         0.0315**           0.0039             0.0169
                                         (0.016)            (0.013)             (0.013)
Board_dep_c                         0.1431*            0.1335            0.1326*
                                         (0.086)            (0.087)             (0.074)
Board_dep_ms                        0.0989            0.0841            0.0053
                                         (0.075)            (0.079)             (0.072)
Board_committees                      -0.0959            -0.2241             -0.0822
                                         (0.159)            (0.156)             (0.154)
Audit_memb                         0.0484           0.0954*           0.0897*
                                         (0.053)            (0.053)             (0.048)
Audit_meet                            -0.0333            0.0128             -0.0061
                                         (0.027)            (0.030)             (0.028)
Audit_dep_c                            -0.1226            -0.1369            -0.2768**
                                         (0.136)            (0.128)             (0.122)
Audit_dep_ms                          -0.0892            -0.1179            -0.1787*
                                         (0.115)            (0.118)             (0.103)
Analysts                                -0.0620            -0.2357             -0.0654
                                         (0.442)            (0.228)             (0.244)
Company_size                          -0.1173           -0.2721**          -0.2458**
                                         (0.112)            (0.112)             (0.100)
Volatility_B                            -8.9821           -15.7614*            -7.5623
                                         (8.091)            (8.121)             (7.591)
Constant                              -2.7625            1.1639            5.2639**
                                         (3.411)            (2.666)             (2.522)

Observations                           1,500             1,407              1,592
R-squared                            0.0194            0.0250            0.0299
Number of Corporate_id                 168              168               168
Adj. R-squared                                 .                     .                      .
                                  Standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25foundfam                   -0.0571            -0.1248            -0.1551**
                                        (0.076)            (0.082)             (0.067)
Closingprice_A                        -0.0011            -0.0083            -0.0065**
                                        (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.003)
Volume_A                          0.0000            0.0000             -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001             0.0002
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                        0.3207            0.2571             0.0628
                                        (0.257)            (0.224)             (0.215)
Board_meet                         0.0095            0.1004             0.0282
                                        (0.073)            (0.071)             (0.069)
Board_dep_c                         -0.3723            0.2423             0.0973
                                        (0.286)            (0.309)             (0.254)
Board_dep_ms                     0.2975           0.1624           0.6475**
                                        (0.301)            (0.304)             (0.273)
Board_committees                    1.3839          2.9091***          2.3388**
                                        (1.111)            (0.996)             (1.176)
Audit_memb                        -0.0747            0.1282             0.0958
                                        (0.193)            (0.173)             (0.161)
Audit_meet                           0.0145            -0.1570             -0.1254
                                        (0.144)            (0.130)             (0.130)
Audit_dep_c                         -0.0688            0.3010            0.9678**
                                        (0.745)            (0.393)             (0.410)
Audit_dep_ms                        0.3474            -0.2622             -0.2879
                                        (0.396)            (0.367)             (0.361)
Company_size                       0.1653            0.0174             0.0108
                                        (0.443)            (0.485)             (0.213)
Volatility_A                       129.6003**       139.1212***        141.2027***
                                      (51.146)           (44.416)            (43.985)
Constant                             -13.8875           -11.0460            -2.2060
                                       (10.440)           (10.938)            (6.192)

Observations                         171              177               218
R-squared                          0.1309            0.2065             0.1352
Number of Corporate_id                23               23                23
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25nonfoundfam                0.0576            -0.0915*            -0.0231
                                        (0.070)            (0.054)             (0.055)
Closingprice_A                        -0.0013            -0.0084*            -0.0044
                                        (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.003)
Volume_A                          0.0000            0.0000            0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001             0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                        0.3487            0.3063             0.0992
                                        (0.262)            (0.223)             (0.211)
Board_meet                          -0.0070            0.1263*             0.0286
                                        (0.077)            (0.072)             (0.069)
Board_dep_c                         -0.3871            0.0403             -0.0958
                                        (0.275)            (0.273)             (0.231)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1652            -0.0809             0.2905
                                        (0.262)            (0.254)             (0.227)
Board_committees                    1.4026           2.5913**            1.9326
                                        (1.159)            (1.005)             (1.181)
Audit_memb                        -0.0167            0.0382             0.0806
                                        (0.194)            (0.166)             (0.152)
Audit_meet                           0.0323            -0.1898             -0.1650
                                        (0.145)            (0.130)             (0.125)
Audit_dep_c                         -0.3857            0.0378             0.6008
                                        (0.752)            (0.365)             (0.381)
Audit_dep_ms                        0.3165            0.1101             -0.0028
                                        (0.387)            (0.331)             (0.322)
Company_size                        0.1515            -0.0095             -0.0225
                                        (0.463)            (0.485)             (0.220)
Volatility_A                      134.8462***       108.6794**        107.1464***
                                      (49.375)           (41.782)            (41.041)
Constant                             -16.6771           -10.1885            -3.3638
                                       (11.162)           (11.157)            (6.635)

Observations                         190              195               239
R-squared                          0.1145            0.1961             0.1041
Number of Corporate_id                25               25                25
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25inst                        0.0776             0.0213             -0.0684
                                        (0.089)            (0.079)             (0.209)
Closingprice_A                        -0.0013            -0.0080             -0.0045
                                        (0.005)            (0.005)             (0.003)
Volume_A                          0.0000            0.0000            0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001             0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                        0.3684            0.2620             0.0818
                                        (0.262)            (0.223)             (0.212)
Board_meet                          -0.0016            0.1135             0.0313
                                        (0.076)            (0.072)             (0.071)
Board_dep_c                         -0.3864            0.0684             -0.0990
                                        (0.275)            (0.277)             (0.232)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1513            -0.0554             0.2999
                                        (0.262)            (0.258)             (0.227)
Board_committees                    1.3157           2.7108***           1.9996*
                                        (1.159)            (1.012)             (1.173)
Audit_memb                        -0.0121            0.0390             0.0773
                                        (0.194)            (0.168)             (0.152)
Audit_meet                           0.0055            -0.1685             -0.1517
                                        (0.147)            (0.132)             (0.128)
Audit_dep_c                         -0.4053            0.0795             0.6143
                                        (0.754)            (0.369)             (0.383)
Audit_dep_ms                        0.3306            0.0788             -0.0200
                                        (0.386)            (0.333)             (0.324)
Company_size                        0.0969            -0.0225             0.0063
                                        (0.463)            (0.490)             (0.213)
Volatility_A                       121.7013**       114.4117***        111.1595***
                                      (50.334)           (42.758)            (41.234)
Constant                             -15.0275           -12.5138            -3.5720
                                       (10.879)           (11.182)            (6.706)

Observations                         190              195               239
R-squared                          0.1150            0.1818             0.1038
Number of Corporate_id                25               25                25
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25corp                       0.4898            0.0396             0.0193
                                        (0.389)            (0.267)             (0.145)
Closingprice_A                       -0.0010            -0.0109*             0.0027
                                        (0.005)            (0.006)             (0.004)
Volume_A                           -0.0000            -0.0000             -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                            0.0024            0.0027             -0.0050
                                        (0.006)            (0.008)             (0.003)
Board_memb                        -0.2037            0.3022             0.1179
                                        (0.441)            (0.391)             (0.315)
Board_meet                          -0.0621            0.0262             0.0704
                                        (0.114)            (0.111)             (0.107)
Board_dep_c                          -0.7977            -0.2159             -0.4129
                                        (0.598)            (0.588)             (0.522)
Board_dep_ms                     1.2727**           0.5586            0.5315
                                        (0.579)            (0.562)             (0.412)
Board_committees                   2.6864*           2.5786*            2.3576
                                        (1.580)            (1.501)             (1.821)
Audit_memb                        0.2759            0.3616             0.3241
                                        (0.263)            (0.262)             (0.223)
Audit_meet                          -0.6722**           -0.6457*            -0.4188
                                        (0.330)            (0.340)             (0.273)
Audit_dep_c                          -1.1262            -1.2880             0.5138
                                        (1.708)            (1.527)             (1.315)
Audit_dep_ms                        -1.7403*            -1.1354             -0.8166
                                        (0.990)            (0.897)             (0.774)
Company_size                        0.2398            0.4795             -0.1173
                                        (0.503)            (0.562)             (0.434)
Volatility_A                         92.2713           70.4187            71.7610
                                      (76.873)           (72.517)            (64.302)
Constant                             -19.2958           -18.9199            -1.3135
                                      (13.595)           (14.025)            (10.592)

Observations                          91               87               115
R-squared                          0.2107            0.2980             0.1732
Number of Corporate_id                11               11                11
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      levents_ev_B      levents_post_B

Excess_25foundfam                  0.0589*          0.0828**           0.0602*
                                        (0.033)            (0.037)             (0.033)
Closingprice_B                       -0.0040**           -0.0008             -0.0014
                                        (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
Volume_B                          0.0000            0.0000           0.0000**
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_B                             0.0000            -0.0000            -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                         -0.0038            0.0898             -0.0583
                                        (0.063)            (0.066)             (0.058)
Board_meet                         0.0258*           0.0077            0.0152
                                        (0.015)            (0.013)             (0.013)
Board_dep_c                        0.1258            0.1287            0.1150
                                        (0.087)            (0.089)             (0.076)
Board_dep_ms                      0.1483*           0.0545            0.0068
                                        (0.078)            (0.081)             (0.075)
Board_committees                     -0.1378            -0.2436             -0.0902
                                        (0.157)            (0.157)             (0.154)
Audit_memb                        0.0634           0.0989*           0.0998**
                                        (0.053)            (0.054)             (0.048)
Audit_meet                           -0.0413            0.0074             -0.0143
                                        (0.027)            (0.030)             (0.028)
Audit_dep_c                          -0.1178            -0.1750            -0.2553**
                                        (0.134)            (0.129)             (0.122)
Audit_dep_ms                        -0.1102            -0.0784            -0.2258**
                                        (0.115)            (0.120)             (0.104)
Analysts                              -0.0534            -0.2441             -0.0566
                                        (0.435)            (0.228)             (0.243)
Company_size                        -0.1096           -0.2667**          -0.2597**
                                        (0.111)            (0.113)             (0.101)
Volatility_B                           -8.1455           -17.7911**           -7.9430
                                        (8.124)            (8.325)             (7.758)
Constant                             -4.2551            -0.7717            4.3478*
                                        (3.195)            (2.714)             (2.529)

Observations                         1,440             1,346              1,519
R-squared                          0.0243            0.0304            0.0321
Number of Corporate_id                160              160               160
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                           (1)                 (2)                (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      levents_ev_B      levents_ev_B

Excess_25nonfoundfam              0.0674***          0.0098           0.0098
                                        (0.024)            (0.024)            (0.024)
Closingprice_B                       -0.0042**           -0.0014            -0.0014
                                        (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)
Volume_B                          0.0000            0.0000           0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Trades_B                             0.0000            -0.0000           -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Board_memb                        -0.0046            0.0788            0.0788
                                        (0.063)            (0.065)            (0.065)
Board_meet                         0.0259*            0.0069           0.0069
                                        (0.016)            (0.013)            (0.013)
Board_dep_c                       0.1905**          0.1512*          0.1512*
                                        (0.086)            (0.087)            (0.087)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1077            0.0685           0.0685
                                        (0.076)            (0.079)            (0.079)
Board_committees                     -0.0940            -0.2134            -0.2134
                                        (0.157)            (0.156)            (0.156)
Audit_memb                        0.0513           0.0964*          0.0964*
                                        (0.053)            (0.053)            (0.053)
Audit_meet                          -0.0380            0.0076            0.0076
                                        (0.027)            (0.030)            (0.030)
Audit_dep_c                          -0.1420            -0.1593            -0.1593
                                        (0.134)            (0.128)            (0.128)
Audit_dep_ms                        -0.0724            -0.1016            -0.1016
                                        (0.113)            (0.118)            (0.118)
Analysts                              -0.0677            -0.2413            -0.2413
                                        (0.437)            (0.227)            (0.227)
Company_size                        -0.0908           -0.2665**         -0.2665**
                                        (0.111)            (0.112)            (0.112)
Volatility_B                           -8.5975           -17.7707**        -17.7707**
                                        (8.063)            (8.189)            (8.189)
Constant                             -4.8429            0.9662            0.9662
                                        (3.244)            (2.643)            (2.643)

Observations                         1,471             1,380             1,380
R-squared                          0.0265            0.0260           0.0260
Number of Corporate_id                164              164              164
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                    .
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                (2)                (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      events_ev_B      events_post_B

Excess_25inst                        0.0049            -0.0000            0.0011
                                        (0.042)            (0.001)            (0.153)
Closingprice_B                      -0.0041**          -0.0000            0.0014
                                        (0.002)            (0.000)            (0.007)
Volume_B                          0.0000           0.0000           0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Trades_B                             0.0000            -0.0000           -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Board_memb                        -0.0020           0.0002            0.0058
                                        (0.063)            (0.002)            (0.247)
Board_meet                         0.0291*           0.0003           0.0291
                                        (0.016)            (0.000)            (0.058)
Board_dep_c                       0.1858**          0.0024           0.6170*
                                        (0.086)            (0.002)            (0.325)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1142           0.0007           0.0665
                                        (0.076)            (0.002)            (0.298)
Board_committees                     -0.0970            -0.0013            -0.0272
                                        (0.157)            (0.005)            (0.613)
Audit_memb                         0.0469            -0.0004           -0.0709
                                        (0.053)            (0.001)            (0.195)
Audit_meet                          -0.0345           0.0006            0.0738
                                        (0.027)            (0.001)            (0.111)
Audit_dep_c                          -0.1404            -0.0011            -0.6085
                                        (0.135)            (0.004)            (0.524)
Audit_dep_ms                       -0.0742           0.0021            0.2061
                                        (0.114)            (0.003)            (0.424)
Analysts                              -0.0633            -0.0028            -0.0609
                                        (0.438)            (0.009)            (1.179)
Company_size                       -0.0982           0.0045            0.3183
                                        (0.111)            (0.003)            (0.422)
Volatility_B                          -8.0713            0.1671            23.6149
                                       (8.068)            (0.238)           (31.825)
Constant                              -3.2660            -0.0944            -8.5280
                                       (3.291)            (0.084)           (11.193)

Observations                         1,477             3,670             3,670
R-squared                          0.0206           0.0019           0.0021
Number of Corporate_id                165              166              166
Adj. R-squared                               .                    .                    .
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                (2)                (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      events_ev_B      events_post_B

Excess_25corp                       -0.0238           0.0003            0.0328
                                        (0.032)            (0.001)            (0.119)
Closingprice_B                       -0.0059**           -0.0000            -0.0022
                                        (0.002)            (0.000)            (0.009)
Volume_B                          0.0000           0.0000           0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Trades_B                             -0.0000            -0.0000            -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Board_memb                        -0.0320           0.0004            0.0105
                                        (0.069)            (0.002)            (0.259)
Board_meet                         0.0232           0.0006            0.0087
                                        (0.016)            (0.000)            (0.056)
Board_dep_c                        0.1689*           0.0026            0.3555
                                        (0.093)            (0.002)            (0.351)
Board_dep_ms                      0.1478*           0.0015           0.1052
                                        (0.088)            (0.002)            (0.335)
Board_committees                    -0.1535           -0.0015            0.1923
                                        (0.161)            (0.004)            (0.594)
Audit_memb                         0.0800            0.0010           -0.0338
                                        (0.055)            (0.001)            (0.200)
Audit_meet                         -0.0518*           0.0004            0.0225
                                        (0.028)            (0.001)            (0.109)
Audit_dep_c                          -0.0921            -0.0020            -0.5096
                                        (0.150)            (0.004)            (0.567)
Audit_dep_ms                        -0.1783            -0.0010            -0.1071
                                        (0.130)            (0.003)            (0.464)
Analysts                              -0.0516            -0.0024            -0.0691
                                        (0.432)            (0.008)            (1.090)
Company_size                       -0.0513           0.0040            0.3588
                                        (0.126)            (0.003)            (0.441)
Volatility_B                          -3.1661            0.1143            -7.2581
                                       (9.075)            (0.238)           (33.635)
Constant                              -3.5846            -0.0970            -8.0924
                                       (3.150)            (0.072)           (10.240)

Observations                         1,159             2,829             2,829
R-squared                          0.0271           0.0029           0.0011
Number of Corporate_id                128              129              129
Adj. R-squared                               .                    .                    .
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                     levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_control25average                -0.0047            -0.0371             -0.0243
                                         (0.029)            (0.025)             (0.023)
Closingprice_B                         -0.0027
                                         (0.004)
Volume_B                          0.0000
                                         (0.000)
Company_size                          -0.0384            -0.0638             -0.0682
                                         (0.422)            (0.468)             (0.201)
Trades_A                           0.0002**           0.0001            0.0000
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Volatility_B                         58.1937**
                                        (25.149)
Closingprice_A                                           -0.0072            -0.0055**
                                                             (0.005)             (0.003)
Volume_A                                            -0.0000            0.0000
                                                             (0.000)             (0.000)
Volatility_A                                         125.4586***        86.9858**
                                                           (37.727)            (35.858)
Constant                               -5.7583            -3.0221             2.3938
                                         (9.604)            (10.495)            (4.856)

Observations                          202              191               239
R-squared                            0.0607            0.1102            0.0605
Number of Corporate_id                  25               25                25
Adj. R-squared                                 .                     .                      .
                                  Standard errors in parentheses
                                *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                     levents_pre_B      levents_ev_B      levents_post_B

Excess_control25average               0.0026            0.0192             0.0040
                                         (0.014)            (0.016)             (0.014)
Closingprice_B                        -0.0035*            -0.0012             -0.0001
                                         (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
Volume_B                           0.0000            0.0000           0.0000***
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_B                              0.0000            -0.0000           -0.0001**
                                         (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Analysts                               -0.0897            -0.2881             -0.0699
                                         (0.449)            (0.229)             (0.246)
Company_size                         -0.1761           -0.2488**           -0.2357**
                                         (0.119)            (0.120)             (0.108)
Volatility_B                            -7.9578           -19.2609**           -12.9584
                                         (8.828)            (8.954)             (8.308)
Constant                              -0.9538            1.7488             5.1272*
                                         (3.668)            (2.849)             (2.738)

Observations                          1,288             1,194              1,347
R-squared                           0.0140            0.0176            0.0182
Number of Corporate_id                 148              148               149
Adj. R-squared                                .                     .                      .

                                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)
 VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

 Excess_25foundfam                    -0.0565            -0.0491             -0.0615
                                        (0.061)            (0.066)             (0.054)
 Closingprice_A                        0.0002            -0.0068            -0.0060*
                                        (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.003)
 Volume_A                          0.0000            0.0000            -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
 Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001            0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
 Company_size                        0.1287            -0.0652            -0.0282
                                        (0.432)            (0.475)             (0.212)
 Volatility_A                       98.3770**         99.3378**         93.8162**
                                       (43.390)           (39.944)            (41.073)
 Constant                             -7.1799            -2.1688             2.8273
                                        (9.707)            (10.548)            (5.252)

 Observations                         164              160               199
 R-squared                          0.0812            0.1014            0.0577
 Number of Corporate_id                21               21                21
 Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25nonfoundfam                0.0550            -0.0917*            -0.0217
                                        (0.068)            (0.053)             (0.053)
Closingprice_A                        -0.0007           -0.0082**            -0.0044
                                        (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.003)
Volume_A                          0.0000            0.0000            0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001             0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                        0.3344            0.3034             0.1051
                                        (0.253)            (0.216)             (0.207)
Board_meet                          -0.0007            0.1289*             0.0268
                                        (0.074)            (0.068)             (0.067)
Board_dep_c                         -0.3613            0.0582             -0.1049
                                        (0.258)            (0.259)             (0.224)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1499            -0.1029             0.2841
                                        (0.251)            (0.245)             (0.222)
Board_committees                    1.3382           2.5537***           1.9541*
                                        (1.122)            (0.980)             (1.140)
Audit_memb                        -0.0102            0.0457             0.0829
                                        (0.185)            (0.161)             (0.149)
Audit_meet                           0.0307            -0.1864             -0.1646
                                        (0.142)            (0.127)             (0.123)
Audit_dep_c                         -0.4279            0.0232             0.5956
                                        (0.732)            (0.357)             (0.375)
Audit_dep_ms                        0.3340            0.1216             -0.0024
                                        (0.371)            (0.319)             (0.316)
Volatility_A                      122.3516***       107.3904***        109.3549***
                                      (45.474)           (39.937)            (38.742)
Constant                            -12.9883***        -10.4854***           -4.0509
                                        (3.649)            (3.055)             (3.208)

Observations                         200              203               244
R-squared                          0.1107            0.1940             0.1068
Number of Corporate_id                26               26                26
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25nonfoundfam                0.0556            -0.0712            -0.0154
                                        (0.068)            (0.053)             (0.054)
Closingprice_A                        0.0005            -0.0079*           -0.0050*
                                        (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.003)
Volume_A                         0.0000            0.0000            0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001            0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Company_size                        0.0946            -0.0241            -0.0476
                                        (0.451)            (0.477)             (0.215)
Volatility_A                       103.5547**        86.6120**         79.9323**
                                      (42.323)           (38.171)            (37.936)
Constant                             -9.4218            -2.3008             2.1037
                                       (10.474)           (10.721)            (5.581)

Observations                         183              178               220
R-squared                          0.0746            0.1110            0.0510
Number of Corporate_id                23               23                23
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25inst                        0.0823             0.0234             -0.0691
                                        (0.087)            (0.077)             (0.206)
Closingprice_A                        -0.0009           -0.0080**            -0.0045
                                        (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.003)
Volume_A                          0.0000            0.0000            0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001             0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                        0.3578            0.2599             0.0873
                                        (0.253)            (0.217)             (0.208)
Board_meet                         0.0029            0.1155*            0.0312
                                        (0.074)            (0.068)             (0.069)
Board_dep_c                         -0.3646            0.0856             -0.1068
                                        (0.257)            (0.262)             (0.225)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1367            -0.0773            0.2912
                                        (0.251)            (0.249)             (0.223)
Board_committees                    1.2492           2.6747***           1.9906*
                                        (1.122)            (0.986)             (1.137)
Audit_memb                        -0.0044            0.0461             0.0807
                                        (0.185)            (0.162)             (0.149)
Audit_meet                           0.0035            -0.1655             -0.1510
                                        (0.143)            (0.129)             (0.126)
Audit_dep_c                         -0.4504            0.0644             0.6061
                                        (0.733)            (0.360)             (0.377)
Audit_dep_ms                        0.3485            0.0922             -0.0182
                                        (0.371)            (0.322)             (0.318)
Volatility_A                       110.6891**       113.1723***        112.0009***
                                      (46.165)           (40.757)            (39.062)
Constant                            -12.7204***        -13.0914***           -3.5080
                                        (3.422)            (2.969)             (4.378)

Observations                         200              203               244
R-squared                          0.1121            0.1797             0.1065
Number of Corporate_id                26               26                26
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25inst                        0.0869            0.0092             -0.0885
                                        (0.085)            (0.075)             (0.187)
Closingprice_A                        0.0005            -0.0075            -0.0050*
                                        (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.003)
Volume_A                         0.0000            0.0000            0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                           0.0001            0.0001            0.0001
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Company_size                        0.0341            -0.0379            -0.0237
                                        (0.450)            (0.482)             (0.209)
Volatility_A                       92.4011**         90.6566**         84.6813**
                                      (42.683)           (39.189)            (38.501)
Constant                             -7.9535            -4.0082             2.6347
                                       (10.170)           (10.715)            (5.607)

Observations                         183              178               220
R-squared                          0.0769            0.1002            0.0517
Number of Corporate_id                23               23                23
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                           (1)                 (2)                 (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25corp                        0.4023            -0.0045             0.0041
                                        (0.327)            (0.252)             (0.138)
Closingprice_A                       0.0000            -0.0083*            0.0026
                                        (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.004)
Volume_A                           -0.0000            -0.0000            -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                            0.0023            0.0004            -0.0039
                                        (0.003)            (0.001)             (0.003)
Board_memb                        -0.0645            0.2911             0.1369
                                        (0.398)            (0.354)             (0.305)
Board_meet                          -0.0049            0.0567             0.0705
                                        (0.103)            (0.094)             (0.098)
Board_dep_c                          -0.3434            -0.1212             -0.3017
                                        (0.507)            (0.512)             (0.457)
Board_dep_ms                      0.8503*           0.5268            0.4542
                                        (0.483)            (0.478)             (0.368)
Board_committees                    2.3019           2.4637*            2.3649
                                        (1.505)            (1.420)             (1.770)
Audit_memb                        0.2164            0.3455            0.3251
                                        (0.242)            (0.242)             (0.214)
Audit_meet                           -0.5564*           -0.5989*            -0.3797
                                        (0.291)            (0.312)             (0.259)
Audit_dep_c                          -1.1930            -1.3738             0.4554
                                        (1.626)            (1.434)             (1.276)
Audit_dep_ms                         -1.0512            -1.0307             -0.6982
                                        (0.801)            (0.766)             (0.686)
Volatility_A                         39.8815           53.2020            68.7015
                                      (66.940)           (64.991)            (57.850)
Constant                            -12.9226**           -8.8454             -3.9953
                                        (6.184)            (6.071)             (4.602)

Observations                         101               95               120
R-squared                          0.1767            0.2757            0.1745
Number of Corporate_id                12               12                12
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_A      levents_ev_A      levents_post_A

Excess_25corp                       0.2378                              0.0104
                                        (0.313)                               (0.142)
Closingprice_A                       -0.0007            -0.0084             0.0020
                                        (0.005)            (0.006)             (0.004)
Volume_A                           -0.0000            -0.0000             -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_A                            0.0022            0.0034             -0.0045
                                        (0.005)            (0.007)             (0.003)
Company_size                       0.2477            0.4468             0.0902
                                        (0.488)            (0.558)             (0.425)
Volatility_A                         46.4996           60.3222            74.3513
                                      (57.767)           (56.799)            (53.619)
Constant                             -13.0153           -12.0131            -0.4810
                                       (11.986)           (11.571)            (9.562)

Observations                          90               80               106
R-squared                          0.0241            0.0695             0.0552
Number of Corporate_id                10               10                10
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      levents_ev_B      levents_post_B

Excess_25foundfam                  0.0588*          0.0924**            0.0356
                                        (0.034)            (0.038)             (0.035)
Closingprice_B                       -0.0036*            -0.0006             -0.0002
                                        (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
Volume_B                          0.0000            0.0000           0.0000**
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_B                             0.0000            -0.0000             -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Analysts                              -0.0898            -0.2964             -0.0697
                                        (0.441)            (0.229)             (0.245)
Company_size                        -0.1627           -0.2376**           -0.2516**
                                        (0.118)            (0.121)             (0.109)
Volatility_B                           -6.8376           -21.4495**           -13.6378
                                        (8.889)            (9.215)             (8.506)
Constant                             -2.6540            -0.3982             4.6917*
                                        (3.412)            (2.900)             (2.739)

Observations                         1,228             1,133              1,274
R-squared                          0.0176            0.0235             0.0186
Number of Corporate_id                140              140               141
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                 (2)                  (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      levents_ev_B      levents_post_B

Excess_25nonfoundfam              0.0678***          0.0104             0.0160
                                        (0.024)            (0.024)             (0.023)
Closingprice_B                      -0.0051***         -0.0042**           -0.0039**
                                        (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
Volume_B                          0.0000            0.0000           0.0000**
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Trades_B                             0.0000            -0.0000            -0.0001*
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
Board_memb                         -0.0077            0.0727             -0.0793
                                        (0.063)            (0.066)             (0.058)
Board_meet                         0.0261*            0.0058             0.0152
                                        (0.016)            (0.013)             (0.013)
Board_dep_c                       0.1955**          0.1654*           0.1581**
                                        (0.086)            (0.087)             (0.075)
Board_dep_ms                       0.1087            0.0683             0.0260
                                        (0.076)            (0.079)             (0.074)
Board_committees                     -0.1055            -0.2457             -0.1354
                                        (0.156)            (0.155)             (0.153)
Audit_memb                        0.0493            0.0875            0.0968**
                                        (0.053)            (0.053)             (0.048)
Audit_meet                           -0.0354            0.0179             -0.0020
                                        (0.027)            (0.030)             (0.028)
Audit_dep_c                          -0.1458            -0.1675            -0.2763**
                                        (0.134)            (0.128)             (0.123)
Audit_dep_ms                        -0.0697            -0.0950            -0.2181**
                                        (0.113)            (0.118)             (0.103)
Analysts                              -0.0811            -0.2651             -0.0812
                                        (0.437)            (0.227)             (0.244)
Volatility_B                           -8.0339           -15.9229*            -5.2223
                                        (8.032)            (8.168)             (7.661)
Constant                            -6.6428***         -4.3867***           0.1508
                                        (2.385)            (1.399)             (1.492)

Observations                         1,471             1,380              1,558
R-squared                          0.0260            0.0214             0.0253
Number of Corporate_id                164              164               164
Adj. R-squared                               .                     .                      .
                                 Standard errors in parentheses
                               *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                           (1)                (2)                (3)
VARIABLES                    levents_pre_B      events_ev_B      events_post_B

Excess_25inst                         0.0024            -0.0001            -0.0103
                                        (0.042)            (0.001)            (0.159)
Closingprice_B                       -0.0036*           -0.0000            0.0050
                                        (0.002)            (0.000)            (0.008)
Volume_B                          0.0000           0.0000           0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Trades_B                             0.0000            -0.0000           -0.0000
                                        (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
Analysts                              -0.0913            -0.0030            -0.0833
                                        (0.445)            (0.008)            (1.227)
Company_size                       -0.1565           0.0045            0.2129
                                        (0.118)            (0.003)            (0.462)
Volatility_B                          -6.8819            0.0323            2.7699
                                       (8.824)            (0.240)           (36.007)
Constant                              -1.4450            -0.0787            -4.2264
                                       (3.509)            (0.082)           (12.346)

Observations                         1,265             3,121             3,121
R-squared                          0.0135           0.0011           0.0005
Number of Corporate_id                145              147              147
Adj. R-squared                               .                    .                    .
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
11. References

Ajnkya, B., Bhojraj,S. and  P.Sengupta., 2005, The association between outside directors,

     institutional investors and the properties of management earnings forecast, 343-376.

Akerlof, G., 1970, The market for " Lemons" : quality uncertainty and the market mechanism,

     Quarterly Journal of Economics 90, 629-650.

Anderson, R., Duru, A. and D.M.Reeb., 2009, Founders, heirs, and corporate opacity in the

     United States, 205-222.

Attig, N., Fong, W.-M., Gadhoum, Y. and L.H.P.Lang, 2006, Effects of large shareholding on

     information asymmetry  and stock liquidity, Journal of Banking and Finance 30, 2875-

    2892.

Bae, S.C., Kwon, T.H and J.W. Lee., 2011, Does corporate diversification by business groups

     create value? Evidence from Korean chaebols,535-553.

Beasley, M. S., 1996, An empirical analysis of the relation between the board of director

     composition and financial statement fraud, 443-465.

Bergström, C., and K.Rydqvist, 1990, The determinants of corporate ownership: An empirical

    study on Swedish data, Journal of Banking and Finance 14, 237-253.

Bergström, C., and K.Rydqvist., 1990, The determinants of corporate ownership: An

     empirical study on swedish data, 237-253.

Boone, A.L., Field, L.C., Karpoff, J.M. and C.G.Raheja, 2007, The determinants of corporate

     board size and composition: An empirical analysis, 66-101.
Brennan, M. a. A. K., 1987, Efficient financing under asymmetric information.

Byun, H.-Y., Hwang, L.-S. and W.-L.Lee, 2011, How does ownership concentration

     exacerbate information asymmetry among equity investors? Pacific-Basic Finance

     Journal,511-534.

Chen, Shuping., Chen,X. and Q.Cheng., 2008, Do family firms provide more or less voluntary

     disclosure? , 499-535.

Chen., C-W a. V. W. L., 2013, Corporate governance under asymmetric information: Theory

     and evidence, 280-291.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S. and L.H.P. Lang, 2002, Disentangling the incentive and

     entrenchment effects of large shareholding, 2741-2771.

Cronqvist, H. and M. Nilsson, 2003, Agency costs of controlling minority shareholders,

     Journal of financial and quantitative analysis 38, 695-719.

Diamond, D. W. a. R. E. V., 1991, Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of capital, 1325-1359.

Dupont, D., 2000, Market Making, prices, and quantity limits,1129-1151.

Eisenhardt K., 1989, Agency Theory: An assessment and review, Academy of Management

     Review 14, 57-74.

Fama, E. F., and M.C. Jensen, 1983, Separation of ownership and control, Journal of Law and

     Economics 26, 327-349.

Ferris, P.R. and M. Jagannathan, 2001, The incidence and determinants of multiple corporate

     directorships, 31-35.
Gaewski, J.-F., and P. Q. Bertrand, 2013, A comparison of the effects of earnings disclosures

     on information asymmetry: Evidence from France and the U.S, International Journal of

     Accounting 48, 1-25.

Harris. M. and A.Raviv, 1988, Carporate governance: Voting rights and majority rules,

     Journal of Financial Economics 20, 203-235.

Hart, O., 1995, Corporate governance: Some theory and implications, 678-689.

Healy, P. M. a. K. G. P., 2001, Information asymmetry, cprporate disclosure, and the captal

     markets:A review of the empirical disclosure literature, 405-440.

Jensen, M.C., and W.H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behaviour, agency

     costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Jiang, H.,Habib, A. and B.Hu, 2011, Ownership concentration, voluntary and information

     asymmetry in New Zealand, British Accounting Review 43, 39-53.

Kanagaretnam,K., Lobo, G.J. and D.J.Whalen, 2007, Does good corporate governance reduce

     information asymmetry around quarterly  earnings announcements? , 497-522.

Karamanou, I. and N. Vafeas, 2005, The association between corporate boards, audit

     committees, and management earnings forecasts: An empirical analysis, Journal of

     Accounting Research 43, 453-486.

Kim, O. a. R. E. V., 1994, Market liquidity and volume around earnings announcements, 41-

     67.

---. 1992, Market reaction to anticipated announcements, 273-309.
Krinsky, L. a. J. L., 1996, Earnings announcements and the components of the bid-ask spread,

    1523-1535.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Schleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 2000, Investor protection and

     corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

Lang, M. and R: Lundholm., 1993, Cross-Sectional determinants of analyst rating of

     corporate disclosures, 246-271.

Lang,M.K., Lins.K.V, and D.P.Miller, 2004, Concentrated control, analyst following, and

     valuation: Do analysts matter most when investors are protected least? , 589-623.

Oreland, C., 2005, Family and dispersed ownership in swedish, public companies: An

     analysis of costs of private benifits of control and agency costs, Unpublished paper,

    Uppsala University.

Rubin, A., 2007, Ownership level, ownership concentration and liquidity, Journal of Financial

     Markets 10, 219-248.

Scheifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1986, Large shareholders and corporate control, Journal of

     Political Economy 94, 461-488.

---. 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of Finance 2, 737-783.

Schöldström, L. a. K.  -. W., Corporate control and value destruction.

Vafeas, N., 2000, Board structure and the informativeness of earnings, Journal of Accounting

     and Public Policy 19, 139-160.

Weisbach, M., 1988, Outside directorships and CEO turnover, 431-460.
Yohn, T. L., 1998, Information asymmetry around earnings announcements, Review of

     Quantitative Finance and Accounting 11, 165-182.

---. 1998, Information asymmetry around earnings announcements, 165-182.

Zingales, L., 1994, The value of the voting right: A study of the Milan stock exchange

     expirience, 125-148.