Stockholm School of Economics
Department of Finance
Bachelor’s  Thesis
Spring 2014

          How Good Are Analysts at Handling Crisis?
-  A Study of Analyst Recommendations on the Nordic Stock Exchanges
                     during the Great Recession

                                                 1                          2
                         Erika Madebrink         Camilla  Sahlin

Abstract
The  purpose  of  this  thesis  is  to  gain  better  understanding  of  the   value  of  analyst
recommendations. We show, by studying analyst consensus recommendations on four Nordic
stock exchanges that during the Great Recession analysts’ ability to  generate profitable stock
recommendations declined. The abnormal profit of the stocks with favorable consensus
recommendations declined during the crisis, at the same time as that of the stocks with the
least favorable consensus recommendations increased  and became positive. We use value
weighted portfolios, which are rebalanced weekly, and examine their benchmark-adjusted
return and alpha, applying the Fama-French three factor model. The implication for investors
is that they should be careful when adhering to analyst recommendations in extreme market
conditions, since the  economic environment will affect the quality of the recommendations.
This result also suggests that  a price drift caused by the recommendations themselves, rather
than analysts’ ability  to predict future returns,  could explain any abnormal profit generated by
following analyst recommendations. Furthermore, we discuss if the positive abnormal profit
from the stocks with least favorable recommendations could be explained by the  flight-to-
safety  phenomenon, which  appeared during the crisis, since these stocks are characterized by
higher book-to-market values.

Keywords:  analyst recommendations, analyst performance, the Great Recession, flight-to-
safety

Tutor:  Irina Zviadadze,  Assistant Professor,  Stockholm School of Economics

Acknowledgements:  We would like to thank our tutor Irina Zviadadze for providing us with
valuable  information and guidance.

1 22443@student.hhs.se
2 22629@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents

I. Introduction                                                        p.  2

II. Theoretical Framework
      Previous Literature                                                    p. 5
     Hypotheses                                                      p.  8

III. Data Description
      Introduction to the Data                                                p. 8
      Analyst Recommendations                                           p. 8
      Other Variables                                                      p. 9
      Descriptive Statistics                                                   p. 9
      Data Issues                                                         p. 11

IV. Method
      Definition of the  Great Recession                                      p. 12
      Portfolio Construction                                              p.  13
      Portfolio Returns                                                     p. 14
     Benchmark Returns                                                p. 14
     Fama-French Factors                                               p.  15
      Performance Evaluation                                             p. 16
      Hypotheses Testing                                                 p. 17

V. Results
      Portfolio Characteristics and  Returns                                   p. 20
      Robustness Tests                                                    p. 22
      Potential  Biases in Results                                            p.  22

VII. Conclusions and Implications                                   p.  23

References                                                          p. 27
Appendix                                                        p. 28

                                                                   1
I. Introduction

In this thesis we examine the profitability of following  analysts’ consensus recommendations
during the Great Recession  in comparison to a reference period, thereby analyzing how the
quality  of  analysts’  stock  recommendations  is  affected  by  relatively  extreme  market
conditions. We study Nordic stocks listed on stock exchanges in Sweden, Finland, Denmark
and Norway, during the time period 2003 to 2013.
      Whether analysts are better informed and can give profitable stock recommendations or
not is a topic that has been debated and discussed in the academic literature  and the financial
world during a long period of time. It is a topic where the opinions of academic researchers
and the financial industry diverge; although there is no complete and uniform consensus,
researchers generally invoke the efficient market hypothesis and claim that investors should
not be able to profit from trading on public information. The research departments of
brokerage houses evidently disagree, since they spend large sums of money at analyzing
firms, to be able to give good stock recommendations to their customers. Therefore we think
analyst recommendations and their investment value is an interesting subject to investigate.
One can note that most of the previous research within this area focus on the effect of
analysts’ recommendations and potentially profitable trading strategies during a certain, quite
short, time period. An area that is relatively unexplored is how analysts’ stock picking
abilities are affected by the market conditions and the changes in the surrounding economic
conditions. Therefore, it is an important and interesting area to study since it can reveal more
characteristics that analyst recommendations have.
      Earlier studies done in this area has been done over time periods with less extreme
changes in the stock market.  Gylling et al.  (2008)  look at analyst recommendations in bull and
bear markets and observe that the probability of a portfolio performing better than the
benchmark depends on if it is value or equally weighted. Wåghäll and Lystedt (2008) perform
a similar  study and find that analysts can find outperforming stocks in both bear in bull
markets. Whether or not these results persisted during the financial crisis of 2008 has not yet
been explored. Therefore it is difficult to pose hypotheses about the results of  our study. To be
able to pose a hypothesis regarding the results we need to do a slight review of the
interpretations of previous research in this area. Overall it is possible to discern two different
explanations as to the general results of previous research in this area, discussed by Jegadeesh
et al. (2004) among others. The first explanation is that analysts can predict future returns of
stocks, by analyzing qualitative aspects of firms and thereby capturing information that is

                                                                   2
orthogonal to other public information. These facts add value for investors and generate
possible trading strategies for investors that give abnormal returns. However, since analyst
recommendations   are   public   information   as   well,   the   information   they   provide   are
incorporated into  the market in ways that makes it impossible for investor to profit, if one
takes transaction costs into account. The second interpretation is that analysts create a
pressure on stock prices and a price drift by their recommendations. From this point of view
the recommendations generate a form of price momentum by themselves, making them self-
fulfilling   prophecies.   For   example,   if   an   analyst   gives   a   favorable   (unfavorable)
recommendation of a stock, this information will make investors believe that stock is  a good
(bad) investment, which will generate an upward (downward) price pressure on that stock.
      By using these two different explanations described above as a starting-point, it is
slightly easier to make a reasonable conjecture about our results. If one  believes in the first
interpretation, that analysts can predict future returns, it is probable that due to the increased
uncertainty during such a severe crisis as that of 2008, it will become more difficult to
analyze firms and predict future returns. Hence should analysts’ ability to provide profitable
stock recommendations decline during the financial crisis according to this reasoning. If one
believes in the second interpretation, that analyst recommendations create a price pressure on
stocks, it is also probable that analysts’ ability to provide profitable stock recommendations
during the financial crisis would decline. This would be due to the fact that during the
financial crisis much emphasis was put on macro-economic news and events, such as for
example national debts and budget deficits and investors were perhaps so overwhelmed with
these news, that they did not pay attention to analyst recommendations as much as they
usually do. To conclude, our hypothesis is that analysts’ ability to give profitable stock
recommendations declined during the financial crisis, compared with the reference period.

                                                                                                                                                                        st
     In this study the financial crisis of 2008 is defined as the time period from January  1

                           st
2008 to December  31  2009. To fully capture the effect of the financial crisis, data from 2007
and 2010 respectively is excluded due to the effects that the financial crisis may have had on
these years. As a reference period, we use recommendations given during the period 2003-
2006 and 2011-2013. We form five  value weighted portfolios in each of  the four countries
based on  consensus recommendation, where portfolio 1 has the most favorable consensus
recommendations and portfolio 5  has the most unfavorable consensus recommendations, and
these portfolios are rebalanced on  a weekly basis. To evaluate the performance of these
portfolios, a weekly value weighted benchmark is created for each country, which is based on
all stocks covered by analysts in that country. The weekly value weighted abnormal return is

                                                                   3
given by the difference between the weekly raw returns and the weekly benchmark. The
average weekly abnormal return is compared over the different portfolios and time periods to
gain an understanding of analyst performance. Thereafter we run a  regression using the three-
factor model developed by  Fama and French (1993)  to control for known risk factors and see
if the results persist. The alphas generated by the portfolios during the two time periods are
compared and to further check the robustness of our results we look at the kurtosis, skewness
and standard deviations of the portfolios.
      We find that during the reference period the portfolios perform in line with previous
literature by for example Barber et al. and Gylling et al. The portfolios with the most
favorable consensus recommendations, portfolio 1 and 2, both generate significantly positive
average abnormal returns and alphas during the reference period. During the financial crisis
on the other hand the results are different. Portfolio 1 still generates a positive average
abnormal return and alpha, but both the magnitude and the significance have declined.
Portfolio 2 produces a negative abnormal return and alpha, where only the abnormal return is
significant. Portfolio 3 and 5 generate a slightly positive average abnormal return and
portfolio 4 produces a slightly negative abnormal return, where all abnormal returns are
insignificant.  Surprisingly, portfolio 5 generates a significantly positive weekly alpha of 0.3
% during the crisis. Portfolio 3 and 4 generate  insignificant alphas around zero. Turning to the
differences between the time periods, we find that there are significant differences in the
average abnormal return and the alpha of portfolio 2, which decrease during the crisis. There
are also significant  differences in the average abnormal return and in the alpha for portfolio 5,
which increase during the crisis. Hence we conclude that our results suggest that analysts’
ability to provide profitable stock recommendations was affected by the financial crisis, in a
way that suggests that their ability substantially declined during the crisis.
      The remainder of this thesis is organized as follows. In section II we provide a summary
of previous research within this area and pose our hypotheses. In section III the data is
described in detail, together with some descriptive statistics. The method we have used for
this study is described in section IV and thereafter are our results presented in section V. To
conclude, in section VI, we summarize and discuss our results.

                                                                   4
II. Theoretical Framework

Previous Literature
Many researchers have looked into the quality and effect of analyst  recommendations during
the last decades. Stickel  (1995) looks at buy and sell recommendations issued within a time
period from 1988 to 1991 and finds that brokerage houses’  recommendations do affect stock
prices, both in the short-  and the long-term. When a brokerage house issues a buy (sell)
recommendation for a stock an average abnormal return of 1.16 (-1.28) percent over the
following 11 days is observed. This impact on stock prices is found to be augmented by the
strength of the recommendation, the magnitude of the change in recommendation, the
reputation of the analyst, the size of the brokerage house, the size of the recommended firm
and the contemporaneous earnings forecast revisions. Of these factors only the strength of the
recommendation, firm size and contemporaneous earnings forecast have a permanent price
effect, which would suggest that these have information effects on the market.
      The results found by Desai and Jain (1995) point in another direction. They have looked
into the performance of stock recommendations  made  by so-called “superstar” money
managers at  Barron’s  Annual Roundtable, between 1968 and 1991. Every year  Barron’s
invites eight to twelve successful money managers, which are those who are considered
among the best in the business, to the Roundtable, where they give stock recommendations
that are published in  Barron’s  about 14 days later. Overall, their results suggest that the
“superstar” money managers do not seem to possess superior skills in recommending stocks,
although the results differs slightly between the managers buy and sell recommendations.
They find that the abnormal return for the buy recommendations after  the publication day
with   a   250-days   holding   period   is   not   significantly   different   from   zero.   The   sell
recommendations, on the other hand, give a abnormal return of  -8.12 percent  over the same
period.
      In concurrence with Stickel’s findings Womack (1996) finds that after an analyst has
made a revision of a recommendation, where the recommendation is either changed to a
strong buy and strong sell recommendation, the stock  price adjusts either up 5 percent, for
strong buy recommendations, or down 11 percent,  for strong sell recommendations, over the
next several months. Already after three days the size-adjusted mean return for the strong buy
recommendations amounts to 3 percent and  -4.7 percent for the strong sell recommendations,
where the size-adjusted return is calculated by subtracting the return of the matching CRSP
market capitalization size decile from the raw return. Womack also finds a large asymmetry

                                                                   5
in the proportions of buy and sell recommendations issued by the 14 major U.S. brokerage
firms; the ratio of new buy to sell recommendations is approximately 7:1 during 1989-1991.
He concludes that there is strong evidence that stock prices are significantly affected by
changes  in  analysts’ recommendations.
      Barber et al. (2001) use a slightly different approach to examine the value of analysts’
recommendations. They examine the abnormal return from purchasing (selling short) stocks
with  the   most   (least)   favorable   consensus   recommendations,   both  gross   and   net   of
transactions costs. The authors create portfolios based on consensus recommendations and
these portfolios are rebalanced on a daily basis. They analyze daily data collected from Zacks
database for the period 1985 to 1996. They define abnormal return as the intercept when
applying different versions  of the  CAPM, such as the Fama-French three factor model. The
authors find that the portfolio that consists of the stocks with the most (least) favorable
recommendations  yield  an annual abnormal gross  return of 4.13 (-4.19)  percent  after
controlling for market risk, size, book-to-market and momentum. After accounting for trading
costs, they find that a trading strategy where the portfolios are rebalanced daily does not yield
an abnormal net return reliably greater than zero. They conclude that the market shows a sort
of   semi-strong   inefficiency,   where   investor   would   be   able   to   profit   from   analyst
recommendations absent transaction costs.
      If indeed analysts can predict future returns, are there any other variables that capture
this information and if so, which are they? These questions have Jegadeesh et al. (2004)
looked into. They have studied which are the typical characteristics of the stocks with
favorable and unfavorable recommendations and posed the question whether analysts add
value after controlling for the return predictability of other signals. They find that after
controlling for signals such as momentum, trading volume, valuation multiples, growth
indicators,  firm  size  and  CAPEX,  the  marginal  predictability  of  the  level  of  analyst
recommendations is not significant. On the other hand, changes in the consensus analyst
recommendation do predict future returns. They propose two different explanations for this,
which were discussed in section I; their first hypothesis is that analysts bring new information
to investors through their recommendations, which is largely uncaptured by other signals.
Their second hypothesis is that the changes in recommendation cause a price drift, by creating
their own price momentum.
     There are some disputes as to whether the consensus recommendation is the variable
that have the best predictive power of future returns. McKnight and Todd uses earnings
forecast revisions instead of recommendations to predict future returns of European stocks.

                                                                   6
They find that the stocks with the greatest number of upward revisions in earnings, net of
downward revisions, earn significantly higher returns. This difference is quite large; a
portfolio consisting of the quintile of stocks with the highest number of net upward revisions
outperforms a portfolio of the quintile of stocks with the lowest number of net upward
revisions by more than 16 percent  per year. This effect is statistically significant for seven out
of the 13 European countries analyzed. In contrast to Barber et al., and Jegadeesh et al. they
find that neither the average consensus recommendation nor changes in that metric are
significant in explaining future stock  returns.
      How the predictive power of analyst recommendations is affected by different market
conditions is a subject that has been touched upon by some researchers. Gylling et al. (2008)
examine the existence of profitable trading strategies based on analyst recommendations and
further they evaluate whether these results are robust over time, in different market conditions
and across firms of different sizes. They use Swedish data from 2003 to 2008. Overall, the
authors find evidence supporting that stocks with the most (least) favorable consensus
recommendations   outperform   (underperform)   their   benchmark,   before   accounting   for
transaction costs. They use a method in line with Barber et al. (2001) where they generate
daily-rebalanced  portfolios, with the difference that they use equally weighted portfolios in
addition  to  value  weighted  ones.  As  a  robustness  test,  the  authors  look  at  analysts’
performance in bear and bull markets, where they define markets as bull when the monthly
sample benchmark is positive and bear markets when the benchmark is negative. The
probability of each portfolio performing better or worse than the benchmark is given for both
value and equally weighted portfolios in bull and bear markets. The authors find that using
value weighted  portfolios, there is a higher probability that portfolio 1 and 5 outperform the
benchmark in bull markets than in bear markets. In contrast, they find that the probability of
beating   the   benchmark   increases   for   portfolio   2-4   if   markets   are   bear.   Somewhat
contradictory, they find that using equally weighted portfolios, the probability of each
portfolio performing better than the benchmark increases for all portfolios except for portfolio
3, if markets are bear. In conclusion, they find that the hold portfolio tends to underperform
the benchmark in both market conditions and both weightings.
     Another paper  written by Wåghäll and Lystedt (2008) also  analyzes  how analyst
recommendations differ depending on market conditions.  They also study the existence of any
profitable trading strategies looking at European stocks. The method used is similar to that
used of both Barber et al. (2001) and Gylling et al. (2008), where they form weekly
rebalanced portfolios based consensus recommendations. In addition to looking  at trading

                                                                   7
strategies that yield a positive abnormal return, they also study how these trading strategies
perform in bull and bear markets, where bull markets are defined as months when the
benchmark index is rising and bear markets as when the benchmark index is falling. They find
that analysts are able to pick winners both in bull and bear markets and also indications  that
analysts  more accurately find winners in period with rising prices and losers in periods with
periods with falling prices.

Hypotheses
In the light of previous research we believe it is reasonable to pose the following hypotheses:
     Hypothesis 1: Stocks with favorable (unfavorable) consensus recommendations will
outperform (underperform) their benchmark and will generate positive (negative) alphas
during the reference period.
      Hypothesis   2:   During  the   Great   Recession   stocks   with  favorable   (unfavorable)
consensus recommendations will perform worse (better) than during the reference period.

III. Data Description

Introduction to the Data
The data used in this thesis is from Thomson Datastream. The database is managed by
Thomson Reuters, one of the biggest providers  of current and historical financial statistics,
covering international macroeconomics, equities, bonds, indices, commodities,  exchange rates
and derivatives. Thomson Reuters collects  data  from many different sources, including a large
majority of the world’s equity research houses. Hence the data should have high reliability
and give a fair representation of analyst recommendations. The data used for our study are

                              st                                               st
from January 1 , 2003 to December 31 , 2013. We use daily data from four different
countries where the data consists of all the constituent stocks in the OMX Stockholm, OMX
Helsinki, OMX Copenhagen Equity index and Olso Exchange All Share (Oslo Bors).

Analyst Recommendations
In the database analysts’ consensus recommendation is given as a number from 1 to 5, where
1   is   a   strong   buy   recommendation   and   5   a   sell   recommendation.   The   consensus
recommendation for a stock is  computed by summarizing the recommendations from all
analysts and dividing by the number of recommendations outstanding. There are currently
858 contributors from whom recommendations are collected. When an analyst makes or
changes a recommendation, it will pass through a screening to make sure that the new

                                                                   8
recommendation does not differ greatly from the analyst’s previous recommendation or the
previous consensus view. Within a few hours a preliminary estimate will appear in the
database  and  the  consensus  recommendation  for that  company is  changed.  The  stock
recommendations remain in the database during  180 days. If the recommendation have not
been confirmed or updated within 180 days, it will be removed. In special cases Thomson
Reuters may want to contact  the analyst regarding a change in recommendations. This causes
a small time delay, but since we use daily data during a time period of 11 years this fact
should not affect the results to any great extent.

Table 1.  Table 1 illustrates the meaning of the analyst consensus recommendations collected from Thomson
Datastream.

Value                              Meaning

1  - 1.49                                Strong buy

1.5 -  2.49                               Buy

2.5 -  3.49                               Hold

3.5 -  4.49                               Underperform

4.5 -  5                                  Sell

Other Variables
To test our hypotheses  we use, aside from consensus recommendations, daily data for stock
prices, market values, market-to-book values, risk-free rates for the four different countries
and the number of recommendations. The stock prices, market values and market-to-book
values are in local currency and the closing stock price is used.  As a proxy for the risk-free
rate we have used four different interest rates, one for each country, since all the countries
have different currencies.  As the Danish risk-free interest rate the Discount Rate of Denmark
is used, whereas for Sweden  the  Swedish Riksbank Repo Rate  is used as the risk-free rate.
The Finnish risk-free rate is approximated with the ECB Main Refinancing Repo Rate and the
Norwegian with  Norges Bank’s  Sight Deposit Rate. All the risk-free rates are recalculated as
weekly risk-free interest rates.

Descriptive Statistics
Table 2  illustrates that the average number of firms is lowest in portfolio 1 and 5 during the
full sample period with 34 and 83 firms respectively. The relatively low number of firms in
portfolio   5  could   be  explained  by  the   fact   that   analysts  are  reluctant  to   issue  sell

                                                                   9
recommendations (Barber et al.  (2001)). The low number of firms in portfolio 1 is a common
phenomenon discussed widely and mentioned by for instance Barber et al.  (2001) that come
to the conclusion that a company must be small and have a low number of analysts following
it to be able to get a strong buy recommendation. This seems to be a reasonable explanation in
our case. For instance,  Table 3, 4 and 5  illustrate  that the firms in portfolio 1 in Sweden,
Finland and Norway respectively  have the lowest average market value and  average number
of analysts covering them. In contrast,  Table 6  illustrating Danish firms shows a somewhat
different pattern where portfolio 2 has the lowest average market value per company, but
portfolio 1 still has the lowest average number of analysts covering it.
      In Sweden, Norway and Denmark, portfolio 3 has the highest average market value and
also the highest average number of analysts covering it (Table 3, 5, 6). This is consistent with
previous findings that analysts tend to issue hold recommendations to a greater extent than
strong buy or strong sell recommendations (Barber et al. (2001)). Furthermore, we can
observe that portfolio 5 also consists of relatively small firms  (Table 3  -  6).  A potential
explanation  for  this  observation  is  that   analysts  are  not  only  reluctant   to  issue   sell
recommendations overall but they are maybe more  reluctant  to issue sell recommendation for
big firms than for  small firms.
      Table 7  illustrates that the average and median consensus recommendations for the full
sample  is  2.56  and  2.5  respectively.  Therefore  they  represent  hold  recommendations
according to the definition of consensus recommendations in Datastream, see  Table 1.  This
further strengthens  previous  findings that analysts tend to issue hold recommendations to a
great extent (Barber et al. (2001)). Looking at the different countries we notice that the
average and median  recommendations  in Finland  are relatively high and the  recommendations
in Norway  are relatively low during the entire sample period, suggesting that  analysts had
different views on these  markets  during our sample period. A pattern we observe for all
countries is that both the average and median recommendations are lower in 2013 than in
2003, implying a more optimistic view on the market in 2013 in comparison to 2003. We also
observe an increase in the average recommendation from 2008 to 2009 in all countries, which
reflects the fact that the financial crisis created a more pessimistic view on the Nordic market.
      Table 8-11  display analyst coverage ratio of listed firms and market value in Sweden,
Finland, Norway and Denmark, respectively.
     Table 8  shows that from 2003-2013, there was  an increase in the percentage of the
market value covered by analysts in Sweden, from 68.0% in 2003 to 91.6% in 2013. The
number of covered firms as a fraction of listed firms also increases, from 56.5% in 2003 to

                                                                  10
69.5% in 2013. In 2008 and 2009, the number of firms listed remained at a level of 259 firms,
reflecting the fact that the financial crisis of 2008 did not encourage  many new firms to go
public. Furthermore, there is a decrease in the total and average market value of the covered
firms from 2008  to 2009, also reflecting the presence of a crisis.
     Table 9  illustrates that the number of listed firms increased from 2008 to 2009 on the
OMX Helsinki, in contrast to the number of listed firms on the Stockholm OMX, which
remained unchanged, see  Table 8.  The fact that 65.1% of the listed firms represent 90.8% of
the market value in 2013 reflects that there are a large number of small firms that are listed
but not covered on the OMX Helsinki.
     Table 10  also shows an increase in the percentage of listed firms covered and the
percentage of market value covered in Norway from 2003 to 2013. In comparison to OMX
Helsinki, there are not as many small and uncovered firms listed on the Olso Exchange All
Share, since 77.7% of the firms represent 91.8% of the market.
      Table 11  shows  that from 2003 to 2013,  there is a decrease  in the  percentage of  listed
firms covered but an increase  in the  percentage of  market value covered, by 6.6 and 9.8
percentage points respectively.
      Table 12  illustrates the average book-to-market value for all portfolios  separately  by
year  and  for the full sample period. Overall, we see that the average book-to-market value is
highest for portfolio 5 and lowest for portfolio 1. This implies that analysts prefer growth
stocks  to  value stocks, where growth stocks are defined as stocks with relatively low book-to-
market ratio and value stocks as stocks with relatively high book-to-market ratio. This is
consistent with the findings of Jegadeesh et al. (2004) that  find that analysts tend to
recommend growth stocks.

Data Issues

When selecting data, we have  chosen to cover four  countries  where there are  different
numbers of stocks constituting each index, see  Table  8-11. Because the number of firms
covered in each  country changes from year to year, the returns from each country respectively
will weigh differently each year. This is because  our results are to a large extent based on the
average of returns from the  four countries. The average implies that we have taken all
observations into account and then divided by the total number of observations, not making
any differences between the countries.  This is something that will  affect  our results  in a way
that there will be a bias toward how analyst recommendations  of  Swedish stocks  perform,
since the majority of  the observations are of those  stocks.

                                                                  11
      Other issues are that we have excluded data that not only lack  analyst coverage but also
book-to-market value and market value. This implies that some stocks that are  covered  by
analysts  are not included, due to the lack of information from the database. This could
potentially cause biases in our results if these stocks that are excluded lack information for the
same  reasons,   for  instance  that  they  have  the   same  characteristics.  Therefore  these
characteristics are not  taken into account in our dataset.

IV. Method

To be able to evaluate the quality of analyst recommendations during different market
conditions and make a comparison between analysts’ performance during the  Great Recession
compared to a reference period, we  first  have to define what time period we refer to  as the
Great Recession.

Definition of the Great Recession
There is no universally acknowledged definition of when the financial crisis, also referred to
as the Great Recession that took place at the end of the 2000’s, actually started or ended. Of
course that definition will depend on not only on which measures of economic activity you
look at, but also the geographical region. We have chosen to define the  financial crisis as the

                                  st                                 st
period between January  1  2008 and December 31  2009. The factors we have looked at
when coming up with this definition of the crisis is the growth in GDP of the countries we
cover in this thesis. At the beginning of 2008 all of  the four countries covered were in
recession and up until the end of 2009 the growth in quarterly GDP of these economies were
mostly negative. During 2010 there was substantial recovery where the growth in GDP

                                                                             3
improved and became positive at some point in  all countries covered. Therefore we have
chosen to define the financial crisis as 2008-2009. We would like to point out that we are not
interested in the quality of analysts’ stock recommendations during recessions per se, but
rather how the quality is affected by severe market conditions in the financial markets. This
financial crisis was not only characterized by a great downturn in measures of economic
activity such as GDP growth and unemployment, but also a substantial dry-up in liquidity and
a large drop of the prices in the financial markets.
     Therefore we believe that one should be careful to draw general conclusions about
analysts’ ability in a smaller recession from our particular results. Furthermore, we exclude

3
  The information of growth in GDP is collected from the website, tradingeconomics.com, that provides
historical data for  economic indicators for 196 countries.

                                                                  12
the transitions periods  2007 and 2010 to isolate and capture only the effect of the crisis. In
other words, data from 2007 and 2010 are  not included in the analysis due to the possible
influences the financial crisis may have had on these years. Henceforth we refer to the
reference period as time period 1 and the financial crisis as time period 2.

Portfolio Construction
To answer our research question we have used a strategy where all stocks in each country,
which are covered by at least one analyst, are grouped into five different value weighted
portfolios depending on the average recommendation, the consensus recommendation. We
use value weighted portfolios because it allows for us to better capture the economic
significance of the results obtained. This is because the returns  of firms with a higher market
value will weigh more heavily in the aggregate return than will smaller firms. A potential bias
of value weighted returns may be that there is harder to find evidence of abnormal returns, as
markets are likely to be more efficient for firms with higher market value (Barber et al.
(2001)).   Before constructing the value weighted portfolios, all stocks that lack analyst
coverage, book-to-market value and market value  are excluded. If a company would lack
coverage during a specific time period, that company is excluded during that specific time
period, otherwise it is included.
     The  limits  for  the  consensus  recommendations  used  when  grouping  stocks  into
portfolios can be viewed in the table below. The cutoffs are set so that only portfolio 5
contains stocks that have underperform and sell recommendations, see table 1.  This is  to
obtain   enough   firms   in   that   portfolio,   because   analysts   rather   issue   buy   and   hold
recommendations than sell recommendations (Stickel (1995)  and  Barber et al. (2001)). The
other limits are set so that we achieve enough firms in each portfolio and gain sufficient
power for our tests.

Table 13.  The stocks are grouped into portfolios in accordance with the following limits.

Portfolio   Limits for consensus recommendation (RECCON)

1                          <=1.5

2                    1.5 < RECCON <=2

3                    2 < RECCON <=2.5

4                    2.5 < RECCON <=3

5                     3 < RECCON <=5

                                                                  13
The portfolios are rebalanced weekly, so that if the consensus recommendation for a certain
stock is changed in the middle of a week, it  is  moved to the new portfolio in  the beginning of
the next week.  After grouping the stocks into portfolios we compute the weekly value
weighted return from each portfolio. If one or several analysts start to follow a company in
the middle of a week, that company is added to the portfolio in  the beginning of the next
week.

Portfolio Returns

The daily return from portfolio  p  on day  t  in country  c  is given by the  equation  below. We
approximate the weight of stock  i  in the portfolio  p  by using the weight based on closing
prices, hence the weight as of day  t.

                                         ௡
                                   Rpct  =  ∑௜ ୀଵ 𝑤ictRict

where:

Rpct = return of portfolio  p  on day t  in country c
wict  = weight of stock  i  on day t  in country c
Rict  = return of stock  i on day  t  in country  c

To calculate the weekly returns from our portfolios we compound the daily value weighted
returns during the week.

                                       ௡
                               Rpcw =  ∏ ௧ୀଵ(  1 + Rpct)  -  1

where:

Rpcw = return of portfolio  p  during  week  w  in country c

Benchmark Returns
To be able to see how the  portfolios perform during the different time periods we need to
relate their returns to an appropriate benchmark. We have chosen this benchmark as an index
constructed from the stocks covered in this study. The reason for this is that these indexes
reflect  the overall performance of the markets in question in a fairly good way, since a large

                                                                  14
proportion of the market value is covered, see  Tables 8-11. Because we have value weighted
portfolios, the indexes we construct are value weighted as well. We generate  four different
value weighted indexes; one for each country, because each country has a different currency.
Each index is constructed in the following way:

                                         ௡
                                   Rbct  =  ∑௜ ୀଵ 𝑤ictRict

where:

Rbct = return of the index  b  on day t  in country c
wict  = weight of stock  i  on day t  in country c
Rict  = return of stock  i on day  t  in country  c

We approximate the weight of each stock on day  t  by the ratio between the closing market
value of the stock and the total market value in country  c, both on day  t. Compounding the
daily returns from the benchmark during week  w generates the weekly index benchmark.

                                      ௡
                               Rbcw=  ∏ ௧ୀଵ (1 + Rbct)  -  1
where:

Rbcw= return of the index b  during  week  w in country c

Fama-French Factors
To be able to properly evaluate the performance of the five different portfolios we also need
to generate the two Fama-French factors SMB and HML. We do this  by sorting the stocks
each day  into two portfolios based on market value, where the stocks with a  market value
greater than the median of that day is put into one portfolio and the rest into another.  We then
sort the stocks into three other portfolios, also rebalanced daily, based on book-to-market
value, where the 30th percentile and the 70th percentile are the breakpoints. We use these two
groupings to form six new value weighted portfolios on a daily basis; big value stocks, big
neutral stocks, big growth stocks, small value stocks, small neutral stocks and small growth
stocks, see  Figure 1. We use the six portfolios to generate the SMB factor by calculating the
equally weighted average return of the three small portfolios minus the equally weighted
average return of the three big portfolios.

                                                                  15
SMB = 1/3 (Small Value + Small Neutral + Small Growth)  –  1/3 (Big Value + Big Neutral +
Big Growth)

The HML factor is generated by calculating the equally weighted average return of the two
high book-to-market portfolios minus the equally weighted average return of the two low
book-to-market portfolios.

HML = 1/2 (Small Value + Big Value)  – 1/2 (Small Growth + Big Growth)

When running our regression with the Fama-French factors, we have compounded the daily
observations to weekly observations.

Figure 1.  Figure 1 illustrates how the six different portfolios are  created based on book-to-market value and
market value.

Performance Evaluation
To evaluate whether the consensus recommendations of analysts add any value to investors
during different time periods we need to calculate the abnormal return form each portfolio.
The abnormal return is calculated by subtracting the weekly return of the benchmark index
from the weekly value weighted return of each portfolio.

                                 ARpcw = Rpcw -  Rbcw

where:
Rpcw = return from portfolio  p  in country c  during week  w
ARpcw = abnormal return from portfolio  p  in country c  during week  w

                                                                  16
Rbcw = return from benchmark  b  in country c  during week  w

We compute an average  weekly  abnormal return for each portfolio and each time period by
summing up all the observations of the abnormal return for portfolio  p  in all countries  during
that time period and dividing by the number of observations. This is referred to as the average
weekly  abnormal return for portfolio  p  during that time period.

Hypotheses Testing
All our statistical tests are based on our hypotheses (1) and (2)  in  Section II. Because we want
to test whether portfolio 1 and 2 perform better than the market during the reference period,
we conduct a hypothesis test where the null hypothesis is that the abnormal return (alpha) is
equal to or less than zero. This is because we want to be able to reject this hypothesis for the
hypothesis that the abnormal return (or alpha) is greater than zero.  The same reasoning
applies to portfolio 4 and 5, but with reversed signs.  When conducting hypotheses tests on
portfolio 3, we have  the null hypothesis that it performs equal to the index. This is because we
want to see if the middle portfolio (portfolio 3) performs significantly different from the
market during the reference period. During the period of financial crisis, we want to test if
analysts have any ability to generate abnormal returns (alphas) that are different from zero in
either direction. Therefore the null hypothesis during this time period is that they perform
equal to the benchmark.  This applies  for all portfolios. Because we have more than 30
observations, we can use the Central Limit Theorem when conducting our tests.
      To see if the abnormal returns from each portfolio during the reference period are in line
with what have been found in previous research we perform the statistical tests outlined below
in  Table 14. The average  abnormal return is computed on data from period 1 only.

Table 14.  Table 14 illustrates the hypotheses tests conducted on the abnormal returns of the portfolios during
the reference period  (period 1).

                          Portfolio   H0          H1
                            1 & 2     H0:  μμAR,1 ≤ 0   H1:  μμAR,1 > 0
                            3         H0:  μμAR,1 = 0   H1:  μμAR,1 ≠ 0
                            4 & 5     H0:  μμAR,1 ≥ 0   H1:  μμAR,1 < 0

To see if the abnormal returns  from each portfolio during the financial crisis are in line with
our hypotheses we perform the statistical test outlined below in  Table 15. The average
abnormal return is now computed on data from period 2.

                                                                  17
Table 15.  Table 15 illustrates  the hypothesis test conducted on the alphas of the portfolios during the financial
crisis (period 2).

                          Portfolio   H0          H1
                            1-5       H0:  μμAR,2 = 0   H1:  μμAR,2 ≠ 0

To test whether the abnormal return from each portfolio differs between the two time periods
we perform the statistical tests outlined in  Table 16  below.

Table 16.  Table 16 illustrates the hypotheses tests conducted on the difference in abnormal return between the
financial crisis (period 2) and the reference period (period 1) of the portfolios.

                    Portfolio   H0               H1
                     1 & 2      H0:  μμAR, 2− μμAR, 1 ≥ 0   H1:  μμAR, 2− μμAR, 1 < 0
                       3          H0:  μμAR, 2 =  μμAR, 1      H1:  μμAR, 2 ≠  μμAR, 1
                     4 & 5      H0:  μμAR, 2− μμAR, 1 ≤ 0   H0:  μμAR, 2− μμAR, 1 > 0

We then control for different risk factors by using the Fama-French Three Factor Model. We
run the following regression for the two time periods:

               Rpcw -  Rfcw = αp +  βp(Rbcw -  Rfcw) + spSMBcw + hpHMLcw+  εpw
where:

Rfcw= return of the risk-free rate in country c  during week  w
αp  = the alpha of portfolio  p
βp  = the benchmark beta of portfolio  p
sp= the SMB beta of portfolio  p
SMBcw= the SMB factor in country c during week  w
hp= the HML beta of portfolio  p
HMLcw= the HML factor in country c during week  w
εpw= the error term of portfolio  p  during week  w

To see if the alphas for each portfolio during the reference period are in line with what have
been found in previous research we perform the statistical tests outlined below in  Table 17  on
the alphas from the reference period.

                                                                  18
Table 17.  Table 17 illustrates the hypotheses tests conducted on the alphas of the portfolios during the
reference period (period 1).

                            Portfolio   H0        H1
                             1 & 2     H0:  α1 ≤ 0   H1:  α1 > 0
                             3         H0:  𝛼1 = 0   H1:  α1 ≠ 0
                             4 & 5     H0:  𝛼1 ≥ 0   H1:  α1 < 0

To see if the alphas for each portfolio during the financial crisis are in line with our
hypotheses we perform the statistical test outlined below in  Table 18  on the alphas from time
period 2.

Table 18.  Table 18 illustrates the hypothesis test conducted on the alphas of the portfolios during the financial
crisis (period 2).

                            Portfolio   H0        H1
                              1-5       H0:  𝛼2 = 0   H1:  α2 ≠ 0

To test whether the alphas for each portfolio differs between the two time periods we perform
the statistical tests outlined in  Table 19  below.

Table 19.  Table 19 illustrates the hypotheses tests conducted on the difference in alphas between the financial
crisis (period 2) and the reference period (period 1) of the portfolios.

                         Portfolio   H0           H1
                         1 & 2     H0:  α2−𝛼1 ≥ 0   H1:  α2−𝛼1 < 0
                            3         H0:  𝛼2 =  𝛼1     H1:  𝛼2 ≠  𝛼1
                         4 & 5     H0:  α2−𝛼1 ≤ 0   H0:  α2−𝛼1 > 0

We also perform hypotheses tests on  the  difference in weekly average abnormal return and
alpha between the  portfolios within the same time period.  This is  to see if there is a statistical
significant difference in  average abnormal return or alpha between the portfolios during the
reference period  or the financial crisis. Hence,  the null hypothesis is that the returns of the
portfolios are equal. These tests are therefore two  tail tests and are conducted on  the weekly
average  abnormal return and alphas during both time periods respectively.

                                                                  19
V. Results

Portfolio Characteristics and Returns
One of the findings in this thesis is that portfolio 1 has the highest cumulative abnormal return
during the full  sample period in all countries, as illustrated in  Diagram 1-4.  This result
indicates  that analysts actually have the ability to predict which stocks will perform the best.
In Norway and Denmark, portfolio 5 has the lowest cumulative abnormal returns, which
indicate that analysts were good at predicting which stocks that would underperform. An
interesting finding is that the Norwegian portfolios perform exactly as the analysts predict,
only looking at cumulative abnormal returns. In contrast, portfolio 5 in  Sweden and Finland
performed third best when looking at the cumulative abnormal returns. This does not indicate
that analysts are good at predicting future stock returns.  In  conclusion, the abnormal returns
for the portfolios  differ between the countries.
      Looking at the cumulative abnormal returns during the financial crisis, illustrated in
Diagram 5-8, the results are  also  different  for the countries. In Sweden and Denmark, the
worst performing portfolio is portfolio 2 and in Finland the corresponding  portfolio  is
portfolio 1. In Denmark and Finland portfolio 5 and 4 performs best respectively. These
diagrams  therefore  suggest that the results have reversed during the financial crisis compared
to the reference period.
      The cumulative returns for all countries and portfolios can be found in the appendix,
A1-A4, as can the cumulative index returns for all countries,  A5-A8.
     The main results of this thesis can be found in  Table 20. We find that  the average
abnormal returns are  significantly positive at a 1%  level for both portfolio 1 and 2 during
period 1. In period 2, portfolio 2 has a negative average abnormal return, which is significant
at a 5 % level. No other average abnormal return for any portfolio in any time period is
significant at a reasonable level. Observing the signs of the average abnormal return, portfolio
1  and 5 have  a positive average abnormal return during period  2. Furthermore, portfolio 5 has
a negative average abnormal return during period 1. We find that the alphas for portfolio 1
and  2 are positive at a 1% significance level during time period 1. This is consistent with
Barber et al. (2001) that also find a positive abnormal return for portfolio 1 controlling for
momentum in addition to the Fama-French factors. Few have found a significant positive
abnormal return for portfolio 1 and the reason for this could be that the number of firms in the
strong buy portfolio often is small, thereby decreasing the power of hypotheses tests on
portfolio 1. For  instance Wåghäll, Lystedt (2008)) find positive abnormal returns for both

                                                                  20
portfolio 1 and 2 where only the abnormal return from portfolio 2 is significant. During period
2,  we find that  portfolio 2 has an insignificant negative alpha. An interesting finding is that
portfolio 5 has a positive alpha which is statistically significant at a 5 % level and this alpha is
greater than the alpha observed for portfolio 2 during both time period 1 and 2. As can be
seen in  Table 20,  the SMB factor is significant for portfolio 1 and 5 during  both time periods.
This is consistent with Barber et al. (2001) that also find a significant SMB factor for
portfolio 1 and 5. A potential explanation for why the SMB factor is significant for these
portfolios is that they contain firms with a low average market value  and therefore small
firms. Furthermore, the HML factor is  also  statistically significant for portfolio 1  and 5  during
both  time periods. This is also consistent with Barber et al. (2001) that find a significant HML
factor for portfolio 1 and 5. The significance and the impact of the HML factor increases  for
portfolio 5  during the financial crisis.
     The differences  in  average  weekly  abnormal return and in alpha between time periods
are illustrated  in  Table 21.  The difference in mean abnormal return and alpha is negative and
significant at a 1% level for portfolio 2.  The interpretation of this result is that portfolio 2
performs significantly worse in period 2 compared to period 1. In addition, portfolio 5 has a
significantly positive difference in the average abnormal return and in alpha in period 2
compared to period 1. Therefore portfolio 5 performs significantly better in period 2 than in
period 1. The difference in alphas  and abnormal returns  are not significant for any other
portfolio  but looking at the signs, portfolio 1 has a negative difference in average abnormal
return and alpha implying that it performs worse during period 2 than during period 1. The
differences in abnormal return and alpha are low and  insignificant for both portfolio 3 and 4.
      The differences in average abnormal return and alphas between the different portfolios
within the  same time period  are illustrated  in  Table 22. Overall, we  find that the difference in
average abnormal returns and  in  alphas between the portfolios are statistically significant
during the reference period. In addition, most signs of the differences  are as we should expect
them to be if analyst recommendations are valuable information. During the period of
financial crisis, the  difference in  average abnormal returns between the portfolios have low
significance overall. There is a significant difference between portfolio 2 and 5, showing that
portfolio 5 has an abnormal return that is 0.387% higher than that of portfolio  2’s at  a  10 %
significance level. Looking at the signs of the differences, there is a tendency toward reversed
results in comparison to the reference period. The differences in alphas during the financial
crisis show that portfolio 1 generates a significantly higher alpha than portfolio 2 and
portfolio 5 generates a significantly higher alpha than portfolio 2, 3 and 4. Overall the

                                                                  21
differences in alphas have very low significance during the financial crisis, in line with the
abnormal returns during  the same  period.

Robustness Tests
Table 23  gives the standard deviations, kurtosis and skewness of the weekly raw returns for
each portfolio during the two time periods. We observe that during the reference period,
portfolio 1 has a lower kurtosis and is less  negatively  skewed  than practically all other
portfolios. During the financial crisis, on the other hand, the kurtosis is approximately at same
level across portfolios, whereas portfolio 1 is the most negatively skewed and portfolio 5 the
least. Regarding portfolio 5 in particular, the probability of an extremely  low return is lower
during the period of financial crisis, since the skewness increases and the kurtosis decreases
substantially compared to the reference period. Overall, we can thus draw the conclusion that
the positive abnormal returns of the portfolio with the most favorable recommendations are
not achieved at the expense of a higher tail risk during the reference period.  But then again,
during the crisis the positive alpha of the highest rated portfolio is to some extent achieved at
a higher tail risk, whereas that of the lowest rated portfolio is not.
      Observing the standard deviations for the portfolios, we can see that the total standard
deviation for all portfolios increases from 2.84% to 5.20% during the financial crisis. This is
reasonable since volatility of returns tends to increase during crises. Further, we find that
portfolio 1 and 5 have the highest standard deviation during the reference period. All the
weekly portfolio returns can be found in appendix,  A9-A13.

Potential Biases in Results
Potential biases in our obtained results may come from the fact that we approximate the
market portfolio with the indexes that are generated for each country and that are based on the
stocks covered in our study. This implies that when approximating the market portfolio in our
regression with the Fama-French factors, we have excluded stocks that are not covered by
analysts. This could cause a bias since the entire market is not represented and furthermore,
the stocks that analysts chose to cover may have special characteristics. That would imply that
the  indexes  are  not  a  perfect   approximation  of  the  market   portfolio   due  to  certain
characteristics that covered stocks  may  have. On the other hand, looking at  Tables 8-11, we
conclude that the  total  market value  of covered stocks is at least 80% of the  total market value
of the index.  This bias should  however  not affect our results to any great extent.

                                                                  22
      Furthermore, we have not  excluded outliers from our dataset. This could cause biases in
our results since extreme  returns  that affect  the average returns and alphas are  not excluded.
On the other hand, these more extreme returns could for instance be the results of different
events such as company specific news. Therefore we  believe that they should be included in
our dataset to capture the true returns. The  risk  of this inclusion is  that we may catch effects
that are not representative for stock returns over long time periods. Given that we cover such
an extensive period of time  we do not believe that this is the case.

VII. Conclusions and Implications

In this thesis we have studied  analysts’  ability to give profitable stock recommendations
during the financial crisis in comparison to a reference period. During the reference period we
find that  analysts’  buy recommendations generate a positive abnormal return and alpha.
However they do not possess an equally good ability when it comes to sell recommendations.
      During the financial crisis we find other results. If you look at stocks with the strongest
buy recommendations, they still perform well, although they generate a slightly lower alpha,
which is not as significant as during the reference period. Surprisingly, we find that the lowest
rated portfolio generates a significantly positive alpha during the crisis.
      Overall, we can conclude that the profitability of following analyst recommendation
declined during the financial crisis. This is also evident  from  the  differences  in abnormal
return and alpha between the two time periods. Portfolio 5 generates a weekly alpha that is
0.23 % higher and statistically significant during the financial crisis. Therefore, we find that
the stocks that analysts thought would perform badly, actually performed better than the
analysts predicted. We can also conclude that analysts were significantly worse at giving buy
recommendations as well during the crisis. We find that the weekly alpha for portfolio 2 is
0.47 % lower during the  financial crisis than under the reference period. We  also  find that the
weekly   average   abnormal   return   for   portfolio   5   (portfolio   2)   increases   (decreases)
significantly with 0.21 % (-0.40 %) during the financial crisis in comparison to the reference
period.
      If we compare the financial crisis with bear markets and the reference period with bull
markets, this is somewhat inconsistent with Gylling  et al. (2008). They find that when using
value weighted portfolios, portfolio 5 is less likely to beat the benchmark and portfolio 2 is
more likely to beat the benchmark if markets are bear. For an equally weighted portfolio, the
possibility that portfolio 5 performs better than the benchmark is higher is bear markets,
which is more consistent with our findings. What also seems to be consistent with our

                                                                  23
findings is that when using value weighted portfolios the authors find that portfolio 1 is less
likely to beat the benchmark when markets are bear. Thus we can conclude that during the
financial crisis the market did not behave exactly like it does during times characterized by
bear markets.
      What are then the implications of our results for investors? Since  we find significant
positive alphas for portfolio 1 and 2 during the reference period, one implication could be that
we have found  a mispricing, which  investors could exploit. However, to be able examine if
this is possible we need to take transaction costs into account. Since transaction costs differ a
lot among different investors, it is difficult to make a relevant calculation of whether or not it
is possible to generate any  abnormal return by following analyst recommendations after
transaction costs. Therefore we leave this to the individual investor, who probably can
estimate her transaction costs better than we can. Many other researchers have however tried
to evaluate their results also after accounting for transaction costs, for example Barber et al.
(2001) and Wåghäll and Lystedt (2008), and the general view is that it is not possible to
generate any substantial abnormal returns after transaction costs. We see no reason to believe
that this would not hold for our data as well, during the reference period. If you consider the
time period during the financial crisis we only find a significantly alpha for portfolio 1 and 5,
but the alphas are of approximately the same magnitude as the alphas of portfolio 1 and 2
during the reference period. Hence, given  the assumption that the turnover of these portfolios
are equal to or greater than that of the reference period, portfolio 1 and 5 can not generate any
abnormal return after transaction costs during the crisis. Another implication of our results is
that investors should be careful when following analyst recommendations. The quality of the
recommendations will be affected by the market conditions to a quite large extent.
      Our results seem to suggest that analyst recommendations actually add value during the
reference period and to some extent during the financial crisis. However is this really the
case? As mentioned earlier, Jegadeesh et al. (2004) propose two different theories to their
findings that changes in analyst consensus recommendations indeed can predict future returns.
The first is that analysts bring new information to the market by analyzing qualitative aspects
of firms and the second is that by the publicity around changes in analyst recommendations,
the recommendations generate a price drift  themselves. Depending on which explanation you
choose to believe in when it comes to if analysts actually add value to investors or not, the
interpretation of analysts’ declining ability to predict future returns during the financial crisis
differs. If you believe that analysts bring new information, then the interpretation could be
that during the financial crisis it becomes more difficult to make qualitative evaluations of

                                                                  24
firms, perhaps caused by the increase in uncertainty, and therefore analysts are not able to
make good predictions about future stock returns. If you on the other hand believe that
analysts   create   their   own   price   momentum   when   changing   a   recommendation,   the
interpretation of our results is that during the crisis it becomes more difficult for analysts to do
this. During the crisis the investor may be focusing more on other news than analyst
recommendations, thereby making it hard for analysts to create this price drift. However, as
we find  that  the portfolio with the lowest rated stocks actually performs relatively well during
the crisis, we believe it is reasonable  to  question analysts’ alleged ability to predict future
returns. Thus the second explanation, that analyst recommendations create a price drift, seems
more plausible  than the first.
      What could then explain the reversal that we see in our results, where portfolio 5 earns a
positive alpha during the financial crisis? If we study  Table 12,  we can see that  portfolio 5
has the highest book-to-market ratio of all the portfolios before the crisis and up until  2007.
This is consistent with Jegadeesh et al. (2004)), who find that analysts tend to recommend low
book-to-market stocks. Since book values are  more conservative than market values, because
of the conservatism bias in accounting, investors may have considered stocks with higher
book-to-market ratios as a  safe haven  during the crisis. A high book-to-market ratio signals
that a firm has real assets  behind the market value, which could be sold and turned into capital
if the firm would go bankrupt and be liquidated. Therefore the investors may view stocks with
higher  book-to-market  ratio as  safer. Investor behavior  during the financial crisis was
characterized  by  a  flight-to-safety  or  flight-to-quality,  which  means  that   investors  sell
investments they perceive as high-risk and buy safer investments.  This could explain why we
see a significant positive alpha and positive difference in alphas between the  financial crisis
and the reference period for portfolio 5. Since investors sought safety in higher book-to-
market ratios, they put an upward price pressure on the  value stocks of  portfolio 5 and thereby
increasing the returns for these  stocks. This reasoning is somewhat inconsistent with the view
brought  forward by Fama and French (1993), where value stocks are associated with the risk
factor HML. Nonetheless, the investors did not seem to regard a high book-to-market ratio as
a risk factor during the  financial crisis  if the explanation of flight-to-safety holds.
      For further research, we  believe  it is interesting to investigate the results from a
behavioral  finance perspective.  The  flight-to-safety phenomenon in the reasoning above is
hard to explain  with a rational view. Therefore it is natural to try to explain  this phenomenon
with another  approach.  Furthermore,  Baker and Wurgler (2006) investigate how investor
sentiment affects the cross-section of stock returns and they find that when beginning-of-

                                                                  25
period proxies for sentiment is low, the subsequent  returns are relative high for  small stocks,
extreme growth stocks, high volatility stocks, etc. It is probable that investor sentiment was
low during the financial crisis and that could  perhaps explain why portfolio 1 and 5 exhibit
positive abnormal returns during  that time. Looking at the standard deviation for portfolio 1
and 5 during the reference period, we find that these two portfolios have the highest standard
deviation and thus the highest volatility. Furthermore, the firms in portfolio 1 and 5 are
relatively small. Therefore, the findings of Baker and Wurgler could  potentially explain why
these stocks perform well during periods of low investor sentiment and therefore in our case,
during the financial crisis. This is an  interesting area where further research needs to be
conducted in order to investigate the profitability of analyst stock recommendations.
     To conclude, we believe that studying analyst recommendations during severe market
conditions  in other countries are important for creating a deeper understanding of the
characteristics of analyst recommendations. Our results suggest that there might be a flight to
safety during the financial crisis that generates the relatively high return for portfolio 5. It
would therefore be interesting to see whether this finding  holds for other periods of crises
compared to a reference period. For instance, looking at the dot.com bubble in the late 90’s
and  other exchanges in other parts of the world to create an understanding whether or not the
results persist.  In conclusion we believe that there is more to learn about analysts’ ability to
predict future stock returns during severe market conditions.

                                                                  26
References

Baker, Wurgler  (2006), Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock returns,  The
Journal of Finance  61, 1645-1680.

Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, Trueman, 2001, Can Investors Profit from the Prophets?
Consensus Analyst Recommendations and Stock Returns,  The Journal of Finance  56, 531-
563.

Desai, Jain, 1995, An Analysis of the Recommendations of the “Superstar” Money Managers
at Barron’s Annual Roundtable,  The Journal of Finance  50, 1257-1273.

Fama, French, 1993,  Common Risk Factors in the Returns on  Stocks and Bonds,  Journal of
Financial Economics  33, 3-56.

Gylling, Larsson, Tobieson, 2008, Analyst Recommendations and Stock Returns  -  Evaluating
the Performance of Analysts Covering Stocks Publicly Traded on the Stockholm Stock
Exchange,  Master Thesis,  Stockholm School of Economics.

Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische, Lee, 2004, Analyzing the analysts: When Do Recommendations
Add Value?, Journal of Finance  59, 1083-1124.

McKnight, Todd, 2006, Analyst Forecasts and the Cross Section of European Stock Returns,
Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments  15, 201-224.

Stickel, 1995, The Anatomy of the Performance of Buy and Sell Recommendations,
Financial Analysts Journal  51, 25-39.

Womack, 1996, Do Brokerage Analysts' Recommendations Have Investment Value?, The
Journal of Finance  51, 137-167.

Wåghäll, Lystedt, 2008, Do Analyst Recommendations Yield Profitable Trading Strategies?  -
Evaluation of Analyst Covering European Stocks,  Master Thesis, Stockholm School of
Economics.

                                                                  27
Appendix

Table 2.  Table 2 illustrates the average, maximal and minimal number of firms in each portfolio during each year from 2003 until 2013  and for the full
sample period. The table is based on data from all four countries, Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway. The different portfolios are created based on
analyst consensus recommendations and they are rebalanced on a weekly basis. Portfolio 1 is the strong buy portfolio and portfolio 5 is the strong sell
portfolio. Portfolio 1 contains companies that have consensus recommendations <=1.5, portfolio 2 has companies with consensus recommendations 1.5  - <=2,
portfolio 3 has companies with consensus recommendations 2-<=2.5, portfolio 4 has companies with consensus recommendations 2.5  -  <=3 and portfolio 5
has companies with consensus recommendations 3- <=5.

           Portfolio 1              Portfolio 2               Portfolio 3                Portfolio 4                Portfolio 5
Date       Average nr.   Max.    Min.  Average nr.    Max.     Min.    Average    Max.     Min.   Average nr.    Max.     Min.  Average nr. Max.      Min.
                    of firms                           of firms                         nr. of firms                              of firms                             of firms
2003           8.7     11      6      42.2      54      29      53.7      62      42      88.8     104      72      80.3   90       69
2004          21.6     30      8      52.9      70      23      56.1      67      45      86.5      92      80      76.6   97       52
2005          23.0     32     14      65.6      87      52      63.7      76      49      102.3     114      90      75.2   82       67
2006          37.5     46     28      93.8     110      75      80.1      99      60      105.5     122      87      62.8   72       48
2007          39.8     56     31      99.0     116      86     101.6     114      89      106.2     122      90      72.8   83       60
2008          50.5     60     42     100.7     124      81     107.1     114      97      109.8     122      99      76.2   110       58
2009          33.3     43     27      74.1      81      67      84.9     104      65      127.7     136     103     123.6   144       96
2010          37.8     44     33     101.7     118      75     108.7     124      93      123.2     136     113      81.5   106       61
2011          32.4     37     23     119.8     139     106     113.3     127     100      128.3     136     119      73.1   82       64
2012          22.0     28     19     121.2     138     109     111.0     122      94      117.7     129     104      78.3   95       65
2013          23.1     28     19     112.8     121     104      82.3      94      74      128.7     134     120      86.5   97       74
Full period       34.2     60      6      97.1     139      23      92.9     127      42      113.2     136      72      83.3   144       48

                                                                                                       28
Table 3.  Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for stocks in the sample that are listed on OMX Stockholm (Sweden). It illustrates the average number of
analysts covering each company in all portfolios and for each portfolio separately by year during the full time period. The average market value, in local
currency and millions, and book-to-market ratio for the companies in each portfolio separately and all portfolios are also given by year over the entire sample
period.  The different portfolios are created based on analyst consensus recommendations and they are rebalanced on a weekly basis. Portfolio 1 is the strong
buy portfolio and portfolio 5 is the strong sell portfolio. Portfolio 1 contains companies that have consensus recommendations <=1.5, portfolio 2 has
companies with consensus recommendations 1.5  -  <=2, portfolio 3 has companies with consensus recommendations 2-<=2.5, portfolio 4 has companies with
consensus recommendations 2.5 - <=3 and portfolio 5 has companies with consensus recommendations 3- <=5.

          All portfolios              Portfolio 1              Portfolio 2              Portfolio 3              Portfolio 4              Portfolio 5

                                 Average                               Average                               Average                               Average                               Average                                Average
                                   market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average
                     Average nr, of      value   book-to-       Average nr, of      value   book-to-       Average nr, of      value   book-to-       Average nr, of      value   book-to-       Average nr, of      value   book-to-       Average nr, of      value   book-to-
Date        analysts/company   (SEKm)    market   analysts/company   (SEKm)    market   analysts/company   (SEKm)    market   analysts/company   (SEKm)    market   analysts/company   (SEKm)    market   analysts/company   (SEKm)    market
2003          7.49   12 650    0.80       2.14   1 788    0.79       2.91   2 370    0.75       12.32  25 297    0.64       8.54  13 775    0.88       6.50  10 121    0.91
2004          7.13   15 622    0.67       1.67    876    0.57       3.00   4 289    0.75       11.30  25 673    0.61       7.92  15 778    0.66       7.17  18 678    0.71
2005          6.81   17 073    0.63       1.56   1 516    0.45       3.08   4 511    0.62       9.56  35 557    0.74       10.43  25 990    0.65       5.50  10 500    0.66
2006          6.51   23 957    0.52       1.38   3 550    0.50       2.89  22 019    0.49       9.21  33 103    0.53       9.67  29 061    0.51       8.25  25 085    0.63
2007          6.70   30 508    0.43       1.58   2 202    0.46       3.19  20 608    0.43       11.51  63 985    0.43       9.64  40 101    0.40       9.18  24 670    0.47
2008          7.22   28 889    1.10       1.88   1 746    0.44       5.42  22 568    2.91       9.34  33 418    0.51       11.09  52 114    0.51       7.67  29 748    0.77
2009          7.50   17 630    1.81       1.72   1 145    0.93       4.50  15 485    0.98       9.00  29 303    0.90       9.64  22 560    1.44       9.89  14 799    4.24
2010          7.71   22 550    0.69       1.57   1 433    0.63       3.56  17 628    0.59       9.03  22 489    0.60       10.53  32 519    0.71       9.91  23 895    0.88
2011          7.23   24 865    0.57       1.72   1 790    0.60       3.70  11 901    0.55       9.59  23 693    0.44       9.76  44 573    0.56       9.46  21 172    0.76
2012          7.68   20 634    0.80       2.00   1 706    0.99       3.73   8 796    0.77       11.61  26 102    0.68       10.63  38 778    0.72       7.33  10 841    1.24
2013          7.29   21 571    0.81       2.55   2 114    1.00       2.89   4 603    0.69       9.05  29 082    0.70       9.18  24 130    0.64       8.86  34 990    1.35
Full period       7.23   21 992    0.81       1.73   1 850    0.61       3.60  13 039    0.88       10.07  31 859    0.61       9.79  31 419    0.70       8.31  20 425    1.32

                                                                                                       29
Table 4.  Table 4 shows descriptive statistics for stocks in the sample that are listed on the OMX Helsinki (Finland). It illustrates the average number of
analysts covering each company in all portfolios and for each portfolio separately by year during the full time period. The average market value, in local
currency and millions, and book-to-market ratio for the companies in each portfolio separately and all portfolios are also given by year over the entire sample
period.  The different portfolios are created based  on analyst consensus recommendations and they are rebalanced on a weekly basis. Portfolio 1 is the strong
buy portfolio and portfolio 5 is the strong sell portfolio. Portfolio 1 contains companies that have consensus recommendations <=1.5, portfolio 2 has
companies with consensus recommendations 1.5  -  <=2, portfolio 3 has companies with consensus recommendations 2-<=2.5, portfolio 4 has companies with
consensus recommendations 2.5 - <=3 and portfolio 5 has companies with consensus recommendations 3- <=5.

         All portfolios              Portfolio 1              Portfolio 2              Portfolio 3              Portfolio 4              Portfolio 5
                                Average                                Average                                Average                                Average                                Average                                Average  Average
                                   market    Average                       market    Average                       market    Average                       market    Average                       market    Average                       market     book-
                   Average nr. of       value    book-to-      Average nr. of       value    book-to-      Average nr. of       value    book-to-      Average nr. of        value    book-to-      Average nr. of       value    book-to-      Average nr. of       value         to-
Date       analysts/company   (EURm)    market  analysts/company   (EURm)    market  analysts/company   (EURm)    market  analysts/company   (EURm)    market  analysts/company   (EURm)     market  analysts/company   (EURm)   market
2003         7.28   1 892    0.89       2.00     95    0.52       3.67    193    0.80      16.54   8 108    0.96       8.32    573    0.86       4.30    783   0.97
2004         6.96   1 902    0.66       1.33    823    0.32       1.60    105    0.69       9.33   1 783    0.50       9.65   3 553    0.67       6.12   1 077   0.71
2005         6.61   1 669    0.59       1.33   1 036    0.50       4.33    276    0.59      10.06   1 691    0.63       7.45   3 563    0.51       5.08    315   0.67
2006         7.72   2 225    0.54       1.50    230    0.32       4.29   1 266    0.51      11.18   2 204    0.55      10.70   4 365    0.49       5.15    440   0.70
2007         8.15   2 589    0.52       3.00    202    0.96       6.39   2 390    0.48      10.12   2 364    0.47      10.61   5 533    0.50       5.86    484   0.54
2008         9.04   3 027    0.53       3.25    356    0.60       6.80    625    0.58      10.91   4 151    0.52      11.15   6 024    0.48       7.52    737   0.54
2009         8.42   1 492    1.08       1.50    486    1.20       6.29   2 401    0.79      11.00   1 904    0.90      13.55   3 323    1.15       5.10    180   1.17
2010         8.81   1 880    0.75       1.00     23    0.75       1.86    197    0.72      12.06   1 394    0.82      11.35   3 081    0.69       6.53   1 378   0.77
2011         8.12   2 084    0.63       1.17     23    0.96       3.00    253    0.64      12.61   4 165    0.53      11.11   3 404    0.52       5.74    638   0.72
2012         8.83   1 507    0.80       2.33     69    0.83       9.67   1 025    0.92      10.95   1 992    0.91      11.59   2 879    0.82       7.07    858   0.71
2013         8.96   1 864    0.82       2.25     98    0.62       3.50    219    1.11      11.47   3 492    0.80      10.24   2 258    0.90       8.83   1 288   0.73
Full period       8.13   2 019    0.71       1.98    266    0.71       4.85    876    0.66      11.39   2 966    0.68      10.51   3 581    0.67       6.16    756   0.77

                                                                                                       30
Table 5.  Table 5 shows descriptive statistics for stocks in the sample that are listed on the Oslo Bors  (Norway). It illustrates the average number of analysts
covering each company in all portfolios and for each portfolio separately by year during the full time period. The average market value, in local currency and
millions, and book-to-market ratio for the companies in each portfolio separately and all portfolios are also given by year over the entire sample period.  The
different portfolios are created based on analyst consensus recommendations and they are rebalanced on a weekly basis. Portfolio 1 is the strong buy portfolio
and portfolio 5 is the strong sell portfolio. Portfolio 1 contains companies that have consensus recommendations <=1.5, portfolio 2 has companies with
consensus recommendations 1.5  -  <=2, portfolio 3 has companies with consensus recommendations 2-<=2.5, portfolio 4 has companies with consensus
recommendations 2.5 - <=3 and portfolio 5 has companies with consensus recommendations 3- <=5.

         All portfolios              Portfolio 1              Portfolio 2              Portfolio 3              Portfolio 4              Portfolio 5
                                 Average                               Average                               Average                               Average                               Average                               Average
                                   market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average                       market   Average
                     Average nr, of       value   book-to-       Average nr, of       value   book-to-       Average nr, of       value   book-to-       Average nr, of       value   book-to-       Average nr, of       value   book-to-       Average nr, of       value   book-to-
 Date       analysts/company   (NOKm)    market   analysts/company   (NOKm)    market   analysts/company   (NOKm)    market   analysts/company   (NOKm)    market   analysts/company   (NOKm)    market   analysts/company   (NOKm)    market
 2003          7.75   7 690    1.06       1.67    387    1.09       6.70   2 301    1.26      13.55   18 871    1.04       5.67   12 416    1.77       7.07    763    0.35
 2004          5.89   9 345    0.72       1.90   1 734    0.50       2.88   2 420    0.87       8.60   10 981    0.62       5.65   5 671    0.93       7.86   21 446    0.62
 2005          5.06   10 246    0.64       2.06   1 765    0.46       4.00   4 701    0.76      11.43   37 169    0.53       5.47   8 592    0.52       2.50    544    1.17
 2006          5.00   12 652    0.60       2.05   3 376    0.47       3.51   3 541    0.72       9.63   43 898    0.56       6.00   16 908    0.38       6.75   6 154    0.64
 2007          5.13   14 414    0.52       2.46   3 792    0.37       3.78   6 334    0.55       9.96   46 882    0.46       6.21   11 098    0.57       2.75   3 284    0.57
 2008          6.92   16 023    0.55       3.06   1 940    0.51       5.22   8 043    0.76      10.18   23 596    0.45       7.24   31 076    0.49       5.36   4 132    0.46
 2009          6.58   7 401    1.74       2.22    435    1.20       4.26   2 477    1.62      13.36   25 565    1.56       5.29   1 104    2.21       4.89   1 738    1.90
 2010          7.16   11 195    1.00       2.78   4 403    0.45       4.79   8 580    1.17      11.42   24 087    0.94       7.83   4 615    0.59       5.14   1 606    1.36
 2011          7.90   12 357    0.85       1.63   4 627    1.08       5.46   4 109    0.83      12.47   34 035    0.80       9.89   6 899    0.77       4.15   1 354    1.13
 2012          8.73   12 030    1.28       4.00   2 070    0.83       6.84   4 447    1.12      13.79   34 285    1.01       8.15   8 332    1.78       6.86    437    1.77
 2013          7.73   12 127    0.99       4.00   1 691    1.02       6.10   4 319    0.78      12.00   21 233    1.28      10.00   32 656    1.44       6.88    802    0.53
 Full period       6.80   11 757    0.92       2.44   2 544    0.63       5.03   4 943    0.92      11.54   29 331    0.85       7.35   12 509    1.11       5.52   4 094    0.99

                                                                                                       31
Table 6. Table 6 shows descriptive statistics for stocks in the sample that are listed on the OMX Copenhagen (Denmark). It illustrates  the average number of
analysts covering each company in all portfolios and for each portfolio separately by year during the full time period. The average market value, in local
currency and millions, and book-to-market ratio for the companies in each portfolio separately and all portfolios are also given by year over the entire sample
period.  The different portfolios are created based on analyst consensus recommendations and they are rebalanced on a weekly basis. Portfolio 1 is the strong
buy portfolio and portfolio 5 is the strong sell portfolio. Portfolio 1 contains companies that have consensus recommendations <=1.5, portfolio 2 has
companies with consensus recommendations 1.5  -  <=2, portfolio 3 has companies with consensus recommendations 2-<=2.5, portfolio 4 has companies with
consensus recommendations 2.5 - <=3 and portfolio 5 has companies with consensus recommendations 3- <=5.

         All portfolios              Portfolio 1              Portfolio 2              Portfolio 3              Portfolio 4              Portfolio 5
                                Average                                Average                                Average                                Average                                Average                                Average
                                  market   Average                        market   Average                        market   Average                        market   Average                        market   Average                        market   Average
                   Average nr. of       value   book-to-        Average nr. of       value   book-to-       Average nr. of       value   book-to-       Average nr. of       value   book-to-        Average nr. of       value   book-to-       Average nr. of       value   book-to-
Date       analysts/company   (DKKm)    market   analysts/company   (DKKm)    market   analysts/company   (DKKm)    market   analysts/company   (DKKm)    market   analysts/company   (DKKm)    market   analysts/company   (DKKm)   market
2003         6.12   6 747    1.03       7.00   3 564    0.67       4.00   3 984   0.86       9.13   18 894    0.92       6.27   6 065   0.98       6.05   4 337   1.21
2004         5.77   8 629    0.78       1.20   1 645    0.67       3.86   6 465   0.80       6.83   18 361    0.68       6.75   11 819   0.63       6.31   6 347   0.91
2005         5.97   10 586    0.65       1.50   1 529    0.86       3.56   5 135   0.55       5.17   4 621    0.60       6.67   14 394   0.75       7.81   15 336   0.62
2006         6.08   13 500    0.49       2.00   13 900    NA       3.67   2 818   0.46       6.23   8 290    0.40       8.22   30 523   0.45       5.48   7 783   0.58
2007         5.34   14 385    0.41       1.43   4 698    0.39       3.36   6 212   0.31       6.56   16 257    0.36       6.08   18 824   0.47       6.82   17 326   0.42
2008         6.13   13 950    0.49       2.90   5 045    0.43       4.43   14 106   0.48       6.17   8 229    0.41       8.48   24 419   0.55       6.24   8 934   0.49
2009         6.40   7 449    1.12       2.00    560    0.93       5.62   4 917   1.14       8.05   11 959    1.09       7.00   8 894   1.42       6.71   6 018   0.96
2010         5.89   11 745    0.91       1.55   2 513    1.16       3.33   5 127   0.99       11.70   22 723    0.80       6.19   19 791   0.85       7.11   7 414   0.83
2011         6.71   15 171    0.75       1.64   3 197    0.89       4.91   9 096   0.67       9.33   22 226    0.52       10.04   26 836   0.89       5.13   4 227   0.75
2012         7.70   16 517    1.05       2.00   20 870    0.89       4.18   3 876   1.28       13.50   34 566    0.81       7.55   10 344   0.92       7.73   6 495   1.56
2013         7.69   20 492    0.95       1.00   55 172    1.66       4.63   2 632   0.96       10.50   55 086    0.70       8.70   15 502   1.06       10.00   12 233   0.79
Full
period         6.35   12 732    0.78       1.88   8 557    0.85       4.23   6 160   0.77       8.67   19 754    0.69       7.51   17 745   0.80       6.75   8 844   0.81

                                                                                                       32
Table 7.  Table 7 displays the average and median consensus recommendations of the companies covered, for all countries together and for each
country separately. The average and median consensus recommendation is given by year and for the full sample period. The consensus
recommendation for each company ranges from 1 to 5, where 1 is a strong buy recommendation and 5 is a strong sell recommendation.

             Full sample              Sweden              Finland              Norway             Denmark
Date             Mean      Median       Mean      Median       Mean      Median       Mean      Median       Mean      Median
2003              2.82       2.80       2.65       2.57       2.93       2.91       2.71       2.68       2.87       3.00
2004              2.68       2.67       2.77       2.67       2.90       2.93       2.57       2.50       2.88       3.00
2005              2.63       2.63       2.51       2.64       2.77       2.91       2.17       2.00       2.79       2.73
2006              2.47       2.47       2.36       2.46       2.64       2.62       2.15       2.00       2.92       2.85
2007              2.47       2.42       2.26       2.19       2.65       2.50       2.30       2.00       2.64       2.75
2008              2.45       2.40       2.19       2.20       2.58       2.55       2.31       2.20       2.58       2.67
2009              2.70       2.67       2.47       2.50       3.06       2.86       2.45       2.29       2.60       2.43
2010              2.52       2.47       2.51       2.53       2.97       2.91       2.46       2.32       2.58       2.60
2011              2.50       2.42       2.43       2.48       2.87       2.67       2.36       2.20       2.41       2.29
2012              2.53       2.44       2.44       2.33       2.96       2.83       2.29       2.12       2.44       2.44
2013              2.58       2.50       2.61       2.53       2.84       2.84       2.24       2.00       2.57       2.54
Full period          2.56       2.50       2.46       2.50       2.83       2.75       2.34       2.19       2.65       2.67

                                                                                                       33
Table 8.  Table 8 shows descriptive statistics that illustrates how much of the OMX Stockholm (Sweden) that is covered by analysts. It  displays the number of listed and
covered firms in Sweden by year.  It also shows the total market value listed and covered, in local currency and millions, by year. The percentage of the firms  and market
value covered is given in columns (6) and (7). The average of the market value of all covered firms by year is given in  column (8).

Date           Number of   Total market value   Number of covered  Market value covered  % of listed firms   % of market value    Mean market value covered
                 listed firms            (SEKm)               firms         firms (SEKm)                                                   firms (SEKm)

2003              200        2 100 617            113         1 429 412        56.5%         68.0%               12 650
2004              209        2 628 036            119         1 859 025        56.9%         70.7%               15 622
2005              217        2 882 174            132         2 253 616        60.8%         78.2%               17 073
2006              233        3 919 874            150         3 593 516        64.4%         91.7%               23 957
2007              252        5 470 471            166         5 064 376        65.9%         92.6%               30 508
2008              259        5 384 120            173         4 997 810        66.8%         92.8%               28 889
2009              259        3 214 470            171         3 014 754        66.0%         93.8%               17 630
2010              265        4 333 352            180         4 058 984        67.9%         93.7%               22 550
2011              274        5 131 353            191         4 749 266        69.7%         92.6%               24 865
2012              275        4 223 223            191         3 941 030        69.5%         93.3%               20 634
2013              279        4 567 765            194         4 184 719        69.5%         91.6%               21 571

                                                                                                       34
Table 9.  Table 9 shows descriptive statistics that illustrates how much of the OMX Helsinki (Finland) that is covered by analysts. It  displays the number of listed and
covered firms in Finland by year. It also shows the total market value listed and covered, in local currency and millions, by year. The percentage of the firms and market value
covered is given in columns (6) and (7). The average of the market value of all covered firms by year is given in column (8).

Date           Number of   Total market value   Number of covered  Market value covered   % of listed firms   % of market value    Mean market value covered
                  listed firms            (EURm)               firms         firms (EURm)                                                    firms (EURm)

2003              110         141 350            74          140 037         67.3%         99.1%                1 892
2004              112         148 561            73          138 875         65.2%         93.5%                1 902
2005              116         158 467            89          148 569         76.7%         93.8%                1 669
2006              120         217 680            92          204 712         76.7%         94.0%                2 225
2007              121         256 648            94          243 386         77.7%         94.8%                2 589
2008              121         297 329            95          287 524         78.5%         96.7%                3 027
2009              124         140 218            90          134 254         72.6%         95.7%                1 492
2010              125         184 071            94          176 746         75.2%         96.0%                1 880
2011              125         221 287            102          212 550         81.6%         96.1%                2 084
2012              126         160 082            102          153 699         81.0%         96.0%                1 507
2013              129         172 387            84          156 603         65.1%         90.8%                1 864

                                                                                                       35
Table 10. Table 10 shows descriptive statistics that illustrates how much of the Oslo Bors (Norway) that is covered by analysts. It displays the number of listed and covered
firms in Finland by year. It also shows the total market value listed and covered, in local currency and millions, by year. The percentage of the firms and market value covered
is given in columns (6) and (7). The average of the market value of all covered firms by year is given in column (8).

                   Number of   Total market value  Number of covered      Market value covered                                      Mean market value covered
Date           listed firms         (NOKm)            firms          firms (NOKm)   % of listed firms  % of market value           firms (NOKm)
2003               81         425 306            51             392 184        63.0%         92.2%               7 690
2004               89         665 430            64             598 060        71.9%         89.9%               9 345
2005              104         896 498            79             809 437        76.0%         90.3%              10 246
2006              121        1 372 002            99            1 252 517        81.8%         91.3%              12 652
2007              132        1 798 160           118            1 700 909        89.4%         94.6%              14 414
2008              135        1 998 200           119            1 906 719        88.1%         95.4%              16 023
2009              136         917 690           118             873 370        86.8%         95.2%               7 401
2010              144        1 462 798           125            1 399 378        86.8%         95.7%              11 195
2011              148        1 694 388           129            1 593 998        87.2%         94.1%              12 357
2012              150        1 505 375           120            1 443 544        80.0%         95.9%              12 030
2013              157        1 610 954           122            1 479 456        77.7%         91.8%              12 127

                                                                                                       36
Table 11.  Table 11 shows descriptive statistics that illustrates how much of the OMX Copenhagen (Denmark) that is covered by analysts.  It displays the number of listed
and covered firms in Finland by year. It also shows the total market value listed and covered, in  local currency and millions, by year. The percentage of the firms and market
value covered is given in columns (6) and (7). The average of the market value of all covered firms by year is given in column (8).

                    Number of   Total market value   Number of covered   Market value covered                                       Mean market value covered
Date             listed firms          (DKKm)             firms        firms (DKKm)    % of listed firms   % of market value            firms (DKKm)
2003              119         520 697            57           384 573         47.9%         73.9%               6 747
2004              120         760 486            60           517 769         50.0%         68.1%               8 629
2005              122         941 302            61           645 760         50.0%         68.6%              10 586
2006              132        1 263 239            66           891 017         50.0%         70.5%              13 500
2007              140        1 459 641            73          1 050 115         52.1%         71.9%              14 385
2008              143        1 532 743            76          1 060 187         53.1%         69.2%              13 950
2009              144         802 036            77           573 600         53.5%         71.5%               7 449
2010              147        1 199 778            75           880 839         51.0%         73.4%              11 745
2011              148        1 548 370            76          1 153 029         51.4%         74.5%              15 171
2012              148        1 259 260            71          1 172 714         48.0%         93.1%              16 517
2013              150        1 517 795            62          1 270 490         41.3%         83.7%              20 492

                                                                                                       37
Table 12.  Table 12 illustrates the average book-to-market  value for all portfolios and the full sample. The average book-to-market is calculated as the
average of all companies book-to-market ratio in the full sample and all portfolios separately during each year and the full sample period. The average book-
to-market values are shown by year for the entire sample period.  The different portfolios are created based on analyst consensus recommendations and they
are rebalanced on a weekly basis. Portfolio 1 is the strong buy portfolio and portfolio 5 is the strong sell portfolio. Portfolio 1 contains companies that have
consensus recommendations <=1.5, portfolio 2 has companies with consensus recommendations 1.5  -  <=2, portfolio 3 has companies with consensus
recommendations 2-<=2.5, portfolio 4 has companies  with consensus recommendations 2.5  -  <=3 and portfolio 5 has companies  with consensus
recommendations 3- <=5.

                       Full sample          Portfolio 1          Portfolio 2          Portfolio 3         Portfolio 4          Portfolio 5

                            Average book-to         Average book-to         Average book-to          Average book-to        Average book-to         Average book-to
Date                                -market                  -market                  -market                   -market                 -market                  -market
2003                      0.86              0.77              0.83              0.79             0.85              0.94
2004                      0.62              0.54              0.59              0.58             0.62              0.69
2005                      0.55              0.45              0.51              0.53             0.55              0.61
2006                      0.48              0.43              0.48              0.47             0.47              0.53
2007                      0.44              0.46              0.43              0.41             0.45              0.49
2008                      0.89              0.58              0.81              0.66             1.24              1.01
2009                      1.15              0.77              1.01              0.97             0.99              1.60
2010                      0.79              0.79              0.81              0.69             0.75              0.95
2011                      0.84              0.86              0.87              0.73             0.83              0.96
2012                      0.88              0.95              0.88              0.78             0.89              1.00
2013                      0.79              0.81              0.77              0.71             0.83              0.83
Full period                   0.77              0.65              0.74              0.67             0.78              0.92

                                                                                                       38
Diagram 1.  Diagram 1 illustrates the weekly value weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic  returns in
                                          st                          st
Sweden for the five portfolios from 1 of January 2003 to 31 of December 2013.

Diagram 2.  Diagram 2 illustrates the weekly value  weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                      st                          st
five portfolios in  Denmark  from 1 of January 2003 to 31 of December 2013.

                                                                  39
Diagram 3.  Diagram 3 illustrates the weekly value  weighted  cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                     st                          st
five portfolios in  Finland  from 1 of January 2003 to 31 of December 2013.

Diagram 4.  Diagram 4 illustrates the weekly value  weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                    st                          st
five portfolios in  Norway from 1  of January 2003 to 31  of December 2013.

                                                                  40
Diagram 5.  Diagram 5 illustrates the weekly value  weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                    st                          st
five portfolios in  Sweden  from 1  of January 2008 to 31  of December 2009 (time period 2).

Diagram 6.  Diagram 6 illustrates the weekly value  weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                      st                          st
five portfolios in  Denmark  from 1  of January 2008 to 31  of December 2009 (time  period 2).

                                                                  41
Diagram 7.  Diagram 7 illustrates the weekly value  weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                     st                          st
five portfolios in  Finland  from 1  of January 2008 to 31  of December 2009 (time period 2).

Diagram 8.  Diagram 8 illustrates the weekly value  weighted cumulative abnormal logarithmic returns for the
                                    st                          st
five portfolios in  Norway  from 1  of January 2008 to 31  of December 2009 (time period 2).

                                                                  42
Table 20.  Table 20 illustrates the weekly returns earned by the portfolios formed according to analyst consensus recommendation. The raw returns are  the
average weekly value weighted raw returns earned by each portfolio during the two time periods. The abnormal  returns are the average weekly value weighted
abnormal return, which is calculated by taking the average of the difference between the raw return and the benchmark return  (Rpcw – Rbcw) for each portfolio
and time period. The Fama-French factors coefficients and the alphas intercept are the estimates from regression  Rpcw -  Rfcw  = αp +  βp(Rbcw  -  Rfcw) +
spSMBcw  + hpHMLcw+  εpw.  The t-values are given under the average abnormal returns and alphas respectively.  The hypotheses tested in this table are
shown in table 14-15 and 17-18.
(*10% sig. lev.)
(**5% sig. lev)
(***1% sig. lev)

                                                                                         Fama-French Factors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
               Average raw return    Average abnormal    Rm- Rf          SMB           HML           Alpha intercept      R
                                                 return
Portfolio 1
1               0.591%           0.249%***         0.707***           0.185***           0.097*             0.423%***         0.242
                                            2.98                  14.55                 2.60                  1.77                  4.83
2                -0.080%           0.017%             0.798***           0.481***           0.152*             0.304%*            0.545
                                            0.10                  14.32                 4.55                  1.76                  1.92
Portfolio 2
1                0.529%            0.168%***          0.776***           -0.033              0.040              0.255%***          0.474
                                              3.04                   16.83                  -0.78                  1.16                   4.29
2                 -0.304%            -0.232%**           0.970***            0.006               0.019               -0.219%             0.736
                                               -1.73                   22.03                  0.06                   0.32                   -1.58
Portfolio 3
1                 0.352%            -0.011%             0.993***            -0.015              0.023               -0.000%             0.761
                                                -0.31                   41.16                   -0.54                   1.14                    -0.00
2                 -0.034%            0.038%             1.030***            0.036               -0.083*             -0.006%             0.828
                                               0.36                   20.53                  0.52                   -1.65                   -0.06
Portfolio 4
1                0.341%            -0.023%            0.913***            -0.009              0.001               0.004%             0.751
                                               -0.67                   34.03                  -0.35                   0.03                   0.10
2                 -0.125%            -0.053%             0.918***            -0.047              0.119*              0.006%             0.811
                                               -0.49                   19.05                  -0.68                   1.73                    0.06
Portfolio 5
1                0.304%            -0.060%            0.901***           0.123**            0.140**            0.067%             0.376
                                              -0.81                  17.39                  2.08                   2.44                   0.90
2                0.083%            0.154%             0.781***           -0.162*             0.319***           0.298%**           0.706
                                              1.06                   12.55                  -1.70                  4.14                   2.08

                                                                                                       43
Table 21.  Table 21 illustrates the results from taking the difference in average weekly value weighted abnormal return (𝜇2− 𝜇1) and weekly alpha (α2 – α1)
for each portfolio between the two time periods. The t-values are given under the average abnormal returns and alphas respectively.  The hypotheses tested in
this table are shown in table 16 and 19.
(*10% sig. lev.)
(**5% sig. lev)
(***1% sig. lev)

                                         Difference in Average Abnormal Return Difference in Alpha
                                                                    (𝜇AR,2 − 𝜇AR,1)             (α2 – α1)
                              Portfolio 1                             -0.232%            -0.119%
                                                                                       -1.19                  -0.65
                              Portfolio 2                          -0.400%***         -0.474%***
                                                                                       -2.11                  -3.14
                             Portfolio 3                             0.049%            -0.006%
                                                                                    0.44                 -0.06
                             Portfolio 4                            -0.030%            0.002%
                                                                                   -0.27                  0.02
                           Portfolio 5                          0.214%*           0.231%*
                                                                             1.32                1.44

                                                                                                       44
Table 22.  Table 22 illustrates the difference in weekly alphas and average weekly abnormal returns (AR) between two portfolios (row minus column) during
both time period 1 and time period 2. The t-values are given under the average abnormal returns and alphas respectively. Significant levels are shown for the
hypothesis test where the null hypothesis is that the alphas (AR) are equal for the portfolios.
(*10% sig. lev.)
(**5% sig. lev)
(***1% sig. lev)

Difference in AR during period 1                                        Difference in AR during period 2
Portfolio              1         2         3         4         5  Portfolio            1        2       3       4        5
            1                 0.082%   0.260%***   0.272%***   0.309%***              1             0.249%  -0.021%   0.070%    -0.137%
                                          0.81          2.86          3.01          2.77                                      1.13      -0.10       0.34         -0.60
             2      -0.082%                0.179%***   0.191%***    0.228%**               2   -0.249%              -0.270%  -0.179%    -0.387%*
                            -0.81                          2.71          2.93          2.47                          -1.13                    -1.58      -1.04         -1.96
             3   -0.260%***   -0.179%***                 0.012%      0.049%              3    0.021%    0.270%            0.091%     -0.117%
                           -2.86          -2.71                        0.24          0.59                          0.10         1.58                  0.60         -0.65
             4   -0.272%***   -0.191%***     -0.012%                  0.037%               4   -0.070%     0.179%   -0.091%              -0.208%
                            -3.01           -2.93          -0.24                         0.45                          -0.34         1.04      -0.60                     -1.15
             5   -0.309%***    -0.228%**     -0.049%     -0.037%                          5    0.137%    0.387%*   0.117%   0.208%
                           -2.77          -2.47         -0.59         -0.45                                         0.60         1.96       0.65       1.15

Difference in alpha during period 1                                         Difference in alpha during period 2
Portfolio              1         2         3         4         5  Portfolio            1        2       3       4        5
            1                0.168%  0.423%***  0.419%***  0.356%***            1           0.523%**   0.311%   0.298%     0.007%
                                        1.59         4.14         4.37         3.11                                    2.48      1.62      1.55         0.03
             2      -0.168%                0.255%***   0.251%***    0.188%**              2   -0.523%**              -0.213%  -0.225%  -0.517%***
                            -1.59                          3.60          3.53          1.98                          -2.48                    -1.21      -1.28         -2.59
              3   -0.423%***   -0.255%***                  -0.004%     -0.067%              3    -0.311%     0.213%            -0.013%    -0.304%*
                            -4.14           -3.60                         -0.07          -0.80                          -1.62         1.21                  -0.08         -1.70
             4   -0.419%***   -0.251%***      0.004%                 -0.063%             4    -0.298%     0.225%   0.013%             -0.292%*
                            -4.37          -3.53          0.07                        -0.75                          -1.55         1.28       0.08                    -1.63
             5   -0.356%***    -0.188%**      0.067%      0.063%                         5    -0.007% 0.517%***  0.304%*  0.292%*
                           -3.11          -1.98          0.80          0.75                                       -0.03         2.59       1.70       1.63

                                                                                                       45
Table 23.  Table 23 illustrates the kurtosis, skewness  and standard deviation for the value weighted raw log returns of each portfolio and all countries during
the full sample period, the period of financial crisis, time period 2, and the reference period, time period 1.

Full period                             Time period 1                            Time period 2
Portfolio         Kurtosis   Skewness     SD  Portfolio         Kurtosis   Skewness     SD  Portfolio         Kurtosis   Skewness     SD
1                10.50      -1.23   3.76%  1                  6.21      -0.70   3.21%  1                  7.75      -1.31   5.05%
2                11.13      -1.18   3.42%  2                 10.69      -1.24   2.69%  2                  6.46      -0.67   5.46%
3                12.83      -1.33   3.45%  3                  6.73      -0.89   2.83%  3                  9.66      -1.21   5.22%
4                 9.71      -1.00   3.21%  4                  6.28      -0.51   2.61%  4                  6.91      -0.98   4.89%
5                12.67      -0.83   3.78%  5                 19.76      -1.21   3.18%  5                  6.79      -0.48   5.35%
Total              11.74      -1.09   3.47%  Total              11.64      -0.95   2.84%  Total               7.50      -0.86   5.20%

                                                                                                       46
A1.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative weekly value weighted logarithmic returns for all five portfolios,
                                                                          st                          st
where the portfolios only comprise Swedish stocks, from January 1  2003 to December 31  2013.

A2.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative weekly value weighted logarithmic returns for all five portfolios,
                                                                         st                          st
where the portfolios only comprise Danish stocks, from January 1  2003 to December 31  2013.

                                                                  47
A3.  The diagram illustrates the  cumulative weekly value weighted logarithmic returns for all five portfolios,
                                                                         st                          st
where the portfolios only comprise Finnish stocks, from January 1  2003 to December 31  2013.

A4.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative weekly value weighted logarithmic  returns for all five portfolios,
                                                                             st                          st
where the portfolios only comprise Norwegian stocks, from January 1  2003 to December 31  2013.

                                                                  48
A5.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative logarithmic return of the value weighted index constructed of all
Swedish stocks covered, between 2003 and 2013.

A6.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative logarithmic return of the value weighted index constructed of all
Finnish stocks covered, between 2003 and 2013.

                                                                  49
A7.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative logarithmic return of the value weighted index constructed of all
Danish stocks covered, between 2003 and 2013.

A8.  The diagram illustrates the cumulative logarithmic return of the value weighted index constructed of all
Norwegian stocks covered, between 2003 and 2013.

                                                                  50
A9.  The  scatterplot illustrates the weekly value weighted logarithmic returns of portfolio 1, comprising all
countries, during the time period from 2003 to 2013.

A10.  The scatterplot illustrates the weekly value weighted logarithmic returns of portfolio 2, comprising all
countries, during the time period from 2003 to 2013.

                                                                  51
A11.  The scatterplot illustrates the weekly value weighted logarithmic returns of portfolio 3, comprising all
countries, during the time period from 2003 to 2013.

A12.  The scatterplot illustrates the weekly value weighted logarithmic returns of portfolio 4, comprising all
countries, during the time period from 2003 to 2013.

                                                                  52
A13.  The scatterplot illustrates the weekly value weighted logarithmic returns of  portfolio 5, comprising all
countries, during the time period from 2003 to 2013.

                                                                  53