Gender Effect on Corporate Risk Taking

                  A study of Swedish data from 2008 - 2012

                                                               1                        2
                      Alexandra Johansen & Fanny Nyberg

                                  Bachelor Thesis
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                                     May 19, 2014

                                       Abstract

In this thesis, data on 108 086 Swedish companies from the years 2008-2012 are examined to determine if
there is a CEO gender effect on risk taking in corporations. The main risk measures chosen are Volatility
in ROE, Volatility in ROA and Volatility in Leverage, intended to provide information about total risk,
operational risk and financial risk. A linear regression model framework has been used in the study,
controlling for several determinants of firm and personality characteristics. Firstly, results for the entire
CEO population show no significant gender effect in any of the risk measures. Secondly, distinct results
can be seen in companies with 1-10 employees, where the CEO gender effect decreases the volatility in all
three risk measures. Thirdly, the industry comparisons show that female CEOs take lower risk if they are
operating in an industry that is characterised by low risk, or if the fraction of female CEOs is high. This
paper seems to be the first in Sweden to examine the CEO gender effect on corporate risk in all listed and
unlisted companies.

Key words: Corporate risk taking, CEO, Gender effect, Volatility, Small firms

Tutor: Pehr Wissén

1 22651@student.hhs.se
2 22436@student.hhs.se
Contents
1 Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 2
2 Theory .................................................................................................................................................... 5
   2.1 Risk in society ............................................................................................................................... 5
   2.2 Risk in finance .............................................................................................................................. 5
   2.3 Measuring risk in corporations .................................................................................................. 6
3 Previous research ................................................................................................................................. 8
   3.1 Gender and risk-taking ............................................................................................................... 8
   3.2 Risk taking in corporations......................................................................................................... 9
   3.3 Risk in smaller firms ..................................................................................................................10
   3.4 Women as CEOs .......................................................................................................................11
   3.5 Our contribution ........................................................................................................................11
4 Data ......................................................................................................................................................12
   4.1 Processing of data ......................................................................................................................12
   4.2 Summary statistics of data ........................................................................................................14
5 Method ................................................................................................................................................15
   5.1 Models for measuring risk ........................................................................................................15
   5.2 Regression model .......................................................................................................................17
   5.3 Final regression model ..............................................................................................................19
   5.4 Additional tests ..........................................................................................................................19
6 Potential biases of the study .............................................................................................................21
7 Results ..................................................................................................................................................23
  7.1 Main regression - gender effect on risk for the complete sample ......................................23
   7.2 Control regressions ....................................................................................................................23
   7.3 Smaller versus larger firms .......................................................................................................24
   7.4 Relationship risk and gender in industry groups ...................................................................27
   7.5 Influence on risk women versus men .....................................................................................29
  7.6 Endogeneity concerns ...............................................................................................................29
8 Conclusion ..........................................................................................................................................31
9 References ...........................................................................................................................................34
10 Appendix.............................................................................................................................................38

                                        1
1 Introduction

In recent years, women’s presence in the corporate world has continuously increased. With more
women being offered managing positions, being appointed board members and running their
own businesses, the interest for investigating behavioural differences with respect to gender is
larger than ever before. Do men and women lead companies in a different way?

                    th
       On the 9  of March 2014, Elisabeth Thand Ringqvist, CEO of Företagarna, published an
article in Dagens Nyheter, commenting on the organisation’s recent findings on male and female
CEOs in Swedish corporations. From extensive regression analysis involving all 125 529 Swedish
listed and unlisted companies who have reported gender of their CEO, Företagarna came to the
conclusion that the 14% of the companies having a female CEO in 2012 presented lower profit
margins than the companies run by men. This is an interesting finding, but as no measure is
entirely sufficient by itself, more research needs to be done to fully understand the implications
of such a statement. Previous research has concluded that women are less risk taking than men in
society at large. This fact, about gender differences, is in this study hypothesised to transfer to
corporate settings, making female CEOs more risk averse in the way they lead their companies. If
this is true it could help explain the differences in profit margins as well as any other research
stating that men and women present differences in key ratios in any corporate area. Risk and
return should go hand in hand, but important to remember is that a high or low risk is not
necessarily better than the other. Acceptable risk instead depends on the investor’s personal risk
tolerance.

       Previous research about individuals’ influence on corporate risk exists, but show
somewhat ambiguous results concerning whether gender matters or not. Those studies are
though most often limited to listed companies. This could be because information about key
ratios is more difficult to obtain for smaller corporations and moreover there is no optimal,
commonly accepted, way to measure risk in private companies. This study handles real historical
numbers presented by more than 100 000 Swedish companies, and assesses not perceived but actual
accounting based risk in Swedish corporations. By solely focusing on the CEO and since also
including small companies in the study, this is an area that has never been assessed in Sweden
before. The purpose of the study is to investigate if there is a gender effect on risk in Swedish
companies, and if this potential effect changes along different risk measures, components,
industries and employee constellations. The objective is to map out the gender effect on risk in
all types of companies to understand when differences might occur. Looking at various company
sizes could potentially create the currently missing bridge in the gap between what has already

                                        2
been concluded about individual risk behaviour in society and the behaviour of leaders of large
firms.

        The dataset has been collected from the database Retriever, containing information from
annual reports in the years 2008-2012. All data points for companies that have not reported any
information about their turnover for a certain year have been deleted for that corresponding year
and extreme outliers have been excluded through John Turkey’s boxplot method. The gender of
the CEO is only available for the latest reported year in the dataset, and as the main risk variables
refer to the volatility over the five year period, all other variables included in the regressions have
also been transformed into only having one data point, a mean value over the five years. Thus,
the final dataset is of cross-sectional nature rather than panel, and includes 95 421 companies.

        From theories concerning risk, three risk indexes have been chosen to analyse data. These
are based on Sven-Erik Johansson’s formula Hävstångsformeln; ROE = ROA + (ROA – RD) x
D/E. This formula originally refers to performance, but through creating volatility measures over
five years, an indication about the risk and stability in the company is given. The risk measures
are Volatility in ROE as a proxy for the total risk, Volatility in ROA as a proxy for operational risk
and the volatility in (ROA – RD) x D/E, here called Volatility in Leverage, as a proxy for financial
risk. It hence captures all types of the firm specific risk that could be present in corporations.

       The model that has been used to test for a CEO gender effect on risk follows a linear
regression model framework and has been obtained through cautious studying of two previously
used models. The basis models come from CEO succession, gender and risk taking by Elsaid and
Ursel (2009), and from CEO, corporate risk taking and the efficiency of capital allocation by Faccio,
Marchica and Mura (2012). All variables used in these two regressions have been evaluated and
adjusted to fit a study handling both large and small companies. All regressions have been run in
a robust framework.

       With the aim of studying the CEO gender effect on risk taking, the analysis is divided
into three main areas: the overall CEO gender effect, the effect relative the company size and the
effect relative the industry that the CEO operates in. In order to extract the general CEO gender
effect, the three chosen risk measures are evaluated and then compared to four other measures,
intended to be alternate ways of measuring the same type of risk. Thereafter, separate regressions
are run to determine the CEO gender effect in different employee constellations. This is to
determine if the gender effect increases or decreases when the company is smaller and the CEO
compose of a larger part of the company. To further investigate if the CEO gender effect
changes depending on the environment they operate in, the 15 most risky industries are

                                        3
compared to the 15 least risky industries, and the 15 industries with the highest fraction of
women are compared to the 15 industries with the lowest fraction of women.

       The results from the overall CEO gender effect on risk taking, using the whole sample,
outliers excluded, show no significant signs of a gender effect in any of the three risk measures.
Also when using alternative risk measures the results hold for both total risk and financial risk.
Operational risk shows significant results if using another measures: where the control risk
measure indicating women taking lower risk.

       While running the regression separately for different employee groups, the group 1-19
employees show significant results over all three risk measures. The coefficients indicate that
female CEOs in this group have lower total risk, lower operational risk and lower financial risk. If
further looking into this group it can be concluded that the large differences are only based on
behaviour in companies with up to 10 employees. As hoped, this information helps to fill the gap
between the concluded differences in risk behaviour in society, and the more ambiguous results
about leaders in large corporations. Female leaders with up to 10 employees lead their companies
more similar to how women in general behave, but female CEOs in companies above the size of
10 will not bring the gender effect in to the corporation.

        Over different industries, the result is that female CEOs take slightly less total risk than
their male counterparts in the industries that are already characterised by lower risk. This
additionally holds in industries with a higher fraction of other women in leading positions, where
female CEOs also take lower total risk.

        The paper is structured in the following manner. Firstly, theories of risk in general and in
corporations are presented. Secondly, an overview of previous research regarding gender
differences in risk taking in society and in corporations is given. A description of the data and
how it was processed to suit the study is thereafter presented. This is followed by the method
where the risk measures, the regression model and additional tests are explained and motivated.
The results section contains the outcome of the regressions, as well as implications for the gender
effect on risk taking. Finally, the conclusion section summarizes the results and implications, and
discusses potential further research on the topic.

                                        4
2 Theory

In this section, fundamental theories for measuring risk in different situations will be presented.
The section is divided into risk in society, risk in finance, and measuring risk in corporations.

2.1 Risk in society

Risk refers to situations in which it is possible, but not certain, that an undesirable event will
occur. It is often quantifiable with known possible outcomes, but with a factor of uncertainty
about something unknown. Perception of risk is the subjective judgement individuals make about
the severity of a risk. With this in mind, risk attitudes vary among different people, environments
and settings (Hansson, 2014). Payne et Al. (1993) argue that risk taking should be studied because
of its importance to three major psychological fields; the adaptiveness of human behaviour, the
rationality of human thought, and the relative importance of genes versus the environment in
determining the expression of traits. While evaluating risk in the general population, the main
focus is often on experiments and qualitative analysis; how people act in a simulated risky
situation or how they believe that they would act if a certain situation occurred.

2.2 Risk in finance

In the financial field, risk most often refers to the balance between the potential of gaining or
losing something of value. It is traditionally divided into two different components: market risk
and firm specific risk. The first is associated with the market as a whole and varies with
macroeconomic changes, whereas the latter is unique for each individual company (Cho, 1997).
Firm specific risk is, according to theory, risk that investors should be able to remove if holding a
diversified portfolio (Ross, Westerfield & Jaffe, 2010). Thus, if all investors held diversified
portfolios, the only risk that anyone would need to account for is the market risk associated with
the company. Firm specific risk consists of financial and operating risk: the first relating to how
the business is financed and the second to risk in operative business decisions (Kallenberg 2008).
Financial risk is usually described as the risk that the company will default on any type of debt, by
failing to make required payments. High levels of debt increases the risk of insolvency as the
company will be obligated to make interest payments and eventually pay back the entire value at
maturity date. Financial risk further makes the return on equity more volatile since debt holder
always get paid before equity owners. Operational risk, on the other hand, is the risk inherent in
the company's operations and is defined by the Basel II Committee as “The risk of loss resulting
from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events”

                                        5
(Operational Risk, 2001).

      One of the most influential theories within finance is the basic risk-return trade-off, stating
that higher risk must be compensated by higher expected returns. It means that in an efficient
market, higher returns can only come from situations where there is also a higher risk of losing
the invested money. Thus, regardless of whether the risk is high or low, the expected return will
compensate the investor for that particular level. In a perfect market all investments with the
same risk should therefore yield the same expected return, which becomes the cost of capital to
perform a certain type of risky project. The acceptable risk is henceforth not dependent on a
certain formula, but based on the investor’s personal risk tolerance (Ross, Westerfield & Jaffe,
2010).

2.3 Measuring risk in corporations

There are countless ways of measuring risk in all types of firms, looking at different key ratios,
indexes and proxies. Most measures are created to estimate the risk in publicly traded companies,
to simplify decisions for both professional and private investors. The majority of the measures
involve comparing a calculated risk against a market index created for the group in which a
certain company is located. It includes concepts such as alpha, beta, R-square, standard deviation

                        3
and Sharpe ratio.

       When looking at risk in private companies, where no stock price can be used, one needs
to broaden the view of risk estimation methods. Apart from qualitative analysis, accounting based
measures are used to explain the different types of risk in these companies. Bromiley and Miller
(1990) suggested several measures with basis in the income statement or the balance sheet, such
as capital intensity, volatility in returns and R&D intensity. Also operational measures such as
cash holdings and volatility in turnover are common. Furthermore, Sven-Erik Johansson (2005),
professor emeritus in business economics at the Stockholm School of Economics, claims total
risk to be made up of operative and financial risk according to the following relationship:

            ROE = ROA + (ROA – RD) x D/E

Where ROE = Return on Equity, where the spread in the measure works as a proxy for
                  total risk

3 Risk Measures Definition (n. d.)

                                        6
              ROA = Return on Total Assets, where the spread in the measure works as a
                proxy for operative risk

             RD = Average interest rate on borrowings

              D/E = Debt-to-equity ratio

            (ROA – RD) x D/E, a leverage measure, works as a proxy for financial risk

       This formula, as it only includes accounting based numbers, is possible to use for all
different kinds of firms and further has the ability to capture three different types of risk. When
using the formula it should be noted that ROE and ROA are not plain risk measures to begin
with, but rather key ratios to describe profitability. The same applies for leverage, which originally
measures how much additional return equity holders should expect due to higher levels of debt.
To be able to make assumptions about risk, it is required to study the changes in the key ratios
over time. A higher volatility in ROA corresponds to a higher operative risk, a higher volatility in
leverage leads to a higher financial risk and a higher volatility in ROE equals higher total risk
(Johansson & Runsten 2005). To capture the volatility, standard deviation has proved to provide
the best quantified estimate of the uncertainty of future returns, and is therefore the most

                                                          4
common measure for historical volatility.

4 Standard deviation Definition (n. d.)

                                        7
3 Previous research

With the theory in mind, previous research regarding risk taking and gender is both widespread
and diverse. The following section provides a brief overview of the previous research on gender
differences in risk taking, that make up the basis of the study.

3.1 Gender and risk-taking

The existence of gender differences in risk preferences has been documented in a large number
of real-life and laboratory studies. One of the most influential ones is Gender differences in risk
taking; A meta-analysis by Byrnes, Miller & Schafer (1999). The authors conducted a meta-analysis
on 150 studies focusing on men’s and women’s tendencies and attitudes towards risk taking in
their everyday decision-making. They concluded that literature clearly states that men are more
likely to take on higher risk than women. With this in mind, researchers have tried to investigate
in what areas women and men behave differently. Weber, Blais, and Betz (2002) assessed the
risks men and women perceived within five different domains: financial, health/safety,
recreational, ethical, and social. Female risk aversion was found in four of the five domains, with
social decision making being the exception. The four categories showed males perceiving less risk
and indicating a greater likelihood of engaging in risky behaviors.

        Continuing to studies looking at simulated financial environments, it has repeatedly been
found that women are less risk taking than men in these situations. Systematically collecting
thousands of observations from existing data, Charness and Gneezy (2007) concluded that
women choose to make smaller investments than men, regardless of the time frame and the
settings in which the experiments were conducted, indicating women being financially more risk
averse. The same conclusion was drawn by Powell and Ansic (1997), whose findings indicated
that women are less risk taking than men regardless of familiarity, framing, cost and ambiguity.
        Contradictive to these findings, Sarin & Wieland (2012) showed that differences in risk
behaviour depend on the possibility to quantify the risk associated with a certain decision.
Differences are more likely to occur in decisions under risk, where the probability of outcomes is
known and objectively quantified, and less likely to occur in decisions under uncertainty, where one
must rely on subjective expectancies of the probabilities of outcomes. This concludes that
women take less risk than men under specific circumstances, but not in others. They also claim
that situations in which women are taking less risk are the most common basis for testing risk
hypotheses.

        Weber et al. (2002) and Johnson et al. (2004) have additionally tried to examine why there

                                        8
are differences in risk behavior between the genders. They found that relative to women, men
perceived they would obtain greater benefits from engaging in risky behaviors. Using a risk-
return framework, Weber and colleagues have suggested that risky decision-making can be seen
as a trade-off between fear (risk) and hope (expected returns). If applying this framework it
means that women expect to receive a lower return than men if engaging in the same level of
risk.

3.2 Risk taking in corporations

Since studies conducted in society at large most often suggest that women are less risk taking
than men, several attempts have been made to draw similar conclusions in corporations. A
common metaphor, introduced by Neelie Kroes, European Union Commissioner for
Competition, is whether the financial crisis would have occurred if the Lehman Brothers had
instead been the Lehman Sisters (Kroes, 2009). People were convinced that more women in
leading positions and in boardrooms would have saved the world from the corrosive gambling
culture that dominated trading rooms.

        With this metaphor in mind, several attempts to confirm it have been made since the start
of the financial crisis. Masoudie (2008) concluded that among US public firms, having at least
one woman among the top five executives decreases the firm’s leverage, and hence the level of
risk. Elsaid and Ursel (2009) conducted a study supporting these findings. They investigated
whether personal risk attitudes carry over in a corporate setting, concluding that female CEOs in
North American public companies are associated with a lower risk for the company, and should
thus be considered if the board is seeking cautious leadership. Faccio, Marchica and Mura (2012)
documented that female CEOs tend to avoid riskier investment and financing opportunities.
Through a large European study of both public and private companies, they showed that the risk
avoidance behaviour of female CEOs appears to lead to distortions in corporate investment
policies, with a negative effect on the company as a whole.

       Even though the mentioned studies all conclude that women take less risk than men in a
corporate setting, no direct findings have supported Neelie Kroes’ suggestion on the financial
crisis. Studies of the banks showed that those with more female directors did not engage in fewer
risk taking activities around the crisis and did not have lower risk than other banks (Adams and
Raghunathan 2013). Additionally, a study by Palvia et al. (2012) concluded that even if smaller
banks showed to have a higher rate of survival with a female CEO or women in the board, none
of the genders were related to the bank failure in general. Ally Fogg wrote in the Guardian in

                                        9
September 2013: “People who reach influential positions in corporations do so because of their
ruthless personality, mind-set and talent needed for the job. It might be easier to find men like
that, but this does not mean women appointed to such roles would behave any differently.”
Looking closer at the Swedish market, Adams and Funk (2012) have found that Swedish female
directors, based on a survey of almost 2000 board members and top managers, are in fact more
risk loving than their male counterparts.

3.3 Risk in smaller firms

Just as research has been made to determine differences in risk behaviour between men and
women, the same has been done for different types of firms. Findings suggest that historically,
risk taking in small corporations has been higher than in larger organisations. This has also been
connected to a higher return in small companies, as is one of the most known relationships
within finance. From 1926 to 2007, public companies saw an annual return in large company
common stock of 12.3% while small company common stock had an average return of 17.1%.
The additional return for small companies is the risk premium that investors receive to
compensate for the higher levels of risk they have taken on (Ibbotson & Sinquefield 2008).

       With smaller and larger firms’ different profiles in mind, Företagarna, a Swedish
organisation focusing on smaller companies, examined the relationship between gender and
profit margin. The study involved all 125 529 Swedish listed and unlisted companies, both large
and small, that had reported gender of their CEO. The main measure “profit margin” is an
operational key ratio, sometimes considered a risk measure and sometimes not. The results stated
that on average, female CEOs present a profit margin that is 18,8% lower than in the companies
with male CEOs. While running the regression separately for different company sizes it became
clear that the results were only applicable on smaller corporations, meaning that female CEOs in
smaller companies present lower numbers for profit margin (Bongard & Sjöholm 2014).

       Globally, conducting these kinds of studies with focus on the CEO is very rare. When
assessing risk behaviour, studies have most often focused on board members, because of the fact
that the percentage of female CEOs in large companies is still low worldwide. This was noted by
Faccio, Marchica and Mura (2012) and was the foundation for their study involving over 100 000
companies in Europe of which 95% were private. This is one of few studies looking solely at
CEOs, and additionally assessing private firms. Even if this study broadened the view of the
corporate landscape, they still decided to remove smaller companies that did not meet their
criteria of revenue, turnover or number of employees. These criteria thus resulted in only around

                                       10
3% of all Swedish companies being included in the study.

3.4 Women as CEOs

To be able to understand the implications of male and female behavioural differences in
corporations, many researchers have tried to find the possible underlying reasons. Determining if
“typical” male and female behaviour emerge by chance, because of differences in genetic setup,
norms of society or conditions in the working life, is thereby important to be able to approach
the findings and determine how it affects the corporate landscape. One concept that is often
brought up is the “Glass Ceiling”, which is said to face women aiming for high corporate
positions. Cotter et Al. (2001) describes the phenomenon as inequality in the chances of
advancement that is not explained by other job-relevant characteristics of the employee. Ryan &
Haslam (2005a, 2005b, 2007) extended the metaphor to what they called the “Glass Cliff”. Their
research demonstrated that when women break through the ceiling they were more likely to
occupy positions that were precarious and thus had a higher risk of failure. Albrecht et Al. (2003)
looked at Swedish wage gaps and concluded the glass ceiling effect to be present on the Swedish
market which, according to Ryan & Haslam, would mean that women in high leadership
positions may be forced to take higher risks than men in the same type of positions.

3.5 Our contribution

This study will look at real historical numbers presented by more than 100 000 Swedish
companies, and assess not perceived behaviour concerning risk, but accounting based measures
showing what risk levels in the corporate world actually look like today. With sole focus on the
CEO (as opposed to boards like in many other studies), and since including small companies in
the study, this is an area that has never been assessed in Sweden before. The aim is to investigate
if there is a gender effect on risk in Swedish companies, and if this potential effect changes along
different risk measures, components, industries and employee constellations. Through mapping
out the gender effect on risk in all types of companies, different company sizes could potentially
create a bridge between what has already been concluded about individual risk behaviour in
society and the ambiguous results regarding behaviour of leaders of large firms.

                                       11
4 Data

In the following section, an overview of the data that has been used in the study is presented.
The section is divided into two parts: Processing of data and Summary statistics of data.

4.1 Processing of data

The data that has been used for analysis was originally obtained from the database Retriever,
which includes all Swedish companies. From the available data of over 400 000 companies, the
125 529 companies that had reported gender of their CEO in their annual report were chosen for
the dataset. Corresponding data has been downloaded for five consecutive years and thus the
starting point was an unbalanced short panel dataset from the years 2008 to 2012. However, the
gender of the CEO is only available for the current year, resulting in one data point for each
company. To make the data consistent throughout the study, all variables used have been
adjusted so that each company only has one value for each variable; a cross-sectional data has
been created.

       Since the aim has been to evaluate risk, the focus has been on active companies in the
dataset. Consequently, 17 443 companies that had not reported any information regarding their
turnover during the consecutive five years studied, were sorted out from the start. A problem
arises in how to treat those companies that have been active for a few or the majority of the years
but not for the remaining years. For simplicity, all data points for a company with an unreported
turnover have been removed for that certain year (Note: companies with a reported turnover of
zero have not been sorted out). Also companies that presented incomplete information for all
three risk measures were additionally sorted out. The final number of companies was 95 421. See
Appendix 1 for a descriptive table of final dataset.

        The original variables collected from Retriever include ranges from the smallest to the
largest number as large as 5 million percentage points, indicating that some disproportionate outliers
affect the sample (see Appendix 4 for information about original variables). Outliers can occur by
chance in any distribution, but they are often indicative either of measurement errors or of the
population having a heavy-tailed distribution. In the former case one wishes to discard them or
use statistics that are robust to outliers, whereas in the latter case they are an indication of high
kurtosis and one should be cautious in using tools or intuitions that assume a normal distribution
(Grubbs 1969). In this case, as in most large samples of data, there is a mixture of both problems,
where a few extremely high values affect the entire distribution more than what is deemed

                                       12
reasonable. The high dispersion, which can be seen in histograms Appendix 5, indicates that
normal distribution of data cannot be assumed.

        To remove outliers, and to create a more robust data, filters have been introduced before
creating the final risk measures. Since outliers may have statistical and scientific importance it can
be argued whether these should actually be removed. However, to get a dataset suitable for the
purpose of the study, these will in fact be excluded. To find the best approach on creating filters,
two common methods have been tested.

       The first method tested was identifying and excluding outliers according to the three-
sigma-rule, a common statistical method for removing outliers lying one, two or three standard
deviations from the mean. This method proved not to be optimal due to three main reasons.
Firstly, the data was shown not to follow a normal distribution for any of the chosen risk
measures. Secondly, if this method was to be used, with the most common “two standard
deviations”-approach, only about 0,2% of the data points would be excluded instead of the
intended 5%. Lastly, if using the method on this dataset, more extreme values than what would
be considered possible to achieve in a normal company would be included. As an example, ROE
values of over 8 000% would be included, even with one standard deviation. This should be
compared to what is considered a very profitable stock in the investment world today; a stock
with an ROE higher than 15% (Richard Loth, 2012).

       The second method tried was introduced by John Turkey (1977) and involves using a
boxplot to identify extreme values. When having datasets with extreme values it is important to
work with robust estimators (Ripley 2004). The median is a robust statistic, while the mean is not.
It thus makes sense to use Turkey’s method, which is based on the median rather than the mean.
Outliers are found through multiplying the interquartile range with 1,5. Extreme outliers are
considered to be data points that lie further out than 3 interquartile ranges from the first or third
quartile. Thus, observations below Q1 - 3*(IQR) or above Q3 + 3*(IQR) have been removed
from the data. Doing a qualitative analysis of the numbers, this method provides a way to create a
dataset that more accurately describes the majority of the companies. After the exclusion of
extreme outliers, all variables additionally show a more normal distribution over the dataset. This
can be seen in the table in Appendix 6 and in histograms in Appendix 7.

        The final processing of the dataset was to divide the data based on different sizes and
industries, enabling regressions to be run in smaller groups. The companies were divided in to
five main size groups, no employees, at least 1 employee, 1-19 employees, 20-49 employees, and above 50

                                       13
                                                                                                     5
employees, and 30 industry groups (collected from Retriever) following the SNI-1 codes. These
groups were firstly used to see how large fraction of female CEOs that were present in each
group. Further on, these groups were ranked to find how risky each size and industry group were
considered to be, this to find if the genders behave differently in certain types of environments.
(See Appendix 8 and 9 for risk ranking and relative fraction of female CEOs).

4.2 Summary statistics of data

Appendix 1 gives an overview of the data included in this study. In the data, 15% of the CEO’s
are women and 86% are men. The majority of the companies are fairly small, with 85% having
less than 20 employees, and 69% having none or up to five employees. Only 6% of the firms
have more than 50 employees and does thus meet one of the criteria for being considered a large
company according to Swedish regulations. Further on, 89% of the corporations are owner lead,
meaning that only 11% have appointed an external CEO with no ownership. Having an external
role is slightly more common for female CEOs with 13% in this dataset. Even though the oldest
company was founded in 1897, almost half of the companies have been founded since 2000.

       Industry-wise, men are dominating all groups except for the Hair & Beauty-category in
which 69% of the CEOs are female. However, it is important to notice that this industry only
represents 0,2% of the total company population in the database. Within the group of female
CEOs, the most common industry to be a CEO in is Law, Accounting & Consulting Services, which
includes 16% of all female CEOs. Female CEOs are additionally spread out all over the country
with the lowest numbers in Jönköping County, 9%, and the highest number in Stockholm
County with 18%. See Appendix 2 for full list of industries and Appendix 3 for more information
about counties.

5 Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in Sweden

                                       14
5 Method

In this section, the methods for choosing risk measures and regression model are presented. The
section is divided into four parts; Models for measuring risk, Regression model, Final regression
model and Additional tests.

5.1 Models for measuring risk

The chosen main model to measure risk is based on the volatility in components of the formula
ROE = ROA + (ROA – RD) x D/E, presented earlier and suggested by Johansson and Runsten
(2005). To capture the risk associated with the key measures, standard deviation in each ratio will
be used as a proxy for risk, showing how much variation or dispersion from the average that
exists. Low standard deviation indicates that the data points tend to be closer to the mean and
thus more stable over time. A high standard deviation indicates that the data points are spread
out over a large range of values. The key ratios have then fluctuated over the period, making
them risky in the sense that it is difficult for equity holders to estimate the future earnings of the
company. Important to have in mind is that when creating these volatility measures, the perfect
relationship between the components in the given formula does no longer hold. Thus, even if
total risk in general can be divided in to operational and financial risk, the volatilities in the
chosen measures do not necessarily summarise to the volatility in ROE. The components and
variables that will be studied are explained below.

       Volatility in Return on Equity (ROE): The fundamental key ratio ROE presents the amount
of net income returned as a percentage of shareholders’ equity. It measures profitability by
revealing how much of the firm’s profit that is attributable to the shareholders in relation to the
equity they have invested. In this case, the volatility in return on equity over five years is a proxy
for total risk over the period. The measure takes into account both operative and financial risk.

        Volatility in Return on Total Assets (ROA): The basis key ratio ROA gives the investors an
idea of how efficient the management is using the company’s assets to generate earnings. The
ratio is affected by changes in investment policies, product policies, pricing, market policies and
everything else that is not connected to how operations are financed (Johansson & Runsten
2005). The five year volatility in return on total assets represents operative risk over the period.

       Volatility in Leverage ((ROA – RD) x D/E): The measure aims to explain how much of the
total return on equity that varies because of changes in the financial situation. Lower borrowing
costs compared to ROA, give a positive contribution to ROE due to leverage, whereas higher
borrowing costs compared to ROA will make the ROE lower than what the company generated
                                       15
in total. This is because interest rate on borrowings is paid out to debt holders before anything
can reach the equity owners. A high volatility in the measure means difficulties for owners to
calculate how the financial situation will affect their returns and is thus considered more risky.
The measure represents the financial risk over five years.

       Using volatility in ROE and ROA to calculate risk is a common method, but the
suitability for private companies can be questioned. Private companies, especially minor ones, do
not have the same requirements on presenting complete information about their operations and
key ratios. This may lead to missing values affecting ROE and ROA. Due to this, four additional
variables intended to capture similar risk, will be used as a control of results.

        Liquidity - a control for both operational and financial risk: The ratio is an indication of a
company’s short-term ability to meet payments. Since the measure is calculated by dividing
current assets with current liabilities, the ratio describes how much of the short-term debt that
could be paid off today and is closely related to the financial structure of a company (Temple,
2001). Liquidity is not a measure that would usually be used as an indicator of total company risk,
but since it is of both financial and operative nature it captures the overall, short-term, position
of the company.

        Turnover Volatility - a control for operational risk: Turnover refers to volume of sales,
meaning it is a strictly operational measure. Looking higher up in the income statement has
become a common method while evaluating risk in smaller companies. A lower volatility in
turnover makes it easier for potential investors to estimate what amount of money that will
actually be brought into the company. Even though the measure is also highly affected by market
swings, looking at volatility in sales/turnover gives an indication of the stability in income from
the company’s operations.

        Altman Z-score - a control for financial risk: The ratio indicates a company’s likelihood of
bankruptcy. It is based on five financial ratios, all calculated through information from the annual

                        6
report of a company. The Z-score combines five ratios to an index of risk, and each component
in the formula is given a certain weight in calculation (Altman, 2000). The Z-score has been
chosen as a control indicator of risk, since it is specifically applicable for private companies. The
gender effect on Z-score will be compared to the gender effect on the financial risk measure.

        Debt-to-Equity Ratio - a control for financial risk: The Debt-to-Equity ratio is a component
in the leverage measure, but will additionally be included on its own, as it is one of the most

6 The full formula is Z’ = 0,717T + 0,847T + 3,107T + 0,420T + 0,998T , where T = (Current Assets – Currents
                                1          2          3          4          5         1
Liabilities)/Total assets, T2 = Retained Earnings/Total Assets, T3 = Earnings Before Interest and Taxes/Total
Assets, T4 = Book Value of Equity/Total Liabilities, and T5 = Sales/Total Assets
                                       16
common measures of financial risk. Even if it is commonly used, studies suggest that most

                                                                                                       7
companies have lower levels of leverage than what would be optimal for the firm.   The
implication of this is that even if men/women are found to have higher levels of debt, this
measure cannot fully conclude whether this makes the companies more risky, or if they are just
closer to their optimal level of debt. Due to the ambiguity regarding the measure, it is only seen
as a control measure in this study. (For more information about the final risk measures, see
Appendix 6).

5.2 Regression model

An OLS regression model will be used to test for a gender effect on risk taking. When
constructing the model, two major previous studies were used as basis. The first one is CEO
succession, gender and risk taking by Elsaid and Ursel (2009), and the second one is CEO, corporate risk
taking and the efficiency of capital allocation by Faccio, Marchica and Mura (2012). In this section, their
chosen variables will be introduced, evaluated and adjusted to suit this particular dataset. For
more information about included variables see Appendix 12.

       Dependent variables: The dependent variables and how they have been obtained, were
described in the previous section. The main variables are Volatility in ROE, Volatility in ROA and
Volatility in Leverage. Debt-to-Equity, Z-score, Liquidity and Volatility in Turnover will be used in control
regressions.

       Independent variables: In accordance to all previous studies, the gender effect on the
dependent variable is tested through adding a dummy for CEO gender, Female CEO. This is the
coefficient that will be given most emphasis throughout the study. In the last regression, CEO
Fraction has been added to see if female or male CEOs have different influence on their
organisations.

       Control variables: Several control variables have been included in the regression model
to make sure that the independent variable does not show significant results that may actually
arise from other circumstances. The included variables are presented below.

       (CEO Age): Numerous studies show that increasing age can lead to changes in risk
behaviour (Wallach & Kogan), which could jeopardise the results of a study if not accounted for.
Elsaid and Ursel (2009) include the variable CEO Horizon, which aims to reflect the possibility
that CEOs with short expected careers due to approaching retirement may make risky changes to

7 Tradeoff Theory Definition. (n.d.)

                                       17
improve near time earnings reports. However, this is less applicable for small companies, since
these do not necessarily follow the same rules of retirement as the rest of society. Descriptive
statistics show that 16 % of the CEO’s in the dataset are working despite an age of more than 65
years old. Therefore, the variable CEO Age will be used in the regression to correct for actual age
rather than closeness to retirement.

       (Company Age): Companies may behave differently due to how long they have been active.
It is said that the more mature a company is, the more it has to lose (Lindegaard, 2012). Faccio,
Marchica and Mura (2012) add a variable based on company age, ln(age-1), to control for the life
cycles of each company. Following their example, the natural logarithm of the company age is
calculated to create the variable ln(Company Age), which is included in the regression to account
for companies having different risk profiles due to maturity.

        (Firm size): It is well known that large and small firms face different challenges and
strategic decisions, as well as different prerequisites for growth and profitability (Chan & Chen
1991). Both Elsaid & Ursel, and Faccio, Marchica & Mura, add the natural logarithm of total
assets as a control variable for firm size. Following their examples, the variable ln(Total Assets) is
added into the regression. A control regression where ln(Total Assets) is replaced by ln(Turnover)
will additionally be run. Turnover and total assets are both part of the criteria that according to
Swedish regulations determine whether a company is considered large or small
(Årsredovisningslagen 1kap. 3 §). Since the majority of the firms in the sample are small, it cannot
be established if the asset base is the best way to estimate the size, and turnover thereby appears
as a suitable way to control for firm size.

        (Profitability): Accounting for profitability is an additional way to correct for firm size.
Both Elsaid & Ursel and Faccio, Marchica & Mura added ROA as a control variable in their
regressions. Following their example, (ROA) is included. Since previous research by Företagarna
suggests a gender effect on profit margin (Bongard & Sjöholm 2014), a control regression will be
run using (Profit Margin) and (Turnover/Total Assets) as indicators for profitability.

       (External CEO): The incentive alignment theory suggests that equity ownership by the
manager may increase corporate performance, due to better configuration of the monetary
incentives between the manager and other equity holders (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). To correct
for differences in behaviour, Faccio, Marchica & Mura added CEO ownership and cash flow
rights into their regression, whereas Elsaid & Ursel use an indicator of whether a CEO is
appointed from within or outside the firm. In this study the CEO’s relationship to the company

                                       18
will be controlled for by the dummy variable (External CEO), indicating whether a CEO has any
kind of ownership in the firm or not.

       In the study performed by Faccio, Marchica & Mura a variable for growth in sales was
additionally added. This is to correct for the fact that a perfectly steady growth will also increase
volatility, making the company seem more risky. If adding this variable multicollinearity arises,
due to correlation with lnTotalAssets as well as with the ROA measure. An idea would be to create
an index. However, these three measures are very different, both in characteristics and in size. If
the study was to include an index instead of the measures themselves there would be a risk for
the index variable not giving the corrections desired. Growth in sales has thus been left out due
to its correlation with both lnTotalAssets and ROA and can henceforth be assumed to already be
included in the model.

        (Fixed County Effects): Leading a company is related to different challenges depending on
location, since the conditions for growth, demand and availability alter (Eriksson 2013). To
account for fixed county effects, dummies for all Sweden’s 21 counties have been added into the
regression.

        (Fixed Industry Effects): It is commonly known that industries have different risk levels and
that some industries tend to have higher operational or financial risks than others (Chicken &
Harbison 1990). 30 industry dummies have been added to the regression, where companies are
categorized after their Swedish Standard Industrial Classification code (SNI). The coding is based
on the European Union’s recommended standard NACE Rev.2 and it is primary an activity
classification (SNI 2007).

5.3 Final regression model

Based on above reasoning, the following regression model will be used:

      Yi = α + β1 * CEOdummyi + β2 * CEOAgei + β3 * ln(CompanyAge)i + β4 * ExternalCEOdummyi
      + β5 * ln(TotalAssets)i + β6 * ROAi + β7 * 2008dummyi + … + β11 * 2012dummyi + β12 *
      County_1dummyi + … + β34 * County_21dummyi + β35 * Industry_1dummyi + … + β64 *
        Industry_30dummyi + ui

5.4 Additional tests

Tests for multicollinearity and heteroscedasticity have been performed to make sure the data is

                                       19
robust. Multicollinearity is tested through a VIF-test and none of the included variables have any
problems with multicollinearity (Appendix 10). The Breusch-Pagan method is used to see if the
null hypothesis of a homoscedastic data should be rejected or not. As the data does not follow a
normal distribution, Koenker’s Score and Wooldridge’s F-test, both including iid-errors, have
been used. Both tests indicate that the null hypothesis must be rejected and heteroscedasticity
assumed to be present (Appendix 11). To correct for heteroscedasticity, robust standard errors
are used throughout the study.

                                       20
6 Potential biases of the study

One of the main drawbacks of this study is that only the current CEO is reported in the database
Retriever. Even though the dataset has been transformed from panel to cross-sectional data, it is
still a problem that only one gender observation is available for 5 years. Companies may have
changed CEO during this period and results would be affected if that also involves a change in
gender. For example, if a company has had a male CEO for the first four years and then
appointed a female CEO in year five, only the female CEO is registered in the database and thus
associated with the company’s volatility over five years. Looking at the global average for how
long CEOs remain in position, it can be seen that in a listed company the average is six years
(Guzmán 2011). This gives reason to assume an even higher number for this dataset, mainly
consisting of unlisted companies. Further on, 89% of the companies are owner lead and 69% of
the companies have no or up to five employees. The chance that these types of enterprises,
which make up the majority of the data, would change both CEO and gender of the CEO within
this time frame is considered fairly low. It is thereby assumed that the companies that have done
this change make up a relatively insignificant percentage part of the total number of studied
companies.

       Furthermore it needs to be noted that it is not only the CEO that takes risk in a
company, especially in larger corporations. Even if the CEO is overall responsible for all
decisions being made in a corporation, he or she is, in most cases, not involved in every decision.
In this study, the CEO is given full responsibility for the risk everyone in the company takes.
Involving the entire executive team, the board, or other influential people could have made the
results even more robust.

       It can also be questioned whether the chosen risk measures are optimal for the study.
Firstly, focusing on equity and assets in small companies may create issues due to different
setups, operations and capital allocation. Normally, a potential investor in a small unlisted
company would do a much more qualitative analysis to determine the risk profile. However, in a
dataset with over 100 000 companies this is not possible to do. The best available numerical
method is used instead, letting volatility in returns and leverage provide a picture of historical
stability for both small and large companies. Secondly, a potential bias is the varying results from
the risk measurements. The controlling risk measures do not consistently point in the same
direction as the chosen main measures. As only the main measures are included throughout all
regression, it is possible that other results would have been presented if different risk measures
had been used in the study.

                                       21
      Furthermore, only companies that have reported gender of their CEO have been
included in the regressions. This was a necessary adjustment to fulfil the purpose of the study.

                                                           8
However, Sweden has 466 789 registered companies and only 95 421 are included in this sample.
Information from the excluded companies may have led to different results. It should also be
noted that female CEOs make up only 15% of the total number of CEOs in the dataset.
Naturally it would have been preferred to have a more equal set with approximately 50% of each
gender. No attempts have been made to create such a dataset, since this would create more
potential biases while selecting a group of male CEOs. The dataset represents the Swedish
corporate world today, and it therefore makes sense to use the set just as it is.

        Lastly, the data is collected from the years 2008-2012, meaning that the financial crisis
may affect risk management during the time studied. The crisis could potentially have made
managers and CEO’s more risk averse than before. The crisis may have affected the included
companies in different ways, or at least to a different extent, especially since a part of the
companies were founded or closed down during the period. However, the aim is to map out the
differences between male and female CEOs, and therefore the impact of the financial crisis is not
vital. The differences might even be more visible during times of uncertainty, and if that is the
case, the results of the study thus represent male and female CEOs in a pressured time and not
for any given time period.

8 According to Retriever 16 May 2014

                                       22
7 Results

In the following section, an overview of the results from the regression analysis is given, as well
as comments around them. The regression results are presented individually in Appendix 15-32,
with a complete summary of all results in Appendix 13 and 14.

7.1 Main regression - gender effect on risk for the complete sample

When running the regression for the whole population, with Volatility in ROE as dependent
variable, the CEO gender dummy gets a negative coefficient but is not significant at any level.
The coefficients for the gender effect on Volatility in ROA and Volatility in Leverage are also
negative and not significant. The economic interpretation of this is that after controlling for
several other determinants of firm and personality characteristics, it is not possible to reject the
hypothesis that the female dummy coefficient is equal to zero and that no gender effect exists.
(Appendix 15).

       The absence of a gender effect may be due to several reasons. The simple explanation
would be that there is no gender effect, as has been concluded in earlier studies looking at
corporate risk taking in Sweden. However, it is also possible that the regression model fails to
pick up on smaller signs within the large sample. With 95 421 companies, total results may point
in one direction even though many groups within the sample deviate from this result. No
conclusions for differences in risk taking can be drawn from the total CEO population, but to
further investigate if and when differences in risk taking can occur, additional regressions have
been run with controlling risk variables, size groups and industry groups.

Summary: Looking at the whole CEO population, none of the risk measures show significant results for a gender
effect on risk. This means that looking at all Swedish CEOs, there is no difference in risk taking between the
genders.

7.2 Control regressions

With Liquidity as dependent variable, the female CEO dummy coefficient is positive but not
significant. Companies with a female CEO thus do not show any significant difference in
capability of paying off their short-term debt with their current assets. Liquidity is here
considered a mixture of operational and financial factors and therefore compares to the result for
Volatility in ROE. The measures point in the same direction, indicating without significance that

                                       23
female CEOs contribute to a lower risk. It appears to be no differences in the measures, and thus
Volatility in ROE will be used for the remaining part of the study.

        Moving to Volatility in Turnover, the coefficient for female CEO is negative and significant
at a 1% level. This indicates women decreasing the operational risk in their companies by
approximately 0,88%, from the group mean of 6,44. This is compared to the gender coefficient
in the regression for Volatility in ROA, which was negative and not significant. As these two
measures point in the same direction but differ in significance, questions arise around which is
the optimal way for measuring operational risk. Volatility in ROA will despite the differences in
significance solely be used to measure operational risk further on. However, one should have in
mind that the variable runs the highest risk of misleading conclusions as other results could have
been presented using another risk variable.

        The last control regressions have been done on financial risk. For interpreting the results
it should be noted that the coefficients of variables for the Altman Z-score and Debt-to-Equity will
show opposite signs to indicate lower or higher risk. A coefficient affecting the Z-score in a
positive way contributes to a lower risk whereas a coefficient affecting the Debt-to-Equity in a
positive way contributes to a higher risk. The results show that neither the Altman Z-score nor
Debt-to-Equity as dependent variables generates significant results for the female CEO dummy.
Since using these variables is intended to be a control on financial risk, they should be compared
to the main regression results on Volatility in Leverage. None of the measures show significant
results, indicating no gender effect on financial risk while looking at the whole sample. It
additionally shows that all three financial risk measures have the same result, which is an
indication that the Volatility in Leverage measure is able to capture the same effects as the control
measures.(Appendix16).

Summary: The results for Liquidity, Altman Z-score and Debt-to-Equity point in the same direction as the
variables they are intended to be a control for. None of them show significant results indicating that no gender effect
is present. However, looking at Volatility in Turnover instead of Volatility in ROA, significant results appear for
women taking lower operational risk than men. This difference in results should be in mind further on in the study.

7.3 Smaller versus larger firms

To further investigate how differences arise; the dataset has been divided into size groups based
on the number of employees in the company.

                                       24
       0 employees: As shown in the descriptive table in Appendix 1, the group of zero
employees account for 30% of the companies in the entire dataset, and has approximately 13%
female CEOs. Running the regression on this group only, the female coefficient for Volatility in
ROE is -1,108 and significant at a 5% level. The average in this group is a deviation of 31,48, and
thus the gender effect corresponds to a decrease in total risk of approximately 3,52%. The female
dummy coefficients with Volatility in ROA and Volatility in Financial risk as dependent variables
are negative and not significant. (Appendix 17).

       A possible explanation for lower total risk is that women running one-man/woman
enterprises make up the CEO group that is most similar to female non-CEOs in society. These
firms can be seen as a reflection of the CEO preferences and therefore show more similar result
to the society overall. In that case it makes sense that women with zero employees show a lower
volatility in ROE, which is considered equivalent to lower total risk.

       Looking at the dataset, the companies with zero employees are the ones that most often
report unusual values for the key ratios studied. As an example, 95% of the companies that
reported a turnover of 0 can be found within this group. These numbers could arise from
companies working in industries such as investment/trading, but could also be a result of
reporting errors or inactiveness. Due to the inability to understand exactly why missing numbers
occur and since too many numbers deviate from what could be seen as normal, no further
conclusions will be drawn for this group.

       At least 1 employee: The category “at least 1 employee” is included to account for the
special circumstances around companies with no employees at all. When removing all companies
that consist of only the CEO, the female dummy coefficient shows significant results for two of
the three risk measures, with Volatility in Leverage being the exception. For Volatility in ROE and
Volatility in ROA, these new findings contradict the outcome of the whole sample, where none of
the two coefficients were significant. This indicates that the group of zero employees heavily
affected the outcome of the original regressions, which makes sense considering 30% of all
companies in the dataset have no employees. As for the sizes of the coefficients, a female CEO is
associated with approximately the same effect on both Volatility in ROE and Volatility in ROA,
lowering the risk with 2,54 and 2,76% respectively. (Appendix 18).

       1-19 employees: As seen in the descriptive table in Appendix 1, the group of 1-19
employees account for 56% of the companies in the dataset, and has approximately 16% female
CEOs. The coefficient for the female dummy is negative and has significance for all three risk
measures, though with weaker results for Volatility in Leverage. With lower volatility in all

                                       25
measures, this indicates that in companies with 1-19 employees, a female CEO is associated with
a lower total risk, lower operative risk and lower financial risk for the company. Looking at the
coefficients in relation to the average indicates that being a woman in this category has
approximately the same effect on Volatility in ROE and Volatility in ROA, with -3,26% and -
3,76% respectively, and a somewhat lower effect on Volatility in Leverage with -2,14% (Appendix
19).
       A possible explanation to these results could come from the theories concerning
portfolio diversification. Mentioned earlier, firm specific risk can be eliminated through holding a
diversified portfolio. However, in the real world, CEOs of small corporations are often relatively
undiversified with most of their investments in the firm. Instead of diversifying through holding
other investments, and hence decreasing their risk exposure, they will match the risk levels of the
company with their personal risk preferences. If this holds, it could explain why such an obvious
gender effect occurs among the smaller firms, given that women in society overall are said to be
more risk averse than men.

       20-50 employees: This category accounts for 8% of the companies in the whole sample
and approximately 11% of these have female CEOs. Running the regression for this group shows
that the female dummy coefficient is for the first time since the main regression, not significant at
any level for any of the risk measures. Consequently, no gender effect can be concluded in this
category. (Appendix 20).

       More than 50 employees: This category only represents 6% of the entire dataset. When
the regression is run for companies with more than 50 employees, the result is similar to that
from the previous group, with no significant results for a gender effect in any of the risk
measures. Referring to previous research, this could be because some types of CEO positions are
filled by a personality rather than a person. If you get a job because you are in a certain way and
give a certain impression, this should account for both men and women and thus there would be
no gender based differences. Furthermore, in a corporation with more than 50 employees, the
CEO’s decisions probably reflect the board and the executive team more than only the personal
preferences of the CEO. Additionally, the CEO in a large company is in many cases not self-
appointed, but chosen by a board. Most boards in Sweden are male dominated and might thereby
be more likely to appoint a CEO similar to themselves. Thus, the gender of the CEO should be
of less importance for a large company’s key ratios, as indicated by the results. (Appendix 21).

       Additional size groups: All the above results give reason for further investigating the
group with 1-19 employees, since this is the only group showing a significant gender effect in all
risk measures. To see where a gender effect is present and where the supposed transition occurs,
                                       26
the group of companies with 1-19 employees has been further divided into four subgroups; 1-5
employees, 6-10 employees, 11-15 employees and 16-19 employees. Results show that significant
results on all measures are only present in companies with up to 10 employees, meaning the two
subgroups of 1-5 and 6-10 employees. In these groups, the gender effect corresponds to a
varying impact of between 2,14 and 8,44% on the risk measures, with the strongest effects being
seen in the group of 6-10 employees. For the companies with more than 10 employees, only
Volatility in ROA shows significant results. (Appendix 29 and 30).

       CEO behaviour in corporations thus only shows results consistent with the society at
large in companies with up to ten employees. This could indicate either that the size of the
company is the changing factor that allows or does not allow the personal traits of a CEO to
transfer into a corporate setting, or that the CEO traits differ between CEOs of smaller and
larger corporations. CEOs in smaller companies are like the majority of society, whereas female
CEOs of larger corporations are not.

Summary: In the group of 1-19 employees a female CEO affects all three risk measures with an approximate 3%
decrease in volatility. While further dividing this group, it is shown that the bridge, or the change in behaviour, is
found where the number of employees falls below or exceeds 10.

7.4 Relationship risk and gender in industry groups

Apart from considering firm size, risk has also been studied from an industrial perspective. Two
industry based separations have been made, the first being a comparison between the 15
industries ranked as least versus most risky (see Appendix 9) and the second between the 15
industries with the highest versus lowest fraction of female CEOs (see Appendix 2).

        Low risk industries versus high risk industries: In the group of less risky industries it
appears that female CEOs take lower risk than male CEOs, with an approximately 2,14% lower
Volatility in ROE. No significant differences appear in Volatility in ROA or Volatility in Leverage.
Females in low risk industries thus have similar operational and financial risk as men, but an
overall 2,14% lower Volatility in ROE. Taking lower risk where others also do might be an
indication of the environment playing a severe role in determining company risk taking. Female
CEOs show similar patterns as women in society overall, but operating in a low risk industry is
what allows those traits to transfer, resulting in women taking even lower risk than their male
counterparts. (Appendix 22). Within the more risky industries, no significant results for a gender
effect appear. (Appendix 23).

                                       27
       High fraction of women versus low fraction of women: The second industry division
that has been done is based on the fraction of female CEOs in the industry. The results show
that women present in industries with many other female CEOs take a lower total risk by 1,88%,
compared to the average of 36,67%. The Volatility in ROE is significantly lower, whereas the
operational and financial risk does not generate enough significance for interpreting results. The
conclusion from this regression is that female CEOs take lower risks if they are working in
industries where more of the other CEOs are female. This goes back to perceiving the
environment to be a fundamental basis for personal traits to transfer into a corporate setting.
Many women in an industry might simplify the transfer of their typical risk traits. (Appendix 24).

        While running the regression for the industries with lowest fraction of female CEOs, this
does not show as strong and coherent results as previous group. When the fraction of female
CEOs is low, there is no significant gender effect on any of the risk measures. No gender effect
in risk taking is thus visible in industries where not many women are present. One possible
reason to this was previously stated by Fogg as “People who reach influential positions in
corporations do so because of their ruthless personality, mind-set and talent needed for the job.
It might be easier to find men like that, but this does not mean women appointed to such roles
would behave any differently”. If this holds in the data, an explanation to why there are no risk
differences in this group could be that women reaching positions as CEO’s in industries which
are very male dominated do so because they have a more similar behaviour to that group
originally. (Appendix 25).

        An interesting notation is also that even if the results are not significant for the industries
with lower fraction of women, the coefficient for Volatility in ROA is positive and would thus, if
significant, indicate that women take higher operational risk than men while operating in
industries that are male dominated. A possible explanation could be the previously discussed
Glass Cliff concept (Ryan & Haslam 2007). This says that women reaching CEO positions are
found in more precarious leadership positions. Thus, women within the group of high risk
companies, which are usually male dominated, would be there because they have taken on
positions in the most risky companies. The findings in this group would also have been the only
results that correspond to Adams and Funk’s (2012) earlier findings in Sweden, stating that
women in a corporate setting are more risk loving than men. Their study only treated companies
fulfilling certain size criteria, which might explain why their results deviate from those of this
study. (Appendix 23).

                                       28
Summary: Women are shown to take even lower risks than men in industries that are already characterised by low
risk, or in which a larger fraction of the CEOs are women. In high risk industries or industries with a lower
fraction of women, no gender effect is found.

7.5 Influence on risk women versus men

In the final regression, women and men have been divided into two groups to capture any
differences between the genders in general. A dummy for CEO Fraction has replaced the gender
CEO dummy and what these regressions show is that female and male CEOs overall seem to
affect the companies in a similar way. The only result that stands out is the CEO Fraction
compared to Volatility in ROE. In this regression, the size of the company impacts the results
almost twice as much for female CEOs as for male CEOs. This indicates that when women
become a larger part of the entire company, they will to a larger extent affect the total risk
measured by the Volatility in ROE. This could further be a reason to why ROE overall has
showed the most significant results for female CEOs. (Appendix 31).

7.6 Endogeneity concerns

As this study is based on real historical outcomes, the ceteris paribus assumption cannot be
assumed and there is reason to believe that the data suffers from endogeneity. Possible
endogeneity problems when looking at CEO gender and risk taking could be self-selection bias;
people acting as CEOs in this study have chosen to take on this role and in many cases even
founded the companies themselves. People starting a business and working as a CEO cannot
represent the entire population, and a non-random variable problem is present. Further on,
endogeneity could be present if firms with particular risk profiles are more likely to choose a
specific gender of their CEO, creating reverse causality. An example of this is the “glass cliff”
which was presented earlier (Ryan & Haslam 2007). It states that female CEOs are
overrepresented in precarious leadership positions. On the other hand, Adams, Gupta & Leeth
(2009) claim female CEOs to more often be appointed to companies in better financial health,
indicating that female CEOs are selected to more stable and thereby less risky firms. These
underlying problems indicate that there might be omitted variables affecting the risk measures.

       Including several control variables is a way to somewhat address the problems with
endogeneity before running the regressions. Furthermore, a comparison has been made between
a group of male CEOs and a group of female CEOs, where all companies have similar
characteristics apart from CEO gender. The aim is to create two groups between which the

                                       29
ceteris paribus assumption holds and where gender is the only differing factor. For information
regarding the chosen criteria of firm and CEO characteristics, see Appendix 32.

       The comparison shows that even in these close to identical groups, female CEOs show a
lower average volatility in all risk measures. This indicates that the results obtained from the
regressions can be supported, even when correcting for other firm and personal characteristics
that apart from gender may determine the appointment of a CEO.

                                       30
8 Conclusion

The purpose of the study was to investigate whether there are any differences in companies lead
by men and women, which would indicate them running their businesses in a more or less risky
manner. As this study includes all company sizes but is based mainly on smaller private firms, it
aimed to find the gap between what has been concluded in society in general, where women take
less risks, and how leaders in large corporations act, where much more ambiguous results have
been presented.

       From previous result section, a general conclusion can be drawn saying that when there is
a gender effect, that effect indicates women being less risk taking than men. The most consistent
results are seen in smaller companies, between 1-19 employees, where a female CEO indicates
lower risk in all three main risk measures. Additionally, women working in industries with either
low average risk, or industries having a high fraction female CEOs, can also be concluded to take
on lower levels of risk in their companies. For companies with more than 20 employees and for
the CEO population as a whole, no effect is seen.

       The first test aimed to find a pattern among the entire population regarding risk
behaviours in general. The regressions showed no significant results for a gender effect in any of
the three main risk measures. When controlling the results by using different measures, the
results for total risk and financial risk pointed in the same direction, meaning no significant
results for a gender effect. However, when using Volatility in Turnover as an indication for
operational risk, female CEOs were shown to take lower risk than their male counterparts.

       The second test looked at companies of different sizes. This showed clearly that the
gender effect on risk taking is only present in smaller companies. In the categories of the largest
companies, 20-50 and above 50 employees, the gender of the CEO does not at all affect the risk
level of the company. Firms with 1-19 employees on the other hand showed strong results
indicating female CEOs taking both lower financial, operational and total risks in these
companies. Important to note is that these companies represent more than half of the entire
sample. While further dividing this group into subgroups, these results showed that the gender
differences were only consistent in companies with up to 10 employees, with female CEOs
showing lower volatilities in all risk measures. Based on these results, the transition where CEOs
do not have the same behaviour as society seems to occur when the number of employees
exceeds 10. A potential explanation of this could be that CEOs of small firms are often
undiversified, and the risk in the company will therefore more closely reflect the personal risk
preferences of the CEO. Other possible explanations are that the size of the company is a critical

                                       31
factor determining whether risk preferences of the CEO will be affecting the company risk level
or not, or that the type of people choosing to take on a role as a CEO in a larger corporation
does not behave the same as the majority of society.

       The results from the industry groups show that women take lower risks when having the
role as CEO in industries where the average risk is low, or when operating in industries where the
percentage of female leaders is higher. When women lead companies in either high-risk
industries, or in male dominated industries the differences seems to disappear. This could
indicate a glass cliff to be present in these more “male characterised” industries, where women
are forced to take on more precarious leadership positions compared to what they otherwise
would have.

       Finally, the overall results showed that the main hypothesis of the study, regarding
women being less risk taking than men, could not be supported. No gender effect on corporate
risk taking is present in Sweden as a whole. The results however showed that a gender effect is
present in certain situations. Gender differences were most apparent in smaller firms, where
women take lower risks, which do create a bridge between women in general, and CEOs of
multi-billion corporations. The link between these two appears to be that women leading
companies with less than 10 employees either act more as the general female population, or are
to a higher degree able to affect the company in a more risk averse manner. When the
corporations grow bigger the effect does not appear. Finally, the industry groups showed that
women act more like the general population when there are many other female CEOs present or
if the industry in general has lower risk, making it easier to take lower risks without standing out.
On the other hand there are no clear differences in high risk industries or in male dominated
fields, which indicates that when women are expected to take higher risks due to its company
peers, they will do so.

       Further research in this area is of high value to understand how CEOs behave around
risk. This could further clarify what the corporate world looks like, and when and why differences
occur. Firstly, a study where the CEO gender is known for all years would be of high interest.
This could show how a change in CEO gender affects the company risk. Secondly, it would be
relevant to look at a longer period of time, both to see changes, and also to get better indications
of the risk measures over time. It would also be interesting to look more into the different kinds
of risk connected to the measures, to understand in what type of situations differences could
occur. Comparing the CEOs effect on risk with other top managers in companies or with the
total number of men versus women in the company would further on provide insights about
what in the end has the largest effects on company risk. Additionally, a study with a deeper focus
                                       32
on industries would be of large interest as some industries are more risky than others. A question
could be whether this is because men and women create different kinds of risks, or if they seek
industries that fulfil certain risk profiles. Lastly, if the results in this study were further supported,
this would be an important contribution to understand why differences in risk behaviour were
seen in some situations but not in others. This could help both individuals as well as corporations
to better tackle future risk, by distinguishing perceived and actual risk behaviour associated with
the genders.

                                       33
9 References

Adams, S.M., Gupta, A., & Leeth, J.D. 2009, “Are Female Executives Over-represented in Precarious
Leadership Positions?”. British Journal of Management, vol. 20, 1-12

Adams, R.B. & Ferreira, D. 2009, "Women in the boardroom and their impact on governance and
performance", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 291.

Adams, R.B. & Funk, P. 2012, "Beyond the Glass Ceiling: Does Gender Matter?", Management Science, vol.
58, no. 2, pp. 219-235.

Adams, R.B. & Ragunathan, V. 2013, “Lehman Sisters”, Financial Research Network Research Paper,
Brisbane. Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2380036##

Allison, P. D., & Christakis, N. A. 2006, “FIXED-EFFECTS METHODS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF
NONREPEATED EVENTS”. Sociological Methodology, 36, 155-X. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com/docview/216129483?accountid=39039

Altman, E. 2000, “Predicting financial distress of companies: revisiting the Z-score and ZETA models”,
page 15-22. This paper is adapted and updated from E. Altman, “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis
and the Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy”, Journal of Finance, September 1968; and E. Altman, R
Haldeman and P. Narayanan, “Zeta-analysis – A New Model to Identify Bankruptcy Risk of
Corporations”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 1, 1977. Retrieved from
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~ealtman/PredFnclDistr.pdf

Ansic, D. & Powell, M. 1997, "Gender differences in risk behaviour in financial decision-making: An
experimental analysis",Journal of Economic Psychology, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 605-628. Retrieved from
http://darp.lse.ac.uk/PapersDB/Powell-Ansic_(JEP_97).pdf

Bongard, R.. & Sjöholm, H. 2014, ”Vinstmarginaler i företag ledda av kvinor och män”, Företagarna,
Stockholm. Retrieved from
http://www.foretagarna.se/PageFiles/31710/PM%20vinstmarginal%20och%20k%C3%B6n%20svar%20
kritik%20.pdf

Breusch, T. S., & A. R. Pagan. 1979, “A simple test for heteroscedasticity and random coefficient
variation”, Econometrica 47: 1287–1294.

Bromiley, P. and Miller, K.D. 1990 ”Strategic Risk and Corporate Performance: And Corporate
Performance: An Analysis of Alternative Risk Measures”, Academy of Managment Journal, Vol. 33, No.4,
p.756-779.

Bymes, J.P., Miller, D.C. & Schafer, W.D. 1999, ”Gender Differences in Risk Taking: A Meta Analysis”,
Phsycological Bulletin 1999, Vol. 125, No. 3, p. 367-383.

Charness, G. & Gneezy, U. 2010, Strong Evidence for Gender Differences in Investment, Social Science Research
Network, Rochester.

Chan K. C. & Chen Nai-Fu 1991 “Structural and Return Characteristics of Small and Large Firms” The
Journal of Finance Vol. 46, No. 4 (Sep., 1991), pp. 1467-1484. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/2328867?uid=3738984&uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=4&sid
=21104172541753

                                       34
Cho, D. 1997, "On the nondiversifiable firm-specific risk: A decomposition of beta for business,
operating and financial risks", The Mid - Atlantic Journal of Business, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 237-255.

Chicken, J. C. & Harbison, S. A., 1990, “Differences between industries in the definition of acceptable
risk”, Advances in Risk Analysis 1990, Vol. 6, pp 651-658

Cotter, D. A., Hermsen J. M., Ovadia S., & Vanneman R., 2001, “The glass ceiling effect”, Social Forces,
Vol. 80 No. 2, pp. 655–81. Retrieved from
http://sf.oxfordjournals.org/content/80/2/655.abstract#cited-by

Elsaid, E. & Ursel, N.D. 2011, "CEO succession, gender and risk taking", Gender in Management, vol. 26,
no. 7, pp. 499-512

Eriksson C., 2013, ”Tuffare företagare på landsbygden”, Institutet för entreprenörs- och småföretagsforskning,
Sweden. Retrieved from http://www.esbri.se/referat_visa_b.asp?id=132

Faccio, M., Marchica, M. & Mura, R. 2013, CEO Gender, Corporate Risk-Taking, and the Efficiency of Capital
Allocation, Social Science Research Network, Rochester.

Fogg, A. 2013, “Don’t give me this ‘if Lehman Sisters would have been in charge…’ nonsense”, The
Guardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/17/dont-give-me-
lehman-brothers-sisters-nonsense

Grewal, R., Cote, J.A. & Baumgartner, H. 2004, "Multicollinearity and Measurement Error in Structural
Equation Models: Implications for Theory Testing", Marketing Science, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 519-529.

Grubbs F.E. 1969, “Procedures for detecting outlying observations in samples”, Technometrics, Vol. 11, No.
1 (Feb., 1969), pp. 1-21, also published by American Statistical Association and American

Guzmán, R., 2011, “Högre omsättning på svenska Vd:ar”, Computer Sweden. Retrieved from
http://csjobb.idg.se/2.9741/1.418428/hogre-omsattning-pa-svenska-vdar

Hansson, S-O, "Risk", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 Edition), Zalta E. N. (ed.).
Retrieved from http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/risk/

Haslam, S.A. & Ryan, M.K. 2008, "The road to the glass cliff: Differences in the perceived suitability of
men and women for leadership positions in succeeding and failing organizations", Leadership Quarterly, vol.
19, no. 5, pp. 530.

Innotson, R.G., Sinquefirld, R.A. 2008, “Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation 2008 Yearbook, Ibbotson
Associates, Inc., Chicago.

Investopedia, ”Definition Autocorrelation” (n.d.). Retrieved 09 May 2014 from
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/autocorrelation.asp

Investopedia, ”Definition Risk Measures” (n.d.). Retrieved 09 May 2014 from
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/riskmeasures.asp

Investopedia. “Definition Standard Deviation” (n.d.). Retrieved May 09, 2014, from
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/standarddeviation.asp

Investopedia. “Definition Tradeoff Theory” (n.d.). Retrieved May 09, 2014, from
http://www.investopedia.com/exam-guide/cfa-level-1/corporate-finance/mm-capital-structure-versus-
tradeoff-leverage.asp

                                       35
Investopedia, “ Definition Risk/Return Tradeoff” (n.d.). Retrieved May 09, 2014, from
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/riskreturntradeoff.asp

Jensen, M.& Meckling, W. H. 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure” Journal of Financial Economics, October, 1976, V. 3, No. 4, pp. 305-360. Retrieved
from http://www.sfu.ca/~wainwrig/Econ400/jensen-meckling.pdf

Johansson & Runsten 2005, Företagets lönsamhet, finansiering och tillväxt – Mål, samband och mätmetoder,
Studentlitteratur.

Johnson, J. G., Wilke, A., & Weber, E. U. 2004. Beyond a trait view of risk-taking: A domain- specific
scale measuring risk perceptions, expected benefits, and perceived-risk attitude in German-speaking
populations. Polish Psychological Bulletin, 35, 153–172.

Kallenberg K. 2008 “Business at risk: Four studies on operational risk management”. Dissertation for the
degree of doctor of philosophy, PhD Stockholm School of Economics, Elanders Vällingby 2008.

Kroes Neelie 2009, “Europe – Good for women and good for Ireland”, European Commission –
SPEECH/09/344, Dublin. Retrieved from http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-09-
344_en.htm?locale=en

Lindegaard, S., 2012, Innovation; the 7 key differences between big and small companies, Retrieved May
2014. Retrieved from
http://www.mcleveland.org/working_papers/Differences_Between_Large_and_Small_Firms.CV.pdf

Loth, R., “Profitability Indicator Ratios: Return on Equity”, Investopedia. Retrieved from
http://www.investopedia.com/university/ratios/profitability-indicator/ratio4.asp

Masoudie L. 2008, Empirical analysis of factors driving stock options grants and firms’ volatility, University of
Southern California, California. Retrieved from
http://digitallibrary.usc.edu/cdm/ref/collection/p15799coll127/id/59872

“Operational Risk – Supporting Document to the New Basel Capital Accord”, Bank for International
Settlements, January 2001, Retrieved from https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbsca07.pdf

Palvia, A.A., Vähämaa, E. & Vähämaa, S. 2012, Do Female CEOs and Chairs Constrain Bank Risk-Taking?
Evidence from the Financial Crisis, Social Science Research Network, Rochester.

Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. 1993. The adaptive decision-maker. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.

Ripley, B.D. 1992-2004, “Robust Statistics”, M.Sc. in Applied Statistics MT2004. Retrieved from
http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/StatMeth/Robust.pdf

Ross, Westerfield and Jaffe, “Corporate Finance”, 9th edition, 2010, Publisher: McGraw- Hill
(International edition). Chapter 10, 11, 12.

Ryan, M.K. & Haslam, S.A. 2005, "The Glass Cliff: Evidence that Women are Over-Represented in
Precarious Leadership Positions", British Journal of Management, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 81-90.

Ryan, M.K. & Haslam, S.A. 2007, "THE GLASS CLIFF: EXPLORING THE DYNAMICS
SURROUNDING THE APPOINTMENT OF WOMEN TO PRECARIOUS LEADERSHIP
POSITIONS", Academy of Management.The Academy of Management Review, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 549-572.

                                       36
Sarin, R.K. & Wieland, A.M. 2012, Gender Differences in Risk Aversion: A Theory of When and Why, Social
Science Research Network, Rochester. Retrieved from
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2123567

 “SNI – Swedish Standard Industrial Classification 2007”, Statistiska Centralbyrån. Retrieved from
http://www.sni2007.scb.se/_pdf/080131snisorteradeng2007.pdf

Temple, P. 2001, “It's all a matter of proportion: PRIME NUMBERS: RATIOS: Use current and acid test
ratios to measure company financial strength, says Peter Temple: [London edition]”, Financial Times.
Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.ez.hhs.se/docview/249058297/301CC2772A1649B8PQ/3?accountid=39039

Thand Ringqvist, E. 2014, “Företag med kvinnor som vd har lägre vinstmarginal”, DN Debatt,
Stockholm. Retrieved from http://www.dn.se/debatt/foretag-med-kvinnor-som-vd-har-lagre-
vinstmarginal/

Turkey, J.W. 1977, “Exploratory Data Analysis: Past, Present, and Future”, Department of Statistics,
Princeton University. Retrieved from http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a266775.pdf

Wallach, M. A. & Kogan, N., 1961, “Aspects of Judgement and Decision Making: Interrelationships and
Changes with Age”, Behavioural Science, Vol. 6, pp. 23-36.

Wang, G.C.S. & Akabay, C.K. 1994, "Heteroscedasticity: How to handle in regression modeling", The
Journal of Business Forecasting Methods & Systems, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 11.

Weber, E.U., Blais, A. & Betz, N.E. 2002, "A domain-specific risk-attitude scale: measuring risk
perceptions and risk behaviors", Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 26

                                       37
10 Appendix

Appendix 1 – Descriptive Table General

                                       38
Appendix 2 – Descriptive Table Industry Groups

                                       39
Appendix 3 – Descriptive Table Counties

                                       40
Appendix 4 – Descriptive Data before creation of Risk Measures

                                       41
Appendix 5 – Histograms Original Variables before filtering

                                       42
Appendix 6 – Descriptive Data after creation of Risk Measures

                                       43
Appendix 7 – Histograms Risk Variables after filtering

                                       44
Appendix 8 – Risk Ranking Company Size

                                       45
Appendix 9 – Risk Ranking Industries

                                       46
Appendix 9 – Risk Ranking Industries cont.

                                       47
Appendix 10 – Multicollinearity test, VIF Value

                                       48
Appendix 11 – Heteroskedasticity test, Breusch-Pagan

                                       49
Appendix 12 – Descriptive Statistics Regression Variables

                                       50
Appendix 13 – Summary of Primary Regressions

                                       51
Appendix 14 – Summary of Control Regressions

                                       52
Appendix 15 – Regression 1: Original Risk Measures

                                       53
Appendix 16 – Regression 2: Control Risk Measures

                                       54
Appendix 17 – Regression 3: Size Risk Measures (0 Employees)

                                       55
Appendix 18 – Regression 3: Size Risk Measures (Any Employees)

                                       56
Appendix 19 – Regression 3: Size Risk Measures (1-19 Employees)

                                       57
Appendix 20 – Regression 3: Size Risk Measures (20-49 Employees)

                                       58
Appendix 21 – Regression 3: Size Risk Measures (50+ Employees)

                                       59
Appendix 22 – Regression 4: Industry Risk Measures (Low Risk)

                                       60
Appendix 23 – Regression 4: Industry Risk Measures (High Risk)

                                       61
Appendix 24 – Regression 4: Industry Risk Measures (High Fraction)

                                       62
Appendix 25 – Regression 4: Industry Risk Measures (Low Fraction)

                                       63
Appendix 26 – Regression 5: Changes of Control Variables (ROE)

                                       64
Appendix 27 – Regression 5: Changes of Control Variables (ROA)

                                       65
Appendix 28 – Regression 5: Changes of Control Variables (Leverage)

                                       66
Appendix 29 – Regression 6: Extra Size Risk Measures (1-10 Employees)

                                       67
Appendix 30 – Regression 6: Extra Size Risk Measures (11-19 Employees)

                                       68
Appendix 31 – Regression 7: Gender Effects on Control Variables

                                       69
Appendix 32 – Test of Endogeneity

                                       70