STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of Finance
Bachelor Thesis
Spring 2014

                     The Olympic Games
            -  Investor Mood and its Effect on the Stock Market

______________________________________________________________________________
Abstract:  In this paper, we study the Olympic Games and the outcome of the events from a
behavioral perspective.  As a proxy for investors’ mood,  a  gold medal is used  in order  to show the
impact on investors’ trading behavior caused by a positive sport event. The dataset consists of
242  gold medals from eight Olympic  Games between the years 1998 to 2014. For the individual
tests on events where more than one gold medal won on the same day or gold medals won two
days in a row, we  cannot  find significant support that gold medals affect investors’ mood and
thus their trading behavior on the stock market. However, on a weak statistical significance level,
after adjusting for extreme outliers, the results when  including all gold medal events  indicate  that
gold medals have a  positive impact on investors’ mood, with a lagging effect of two days.
______________________________________________________________________________
Keywords:  Behavioral finance, investor sentiment, mega sport events, the Olympic Games, non-
parametric test

                           ✡                             ♥
Authors: Max Ladow (22635)  and Johan Lagerholm (22646)
Tutor:  Professor Clas Bergström
Discussant:  Mathilde Karlsson (22070)
Presentation:  May 26, 2014

✡                          ♥
 22635@student.hhs.se        22646@student.hhs.se

__________________________________

*
 The authors are  thankful to Clas Bergström for his valuable inputs and comments throughout the process of writing
this thesis. The authors are also grateful to Håkan Lyckeborg for advising in statistical matters. Finally, the authors
would like to thank our friends for providing support and comments when writing the thesis.
I:     Introduction
The previous research of finance can in its simplest form be divided into two large research
areas. On the one hand, there is  research made on the neo-classical perspective, studying  the
rational investors in an efficient market. On the other hand, a growing part of literature, both
previous and current, are focusing on behavioral finance, studying irrational investors trading on
the market. As explained by Schiller (2003), the field of behavioral finance is more of a
complement to the neo-classical finance, than a mutual exclusive alternative. Within the area of
behavioral finance, theories have been developed trying to explain reactions on the market not
fully explained by rational investors. An example of such research, showing irrational reactions
of investors acting on the market, is Schumway and Hirschleifer (2003),  who  show how sunny
weather can have an impact on investment decisions and asset pricing.
       Another area of which behavioral finance recently has been applied to is sports. Due to
the importance of sport events throughout the history, it is reasonable to think that other human
factors, such as emotions and mood, may be affected from outcomes of such sport events.
Edmans et al (2007) for example, connected this sport sentiment  to  the stock market by looking
at the change in investors’ mood after a soccer game. This behavioral finance aspect of mega
sport events inspired us to elaborate more about sports and its potential impact on investors’
asset pricing behavior.
       One sport event that has gained an increasing attention in media in recent years is the
Olympic Games. The latest Summer Games held in London 2012, for example, had an estimated
viewer base of more than 4.8 billion  people and over 200 countries broadcasting the events

                    1
around the world.  Another example that has had a lot of attention is the most recent Winter
Game held in Sochi, Russia in 2014. The main focus in Sochi was, besides the sport events, the
economical impact that the Olympic Games can induce on a country hosting it. For instance, the

                                                                                    2
total cost of just hosting the games in Sochi was estimated to over $50 billion.  However, it is not
just the actual cost of arranging and hosting  the Olympic Games that can give rise to economic
impacts, it could also benefit a country the time after. This is for example shown by Rose and
Spiegel  (2011), who study  the future economic effect on trade the time after the Olympic Games

1
 IOC Marketing: Media Guide, London 2012, s. 15
2
 http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-01-02/the-2014-winter-olympics-in-sochi-cost-51-billion,  Accessed:
2014-04-03, 15:00

                                                                                  1
are held for the  countries involved in the bidding process to become the host of the mega sport
event.  If such large amounts of people are watching the Olympic Games in so many different
countries, it is hard not to think about the potential impact the Olympic Games can have, both on
a country as a whole, but also on its citizens. One might even think that it is plausible that this
large global event also could have an indirect impact on the stock market in general, and more
specifically, the mood of investor’s trading on  the market. Having the work of Edmans et al
(2007) in mind, our primary objective with this thesis is to find out if the outcome of an Olympic
event, in terms of winning a gold medal, can have an impact on investors’ trading behavior.

II:    Previous Literature
Neo-classical View vs. Behavioral Finance
According to Fama (1963), in an efficient market, where rational investors strive to make
rational decisions, any new information should be incorporated into the stock prices so that the
prices reflect any  known information. This theory is widely known as the Efficient Market
Hypothesis (henceforth EMH). However, during the 1980’s, more of the literature tried to
explain the anomalies arising in the market, which were not fully explained by the EMH. One of
the founders, of what later became known as behavioral finance, was Robert Schiller. In Schiller
(2003), he emphasizes that behavioral finance is not something that is mutually exclusive and
will replace the  EMH, but rather an extension of the theory to be  able to explain why the market
is not always completely efficient.

Investor Sentiment on the Stock Market
One area within behavioral finance that recently has been studied more extensively is investor
sentiment and its impact on the stock market. An increasing number of papers investigate how
investors’ mood can affect the investment decisions and hence the trading patterns on the stock
market. Consistent with recent literature is the paper  presented  by Hirshleifer and Shumway
(2003), who, as briefly mention above, study the effect of morning sunshine on market indexes.
They collect data from days with morning sunshine and analyze the effect on the stock market.
The question regarding sunny weather having an impact on mood has in previous literature and
various physiological papers already been proven. However, what had not been studied was if
this positive mood effect from sunshine in turn affects the stock market. The conclusion from the

                                                                                  2
paper suggests that morning sunshine actually has a large significant positive effect on the daily
stock returns. Another research made by Kamstra et al  (2000) investigates the effect of Daylight
Saving Time (henceforth DST) and its impact on the stock market. The effect stems from the de-
synchronization in the sleep cycle. One might think that if you gain an extra hour of sleep (as is
the case during fall) compared to losing an hour (in the spring) the results would be the opposite,
in other words, that the impact on the stock market is positive when gaining an hour of sleep.
However, as is the case with jet lag, whether you travel east to west or west to east, one’s sleep
cycle is still in imbalance and the problem solving and information processing ability is in turn
affected. As a result, the authors find that the change  in time has a large negative impact on the
stock market. According to Kamstra et al  (2000), the DST-effect was around 300-500% of the
weekday effect. Converting the DST-effect into dollars, the NYSE, AMEX  and NASDAQ
exchanges experience  an implied one-day  loss of $31 billion, regardless if you gained an extra
hour of sleep or lost an hour of sleep. Even though this is just a small fraction of the total market
trade, it is still a significantly large effect to result in an impact on the stock market.
       A research closely related to behavioral finance is Bower (1992), who explores the field
of psychology. Bower (1992) argues that there is a difference between an emotional state of
mind and mood. While emotions are characterized as more distinct and short lasted, and
connected to strong feelings, that can easily be attributed to a specific event, mood, on the other
hand, such as happy, sad, anxious etc., is more subtle and longer lasting which is not as easily
identified if attention is not drawn to it. The theory according to Bower (1992) implies that the
emotion, the days following the event, transforms into a longer-lasting mood. In line with the
findings of Bower (1992) is  the research made by Bollen et al  (2011), who studied the collective
mood from the  public to see if any effect on the stock market would appear. They did so by
tracking certain key words in the twitter feeds as proxy variables for public mood during a period
of time. When comparing the mood flow captured from the twitter data with the Dow Jones
Industrial Average (DJIA), they distinguished a co-movement for the stock returns with the
public mood swings. They also found that stock prices showed a lagged effect and registered a
movement in accordance to the mood swings 3-4 days after the mood had been registered.
       Furthermore, Baker and Wurgler (2007) investigated investor mood and its effect on the
stock market by creating an investor sentiment index using a number of different variables as
proxies for investor sentiment, for example; trading volume, closed-end fund discount and the

                                                                                  3
number and first-day returns on IPOs. With the index created, the authors were actually able to
measure and track sentiment in the market. They also found evidence supporting that the index
followed historical events such as bubbles and crashes reasonably well. Baker and Wurgler
(2007) were also able to show that sentiment could affect the market as a whole, although the
effect was larger on individual stock returns, particularly high speculative stocks. They define
high speculative stocks as “[s]tocks of low capitalization, younger, unprofitable, high-volatility,
non-dividend paying, growth companies or stocks of firms in financial distress are likely to be
disproportionately sensitive to broad waves of investor sentiment.”  Today, studies about investor
mood and behavioral finance go  beyond the academic research, and are increasingly being
conducted by companies in their  day-to-day work. For instance, in line with the index created by
Baker and Wurgler  (2007),  Johnson and Watson (2011) have  shown that  a Purchasing Manager
can act as a forward-looking sentiment indicator and thus have  a  certain predictive power  on
stock returns.

Sport Events and Investors’ Mood
The effect on the stock market resulting from changes in  investor’s mood has also been studied
with the help of mega sport events. This is due to the fact that these events are watched by a
large part of the population, thus having a tendency to affect a large amount of people’s mood.
One research  that  studies  the effects from large sport events is Edmans et al  (2007),  which  looks
at the largest international soccer tournaments. They investigate whether there is an effect from a
change in investors’ mood in the winning and losing country after a match. They find that there
is a significantly  negative effect on the stock market in the losing country, but they do not see a
corresponding positive effect on the stock market in the winning country. Moreover, as Baker
and Wurgler (2007) also point  out, Edmans et al (2007) discovers that the sentiment effect on
soccer match results  is  greater on small cap stocks. However, there have also been studies
supporting the theory that investors’ mood do not affect the stock market. An example of such
research was conducted by Gerlach (2011), who performed a similar research  as the one made by
Edmans et al  (2007). The author finds somewhat contrasting result compared to Edmans et al
(2007). Gerlach  (2011)  basically replicates  the data used by Edmans et al  (2007), but instead of
using the World Market Index from Datastream, he employs another benchmark index. Gerlach
creates a matching country index, which is  generated  by using the largest country (measured by

                                                                                  4
its Gross Domestic Product),  which  does not compete on day  t, closest to the country competing
in the soccer tournament on day  t. He uses the neutral country’s stock market index (it is
considered neutral since  the country  does not play a soccer game on that specific day,  which
otherwise could have affected its index), instead of Datastream’s World Market Index, to see if
any  abnormal  return  can  be  observed.  By  using  a  matching  country  index  instead  of
Datastream’s World Market Index, Gerlach  (2011)  argues that the problem with regional
differences in the stock markets can be overcome, something that the World Market Index does
not always  identifies. Another problem identified by Gerlach  (2011)  is that the composition of
the World Market Index makes the index biased towards the developed countries, since about
80% of the index’s market value is based on Western Europe, Japan,  the  United States and
Canada. Gerlach  (2011)  concludes that the matching countries experience a similar loss or gain
on the stock market as the countries whose national team lost or won, which thus supports  the
theory that the outcome of a soccer game, and therefore investors mood, do not have any impact
on the stock market. However, Gerlach  (2011)  states that this conclusion is only true if the
matching countries are not affected by their bordering country’s national teams’ performance.
Otherwise, the matching  country index would not be valid.

The Olympic Games
Another example of a mega sport event is  the Olympic Games. Previous research on the Olympic
Games has mostly been within the neo-classical area of finance. For instance, Dick and Wang
(2010) performed  an event study methodology to examine the announcement effect on the stock
market when the International Olympic Committee (henceforth the IOC) announces which
country that wins the bidding process and thus successfully becomes the hosting country of the
Olympic Games. The authors find indications that the stock market experiences a significant
positive effect when the country hosting the Summer Olympic Games is announced. Another
research studying the effects from The Olympic Games is the paper from Rose  and Spiegel
(2011). This research focuses on the trade effect that a mega event, such as the Olympic Games,
generates. They conclude that trade increases permanently with almost 20% for countries that
hosts the Olympic Games. What is even more interesting  with their findings is that countries not
winning the bidding  process,  also experience a similar increase in exports. Hence, the authors
argue that the effect on trade is not due to the fact that a country actually wins the bidding

                                                                                  5
process arranged by the  IOC, but rather it is the participation in the bidding process  that  sends a
signal to other countries that have a positive impact on the trade. However, there has not yet been
any research looking at the effect of the Olympic Games on investors’ mood, which makes it an
interesting topic for a research.

III:   Contribution
There  have  been an increasing number of literatures  discussing the topic of sport sentiment
within the area of behavior finance. Consequently, and due to the fact there have not been any
previous studies of the Olympic Games from a behavioral finance perspective, it would be
interesting to study the impact  on the stock market resulting from the Olympic Games.
Consequently, this study will see if  it  is possible to find effects resulting from a positive event,
since previous literature has  only found significant results from negative outcomes in sport
events.

Studying the  Olympic Games and Defining our Variable
Before defining our hypotheses, that will test if there are any abnormal returns resulting from the
Olympic Games, we need to find a variable that can be used to detect these abnormal returns. In
our  thesis, to be able to distinguish a potential effect on the stock market from investor
sentiment, we intend to use Olympic gold medals as our proxy for investors’ mood. This variable
is chosen in accordance with the three key  characteristics that Edmans et  al (2007)  employ  for
determining a good mood variable. These requirements are as follows:

1.“[f]irst the given variable must drive mood in a substantial and unambiguous way, so that its
effect is powerful enough to show up in asset prices.

2.  Second,  the variable must impact the mood of a large proportion of the population, so that it is
likely to affect enough investors.

3.  Third, the effect must be correlated across the majority of individuals within a country.”

                                                                                  6
In our opinion, the Olympic Games, or more specifically, a gold medal as a proxy variable for
investors’  mood, satisfies these criteria.  First of all, previous research, such as Edmans et al
(2007), has shown that sport outcomes can affect people’s mood and consequently their
economic behavior. Secondly, the reason for choosing only gold medals (and not silver or bronze
medals) as our proxy for investor mood is because expectations about the outcome of the game
will affect the impact on the stock prices. The impact will differ depending on  what was
expected from the national team’s performance prior to the Olympic Event, and to include silver
medals might therefore distort the sample. For instance, if a country is not expecting to win any
medals, a bronze or silver might have a positive effect on investors’ mood, whereas a country
expecting to win a gold medal, but only wins a silver, might result in a negative impact on
investors’ mood. Since the effects from winning a silver or bronze medal might contradict each
other, depending on each country’s expectations, it would be hard to interpret the results.
However, even though a country and its population  anticipate  winning  a  gold medal, we would
still expect  to see a reaction when  the  gold medal  is won, since it should be seen as a positive
event.
       Moreover, the second criterion is also met. Since the Olympic Games is such a wide and
extensive tournament, with, for instance,  over 200 countries broadcasting the Games and with an
estimated viewer base during  the most recent  Summer Olympic Games of  4.8 billion  people, the

                                                                                                                     3
event should be able to reach and affect enough people and most importantly enough investors.
This is important to be able to spot changes on the stock market based on changes in  an
investor’s mood. In line with the second key characteristic in choosing the mood variable pointed
out by Edmans et al  (2007), it is also vital to choose the largest and most popular sports that are
viewed by a large portion of the population. As a result,  we have chosen the six sports with the
most viewer hours, in percentage of total viewer hours, as a proxy for being the most popular
sports. The most popular sports selected for the Summer and Winter Olympic Games  are,
arranged in ranking order, the following:

3
 IOC Marketing: Media Guide, London 2012, s. 15

                                                                                  7
                                              4                                      5
                   Summer Olympics                Winter Olympics

               1.      Volleyball  (12.90 %)                Figure Skating  (17.28%)
              2.      Basketball  (11.43%)               Snowboard  (12.61%)
              3.      Athletics  (10.80%)                 Nordic Combined  (10.84%)
              4.      Artistic  (5.92%)                    Alpine skiing  (7.15%)
              5.      Table Tennis  (5.85%)              Speed Skating  (6.79%)
              6.      Football  (5.41%)                  Ice  Hockey  (6.40%)

The percentage represents the fraction  of  the total amount of viewer hours in the world for the
specific sport  to  the total amount of viewer hours in the world covering the whole Olympic
Games. When extracting the data that is to be used in our research,  we have limited the number
of  sports  to  the  six  most  common  sports  for  the  Summer  and  Winter  Olympic  Games
respectively. Even though all sports in the Olympic Games have not been included, these six
sport categories represent the majority of the viewer hours based on the total viewer hours in the
world.  Furthermore, the data on viewer hours was only available for the broader sport category
and not for each single event within the sport, which is also why we, besides looking at the most
important sport categories, also include all the branches within each sport. For example, in the
sport event “Athletics” during Summer Olympics in London 2012, we included all the 47
individual branches within this category. This is also because the specific events within each
sport have changed slightly during the years, so the only way to be certain that the sports were
present each year was to take the broader sport category and include all the specific events. The
TV-coverage broadcast data, retrieved from IOC, was consolidated by using one Summer
Olympic Games (Athens  2004) and two Winter Olympic Games,  (Salt Lake  2002)  and  (Turin
2006).  The  IOC then takes an average of the amount of total viewer hours to determine  the
popularity of each Olympic sport. We assume that this  popularity for the individual Olympic
sport is still high and has not changed, which is why we use the same proxies for all the Olympic
Games between the years 1998-2014. Since we use the total amount of viewer hours in the world
to distinguish the most popular sport category, the popularity of the selected sports might not

4
 Olympic Programme Comission Report to the 117th IOC Session
5
 Olympic Programme Comission Report to the 119th IOC Session

                                                                                  8
represent the most popular sport in each country. For example, the most popular sports in

                                                           6
Sweden during the Winter Games in Sochi were:

                               Winter Olympics

                           1.      Cross-country Skiing  (25.5%)
                           2.      Ice  Hockey (25.2%)
                           3.      Biathlon (13.7%)
                            4.      Alpine Skiing (12.5%)
                           5.      Speed Skating (9.9%)
                           6.      Snowboard (8.9%)

When comparing these sports with the sports selected in our paper, they differ in 2 out of 6
sports. Unfortunately one of the  sports that differ  from the above selected sports is in this case
also the most popular sport in Sweden, where 25.5% of the total amount of viewers watched the
Cross-Country Skiing event. These differences in the sports we use and sports that should have
been used,  if looking at the popularity of the sport in each specific country, is most likely present
in several other countries as well. Despite these differences in the selected sports, the above
method for choosing the most popular sport is still in favor. One reason is due to lack of reliable
broadcasting data for  each  country winning a gold medal. If some Olympic events would be
chosen, based on unreliable data, to represent the most popular sports within a country, the
selection criteria would be somewhat arbitrary. Thus, to minimize any biases and to be consistent
in our selection method, we base our selection of sports on the IOC’s official broadcasting
reports. To conclude, the above arguments for choosing the largest events within the Olympic
Games makes the second requirement more than fulfilled.
       As for the third criterion, since the contestants are competing for their home country, a
gold medal is likely to affect the mood of all kinds of people in different parts of the country, and
not just a certain region, as may be the case if they were competing for a certain team within the
country. It is also assumed to affect them in the same way, i.e. that a gold medal will be seen as
something positive for most people.

6
  http://www.mms.se/wp-content/uploads/_dokument/rapporter/tv-
tittande/evenemang/2014/OS%20i%20Sotji%202014.pdf,  Accessed: 2014-04-24, 20:00

                                                                                  9
Since most of the Olympic events are not pure games between two countries, but rather a whole
competition between several countries, and the fact that we do not look at the qualification
results but only the gold medal from the final round, we believe that it is possible to see positive
abnormal returns from winning a gold medal. Compared to a soccer tournament, where a loss
often means that the country will not play any more games, a win in such a tournament only
results in the team qualifying to the next round. Therefore, the fact that there are only significant
abnormal returns for losses and not for wins is understandable. However, since we are only
looking at the final round that leads to a gold medal, we believe that it is just as likely to see
positive abnormal returns from a win, as  it is to see negative abnormal returns after a loss in a
soccer tournament shown in previous research. Consequently, we are looking at wins in a quite
different manner than previous authors. Moreover,  as previously explained, since the Olympic

                                                                                7
Games is a  larger event compared to international soccer games , we expect to see a different
result when using the Olympic events as a base in our research.
       Due to the lack of evidence of any impact from positive sport events in previous studies,
the results from this thesis can give valuable information to the increasing research within the
area of behavior finance.

IV:   Hypothesis
Being inspired by the work of Edmans et al (2007), and since no other research has focused on
the Olympic Games  in the same manner as we do, it made us interested in finding out if previous
findings within behavioral finance also could  be applied on an event such as the Olympic Games.

Defining our Hypotheses
After having chosen the Olympic gold medals as the appropriate variable to use as a proxy for
investors’ mood and after having selected the sports for which these gold medals should in
theory significantly impact the investors the most, the next step is to define our hypotheses.
       For the first hypothesis 1(a),  we want to see if a gold medal event day has any impact on
the stock market, regardless if one or more gold medals are won on that event day. In other
words:

7
  http://www.fifa.com/mm/document/affederation/tv/01/47/32/73/2010fifaworldcupsouthafricatvaudiencereport.pdf,
Accessed: 2014-04-26, 14:00

                                                                                 10
Hypothesis 1(a): There is no significant impact on investors’ mood (positive or negative), and
thus not on the stock market, based on the event day when a country wins a gold medal from an
Olympic event:

                                 H0,A: ARGold Medal = 0
                                 H0,A: CARGold Medal = 0

                                H1.A: ARGold Medal ≠ 0
                                H1,A: CARGold Medal ≠ 0

Since we argue that a gold medal event is seen as a positive event, one might expect that winning
more than one gold medal on the same day should result in an even stronger mood reaction. This
leads us to our second test, where we instead are going to test if there is any impact from winning
more than one gold medal on the same event day, which is stated as follow:

Hypothesis 1 (b): There is no significant impact on investors’ mood (positive or negative), and
thus on the stock market, based on a country winning more than one gold medal on  the same day
from the Olympic events:
                                 H0,B: ARGold Medal = 0
                                 H0,B: CARGold Medal = 0

                                H1.B: ARGold Medal ≠ 0
                                H1,B: CARGold Medal ≠ 0

The above hypotheses will both test if a gold medal event day will affect the market index in
country  i  and if several gold medals won on the same day will have an even larger impact on the
market index in country  i.  These tests are performed in a way that isolate a gold medal event and
thus only focus on the event when a gold medal is won by country  i  and no other gold medal is
won on another day within the same event window as the previous gold medal event. Since the
Olympic Games duration is limited to usually two-three weeks, countries may win gold medals
on more than one day. The situation can arise when a country wins gold medals in the days

                                                                                 11
following each other. In line with the hypothesis 1(b), one might think  that winning gold medals
in the days following each other also could result in a strong mood reaction. As a result, we
define our third unique event as two gold medal event days taking place two days in a row.

Hypothesis 1 (c): There is no significant impact on investors’ mood (positive or negative), and
thus on the stock market, based on a country having two gold medal event days in a row:

                                  H0,C: ARGold Medals in a row = 0
                                 H0,C: CARGold Medals in a row = 0

                                  H1.C: ARGold Medals in a row  ≠  0
                                H1,C: CARGold Medals in a row ≠ 0

The reason why we in all the above stated hypotheses include both the abnormal return and the
cumulative abnormal return, is due to the fact that we will test both the event day and the
following two days. We will study the abnormal return  (henceforth AR)  for the event day, that is,
AR(0,0), and cumulative abnormal return  (henceforth CAR)  for the following two days, that is,
CAR(0,1) and CAR(0,2).
        We have argued that, if there is an effect on investors’ mood that will result in a changed
trading pattern for investors, the effect is expected to be positive due to the fact that winning a
gold medal is seen as something positive. Hence, we could argue in favor of using a one-tailed
test to see if our one-sided hypothesis, that there is a positive effect, is valid. However, there
could potentially be other underlying factors that affect the stock market in a negative way due to
a gold medal event, such as a decrease in trading volume during and after the Olympic event. In
a research made by Frieder and Subrahmanyam (2004) the authors emphasize the difficulty of
estimating whether there will be a positive or negative impact from an event. They showed that
some holidays and other religious feasts gave positive results, whereas other gave negative
outcomes. As a result, even though we should expect a positive divergence, we have chosen the
hypotheses  to be non-zero, due to the uncertainties.

                                                                                 12
V:    Methodology
The research will be conducted by using an event study approach.  Applied on this thesis, a
reason for using this approach  is  to be able  to discover sudden changes in investors’ mood  more
clearly, compared to if the continuous variable had been used. According to Edmans et al (2007),

                                                     8
this gives a large signal-to-noise ratio in returns.  The disadvantage connected to event-studies,
explained by the same authors, is that the number of signals observed have a tendency to be low.
This can be seen in the section “Data”, where approximately 60% of our initial data had to  be
dropped in order to be able to create a unique event within our stated event window.
       To perform an event study, we will have to compare the realized return with the predicted
normal return the country would have had if the event  had  not  taken place, to  be able  to get the
abnormal  return.  According  to  MacKinlay  (1994)  this  predicted  normal  return  could  be
calculated in two ways, either with the use of the constant mean model or the market model.

Constant Mean Model
As described by MacKinlay (1994) the constant mean model is defined as:

                                              Rit=  𝜇it  +  𝜁it

                                                                          2
                                              E(𝜁it) = 0        Var(𝜁it) =  𝜎 𝛇it

The Rit  is the normal return in security  i  during period  t,  and  𝜇it is the average return for security  i

during period  t.  The  𝜁it  is  defined as the disturbance term for security  i  during time period  t,

                                                                                  2
which will have an expected value of zero and a variance of  𝜎 𝛇it. Furthermore, MacKinlay

(1994)  describes that when this model is applied on daily returns, a common approach is  to use
nominal returns.

8
  Signal-to-noise ratio measures the effect caused by an event in comparison with the noise in the data that can
distort the signal from the event. An advantage with event studies is the assumption that a reaction, observable in the
event  window, is derived from the event itself and not from other factors.

                                                                                 13
Market Model
The difference between the constant mean model and the market model is that the latter is a
statistical model, where the parameters are estimated using a regression.

                                       Rit  =  𝛼i  +  𝛽i RRmt  +  𝜀it

                                                                              2
                                       E(𝜀it) = 0                 Var(𝜀it) =  𝜎 𝜀 it

The Rit  is the return for security  i  in period  t  and the RRmt  is the return for the market portfolio in
period  t. The  𝜀it  is the error term, or disturbance term as mentioned by MacKinlay (1994), for

security  i  during period  t, which has an expected average value of 0. The parameters of the

                          2
model are  𝛼i,  𝛽i and  𝜎 𝜀 it.

       As described in MacKinlay (1994), both models can be used when estimating the normal
return of a security, or as in our case, the return for a country index. The constant  mean model
has the advantage that it is simple and not as time consuming to compute, but still has an
acceptable accuracy similar to other models in many situations (see for example Brown and
Warner (1980)). However, the market model is a potential improvement of the constant mean
model, as stated by MacKinlay (1994). This is because the constant mean model may generate a
mean  return that could be misleading if the  variations in the market return  are  high, which in turn
affects the variance in the abnormal  return. Thus, the real benefit of using the market model,

                                                                             2
compared to the constant mean model, depends on how high the R  is in the market model

                                    2
regression. The higher the R , the lower the variance in abnormal returns, which consequently
gives a better measurement and increases the possibility to detect potential effects from an event.
Dick and Wang (2010) use the market model in their event study when estimating the
announcement effect on the stock market, which is the model we also intend to use in our thesis.
        Before estimating the predicted normal return for country  i’s index, we calculate the
realized return for the index using the following return model:

                                      rit  = log(Pit)  -  log(Pit-1)            (1)

                                                                                 14
The  rit  is the actual return for country  i, the log(Pit)  is the logarithmic closing market index price
in country  i  on day  t, and log(Pit-1) is the logarithmic closing market index price in country  i  on
the day before  t.
       After the realized return has been retrieved for the countries winning a gold medal in
accordance with the above stated return model (1), we need to compare the realized return with
the expected return the country should have earned in absence of a gold medal event, in other
words, its predicted normal return. To do that, we calculate the country’s predicted normal return
using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (henceforth CAPM). When calculating the expected return
using CAPM, we will use historical index returns during a pre-determined period for country  i’s
stock market index and run a regression on the country  i’s excess return with the World Market
Index excess return. The regression will then give us the beta for country  i  during that period,
which we assume to be equal also for today’s beta. To retrieve the betas, we run the following
regression:

                           (Rit  -  Rf, t, i) =  𝛼i  +  𝛽i (RWorld Market Index, t -  Rf, t) + eit

Where Rf, t, i  is the risk free rate, which is the long-term government bond in country  i  on day  t
and  (Rit  -  Rf, t) is the excess return of country  i’s stock exchange. The retrieved beta represents
the sensitivity to the World Market Index’s volatility. Furthermore, the  𝛼  is assumed to be zero

                                          9
when calculating the predicted return.  Another  common assumption is also to assume that the
country  i’s beta is equal to one. However, this is a very strong assumption due to the fact that it is
very unlikely that the betas among the countries will be the same. Although a strong assumption,
when doing a robustness test on our results, we will also test this assumption to see how much
our results differ and  to  confirm a stronger robustness of our results.

Estimation Window for the Beta
When estimating the beta value, we choose to include all trading days from the year 1997 to
2014 except 10 trading days before and 30 trading days after the first medal event occurs. By
excluding these days prior to and after the event, the estimated beta value will not be affected by
the actual event. The reason why we take 30 days after the first medal event and not 10  days  is

9
  This is only true if CAPM holds. This is derived from the assumption that the market is efficient.

                                                                                 15
due to the fact that the duration of the Olympic Games is  around  two-three weeks. By taking a
month  after the first medal event, we  avoid  the  post-effect  from being  captured in the estimation
window. This approach is a slightly different approach compared to the ordinary event study,
since the estimation window for event studies is usually only before an event takes place.
However, since the Olympic Games are recurring events every two year, we have to take into
account the years between the Olympic Games when estimating the beta-value. This is because
the days after the Olympic Games until the next Olympic Games will be the days before the
event-window for the coming Olympic Game. As a result, the following calculation will be used
to obtain the expected return for the stock exchange  i  on day  t:

                             E(Rit|Xit) = Rf, t  +  𝛽i (RWorld Market Index, t -  Rf, t)

The  E(Rit|Xit) is the expected return in country  i  on day  t. When comparing the realized return
with the expected return, the return above normal return,  that is abnormal return, will be
calculated for each unique observation in order to compute the cumulative abnormal return. The
CAR will then sum up the AR and be used as a measure of the total impact a gold medal has had
on the country  i’s stock market. The CAR will also reveal the total time for which it took the
market to fully incorporate the mood effect from the investors.

                                   ARGold Medal (i),t  = Rit -  E(Rit|Xit)

                           CAR = ∑ARGold Medal (i), t

In order to test our hypotheses, we need to define which statistical approach to use. One of the
statistical models that we are going to use is the Student’s t-test, also known as the t-test.  An
assumption that needs to be fulfilled to able to use the t-test is that the data is presumed to follow
a normal probability distribution. When  this  cannot  be  confirmed, which is normally the case
when the  sample size is small,  we have to use a non-parametric test instead. The statistical test
we intend to use when testing our hypotheses, if the data does not fulfill the requirements of the
t-test, is the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. In comparison to the Student’s t-test, the statistics

                                                                                 16
generated when using Wilcoxon signed-rank test is somewhat weaker compared to the t-test, but
it does not require a certain sample distribution.

VI:   Data
Data on Gold Medals
We have collected the data on gold medalist countries between the years 1998 to 2014. Between
the years 1998 to 2012 we have used  the  IOC’s official reports to collect the data. Since our
research is based on daily stock market returns, we needed the exact dates for when the final
rounds were performed which resulted in a gold medal. However, due to the  lack of a brief
compilation of the days when the gold medals were won, the data has been collected from these
extensive reports separately for each individual sport and its different branches within the sport.
The advantage with these reports is that they  are updated with the latest results and dates. For
instance, the reports show the actual date when the gold medal is won even if the events are
postponed to a later day. For the Olympic Games of 2014 we have used the official website for

                                10
the Winter Games in Sochi.   The total number of gold medals that were initially retrieved
amounted up to 464.

Adjusting for Gold Medal Events Occurring on a Weekend or on the Same Day
One problem affecting our sample size was the situation where an event was played on a
weekend. The games that were played  on a Saturday or  a Sunday, were all adjusted for as if they
occurred on a Monday instead, that is, the first trading day after the event.

Multiple Gold Medal Events in the Same Event Window
Since the Olympic Games are only occurring  during  two-three weeks, there are a lot of events
taking place during this period. Consequently, many of these events happened the same day or
on the days shortly after. This created a problem when the potential effect from the events had to
be isolated. In line with previous research of  effects  derived  from investors’ mood, our event
window for hypotheses 1(a) and 1(b) is three days, to be able to catch a  possible lagged effect.
As a result, any event occurring in another event’s event window, would distort the true effect

10
  http://www.sochi2014.com/en,  Accessed: 2014-03-26, 18:00

                                                                                 17
      and thus bias the result. This is because, if for instance one event is taking place on Monday, the
      event  window will be Monday to Wednesday. If then another event takes  place during Tuesday,
      the event  window for that event will be Tuesday  to  Thursday. This results in the AR for Tuesday
      and Wednesday being calculated twice since the same return is included in both event  windows.
      Consequently, when looking at the aggregated effect for Tuesday and Wednesday, the AR for
      these two days will not be the true effect as a result of double-counting the same return. Assume
      that there is actually only an effect from Monday’s event and not any for Tuesday’s event, then it
       will appear as if the AR for the first and second day,  for the event taking place on Tuesday (that
      is the AR for Tuesday and Wednesday),  also  is  positive, even though this is just the  lagging
      effect from Monday’s event. As a  result, we have to create a dummy variable that only includes
      the events that have no surrounding event distorting its effect.  Only the events  with an event
      window  not colliding with other event windows  could be kept. When the events take place on the
      same  day, the problem with double counting the AR and the CAR  is  not present, since the
      multiple events affect the same trading days. The thing that could result is that one might expect
      the effect to be larger for these days, which is not a problem. However,  multiple events taking
      place on the same day will accordingly result in less unique event days.

                                         Table I: Gold Medal Events Colliding

This table describes the situation where events need to be dropped due to a collision in their event window. The event window  contains
three days and the abnormal returns are stated in letters instead of numbers. Only Event number 4 is a clean event, where CAR(4) does
not include any double counted letters (i.e. return), and hence is the same as in CAR(TOT).  The example is also illustrated by the
ellipses, shown under the variable Gold Medals. One ellipse illustrates the length of the event  window, that is,  three days. As can be
seen, the three first event windows collide with each other, shown by the red ellipses. However, the fourth event, shown by the green
ellipse, does not collide with any other event and hence its event window is clean.

      Date         TIC     Gold Medals     Event    AR   CAR(1)   CAR(2)   CAR(3)  CAR(4)     CAR(TOT)
    2010-02-17       USA          G           1       a       a                                    a
    2010-02-18       USA          G           2       b      a+b       b                         a+2*(b)
    2010-02-19       USA                            c     a+b+c     b+c                        a+2*(b+c)
    2010-02-22       USA          G           3       d             b+c+d      d                2*(b+c+d)
    2010-02-23       USA                             e                      d+e                 2*(d)+e
    2010-02-24       USA                             f                      d+e+f                2*(d)+e+f
    2010-02-25       USA          G           4       g                              g            g
    2010-02-26       USA                            h                             g+h          g+h
    2010-02-27       USA                             i                              g+h+i         g+h+i

                                                                                      18
A potential way to circumvent the problem with events taking place on days after one another
and thus avoid dropping events is, if there for instance are several gold medal events for one
country three days in a row (but not on the two following days after  the last of these events), to
combine these three events  and define it as  one event. Then AR(0,0) will be calculated on the
first day of the third  gold medal  event, but including the cumulative abnormal return from the
previous two gold medal event days since this event’s “first day” will be the sum of all three
days. However, if we were to see significant results, we would not know if the effect after our
tests  is due to the fact that there were three gold medals taken three days in a row or if just a
single gold  medal  actually had an impact. As a result, we would not be able to come to the
conclusion that a gold medal event in general has an impact, since it might only be these events
with multiple medals won several days in a row  that creates the effect.  Thus, we have decided
not to include these events. To be fair, this problem could also arise in our existing hypothesis
1(a), since we include event days where several events have taken place on the same day. If any
significant effect were to appear, we cannot be sure if it is mainly due to the fact that there were
several events on the same day, or if there was also an effect from the event days with only one
gold medal event. This is the reason why we have chosen to state  our second hypothesis as  more
than one  gold medal being won on the same day to see,  if both tests for hypothesis 1(a) and 1(b)
become significant, if an event day with several events on the same day creates a larger impact
on the stock market.

Time-zone Differences Affecting the Gold Medal Events
Since the time of the Olympic Events are given in local time, it is likely that the time zones
differs depending on the time zone in the host country compared to the time-zone of the national
teams’ home country.
       For an event to be affected by  the time-zone difference, that is, that the competing
country’s stock exchange is still open the day before due to the differences in time-zones when
the Olympic event occurs in the hosting country, the competing country has to have a time-zone
difference  of approximately 15 hours before the time-zone in the hosting country. This 15 hours
time-difference was chosen due to the assumptions that the earliest Olympic event would be
finished at  9:00  a.m.  and the closing time for most stock exchanges are at latest around 6:00
p.m., which results in a 15 hour time-zone window. When restricting our search criteria as

                                                                                 19
described above, only a couple  of  hosting countries could have a time-zone impact on other
countries. The two countries in our sample that could be affected were USA and Canada, when
the events were held in Sydney  in the year 2000 and Beijing in 2008. Although USA usually
wins a lot of gold medals during the Olympic Games, we expect the event of a gold medal being
won at  9:00 a.m. as rare and thus the bias error to be insignificant. Another reason for not
adjusting the event window to take into account the day before to capture any time-zone effect is
because we do not have exact data on when the specific events ended. As a  result, even if the
assumption  that it is seldom for a gold  medal event to end as early as  9:00  a.m.  would be wrong,
these events will still not be possible to adjust for every year due to lack of information for when
the events ended.

Defining the Event Windows
When an event takes  place, we expect the day of the event and the following days to be
particularly important, which has to do with the natural state of emotions and the characterization
of mood as previously explained by Bower (1992). This is  also in line with Bollen et al  (2011),
who, as stated earlier, find evidence that the mood swings registered in the twitter feeds have a
lagging effect on the stock market by 3-4 days. Translating the findings of Bower (1992) and
Bollen et al (2011) into our thesis, it means that when a  country wins a gold medal, the investor
might in the same moment experience a distinct emotion, which he or she attributes to the event
when the country wins the gold medal. This emotion could later on be transformed into a state of
mood, which lasts for a  longer period of time. Therefore, to make sure we do not miss the entire
effect of winning a gold medal on investor sentiment, we extend and define our event window
for the hypotheses 1(a) and  1(b) as the day of the Olympic event and the two days following the
event, which should be enough to capture any potential effect from the investors’ mood when
calculating the CAR. A normal approach in the event studies is also to include the day before to
see if any potential leakage on the market can be observable,  or if the data goes back a long time
which can make the actual dates for the data uncertain. In contrast to the normal approach, there
is no reason for us to include the day before due to leakage or uncertainty. First of all, our data
do not go back more  than to 1997 and as a result  hereof,  the dates should be reliable.
Furthermore, although expectations on a country’s performance can be present beforehand, no
one can foresee which country who will win a gold medal, and as a result, leakage will not be a

                                                                                 20
factor that will affect our data in a negative way. The only plausible reason for us to include the
day before in our event window is due to the time-zone differences between the countries.
However, as described above, few situations arise that could be affected by this time-zone
difference. As a result we have not included the day before in our event window. As for the
hypothesis 1(c) our event window is instead defined as when gold medals are won two days in a
row and two  more additional days, that is, four  days including the events. The following two
days, counted from the last gold medal event, are included in the event window in order to be
consistent with our above stated hypotheses, and also previous literature, to make sure that the
mood effect is entirely captured.

Gathering Market Indexes and Government Bonds
To be consistent in our data, we wanted to use the same index for every country included in our
sample. In line with Edmans et al (2007), we therefore, where possible, retrieve data on each
country’s Total Market Index (henceforth “TOTMK”) available on Datastream. Some countries
had no trading data available for the specific index and hence had to be excluded. We obtained
the trading data for the “TOTMK”-indexes from Datastream one year before the first Olympic
Game in our sample, which resulted in a collection of data for daily market returns between the
years 1997 and 2014.
       To be able to conduct the CAPM-formula, we also need the risk-free rate for each
specific country. As a proxy for the risk-free rate, we will use, where possible, the 10-year
government bond. When this data was not available, we instead used the 5-year government

                                        11
bond as a proxy for the risk free rate.  The values for the government bonds are stated annually,
and consequently we divided the values with 365 to get the daily return.
       The retrieved indices will be regressed on the World Market Index, as shown below in
section “Methodology”. The World Market  index will be represented by the “TOTMKWD” from
Datastream as used in Edmans et al (2007), which in this perspective will be viewed upon as the
market portfolio. Since no  data exists for the risk-free rate on the World Market Index, we had to
use a proxy  for this. When doing this, we looked at the country affecting the World Market Index
the most, which according to Gerlach (2011) is the United States. In lack of any better proxy, the
risk-free rate in the US can be viewed upon as a World market risk free  rate, even though it

11
  The 5 year government bond was only used for Brazil.

                                                                                 21
might be skewed more towards the developed part of the world compared to the emerging
countries.
       As explained above, not every country’s data on government bonds were available on
Datastream or the data available were unreliable. For example, the Russian 10-year government
bond on Datastream had unusually stable returns for multiple years. As a secondary source, we
instead looked at  each  country’s Central Bank’s website  to see if any other historical returns
could be retrieved. However,  these indexes could not be downloaded and as a result were not
able to be automatically connected to the dates in our existing dataset. This would not be a
problem if we just copied all the data for the indexes for each day and manually inserted it in our
excel sheet. But in order to be able to  do that, the number of days in  our existing excel sheet had
to be equal to the number of days for the dataset with indices downloaded from Datastream. Due
to these different index formats on the dates in  Datastream  and the Central Banks’  index, it made
it hard to synchronize with the data on the market index returns that we had retrieved from
Datastream. For instance, if a holiday occurred on a Tuesday in Russia, then Datastream would
replicate Monday’s return index  as being the index value for Tuesday, in other words, the return
in percentage would be zero between Monday and Tuesday. On the Central Bank’s website in
Russia, on the other hand, the date for that holiday was not included in the data, but instead the
return for Wednesday was displayed. This problem made it hard to connect the time series for
the returns that were retrieved from Datastream and the data retrieved from the Central Bank.
Since every country in average has 4509 observations for their historical market returns, that is,
data on the daily market returns between the years 1997 to 2014, this would have to be computed
manually to make the data consistent when importing it to Stata. However, as previously
described, the Central Banks’  data are stated in a different format, which made us, for example in
this situation, not to include the Russian gold medal events. Due to this problem, other countries
besides Russia had to be dropped as well, which can be seen in Table A  in Appendix.

The Sample Remaining After Various Adjustments
We collected a total of 464 gold medal observations from 56 countries. However, as mentioned
previously, some countries lacked a “TOTMK”-index, and hence these countries had to be
dropped. Consequently, of the  initial 56 countries, only 33 countries had data for their country’s
respective market index and the other 23 countries were dropped. The remaining 33 countries

                                                                                 22
had a total of 385 gold medal observations. In other words, by dropping 23 countries, we lost 79
gold medal observations, as can be seen in Table A in Appendix. Even though dropping a large
amount of the countries, the number of observations did not drop dramatically. This was mainly
due to the fact that the countries lacking a “TOTMK”-index were small countries that had not
won a lot of gold medals. When adjusting for the countries that did not have government bonds
available on Datastream to be used as a proxy for the risk-free rate, we had to exclude 14 more
countries. By dropping these additional  14 countries, we lost 143 gold medal observations, as
shown in Table A. The remaining 19 countries in our sample had a total of 242 gold medal
observations. Accordingly, from the initial 464 gold medal observations collected, 222 gold
medal observations  had to be dropped due to either lack of country market index or lack of data
on government bonds.
       Moreover, as stated above, there are some events taking place on the same day or
occurring on a weekend. As a result, of these 242 gold medal observations from the 19 countries
left in our sample, the total number of unique event days that occurred on trading days, when at
least one gold medal was won, amounted up to 194 observations. To clarify, the number 194
constitutes the number of unique event days where  one or more gold medal was won, and hence
not the total number of gold medals. The total number of gold medals is still 242 outspread on
these 194 unique gold medal days.
       When testing hypothesis 1(a), it is the unique event days that are crucial, independent of
whether there is one or several gold medals on the same day. As just stated, this sums up to 194
event days. From these 194 unique event days, we will drop those whose event windows that
collide,  which is illustrated in Table I.  This results in a total number of 98 unique and non-
colliding event days.  As for the hypothesis 1(b), even more observation had to be dropped. When
adjusting for the above restrictions, we now also had to focus on the situation where more than
one gold medal  was  won on the same day. This resulted in only 8 unique observations.  When
testing hypothesis 1(c), the total event window consisted of 4 days, since we wanted to be
consistent with previous assumptions that there might be a lagging effect of two days after the
last gold medal within the event window. After adjusting for this and the restrictions also used
for non-colliding event windows, we had  9  unique events.

                                                                                 23
Beta Estimation
As mentioned above, we estimate our betas in accordance to the market model in line with
MacKinley (1994).

                      Table II: The Betas and Correlation  of the Countries

  This table shows the different betas for each country in our sample  and  the correlation for each
   country’s Total Market Index Return with the World Market Index Return and its respective
   significance level. The betas are estimated by using the market model, where each country’s excess
   return are regressed on the World Market Index’s excess return. The sample period used when
   estimating the betas is between 1997 and 2014. However, 10 days before the first gold medal event in
   an Olympic Game and 30 days after the first gold medal event are excluded from the regression in
   order to avoid affecting the  beta estimation from any potential effect caused by an event.

                   Country                          Beta                Correlation
                  Australia                        0.4261762                0.4378
                  Belgium                       0.7763626               0.6795
                    Brazil                         0.8403155                0.6545
                  Canada                       0.7871953               0.7396
                   Finland                        1.228215                0.6094
                   France                         1.028254                0.7708
                 Germany                       1.054414                0.7569
                 Great Britain                      0.8975403                0.7705
                  Hungary                       0.7111413                0.5186
                     Italy                           1.030706                 0.7210
                    Japan                         0.5524196                0.4396
                 South Korea                      0.6771556                0.4413
                 Netherlands                       1.025008                0.7502
                  Norway                       0.8968819               0.6553
                New Zealand                      0.1514984                0.2020
                    Spain                         0.9419529                0.7057
                  Sweden                        1.118228                0.7066
                 Switzerland                       0.7893118                0.7030
           United States of America                  1.075294                0.8296

As can be seen in Table II, some of the betas that were estimated had very different values from
what could be expected of them. For instance Australia  New Zealand and Japan have very low
beta values. One example is New Zealand with a beta of approximately 0.1515, which is most
likely not the case for this country. In this case, one reason why New Zealand’s beta is too low
could be due to its low correlation of only 0.2020 with the World Market Index. Then the
situation could arise  that  the World Market Index is volatile during one period and New
Zealand’s Market Index might instead be stable during the same period.

                                                                                 24
The correlation problem is hard to  adjust for in our thesis. In Gerlach (2011), the author created a
matching country index, as described above, which matched the countries not competing in the
FIFA World Cup that day with a country competing in the World Cup. Since only two countries
at the time face each other in a soccer match, it is easier to find neutral countries to match with
the countries competing in the tournament. However, this index cannot as easily be created for
the countries in our data, since in the Olympic Games, every country competes for the same gold
medal, which makes it hard to find any neutral countries to match against the competing
countries. Another possible reason for the betas of Australia, New Zealand and Japan being too
low could be due to the lagging effect from  the World Market Index. Edmans et al (2007), for
example, have a lagging dummy variable for the World Market Return to adjust for those
countries that may experience a lag in their own Market Index compared to the World Market
Index. However, after adjusting for this in our sample, Australia, New Zealand and Japan only
experienced a marginal difference,  which indicate that most of the error could derive from the
low correlation with the market index for these countries. The only exception is Japan, which,
according to Gerlach (2011), is one of the few countries whose market index is in the group that
represents 80% of the whole World Market Index. This should make Japan’s Market Index more
coherent with the World Market Index. However, as can be seen in Table II, Japan only has a
correlation of 0.4396, which therefore might have resulted in its too low beta, since its
correlation should have been higher according to Gerlach (2011).

VII:   Empirical Results
In this section we aim to present our results that are generated when testing our hypotheses.
Thereafter, a discussion of our results and implications  of them  will be presented.

Winning a Gold Medal
When testing our hypothesis 1 (a), we ran three t-tests on; AR(0,0), CAR(0,1) and CAR(0,2). To
confirm  that  the underlying data was normally distributed, we ran both a graphical and a
numerical test. For  AR(0,0) the results showed a slightly positive mean for the return of
0.0010%, however the results were not significant at an acceptable significance level.

                                                                                 25
                           Table  III: Hypothesis 1(a)  –  Event: Winning a Gold Medal

This table describes the results  from performing a one-sample t-test on the abnormal returns for the gold medal event day,
and the cumulative abnormal returns for the two following days after the gold medal event day. The gold medal
observations for hypothesis 1(a) has been isolated into  unique gold medal events, which means that no other event window,
prior to an event or after an event, collides with a gold medal event window. The sample period is between 1998 and 2014.

    Variable                Obs          Mean       Std. Err        t-stat       Pr(|T|>|t|)      95% Conf. Interval
    AR(0,0)                98        0.0010218    0.0008619      1.1854       0.2387    -0.0006889   0.0027325
   CAR(0,1)               98        0.0015468    0.0009867      1.5676       0.1202    -0.0004115   0.003505
   CAR(0,2)               98        0.0020063    0.0012151      1.6511       0.1019    -0.0004054   0.0044179

   The two-tailed t-test for CAR(0,1) shows a slightly  higher positive mean return of 0.0015%, as
   seen in Table III. The results, albeit still a too high significance level to reject the null
   hypothesis, indicate that winning a gold medal could have a positive impact on investors’ mood
   and in turn affect their trading behavior.
          As for the CAR(0,2) the two-tailed t-test shows an even higher mean of 0.0020% at a
   significance level  of 10.19%. Despite a somewhat stronger significance level than for CAR(0,1),
   it is still too weak to be able to reject the null hypothesis. However, the results, although weak,
   still indicate that the positive mood effect might have an even stronger effect on the returns two
   days after the gold medal event. These results are also in line with both the findings of Bower
   (1992) and Bollen et al (2011), where the authors argue that the mood effect has a lagging impact
   on the stock returns, and hence why we expect the CAR for the last day in the event window also
   to be the largest.
          Due to weak significance levels for all the results we receive, we could not with certainty
   reject the null hypothesis in any case. As a result, one could not draw the conclusion that a gold
   medal will affect investors’ trading behavior. However, the results are still interesting in the way
   that they are pointing in the direction to what we expected and compared to previous literature,
   our results, to some extent, indicate that there might be a small positive effect on a country’s
   stock market from winning  a gold medal.

  Trimming the Data
   Due to weak  significance  levels in our tests, we decided to trim the data for hypothesis 1(a), and
   perform the same test as above. The reason for only focusing on the hypothesis 1(a) is because
   there are enough observations left after trimming the data, compared to hypotheses 1(b) and 1(c).

                                                                                    26
   When looking at a graph over the distribution of the CAR for the data used in hypothesis 1(a), it
  is possible to see extreme outliers in our sample. When trimming the data, we removed the
   extreme outliers in the 1% percentiles. As can be seen in Table  IV, 96 observations remain to
   conduct the test for hypothesis 1(a).

              Table IV: Hypothesis 1(a) – Event: Winning a Gold Medal When Trimming the Data

This table describes the results from performing a one-sample t-test on the abnormal returns for the gold medal event day,
and the cumulative abnormal returns for the two following days after the gold medal event day. The data in for this test has
been trimmed by removing the extreme outliers  in the  1% percentiles.  The gold medal observations for hypothesis 1(a) has
been isolated into unique gold medal events, which means that no other event window, prior to an event or after an event,
collides with a gold  medal event window. The sample period is between 1998 and 2014.

    Variable                Obs          Mean       Std. Err        t-stat       Pr(|T|>|t|)      95% Conf. Interval
    AR(0,0)                96        0.0010183    0.0008694      1.1713       0.2444    -0.0007076   0.0027443
   CAR(0,1)               96        0.0015823    0.0009584      1.6509       0.1021    -0.0003204   0.003485
   CAR(0,2)               96        0.0022176    0.0010873      2.0395      0.0442     0.000059    0.0043763

   By trimming the data, we can see that the result for CAR(0,2) now is positive  and the null
   hypothesis can be rejected  at a 5% significance level,  in contrast  to the CAR(0,2) for the original
   hypothesis 1(a), which is consistent with our theory of how a gold medal event should affect the
   investors’ mood with a lagging effect on the stock market.

  Winning More Than One Gold Medal on the Same Day
   There are only  8 observation left when conducting our second hypothesis test to see the possible
   impact on AR and CAR when several gold medals are won on the same day. This makes it hard
   to perform a t-test on it, since the observations are too few which usually results  in the data not
  being normally distributed. Consequently, we needed to make sure whether the data was
   normally distributed or not, which we did by conducting both a graphical-  and a numerical test.
   The tests confirmed our predictions, that is, that the sample for our 8 observations is not
   normally distributed. This is why we instead use the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, since it is a non-
   parametric test, and hence does not require the data to be normally distributed as the t-test does.

                                                                                    27
      Table V: Hypothesis 1(b) – Event: Winning More Than One Gold Medal on the Same Day

 This table describes the results from performing a Wilcoxon signed-rank test on the abnormal returns for the
 gold medal event day, and the cumulative abnormal for the two following days  after the gold medal event.
 The gold medal observations for hypothesis 1(b) has been isolated into unique gold medal events, which
 means that no other event window, prior to an event or after an event, collides with a gold medal event
 window. The sample period is between 1998 and 2014.

Variable     Sign              Obs.         Sum ranks      Expected    Prob >|z|          z
            Positive           5             28           18
 AR(0,0)    Negative          3              8            18       0.1614          1.4
            Zero              0             0            0
            All               8             36           36

            Positive           3             19           18
 CAR(0,1)   Negative          5             17           18       0.8886         0.14
            Zero              0             0            0

            All               8             36           36

            Positive           5             25           18
 CAR(0,2)   Negative          3             11           18       0.3270         0.980
            Zero              0             0            0

             All               8             36           36

As seen in Table V, the signed-rank test shows that the AR(0,0) has more positive signs than
negative. However, due to the low significance level of 16.14%, we cannot reject the null
hypothesis. For the two following days, CAR(0,1) and CAR(0,2), the results are far from being
acceptable at any normal level of significance. However, as our hypothesis 1(b) is stated, the
results should have implied a stronger result on the event day when a country wins more than
one gold medal, which is also indicated in this test.

Olympic Medals Two Days in a Row
As with hypothesis 1(b), the number of observations when testing the hypothesis 1(c)  was  very
low. As predicted, both the graphical and the numerical test indicated that the underlying data
was not normally distributed. As a result, we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to see if any
significant results could be obtained.

                                                                                 28
             Table  VI: Hypothesis 1(c) – Event: Winning Gold Medals Two Days in a Row

  This table describes the results from performing a Wilcoxon signed-rank test on the abnormal returns for the
  gold medal event day, which implies the last gold medal and the cumulative abnormal for the two following
  days after the gold medal event. The gold  medal  observations for hypothesis 1(c) has been isolated into
  unique gold medal events, which means that no other event window, prior to an event or after an event,
  collides with a gold medal event window. The sample period is between 1998 and 2014.

Variable     Sign              Obs.         Sum ranks      Expected    Prob >|z|          z
             Positive            3              13           22.5
 AR(0,0)    Negative           6              32           22.5       0.2604         -1.125
            Zero              0             0            0

            All               9             45           45

             Positive            3              12           22.5
 CAR(0,1)   Negative           6              33           22.5       0.2135         -1.244
            Zero              0             0            0

            All               9             45           45

             Positive            4              17           22.5
 CAR(0,2)   Negative           5              28           22.5       0.5147         -0.652
            Zero              0             0            0

             All               9             45           45

             Positive           3              9           22.5
 CAR(0,3)   Negative           6              36           22.5       0.1097         -1.599
            Zero             0             0            0

             All               9             45           45

 As the previous two tests, signed-rank test for hypothesis 1(c) did not show any  significant
 results,  which can be seen in Table VI. The difference in these results compared to the results in
 the previous tests, however, is that it showed that a majority of the returns had negative abnormal
 returns. Furthermore, the significance level  was even higher than previous tests, with 26.04% for
 AR(0,0). The results are hard to interpret due to the contradictory results, compared to the above
 tests. The fourth day in the event window, that is CAR(0,4), which is two days after the last gold
 medal  event day, also implies that most of the abnormal returns are negative, but with a  lower
 significance level of 10.97%  compared to the tests for the previous days.  However, the results
 are still insignificant at any acceptable significance level.

                                                                                  29
  Beta Equals One
   Another way to test our hypothesis 1(a), and also to see if the results are reasonable, is by
   assuming that the beta for the different countries is equal to one, instead of estimating the betas
   separately. The main reason for doing this test is  to confirm that, even though including such a
   strong assumption, the results would not be better than the ones obtained when we estimated the
   betas for each individual country. Replacing all betas with one resulted in an AR(0,0) showing a
  mean of 0.00082%,  CAR(0,1) having a mean 0.0016% and CAR(0,2) a mean  of  0.0018%. As
   shown in Table VII, these results deviate slightly from our results we receive when estimating
   the betas separately, with a lower mean for all of the AR and with a weaker significance level.
   However, the robustness test still showed a result in line with our  original  results.

             Table VII: Hypothesis 1(a) – Event: Winning a Gold Medal when using a beta equal to 1

This table describes the results from performing a one-sample t-test on the  abnormal returns for the gold medal event day,
and the cumulative abnormal returns for the two following days after the gold medal event day. The abnormal returns, and
in turn the cumulative abnormal returns, has been obtained by taking the realized returns less the predicted returns, where
the predicted returns has been calculated using a beta equal to one for every country. The gold medal observations for
hypothesis 1(a) has been isolated into unique gold medal events, which means that no other event window, prior to an event
or after an event, collides with a gold medal event window. The sample period is between 1998 and 2014.

    Variable                Obs          Mean       Std. Err        t-stat       Pr(|T|>|t|)      95% Conf. Interval
    AR(0,0)                98        0.0008187    0.0008634      0.9483       0.3453    -0.0008948   0.0025323
   CAR(0,1)               98        0.0015648    0.001039      1.5061       0.1353    -0.0004972   0.0036269
   CAR(0,2)               98        0.0017758    0.0012777      1.3899       0.1678    -0.0007601   0.0043117

  VIII:  Analysis
   There were no significant results for any of the original tests in the thesis, and hence the null
   hypotheses could not be rejected at any commonly accepted significance level. This is in line
   with previous literature, which has not yet shown any impact on  investor sentiment from positive
   sport events. In other words, the significance level is still too high to be able confirm that gold
   medals have an impact. However, in the test for hypothesis 1(a), the results still show, to some
   extent, an indication of a  positive mean, especially for CAR(0,2), at a significance level close to
   10%. The results for hypothesis 1(b) show  an even higher mean. However due to the low number
   of observations for  the  test made on hypothesis 1(b), these results become  less reliable.
   Nevertheless, although weak indication, there might be some investor sentiment present affecting

                                                                                    30
the stock markets. This indication is even stronger when looking  at the results for hypothesis 1(a)
when trimming the  data. In that test, CAR(0,2) show a  positive mean of 0.0022 % for a three day
return and the null hypothesis can be rejected at the 5% significance level. In the perspective that
the returns are seen from country indexes, it could also be said to be economically significant,
when looking at  an annual perspective. Even though a 5% significance level is a commonly used
significance level, it is not a perfect one. Thus,  we cannot with  a  high certainty reject the null
hypothesis to be sure that gold medals affect the stock market. However, the results  from this test
with trimmed data create  a stronger support to the small indication already seen in the original
results.
       Previous literature has  only  shown significant results of investor sentiment on the stock
market for negative sport event outcomes. This is to a  large extent explained by the allegiance

     12
bias.   If a national team loses a game, the loss effect derived from the allegiance bias becomes
so strong that it results in a change in investors’ mood, which in turn  has a negative impact on
the stock market. In this event study, we use positive events as an explanatory variable to why
the stock market may experience an impact. Since our main results are insignificant at any
commonly used significance level, it suggests that positive events, in terms of sport outcomes,
might not have the same impact as negative, which is in line with previous literature. These
findings may result from the allegiance bias being present in the case of the Olympic Games as
well. The positive outcome, that a gold medal  represents, may thus in the presence of the bias,
not affect the investors’ mood that much since a positive outcome from the Olympic event would
already be expected. However, since there is, to some extent, an indication  of  an effect from gold
medal events, especially from the  test with  trimmed data, the allegiance bias might not be as
apparent in the Olympic Games as it is in other sports. This is supported by the fact that in other
sports one could follow the team for a long time and the fans can build up  biased expectations  for
its own team. This is not as easy to follow when it comes to the Olympic Games, since one has to
keep track on individual athletes rather than on national soccer teams.
       Seen in a broader perspective, where allegiance bias is not applicable to the same extent
in the Olympic Games, our results indicate, but cannot confirm, that there might be an effect

12
   Allegience Bias can be described as a distortion of ones own strong personal belief in something. In Edmans et al
(2007), they applied this allegience bias on the fans supporting the national home team. Fans usually have a strong
belief that their home team is going to win, even if the odds are against them. According to Edmans et. al (2007),
this is also why the reaction is stronger when the team loses compared to when they win.

                                                                                 31
from a gold medal event, it could also be said to support  the growing literature within behavioral
finance and investor sentiment. The results also support our previous assumption, which is in line
with previous literature, that  emotions changing into mood have  a lagging effect. At the time of
the event, investors might experience a distinct emotion derived from the gold medal event.
Initially they become happy, however, as can also be seen in our results, the entire effect has  at
that moment  not yet been fully incorporated. Instead, the more longer-lasting mood,  to  which the
emotions a few days later transforms into, is what actually gives the full effect and can be seen
on the stock market. This process, when emotions transform into mood, is according to previous
literature within the area of psychology and also  supported to some extent by our results, takes
about 2 days from the time the emotion arises. The lagging effect of mood has also been evident
in earlier research within behavioral finance, where it is seen that the effect from investor
sentiment on the stock market is largest after a few days from an event. Hence, the CAR(0,2),
especially for the trimmed data, suggests that mood affecting investors’ trading behavior on the
market, is observable with a lagging effect.
        The results for the hypothesis 1(c), however, are more difficult to interpret. We expected
the result to be more in line with hypothesis 1(b), since winning more gold medals two days in a
row should result in an even greater effect, at least compared to hypothesis 1(a). However, the
Wilcoxon  signed-rank  test showed instead a negative result for all the four days in the event
window where the CAR(0,3) had a significance level of 10.97%. This result is neither in line
with our previous expectations before the test nor with what our results for hypotheses 1(a) and
1(b) would suggest. However, even though the last result shows  a slightly stronger significance
level, it is still a too weak significance for us to reject the null hypothesis. Furthermore, in the
same way as for hypothesis 1(b), there  are  a low number of observations to run the tests on.
Since the results are contradicting all of our other tests, is makes the results even more
unreliable.
        Another reason for all our results having a weak significance, besides allegiance bias and
the small  sample sizes in hypotheses 1(b) and 1(c), may have to do with gold medals not being a
strong proxy variable for investors’ mood. If a gold medal does not correlate well with the
investors’ mood, it makes the proxy less useful when estimating the impact of  mood on the stock
market.

                                                                                 32
IX:   Implications and Conclusions
In this thesis, we have  studied the effect on investor  sentiment on the stock market using gold
medals in the Olympic Games as a proxy variable for investors’ mood. Previous literature has
not tested positive sport outcomes in the same manner as this thesis has done. The aim of this
thesis is to contribute with new information in an area of research that has yet to be explored.
        Due to the weak significance for our results, it is hard to draw the conclusion that a gold
medal  with certainty  affects investors’ behavior to the same extent as a negative event does. If
this is due to a potential allegiance bias, gold medals being  a poor proxy  for mood or other
factors distorting our results,  is  hard to determine. However, what can be concluded is that we
could not reject our null hypotheses for any of our  original tests, which indicate  that the win
effect, in contrast to a loss effect, does not have the same impact on investor sentiment.
       Even though the null hypothesis could not be rejected for the three original tests we
performed, the results still, to some extent, indicate that there might be an effect present when a
country wins a gold medal, especially for CAR(0,2) when doing the  test  with  trimmed  data  for
hypothesis 1(a). This suggests that, if any effect on investors’ mood, CAR(0,2)  should be the
strongest, which our results also indicate. The positive mean generated when testing hypothesis
1(a), could also be seen as economically significant, considering that the effect relates to a
cumulative three day abnormal return on a country’s total market index. However, since the
results for the hypothesis have a weak significance level, the economic significance becomes less
important for a  potential trading strategy. The question remains though, if a country’s total
market index is too large compared to the possible effect a gold medal event generates. The
effect  might be more prominent for small cap stocks that tend to be more affected by  investor
sentiment. The fact that previous literature  has  found stronger evidence for small cap stocks and
due to the fact that our results, at least to some extent, show that there could be an effect on the
stock market for a country winning a gold medal,  makes this area interesting to explore further.

Further Research
As mentioned above, Baker and Wurgler (2007) created a sentiment index, where one of its
components was trading volume. They discuss that differences in opinions could be revealed by
looking at the trading volume.  Hence, an interesting topic for a continued research would be to
include the trading volume to see if any potential difference in the normal trading volume occurs

                                                                                 33
during the Olympic Events. In this  case, by looking at the trading volume after a gold medal is
won by a certain country or by looking at the trading volume during the time the event takes
place, regardless of the outcome, one might see an indication of sentiment being present during
or after the medal event.  This can be derived from  irrational investors being optimistic after a
positive event,  which  may lead  to  an increased trading volume in total. However, it might also be
possible to see a decreased trading volume, for example during the  time a certain event takes
place as a result of investors watching the event instead of working. Since trading volume can be
used as a sentiment indicator on the market, it might also be useful in further research regarding
investor sentiment from  sport events.
       Edmans et  al (2007), as  well as  Baker and Wurgler (2007),  find  that small speculative
stocks are more exposed to investor sentiment. In Edmans et al (2007), the authors  find  that the
loss effect after a soccer game was more evident in small cap stocks than on large cap stocks.
The same method could also be applied to this research topic. Even though we  are  unable to
detect any significant results for the  original tests on the total market, an interesting aspect would
be to see if it is possible to  see an effect on small cap-indexes when a gold medal is won. Since
smaller stocks tend to have a true fundamental value that is harder to define, one might see that
small cap stocks could respond more to the  gold medal  event compared to large cap stocks and
hence give  significant results.
       As explained in our thesis, we  are  not able to find expectations  for a country’s
performance in  the Olympic Games. As a result, we had to use a variable that to a great
probability would result in a positive mood swing, regardless of the expectations, which in our
case was the gold medal event. However, the lack of data on pre-expectations made us unable to
look at a similar effect from an outcome of a negative event. Nonetheless, if  one can  find and
confirm the pre-expectations for a country’s performance in the Olympic Games,  it  might be
possible  to study a similar loss effect for the Olympic Games in the same manner as have  been
done for other sport events. This is because, if one beforehand expected a country to perform  in a
certain way and the outcomes from the  event then differed from the  expectations  prior to the
event, there could be both positive and negative changes in investors’ mood. For instance, if one
did not expect a country to finish in the top five  positions, but manages  to win a silver medal,
this should also have a positive impact on investors’ mood, even though not winning a gold
medal. However, if one expected a country to win a gold  medal  but only won a silver medal, it

                                                                                 34
could be comparable to a  loss in a match. Hence, by looking at the expectations before the events
and compare these with the outcomes, it might be possible to conduct a study for negative
Olympic event outcomes as well. Since there have only been significant results for negative sport
event outcomes in previous literature, it  would  be  interesting  to conduct a  similar  test  for  the
Olympic Games as well.

                                                                                 35
X:    References

Baker, M., Wurgler, J., 2007, Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market,  The Journal of Economic
Perspectives,  Vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 129-151

Bollen, J., Mao, H., Zeng, X.-J., 2011, Twitter Mood predicts the stock market,  Journal of
Computational Science, Vol.  2, no.  1, pp.  1–8.

Bower G.H,  1992, How Might Emotions Affect Learning?,  In  The  Handbook of Emotion and
Memory: Research and Memory, ed.: S.A. Christianson  (Lawrence Erlbaum  Associates, Inc.,
Publishers), pp-  3-31

Brown, J. S., Warner, B. J.,  1980,  Measuring Security Price Performance,  Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 8, no. 3,  pp. 205-258

Dick, D. C., Wang, Q., 2010, “The Economic Impact of the Olympic Games: Evidence from
Stock Markets”,  Applied Economic Letters, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 861-864

Edmans, A., Garcia, D., Norli, O., 2007, Sports Sentiment and Stock Returns,  The  Journal of
Finance, Vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1967-1998

Fama, E. F., 1963, Mandelbrot and the Stable Paretian Hypothesis,  The Journal of Business, vol.
36, no. 4, pp. 420-429

Gerlach, R. J.,  2011, International Sports and Investor Sentiment: Do National Team Matches
Really Affect Stock Market Returns?,  Applied Financial Economics, Vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 863-
880

Hirshleifer, D., Shumway, T., 2003,  Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the Weather,  The
Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1009-1032

International Olympic Committee, 1998, Official Report of the XVIII Olympic Winter Games,
Nagano

International Olympic Committee, 2000, Official Report of the XXVII Olympic Summer Games,
Sydney

International Olympic Committee, 2002, Official Report of the XIX Olympic Winter Games,
Salt Lake

International Olympic Committee, 2004, Official Report of the XXVIII Olympic Summer
Games, Athens

                                                                                 36
International Olympic Committee, 2006, Official Report of the XX Olympic Winter Games,
Torino

International Olympic Committee, 2008, Official Report of the XXIX Olympic Summer Games,
Beijing

International Olympic Committee, 2010, Official Report of the XXI Olympic Winter Games,
Vancouver

International Olympic Committee, 2012, Official Report of the XXX Olympic Summer Games,
London

International Olympic Committee, 2014, Official Report of the XXII Olympic Winter Games,
Sochi

International Olympic Committee  Marketing, 2012, Media Guide: London

Johnson, A. M., Watson, J. K., 2011, Can Changes in the Purchasing Managers’ Index Foretell
Stock Returns? An Additional Forward-Looking Sentiment Indicator,  Journal of Investing, Vol.
20, no. 4, pp. 89-98

Kamstra,  J. M.,  Kramer, A. L., Levi, D. M., 2000,  Losing Sleep at the Market: The Daylight
Saving Anomaly,  The  American  Economic Review, Vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 1005-1011

KantarSport, 2010, FIFA World Cup South Africa: TV Audience Report. Retrieved from URL:
http://www.fifa.com/mm/document/affederation/tv/01/47/32/73/2010fifaworldcupsouthafricatva
udiencereport.pdf
[Accessed  2014-04-26,  14:00]

Mediamätning i Skandinavien (MMS), 2014, OS i Sotji 2014. Retrieved from URL:
http://www.mms.se/wp-content/uploads/_dokument/rapporter/tv-tittande/evenemang/2014/OS
%20i%20Sotji%202014.pdf.
[Accessed  2014-04-24, 20:00]

Olympic Programme Commission Report, 117th IOC Session, 2005, Lausanne, Switzerland

Olympic Programme Commission Report, 119th IOC Session, 2007, Id-Média S.à r.l., Belmont-
sur-Lausanne, Switzerland

Rose, K. A., Spiegel, M. M., 2011, The Olympic Effect,  The Economic Journal, Vol. 121, no.
553, pp. 652-677

Sochi 2014 Olympics, 2014.  Retrieved from URL:  http://www.sochi2014.com/en
[Accessed 2014-03-26, 18:00]

                                                                                 37
Yaffa, J., 2014, January 01. The 2014 Winter Oympics in Sochi costs $51 Billion.
Businessweek.com.  Retrieved from URL:  http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-01-02/the-
2014-winter-olympics-in-sochi-cost-51-billion.
[Accessed  2014-04-03, 15:00]

                                                                                 38
        XI:   Appendix

         Appendix A.
                           Table A: Countries in the Sample and the Gold Medal Distribution
 This table shows the original amount of countries in our sample and the amount of gold medals for each country. It also shows  how
 many  countries, and consequently gold medals, that are being dropped due to either lack of Total Market Indexes, lack of Government
 Bonds or unreliable data for the Government Bonds.
                      Countries                                                                                   No.
                    dropped due to             Countries dropped due                                    No. Total    Unique
Original amount of   lack of  market   No. Gold    to lack of 10 year     No. Gold                          Gold       Gold
 Countries in the       index data      Medals    Government Bonds     Medals    Countries left in our    Medals    Medals
     dataset         (“TOTMK”)     dropped  data or unreliable data   dropped          sample         remaining  remaining
    Algeria            Algeria          2
    Argentina                                  Argentina           3
    Australia                                                                Australia           4          4
    Austria                                      Austria            17
    Bahamas         Bahamas        3
     Bahrain                                    Bahrain            1
     Belarus           Belarus          4
     Belgium                                                             Belgium           1         1
     Brazil                                                                   Brazil            5          5
     Bulgaria                                    Bulgaria            1
    Cameroon       Cameroon        3
    Canada                                                              Canada           19        17
     China                                     China            39
     Croatia           Croatia          5
    Cuba             Cuba          6
     Czech                                    Czech Republic        9
     Republic
     Dominican      Dominican        2
     Republic          Republic
     Estonia           Estonia          2
     Ethiopia          Ethiopia         13
     Finland                                                                Finland            4         4
     France                                                                France           12        12
    Germany                                                           Germany          20        20
     Great Britain                                                           Great Britain         10         6
     Greece                                    Greece            4
     Grenada          Grenada         1

                                                                                          39
Hungary                                                            Hungary           3         2
Italy                                                                      Italy             8          8
Jamaica          Jamaica         12
Japan                                                                 Japan            8         7
Kazakhstan      Kazakhstan        2
Kenya            Kenya         10
Korea                                                                Korea            7         7
Latvia             Latvia          1
Lithuania         Lithuania         2
Mexico                                   Mexico           1
Morocco         Morocco         2
Mozambiqu     Mozambique       1
e
Netherlands                                                           Netherlands         24        19
New                                                                 New Zealand         2         2
Zealand
North Korea     North Korea        1
Norway                                                            Norway          15        15
Panama          Panama         1
Poland                                     Poland            9
Portugal                                    Portugal            1
Romania                                 Romania          11
Russia                                     Russia            43
Slovenia                                   Slovenia           3
Spain                                                                 Spain            2         2
Sweden                                                            Sweden           5         3
Switzerland                                                           Switzerland          10        10
Trinidad      Trinidad Tobago      1
Tobago
Turkey                                    Turkey            1
Uganda          Uganda         1
Ukraine          Ukraine         3
United                                                                     United States         83         50
States
Yugoslavia       Yugoslavia        1
Sum: 56         Sum: 23       Sum:         Sum: 14         Sum:         Sum: 19         Sum:      Sum:
                               79                           143                           242       194

                                                                                      40