 Potential Overreactions and Reversal Effects,
     Evidence from the Swedish Market

                                                 ∗                     †
        Filip Abrahamsson Kwetczer & Carl ˚Akerlind

                      May 17, 2015

                            Bachelor Thesis
                    Stockholm School of Economics

                            Abstract

   Ever since De Bondt and Thaler first formulated the Overreaction Hypoth-
   esis researchers have been studying different financial markets searching for
  evidence for an overreacting market. This paper examines if the OMXS30
   stocks overreact to extreme events and if certain variables, such as the un-
   derlying causational event of the potential overreaction and furthermore the
   characteristics of the potential overreaction itself, can explain the probability
   of reversals taking place. The main result of this study is that on average
   there are no reversals taking place. Therefore, the Overreaction Hypothesis is
   rejected for the OMXS30 stocks. Reversals are however found to exist in over
   one third of the events examined which is considered a high fraction keeping
   in mind the size of the companies studied. Short time reversals occurred
   after 34.7% of the potential overreactions and long time reversals occurred
   after 43.3% of the cases. The main tests of the thesis show on a statistically
   significant level that increased traded volume on the event day increases the
   probability of reversals taking place. Some of the causational events are with
   statistic significance found to increase or decrease the probability of rever-
   sals. The conclusion that the likelihood of a reversal is dependent on the
   causational event is therefore drawn.

  Keywords: Overreaction Hypothesis, Reversal effects, Causational events,
  OMXS30, Swedish Market

   Tutor: Irina Zviadadze

  Acknowledgements: We would like to express our gratitude to Irina Zvi-
   adadze for insightful comments and guidance throughout the entire project.

∗
 22800@hhs.se
†
 22707@hhs.se
Contents

   1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
   2 Previous Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
         2.1 Studies Conducted within the U.S. Market . . . . . . . . . . 4
         2.2 Non-American Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3 Hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
         3.1 The Existence of Reversals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
         3.2 Variables of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         5.1 General and Prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         5.2 The Fama-French Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         5.3 Robustness Test of the Model and Implications . . . . . . . 11
         5.4 Finding the Expected Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         5.5 Trigger Level and Finding the Abnormal Returns . . . . . . 12
         5.6 Causational Events and Event Windows . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         5.7 Cumulative Abnormal Returns and Reversals . . . . . . . . 14
         5.8 Further Variables of Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         5.9 The Linear Probability Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
        5.10 The Probit Model and Robustness Test . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   6 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
         6.1 Descriptive Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
         6.2 Main Statistical Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
         6.3 Robustness Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
         6.4 Potential Trading Strategy Ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   7 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   1 Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   2 Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
1 Introduction

Observing the movements of stocks’ prices subsequently to major price changes this
thesis investigates the stock market’s reactions to extreme events. The main interest
concerns the nature of reversals, i.e. rebound effects in the opposite direction
of the initial price movement. Furthermore, the thesis also endeavours to shed
light on some explanations as to when reversals are to be expected. The question
whether the market is efficient or if mispricing sometimes occurs is one of the most,
if not the most, extensively debated questions within the field of finance. The
three forms of the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) put forward by Fama (1969)
represents one of the most fundamental theories within financial economics. This
thesis examines the aspect of mispricing regarding the market reacting severely to
spectacular events. This is of greatest interest since determination of future stock
prices from past is a violation of the EMH and could lay a foundation to positive
alpha trading strategies.
      Ever since De Bondt and Thaler (1985) first formulated the Overreaction
Hypothesis researchers have been studying different financial markets searching for
evidence for an overreacting market. Arguments regarding the market’s reactions
to extreme events have been put forward for all of the three main competing the-
ories, the EMH, suggesting that investors are unable to predict future returns, the
Overreaction Hypothesis, suggesting that the market overreacts to new information
and later on will correct these overreactions and the Underreaction Hypothesis, sug-
gesting that the market underreacts to new information and later on will move in
the same direction.
       Atkins and Dyl (1990) as well as Lehmann (1990) claims that the U.S. market
is overreacting to extreme events and also find support for the existence of a reversal
effect, defined as a price decrease if the initial overreaction is positive or a price
increase if the initial overreaction is negative, taking place. On the one hand Cox
and Peterson (1994) find evidence for reversals taking place the first three days
following a large one-day stock price decline. On the other hand they claim that on
average there are no reversals to be found after 1987. Not only have our predecessors
examined whether the market overreacts or not but also investigated the effect of
different factors, such as market liquidity and bid-ask spread, on the characteristics

                                   1
of the reversals.
       This paper sets out to examine the behaviour of the stocks of the 30 largest
companies on the Swedish stock market (the OMXS30 stocks) in a short time
period after the stocks experience severe change in prices. In line with the method
used by Bremer and Sweeney (1991) a pre-set trigger level of ±5% is defined.
Price movements passing this threshold value and fulfilling further criteria of being
the sole such movement in a 40 days window are then investigated to see if the
market overreacts to extreme events related to the OMXS30 companies. Moreover,
the thesis addresses the relation between major price changes and reversals to the
underlying explanation of the initial price movement, i.e. causational event, and the
market liquidity measured by the quantitative variables traded volume and bid-ask
spread. The two main features that distinguishes this thesis from previous work
in the field are i) the market where it is conducted, the authors are not aware of
any similar study being conducted on the Swedish market, and ii) the endeavour
to explain outcomes by the causational events of the initial price change.
      Using the trigger level of ±5% and applying the criterion of only one potential
overreaction per event window 150 potential overreactions are found in the period
between 2010-2014. Furthermore, reversals are found during the examined time
period. In total, short time reversals (defined as cumulative abnormal return closer
to the zero level 5 days after the event day than on the event day) occurred after
34.7% of the potential overreactions and long time reversals (defined as cumulative
abnormal return closer to the zero level 20 days after the event day than on the
event day) occurred after 43.3% of the cases. However, this means that on average
there are no reversals after an initial price movement of ±5%.
       Furthermore, some variables of interest are found on a statistically significant
level to either increase or decrease the probability of a reversal after a potential
overreaction. The main tests of the thesis shows that traded volume and some of
the causational events have a significant impact on the probability of the existence
of reversals. The ability to link the probability of reversals to the causational event
is an important result and differentiates a lot from previous research and findings
in the field. Worth to notice is that even though bid-ask spread seemed to have
an impact on the probability of reversals occurring in the descriptive statistics no

                                   2
statistically significant results could be attained.
       The obtained results show that there on average have been no reversals dur-
ing the last five years for the 30 largest firms on the Stockholm stock exchange.
This means that the Overreaction Hypothesis can be concluded not to be valid for
these firms. However, since this thesis considers very large firms it is possible that
the outcome had been quite different if smaller firms would have been considered.
Finding that more than one third of all potential overreactions in fact were overre-
actions has to be seen as a quite large fraction considering the size of the companies
observed.
       The remainder of this thesis is organized as follows, in section 2 related liter-
ature is reviewed and the most important results of previous research is presented.
After that follows section 3 containing an outline of the hypothesis of this thesis.
Moreover, in section 4 the data used in the study is presented and some potential
biases are discussed. Section 5 contains a description of the methodology used in
order to receive the results which are to be found in section 6. In section 7 follows
the conclusions, and their implications, which are reached from the results. Finally,
the last section contains the appendix where most of the graphs, tables and some
detailed calculations are to be found.

2 Previous Literature

Numerous authors have explored the area of research concerning the reversal pro-
cess following large movements of stock prices. Their findings sometimes seem to
differ. Empirical evidence have been found both in favour of a financial market that
seems to overreact to certain events as well as of a financial market that seems to
underreact. Either of these scenarios causes effects that are violations of the EMH.
Researchers who have found evidence for reversals taking place are in favour of the
Overreaction Hypothesis whereas researchers who have not found these evidences
but rather suggest momentum in returns are in favour of the Underreaction Hy-
pothesis. Often, market capitalization, bid-ask spread, stock illiquidity and similar
cross-sectional aspects are referred to as explanation for over- and under reactions.

                                   3
2.1 Studies Conducted within the U.S. Market

De Bondt and Thaler (1985) was first to formulate the Overreaction Hypothesis.
The hypothesis suggests two things: ”Extreme movements in stock prices will be
followed by subsequent price movements in the opposite direction.” and furthermore
”The more extreme the initial price movement, the greater will be the subsequent
adjustment.”. The Overreaction Hypothesis is regarded as a violation of the EMH
since it contradicts the part of the EMH stipulating that stock prices cannot be
predicted from historical prices. Moreover, De Bondt and Thaler (1987) denies that
price reversals are caused by size effect, seasonality or change in market risk.
      Atkins and Dyl (1990) found evidence of the stock market overreacting in
the short run. The effect was especially visible for stocks experiencing large price
declines. Though, the authors did not find evidence for the market being inefficient
when transaction costs were taken into account since traders were unable to profit
from the price reversals as a result of the magnitude of the bid-ask spread. In
contrast to Atkins and Dyl, Lehmann (1990) suggests that arbitrary profits can be
made on trading on reversal patterns despite the existence of transaction costs.
      Bremer and Sweeney (1991) examines reversals after large stock price de-
creases. The authors use a pre-set trigger level return and examine the subsequent
returns of the stocks passing the threshold value. In their study they find statis-
tically significant reversals for stocks experiencing a single day return of less than
-10%. The cumulative reversals of these stocks equal a 2.2% price increase over the
next two trading days (1.77% day one).
       Cox and Peterson (1994) studies the impact of the market liquidity and bid-
ask bounce on price reversals the following three days after large one-day declines
in stock prices. Their sample consists of daily data for all AMEX, NYSE and NMS
firms that are listed on CRSP between 1963 and 1991. Significant positive average
cumulative abnormal returns are found for the following three days after a steep
price fall. The cumulative abnormal returns for day four to twenty are however
found to be negative. Moreover, the amount of reversals tends to diminish over
time, following late 1987 there are on average no reversals. Cox and Peterson also
claim that if liquidity is an important factor in the reversal process stronger reversals
are to be expected in less liquid markets and for smaller firms. Furthermore, the

                                   4
results claim that larger initial declines not necessarily lead to greater subsequent
reversals in contradiction to the Overreaction Hypothesis.
       Studying stock price overreactions and delayed reactions contribution to prof-
itability of contrarian strategies Jagadeesh and Titman (1995) found that stock
prices overreact to firm-specific information and react with a delay to common
factors.
      More recently, Pritamani and Singal (2001) and Larson and Madura (2003)
found, in contrary to their predecessors, that large price changes following a public
announcement are associated with continuation in the trend, i.e. no reversals. Their
findings supports the theory of reversals being connected to uninformed events
whereas informed events are connected to underreactions.
      Benou and Richie (2003) found evidence largely consistent with the Over-
reaction Hypothesis when studying the long-run reversal patterns for a sample of
large U.S. firms with a trigger level of -20%.

2.2 Non-American Studies

All the abovementioned papers have at least one thing in common, their samples
are from the U.S. market. However, studies have been conducted for other markets
as well, though the U.S. market is the by far most studied.
      Brailsford (1992) and Allen and Prince (1995) find evidence for reversals
using Australian data. Da Costa (1994) studies the Brazilian market and finds
evidence for reversals. Bremer, Hiraki and Sweeney (1997) examines the Japanese
market and finds evidence for reversals as well as claims that the reversals for losers
is related to traded volume. However, as far as the authors are concerned, no similar
studies have yet been conducted on the Swedish market.

3 Hypotheses

The research question this thesis sets out to answer is whether the Swedish stock
market overreacts or not on extreme events concerning the OMSX30 companies.
Moreover, do certain underlying causational events and furthermore the character-
istics of the potential overreaction itself affect the nature of the reversal effect. In

                                   5
order to answer the research question about potential overreactions and the rever-
sal effects that might follow a set of hypotheses are developed. The hypotheses
being tested within the thesis regard two different main aspects of reversals. First
and foremost, it is examined whether there are any reversals or not on the Swedish
market. Second, if reversals do happen, can they be explained and when are they
to be expected?

3.1 The Existence of Reversals

The first hypothesis being tested is if there have been overreactions followed by
reversals during the studied time period. Concerning the question whether over-
reactions happen frequently or more sporadically guidance can be obtained from
previous research in the field. Since reversals have been found to exist in different
markets (e.g. Atkins and Dyl (1990), Lehmann (1990) and Bremer and Sweeney
(1991)) the hypothesis is in line with previous findings. Though, Cox and Peterson
(1994) claims that there are on average no reversals in the years following 1987
which might indicate that the reversals might not be numerous relatively to the
amount of potential overreactions. In accordance with the findings of Cox and Pe-
terson the size of the companies being studied ought to speak against overreactions
and reversals taking place. Since these are big companies their stocks are very liq-
uid which usually causes the stocks to fluctuate less than the ones of smaller, more
risky, firms. This statement is in line with Cox and Peterson (1994). With this in
mind, the second hypothesis is that on average there should be no overreactions
taking place for the OMXS30 firms.
       When investigating the existence of reversals a distinction between potential
overreactions following positive and negative abnormal returns can be made. It
is possible that the likelihood of overreactions is different between the two cases.
The underlying idea is that behavioural economic concepts such as loss aversion,
tendency to hold on to losers and sell winners and other similar concepts can affect
the likelihood of reversals in the two different scenarios.

                                   6
3.2 Variables of Interest

Given that reversals exist it is logical to assume that certain variables might help
to explain the probability of reversals taking place. Previous literature has found
similar results, e.g. Cox and Peterson (1994) found that liquidity is a factor of
interest and Bremer, Hiraki and Sweeney (1997) states that reversals are connected
to traded volume. In line with the two recently mentioned papers both traded
volume and bid-ask spread are believed to have influence on the probability of
reversals taking place.
       The hypothesis that the bid-ask spread affects the probability of a reversal
is motivated in a similar way as in Cox and Peterson (1994). Since large one-
day price movements are likely to be associated with substantial selling or buying
pressure, enhancing the probability that a closing transaction is at a bid or an ask
price and, consequently leading to a reversal the next day due to the bid-ask bounce.
Furthermore, greater bid-ask spreads ought to indicate more separated beliefs about
the proper value of a stock. This in turn could increase the probability of a reversal
since more investors potentially complete deals at the wrong price. Thus, when the
market later on settles the fair value the potential mispricing should be corrected.
       Traded volume is also likely to have influence on the probability of whether
there is a reversal or not. The hypothesis is based on the idea that investors are
pushing each other as well as the stock price in a certain direction. Somewhere on
the way the logic disappears and some investors might loose perception of what the
fair price actually is. The higher the traded volume is the higher is the chance of
the above-explained scenario and therefore also reversals.
       The final hypothesis being tested is whether the cause of the potential over-
reaction, i.e. the causational event, in some way affects the probability of reversals
taking place. The underlying economic intuition for this is that the reaction to
unexpected events should be greater than the reaction to expected events since
expected events should be incorporated in the stock price according to the EMH.

                                   7
4 Data

The data on the stocks being analysed in this report as well as the market proxy and
the data used to calculate the Fama and French factors originates from Thompson
Reuters Datastream. The main data being analysed in this thesis is the information
concerning the OMXS30 stocks, i.e. the stocks of the 30 largest companies on
the Stockholm Stock Exchange. However, the constitution of the OMXS30 might
change over time, to secure having the same 30 companies for the entire period
the constituents as of Mach 2015 were elected for the entire time period. Data
regarding closing price, traded volume and bid-ask spread are collected on a daily
basis. The sample constitutes of data from the five most recent years (January
2010 March 2015), for choice of period of interest please consult the Methodology
section.
      Furthermore, the data required to compute the daily Fama and French fac-
tors, i.e. closing price, price-to-book, and market capitalization, are gathered on
a daily basis for all companies listed on the Stockholm Stock Exchange. In the
cases no price-to-book is available this figure is calculated by dividing market cap-
italization with book value. Important to notice is that if data is not available for
the entire period of interest the stock is not included in the sample. One might
argue that this gives a survivorship bias. The effect is however mitigated since the
period of interest is relatively short and thus the survivorship bias effect ought to
be relatively small. Another attenuating effect is that in the end the factors will
have minor impact on the result. This causes the eventual impacts of survivorship
bias to be negligible. Additionally, if parts of the required data are missing and
not possible to calculate, the stock is left out. Also, in line with Fama and French
(1993) negative book value firms are not considered.
      As a proxy for the market the OMXS index is being used, price is collected
on a daily basis. Quite frequently the OMXS30 index itself is used as market proxy
for the Swedish market. The reason not using OMXS30 in this thesis is that some
of the companies of interest would make up a significant large proportion of the
market itself.
      Regarding a proxy for the risk-free rate the daily STIBOR rate is used.
Since daily returns are analysed the risk-free rate should have the same term. The

                                   8
                                                                   1
STIBOR figures are collected from the website of Riksbanken  (the Swedish central
bank) and then adjusted by hand within Excel to fit the data set from Datastream,
which is not corrected for Swedish holidays.
       Finally, Retriever is used to gather the information concerning causational
events, mostly being articles from news agencies and press releases.

5 Methodology

In the following section the methodology used in our empirical tests is described.
First, the general framework used to find abnormal returns is described. After that
comes a part containing the necessary information about the Fama-French Three-
Factor model and how expected returns are determined. The section then proceeds
with the abnormal returns and the concept of a trigger level of ±5% for extracting
the interesting parts of the data from the total sample is introduced. The terms
causational event and reversal is then further defined and put into context. After
that follows a description of the Linear Probability Model and how it is used in the
thesis to test the statistical significance of the descriptive results. The section ends
with the Probit Model which is used to test the robustness of the results.

5.1 General and Prerequisites

In order to study potential overreactions the returns qualifying for being studied
need to be separated out. This is done by finding daily abnormal returns defined
as daily actual return less daily expected return.

                              ARi,t = ri,t − E[ri,t] (1)

In (1) ri,t denotes actual return for stock i on day t computed as ri,t = (Pi,t −
Pi,t−1)/Pi,t−1. Here Pi,t is the closing price for stock i on day t.
       Furthermore, daily expected returns need to be calculated for all 30 stocks
throughout the entire time period of interest. In order to estimate the expected

   1
    http://www.riksbank.se

                                   9
returns the Fama-French Three-Factor Model is used,

                        M RP          SM B          HM L
        E[ri,t] = αi,t + βi,t M RPt + βi,t SM Bt + βi,t HM Lt + rf,t−1 (2)

where M RPt is the market risk premium on day t defined as the return of the
market on day t less the risk-free rate on day t − 1, i.e. M RPt = rm,t − rf,t−1. The
market return on day t is defined as rm,t = (Pm,t − Pm,t−1)/Pm,t−1. Furthermore,
HM Lt and SM Bt are the Fama-French factors on day t.

5.2 The Fama-French Framework

According to the framework introduced by Fama and French (1993), factors are
created for the OMXS. Swedish factors are used since domestic factors in the model
of interest better explain stock and portfolio average returns than world-based
factors according to Griffin (2002). Note that the factors do not exist to download
for the Swedish market and therefore are created. The reason for choosing the
Fama-French Three-Factor Model is that it has a higher explanatory value than
other models, for example the CAPM, according to Fama and French (1992a).
Furthermore, the article argues that the beta (the slope coefficient in the CAPM)
has little information about average stock returns, regardless if it is used alone or
in combination with other variables. The factors in the Fama-French Three-Factor
Model depend on market risk premium (MRP), firm size, which is measured by
market equity (ME) (i.e. market capitalization) and the book-to-market equity
ratio (BE/ME).

            M E = stock price × number of shares outstanding (3)

                                                                                                                                                 ′
            BE/M E = the ratio of the book value of a f irm s
                                                                                 (4)
                    common stock, BE, to its market value, M E

In Fama and French (1993) the authors argue that ME and BE/ME have explana-
tory power and that they explain the cross-section of average returns. However,
ME and BE/ME cannot explain the great difference between the risk-free rate and
the stocks average return, which is why the MRP is important in the model. Fama

                                   10
and French argue that firms with higher BE/ME are more likely to be in a financial
distress than firm with a lower ratio, and that larger stocks are less sensitive to
changes in business conditions than smaller ones. Therefore, the factors based on

                                                                                     2
ME and BE/ME capture the sensitivity of risk factors in the macro economy.  For
further details on constructions and calculations of the Fama-French factors please
see 2 Appendix.

5.3 Robustness Test of the Model and Implications

The findings of the robustness test of the model (see 2 Appendix ) show that the
model is rejected for the Swedish market. However, this is not surprising, Fama and
French (2012) show that the Fama-French Three-Factor Model and its subsequent
versions with even more factors are rejected. However, the Fama and French factor
models are widely used in both research and applications in order to explain returns.
The differences between the three-factor model and models of a higher degree are
minor according to Fama and French (2012). In Fama and French (2014) evidence
is presented for the five-factor model providing acceptable results when using the
model for applied purposes, as is the case in this thesis. Since the differences
between the models are minor, and the application of the model within this study
is to set off the trigger level of ±5%, the small constant terms that ought to be zero
(average size magnitude of 0.32%), will neither misguide this study nor its results.
Therefore, the Fama-French Three-Factor Model can still be used even though it is
rejected.

5.4 Finding the Expected Returns

Using the Fama-French Three-Factor Model the daily expected return is defined as
follows,

                        M RP          SM B          HM L
        E[ri,t] = αi,t + βi,t M RPt + βi,t SM Bt + βi,t HM Lt + rf,t−1 (5)

   2
    Bodie, Kane and Marcus, 2014, Investments, 10th Global Edition, p. 341

                                   11
In order to get the slope coefficients in (5) the following regression is performed,

                           M RP          SM B          HM L
    E[ri,t] − rf,t−1 = αi,t + βi,t M RPt + βi,t SM Bt + βi,t HM Lt + i,t (6)

In the abovementioned regression the time period is defined on a quarterly basis,
i.e. quarterly betas are calculated from the daily data. There are several arguments
in favour of using quarterly betas. First, the study benefits from recalculating the
betas quite frequently since the more accurate the betas are the more accurate
will the estimation of the local behaviour be. Secondly, in order to mitigate the
impact of extremely deviating daily returns the time period for the betas must not
be too short. Therefore, the conclusion is that quarterly betas are best suitable.
It is possible that monthly betas had performed even better but since the impact
of individual deviations risk to be bigger using monthly betas the risk is further
reduced using quarterly betas.

5.5 Trigger Level and Finding the Abnormal Returns

Using (1) and (5) the abnormal returns are retrieved. In order to select the potential
overreactions to study a certain predetermined trigger level is established. This is
in line with the methodology used by Bremer and Sweeney (1991) and many of
their successors. The trigger levels used in previous studies vary and there does not
exist a norm on what magnitude to use. Since this study examines the 30 largest
listed companies in Sweden the deviations from the expected returns are expected
to be relatively low compared to smaller companies. Therefore, the trigger level
being used is set to ±5%. If the absolute value of an abnormal return is greater
than the trigger level the return is considered as a potential overreaction according
to,
                  |ARi,t| ≥ 5% =⇒ potential overreaction (7)

After studying the results the years of the time period prior to and including the
financial crisis are removed from the original sample. This is due to the problems
associated with an extremely volatile market. During the removed period, the
number of potential overreactions was approximately three times as many than
during the more normal financial period following in 2010-2014. However, defining

                                   12
the period of interest to 2010-2014 there are still enough potential overreactions to
study.

5.6 Causational Events and Event Windows

After having identified the potential overreactions the following action is to identify
the real event, i.e. the causational event, which caused the potential overreaction.
The causational events found are then sorted into five categories depending on what
type of event that occurred. The five categories are: Report, News release, Dividend
record date, Result indications and Environment change. The event is categorised
as a report if the event causing the potential overreaction is a quarterly report or
similar. An event gets categorised as a news release if there is a piece of news
published from the company or regarding the company on the day of the potential
overreaction. If a company indicates something about their performance prior to
the result is published officially or there are some other indications (for example
the performance of the sector) the event is defined as a result indication. Finally,
events regarding change in sector structure, legislation and judgements following
judicial process are defined as environment change. The reason for only having
five different categories is that with too many the number of observations in each
category would be too few to be able to find accurate results.
       The causational events are further used to filter away identified potential
overreactions that have no causational event but rather are responses to earlier
movements. More important, the causational events are used to determine which
potential overreactions to study. The criterion for the potential overreactions is
that they need to be the sole potential overreaction for a company in a time span
reaching ±20 days from the event day. A time span meeting the criterions is
defined as an event window. This implies that if two potential overreactions for
the same company are within a time span of 40 days from each other both events
are excluded from further analysis. The reason for only allowing one potential
overreaction in each time span of ±20 days is that it otherwise would be impossible
to distinguish the movements deriving from each separate event. From this point,
the event windows are the time intervals of interest.

                                   13
5.7 Cumulative Abnormal Returns and Reversals

The cumulative abnormal return CARi for stock i from day t1 to day t2 is defined
as,
                                                                     t2
             ∑
                              CARi(t1, t2) =     ARi,t (8)
                                                        t=t1
Having obtained the cumulative abnormal returns for all event windows it is possible
to define a reversal. A reversal is defined as a rebound towards the zero CAR level
after a potential overreaction. In this thesis two different reversals are being studied,
short time reversals and long time reversals. A short time reversal prevails if the
CAR is closer to zero five days after the potential overreaction than on the day of
the potential overreaction. The case is similar for long time reversals, except for
the time period being changed to 20 days. The reason to studying two different
time spans is to see if there are any differences. If there is a reversal the conclusion
that the potential overreaction in fact was an overreaction can be drawn.
       In order to be able to study general tendencies of the identified potential
overreactions denote CAR as the average cumulative abnormal return across all
event windows for all companies.

                             t2              N                        N   t2
         ∑   1 ∑      1 ∑∑
         CAR(t1, t2) =    ARt =       CARi(t1, t2) =           ARi,t (9)
                   N           N
                              t=t1              i=1                        i=1 t=t1

Important to notice is that a necessary distinction between positive and negative
abnormal returns on the day of the potential overreactions needs to be done in
order for the abnormal returns not to offset each other.

5.8 Further Variables of Interest

In order to seek to answer if reversals are more likely to occur under some particu-
lar circumstances than others two additional variables are defined, relative traded
volume and relative bid-ask spread. Relative traded volume is defined as the traded
volume on the event day divided by the average volume of the previous days of the
event window, and similar for the relative bid-ask spread. Mathematically, these

                                   14
variables are defined as,

                V olume0
               −1             , where N = min(t ∈ event window) (10)
        1 ∑
               |N |     V olumet
               t=N

              BA0
                 −1         , where N = min(t ∈ event window) (11)
          1 ∑
                |N |     BAt
                 t=N
respectively. The reason for defining the variables in this way rather than just
comparing traded volume and bid-ask spread in absolute terms between the events
is to normalise the substantial differences especially in traded volume between the
companies. Furthermore, the variables are defined in a way making it possible to
relatively compare traded volume and bid-ask spread on the day of the potential
overreaction across different event windows. Moreover, the variables measure the
impact of the relative change in traded volume and the relative change in bid-ask
spread on the event day compared to the average of the days in the event window
prior to the event day as can be seen from (10) and (11).

5.9 The Linear Probability Model

In order to test if the descriptive results are statistically significant a regression
model called the Linear Probability Model (LPM) is used. The choice of model is
motivated by the LPM being a model for binary outcomes, which suits this study
perfectly since either a reversal happen or it does not. The dependent side of the
regressions, i.e. the reversal variable will be denoted as a dummy variable. Note
that the use of big letters implies stochastic variables.
                   
                                 1 , if reversal
                  REV ERSAL =                             (12)
                                0 , otherwise

For the independent side of the regression, i.e. the right hand side, a vector x that
includes all variables of interest as components is created. The variables of interest
are the causational events, the relative traded volume variable and the relative bid-
ask spread variable. Furthermore, when doing the regression, the slope coefficients

                                   15
will come out as a vector denoted as β.

x = [Report, N ews release, Dividend record date, Result indications, Environment change]
                                                                             (13)
  β = [βReport, βN ews release, βDividend record date, βResult indications, βEnvironment change]
                                                                             (14)
Let F denote the cumulate distribution function, let P stand for the probability
and let E denote the expected value. Then the following holds,

                     P (REV ERSAL = 1|x) = F (x, β) (15)

                   P (REV ERSAL = 0|x) = 1 − F (x, β) (16)

From (15) and (16) one can see that β reflects impact on the probability of changes
in x . One possible way of using the LPM is to make the regression,

                              F (x, β) = x· β (17)

Since the following holds,

           E[Reversal|x] = 0 · (1 − F (x, β)) + 1 · F (x, β) = F (x, β) (18)

it is possible to construct the following regression model,

     Reversal = E[Reversal|x] + Reversal − E[Reversal|x] = x· β +  (19)

Note that there are some drawbacks of the LPM. In (19)  is heteroscedastic and
depends on β, and because x· β +  must equal 1 or 0,  equals either 1 − x· β or
x· β, with probabilities F and 1 − F respectively. Thus, the variance of the model
is,
                         V ar(|x) = x· β(1 − x· β) (20)

Also, the model might give probabilities outside of the span [0,1]. This is of course
a major error. Though, the results of this report were never close to the critical
values and therefore this drawback did not affect the outcomes. Even though the

                                   16
model has drawbacks, it is widely used, for example by Caudill (1988), Heckman
and MaCurdy (1985) and Heckman and Snyder (1997). Since the left-hand side
is binary, the linear probability model is a suitable model for this thesis. When
analysing the results, the main interest will be the sign of the slope coefficients and
the confidence interval of the values of the slope coefficients.

5.10 The Probit Model and Robustness Test

The Probit Model is used to test the robustness of the results obtained from the
LPM. The Probit Model is also a regression model for binary outcomes. As in the
case of the LPM, the reversal variable is denoted as a dummy variable,
                   
                                 1 , if reversal
                  REV ERSAL =                             (21)
                                0 , otherwise

The variables of interest are included in a vector x,

x = [Report, N ews release, Dividend record date, Result indications, Environment change]
                                                                             (22)
and the slope coefficients from the regression will come out as a vector β,

  β = [βReport, βN ews release, βDividend record date, βResult indications, βEnvironment change]
                                                                             (23)
The underlying idea behind the Probit Model is the use of the standard normal
distribution function, denoted by φ, where

                                                 1     1 2
                                               − 2 x
                           φ(x) = √  e                           (24)
                                           2π

The Probit Model is defined as follows,

                                             ∫x·β
                 P (REV ERSAL = 1) =    φ(t)dt = Φ(x· β) (25)

                             −∞

                                   17
where Φ is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution
defined as,
                                 ∫x         ∫x
                                         1          t2
                                          − 2
                     Φ(x) = √      e   dt =   φ(t)dt (26)
                            2π
                         −∞       −∞
Since the standardized normal distribution function is used within the model, the
outcomes are bounded between 0 and 1 Φ is the estimated probability that a reversal
will happen. Furthermore, it is expected that following equations hold,

                       lim  P (REV ERSAL = 1|x) = 1 (27)
                    x·β→+∞

                       lim  P (REV ERSAL = 1|x) = 0 (28)
                       x·β→−∞

      When comparing the results from the Probit Model and the LPM, the main
concern will regard if the outcomes of the two models point in the same direction.
Therefore, the significance of the results of the Probit Model will not be studied in
great detail.

6 Results

In the following section the empirical results of the thesis will be described in detail.
The section begins with the main descriptive results concerning if reversals exists
or not. Results regarding the different causational events, relative traded volume
and relative bid-ask spread are then presented. Later follows the results of the main
statistical tests and a discussion of the robustness of the tests. The section is finally
complete by a potential trading strategy taking the main results into consideration.

6.1 Descriptive Statistics

Using the trigger level of ±5%, as described in the methodology section, 296 poten-
tial overreactions are found. Applying the criterion of only one potential overreac-
tion per event window reduces the number of potential overreactions to 150. Thus,
the final sample to be studied consists of 150 potential overreactions with related
event windows. The overreactions are well diversified over the different companies
and in total 27 out of 30 have potential overreactions associated with them.

                                   18
       In accordance with the first hypothesis presented, reversals are found during
the examined time period. In total, short time reversals occurred after 34.7% of
the potential overreactions and long time reversals after 43.3% of the cases. See 1
Appendix, Table 1. This means that on average there are no reversals after an initial
price movement of ±5%. The following two graphs shows the average cumulative
abnormal return following positive and negative potential overreactions.

Figure 1: Evolution of the average CAR following negative potential overreactions.

                                Evolution of the CAR (negative potential overreaction)

                         0%

                          −5%

                              Average CAR
                            −10%

                            −15%
                           −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                                      Time (days)

Figure 1 plots the average CAR for all the 82 negative potential overreactions in
the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis time in days is depicted.

Figure 2: Evolution of the average CAR following positive potential overreactions.

                                 Evolution of the CAR (positive potential overreaction)

                           15%



                           10%

                        Average CAR
                         5%


                         0%
                           −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                                      Time (days)

Figure 2 plots the average CAR for all the 68 positive potential overreactions in the
time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis time in days is depicted.

                                   19
       The findings indicate continuation in trend after the initial price change on
day zero. This is not in line with the Overreaction Hypothesis. However, it might
be in line with the Underreaction Hypothesis though it cannot be concluded with
certainty since the observed continuation in trend might as well originate from the
trend from before the potential overreaction. However, even though there are no
reversals on average the observed stocks have overreacted a considerable amount of
times. This enables further studies on when to expect reversals.
       When the sample is split up on the five different causational events there are
indications that the potential overreactions of some causational events are more
likely to be followed by reversals than others. In 1 Appendix, Figure 3-11 the aver-
age cumulative abnormal returns are shown for the different causational events after
both positive and negative potential overreactions. If the potential overreaction is
caused by a report, there are on average no reversal to be expected, indifferently of
the potential overreaction is positive or negative. Furthermore, potential overreac-
tions caused by news seem to be followed by reversals if the potential overreaction
is positive but not if it is negative. The opposite seems to be true if the potential
overreaction is caused by result indications. Negative potential overreactions are
likely to be followed by a reversal while positive potential overreactions are likely
to be followed by continuation in trend. If the initial price change is caused by
environment change there are indications that reversals exist if the initial price
change was positive but not if it was negative. Obviously, no positive potential
overreactions exist for dividend record date. However, when a negative potential
overreaction occurs and the causational event is dividend record date, it seems like
on average reversals are taking place.
       Finally, calculations regarding whether relative traded volume and relative
bid-ask spread affects the chance of a reversal effect indicates that there is a corre-
lation. The results are compiled in 1 Appendix, Table 2. Calculating the relative
traded volume it is found to be on average 4.286 times of normal on the event days
after which no reversal effects occurs. However, when short time reversals occur the
relative traded volume is on average 4.688 times higher on the event day than on
average. Thus, the relative traded volume is on average 9.4% higher on the event
day after which reversals follow than on an event days after which there are no

                                   20
reversals. The case is similar for relative bid-ask spread. On event days followed by
short time reversals the relative bid-ask spread is on average 1.171 times of normal
whereas on event days not followed by short time reversals it is on average 1.064
times of normal. Thus, relative bid-ask spread is on average 10.1% higher on event
days followed by short time reversals than on event days not followed by reversals.
The results are similar when looking at long time reversals instead of short time
reversals, as can be seen in the same table.

6.2 Main Statistical Tests

In order to find if the descriptive results are statistically significant the Linear Prob-
ability Model is used. The main findings are described in the following paragraphs
and the results are summarized in 1 Appendix, Table 3-9. Given that a negative po-
tential overreaction has occurred it is found that the higher relative traded volume
the higher is the probability of a short time reversal with a statistical significance
of 15%. At the same significance level it is also found that if the causational event
is a dividend record date the chance of a short time reversal is higher than for the
other causational events. Please see Table 3.
      In Table 4 and 5 the following results can be found. Regarding the case of a
negative potential overreaction on the event day the results are the same for both
relative traded volume and dividend record date as above for long time reversals.
Additionally, if the causational event is a result indication the probability of a long
time reversal increases with a statistical significance of 5%.
       In Table 6 results concerning short time reversals after positive potential
overreactions are found on a significance level of 1%. The causational events report
and result indications are both found to decrease the probability of a short time
reversal. The two mentioned causational events are therefore most likely followed
by continuation in trend.
       Table 7-9 contains the results regarding long time reversals after a positive
potential overreaction. As before, both report and result indications are found
to lower the probability of long time reversals with significance levels 1% and 10%
respectively. Furthermore, as in the case of negative potential overreactions relative
traded volume increases the probability of long time reversals. The higher the

                                   21
relative traded volume, the higher the probability of a reversal on a significance
level of 5%.
       Generally, in three out of four different cases relative traded volume has a
positive impact on the probability of reversals taking place. Important to notice is
that even though relative bid-ask spread seemed to have an impact in the descriptive
statistics no statistically significant results could be attained. Furthermore, even
though it looked as if both the causational events news and environment change
could have an impact on the probability of reversal effects taking place no results
could be found on an acceptable significance level with the underlying sample.

6.3 Robustness Tests

In this subsection the results of the robustness tests using the Probit Model are
presented. The results of the regressions are to be found in 1 Appendix, Table 10-13.
In the three scenarios negative potential overreaction, short and long time reversal,
and positive potential overreaction short time reversal the results are very similar
to the ones obtained using the Linear Probability Model. The same variables of
interest are statistically significant in the same way as before. Since the Probit
Model only is used to check the validity of already obtained results all tests are
conducted on a 15% significant level. However, in the fourth case, positive potential
overreaction and long time reversal the Probit Model does only find relative traded
volume to be statistically significant. Some of the causational events are omitted
in the regression. This might be the reason to why the regression does not give
the same outcome in that case compared to the Linear Probability Model. Overall,
the Probit Model gives very similar results as the Linear Probability Model which
indicates that the previously presented results are robust.
      A potential problem with the main results is that after dividing the final
sample of 150 potential overreactions on the five different causational events some
of the causational events contained quite few observations. Potentially, individual
event windows risk being too influential when calculating the average cumulative
abnormal return for these causational events. With a larger original sample this
potential problem might have been smaller and consequently more and better sta-
tistically significant results might had been possible to find.

                                   22
6.4 Potential Trading Strategy ideas

If a trading strategy were to be based on the findings of this thesis the results
indicate that several factors should be taken into consideration. In this subsection
some basic ideas will be outlined together with a primitive calculation to shed light
on a potential application of the contents of this thesis. The development of a
sophisticated trading strategy is however left to future researchers.
       Since there on average are no reversals taking place the basic idea should be
to trade on continuation in trend. Therefore, after a negative potential overreaction
the stock in question should be shorted and after a positive potential overreaction
the stock in question should be bought. If this would have been done consequently
for all 150 potential overreactions with the same amount invested every time and
the stocks had been held/shorted for 20 days the return would have been 410%,
not taking trading costs into consideration.
       There are however several issues with the figure calculated above. First and
foremost, the return is only based on the final sample consisting of 150 potential
overreactions. When calculating a proper trading strategy the potential overreac-
tions that were removed from the sample as a result of not meeting the criterion
of being the sole overreaction in a 40 days time span need to be taken into consid-
eration. It would be impossible for an investor to know beforehand whether more
overreactions were to expect in the near future or not. Moreover, a sophisticated
trading strategy needs to take trading costs into consideration. Though, since the
strategy outlined above only corresponds to 150 switches of position the trading
costs are alleged to be fairly small.
      A more sophisticated trading strategy should take more of the significant
results into consideration. For example it is reasonable to trade on continuation
in trend if the potential overreaction is positive and the causational event is a
report whereas it would be wise to trade on a reversal if the causational event is
a dividend record date. If the causational event is a result indication the trading
strategy should be to trade on continuation in trend if the potential overreaction is
positive whereas it should be to trade on a reversal if the potential overreaction is
negative. Also, incorporating the relative traded volume aspect could improve the
strategy since reversals are more likely the higher the relative traded volume on the

                                   23
event day. However, since the development of a sophisticated trading strategy is
beyond the scope of this thesis we leave that to future research.

7 Conclusions

This study sets out to investigate if the OMXS30 stocks overreact to extreme events
and if certain variables can explain the probability of reversals taking place. Inspi-
ration has been gathered from previous research and the study is based on the idea
of a trigger level introduced by Bremer and Sweeney (1991). Moreover, the study
extends the previous research in two ways. First, the Swedish market is being stud-
ied and second, causational events are viewed as potential explanatory variables
for the probability of reversals. The results found are statistically significant and
robust.
       The main result of this study is that on average there are no reversals taking
place. This is in line with the second hypothesis being presented. The economic
interpretation of this result is that on average the market does not overreact to
extreme events. Therefore, the Overreaction Hypothesis can be rejected for the
OMXS30 stocks. However, as outlined in the first hypothesis, reversals are found
to exist in over one third of the events examined which is considered a high fraction
keeping in mind the size of the companies studied. The result that reversals ac-
tually are taking place is consistent with previous research. Moreover, a potential
implication of the result is a trading strategy, which mainly takes advantage of that
there on average are no reversals.
       Some variables of interest are found, on a statistically significant level, to
affect the probability of reversals taking place. In accordance with the hypothesis
regarding the impact of traded volume the results show that increased traded vol-
ume increases the probability of reversals taking place. Furthermore, the outcome
is the same of the hypothesis regarding causational events. Some of the causational
events are found to increase or decrease the probability of reversals whereas others
cannot be said to have a significant influence. The conclusion that the likelihood
of a reversal is dependent of the causational event can therefore be drawn. This
can be seen as a violation of the EMH since the results make it possible to predict

                                   24
trends in the market. However, in contradiction to the hypothesis and previous
literature regarding the impact of the bid-ask spread on the probability of reversals
taking place, there are no significant results indicating that there is such a rela-
tion. One possible explanation for this is that the observed stocks are very liquid.
The observed relative traded volume was around 450% of average on the day of
the potential overreaction whereas the relative bid-ask spread was less than 112%
of average which implies that the bid-ask spread does not change remarkably on
the event day. Therefore the bid-ask spread lacks explanatory power as to when
reversals are to be expected.
      There are some limitations in the thesis that are important to shed light
on. To begin with, using the approach with event windows only allowing for one
potential overreaction per company in each event window almost 50% of the original
identified potential overreactions was disregarded. However, having regarded these
as well the main results still ought to be the very similar since the final sample
still is a large fraction of the entire sample. Though, disregarding some of the
potential overreactions prohibits the possibilities of forming a complete trading
strategy. Moreover, another possible limitation is the time period over which the
study is conducted. Since the time period is fairly short the market might have had
certain characteristics during this period which are not necessarily true for other
periods.
       Even though the area of finance investigated in this thesis is quite well ex-
amined there are still interesting questions to seek answers to. In this thesis only
stocks of large companies were considered. It would be interesting to compare the
results of this thesis to a similar study regarding stocks of different sizes to see if
the results found here would be similar or if there are some significant dissimilari-
ties between firms of different sizes. Another interesting setting for future research
would be to use a bigger sample. This would enable more specific categorizations
of the causational events and not necessarily limit to the five causational event cat-
egories studied in this thesis. Finally, it would be interesting to develop a complete
trading strategy based on the results of this thesis. If such a trading strategy would
be found to perform successfully it would imply a violation of the EMH. This task
is however left to future research to explore in greater detail.

                                   25
References

[1] Allen, D. E. and R. Prince, 1995, ”The winner/loser hypothesis: Some prelim-
   inary Australian evidence on the impact of changing risk”, Applied Economics
    Letter, 2, 280-283.

[2] Atkins, A. B. and E. A. Dyl, 1990, ”Prince reversals, bid-ask spread and market
    efficiency”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 25, 535-547.

[3] Benou, G. and N. Richie, 2003, ”The reversal of large stock price declines: The
    case of large firms”, Journal of Economics and Finance, 27, 19-38.

[4] Brailsford, T., 1992, ”A test for the winner-loser anomaly in the Australian
    equity market: 1958-1987”, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 19,
   225-241.

[5] Bremer, M., T. Hiraki and R. J. Sweeney, 1997, ”Predictable patterns after
   large stock price changes on the Tokyo stock exchange”, Journal of Financial
    and Quantitative Analysis, 32, 345-365.

[6] Bremer, M. and R. J. Sweeney, 1991, ”The reversal of large stock-price de-
    creases”, The Journal of Finance, 46, 747-754.

[7] Caudill, S., 1988, ”An Advantage of the Linear Probability Model Over Probit
    or Logit.”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 50, 425-427.

[8] Cox, D. R. and D. R. Petersen, 1994, ”Stock returns following large one-day de-
   clines: evidence on short-term reversals and longer-term performance”, Journal
    of Finance, 49, 255-267.

[9] Da Costa N., 1994, ”Overreaction in the Brazilian stock market”, Journal of
   Banking and Finance, 18, 633-642.

[10] De Bondt, W. F. M. and R. Thaler, 1985, ”Does the stock market overreact?”,
    The Journal of Finance, 40, 793-805.

[11] De Bondt, W. F. M. and R. Thaler, 1987, ”Further evidence on investors
    overreaction and stock market seasonality”, Journal of Finance, 42, 557-582.

[12] Fama E. 1969, ”Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empiri-
   cal Works”, Papers and proceedings of the Twenty-Eight annual meeting of the
    American Finance Association, 28-30.

[13] Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1992, ”The cross-section of expected stock
    returns”, The Journal of Finance, 47, no 2, 427-465.

                                   26
[14] Fama, E. F. and K. R. French, 1993, ”Common risk factors in the returns on
    stocks and bonds”, Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.

[15] Fama E. F. and K. R. French, 2012, ”Size value and momentum in international
    stock returns”, Journal of Financial Economics, 105, issue 3, 457-472.

[16] Fama and French, 2014, ”A five-factor asset pricing model”, Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics, 116, issue 1, 1-22.

[17] Griffin J. M., 2002, ”Are the Fama and French factors global or country spe-
    cific?”, The review of Financial Studies, 15, issue 3, 783-803.

[18] Heckman J. J. and T. E. MaCurdy, 1985, ”A simultaneous equations linear
    probability model”, The Canadian Journal of Economics, 18, 28-37.

[19] Heckman, J. J., and J. M. Snyder, 1997, ”Linear Probability Models of the
   Demand for Attributes with an Empirical Application to Estimating the Pref-
    erences of Legislators.”, Rand Journal of Economics, 28, s142-s189.

[20] Jagadeesh N. and S. Titman, 1995, ”Overreaction, delayed reaction and con-
    trarian profits”, The rewiew of Financial Studies, 8, 973-993.

[21] Larson, S. J. and J. Madura, 2003, ”What drives stock price behaviour follow-
    ing extreme one-day returns?”, The Journal of Financial Research, 26, 113-127.

[22] Lehmann B. N., 1990, ”Fads, martingales, and market efficiency.”, Journal of
   Economics, 105, 1-28.

[23] Pritamani M. and V. Singal, 2001, ”Return predictability following large price
    changes and information releases”, Journal of Banking & Finance, 25, issue 4,
   631-656.

                                   27
1 Appendix

                        Table 1: Number of Reversals

           Type of reversal N Number of reversals Frequency

            Short 150 52 37.4%

            Long 150 65 43.3%

Table 1 summarizes the number of reversals taking place. 52 out of the 150 potential
overreactions, corresponding to 37.4%, were followed by a short time reversal. 65
out of the 150 potential overreactions, corresponding to 43.3%, were followed by a
long time reversal.

                                   28
Figure 3: Evolution of the average CAR following negative potential overreactions
caused by Reports.

                             CAR of causational event: Report

                0%

                 −5%

                  Average CAR
                 −10%

                 −15%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 3 plots the average CAR for the negative potential overreactions caused by
Reports in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time in days from
the event day is depicted.

Figure 4: Evolution of the average CAR following positive potential overreactions
caused by Reports.

                             CAR of causational event: Report

                 15%



                 10%

                 Average CAR
                5%


                0%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 4 plots the average CAR for the positive potential overreactions caused by
Reports in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time in days from
the event day is depicted.

                                   29
Figure 5: Evolution of the average CAR following negative potential overreactions
caused by News.

                             CAR of causational event: News

                0%

                 −5%

                 −10%

                  Average CAR
                 −15%

                 −20%

                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 5 plots the average CAR for the negative potential overreactions caused by
News in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time in days from
the event day is depicted.

Figure 6: Evolution of the average CAR following positive potential overreactions
caused by News.

                             CAR of causational event: News

                5%


                0%

                  Average CAR



                 −5%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 6 plots the average CAR for the positive potential overreactions caused by
News in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time in days from
the event day is depicted.

                                   30
Figure 7: Evolution of the average CAR following negative potential overreactions
caused by Result indications.

                         CAR of causational event: Result indications

                0%

                 −5%

                  Average CAR

                 −10%

                 −15%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 7 plots the average CAR for the negative potential overreactions caused by
Result indications in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time in
days from the event day is depicted.

Figure 8: Evolution of the average CAR following positive potential overreactions
caused by Result indications.

                         CAR of causational event: Result indications

                 25%



                 20%



                 15%


                  Average CAR
                 10%


                5%


                0%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 8 plots the average CAR for the positive potential overreactions caused by
Result indications in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time in
days from the event day is depicted.

                                   31
Figure 9: Evolution of the average CAR following negative potential overreactions
caused by Environment change.

                      CAR of causational event: Environment change

                0%

                  Average CAR

                 −5%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 9 plots the average CAR for the negative potential overreactions caused by
Environment change in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time
in days from the event day is depicted.

Figure 10: Evolution of the average CAR following positive potential overreactions
caused by Environment change.

                      CAR of causational event: Environment change

                0%

                 −5%

                  Average CAR

                 −10%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 10 plots the average CAR for the positive potential overreactions caused by
Environment change in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time
in days from the event day is depicted.

                                   32
Figure 11: Evolution of the average CAR following negative potential overreactions
caused by Dividend record date.

                       CAR of causational event: Dividend record date

                0%

                 −5%

                  Average CAR
                 −10%

                 −15%
                    −20 −10 0 10 20
                                                        Time (days)

Figure 11 plots the average CAR for the negative potential overreactions caused by
Dividend record date in the time period 2010-2014. On the horizontal axis the time
in days from the event day is depicted.

          Table 2: Relative traded volume and Relative bid-ask spread

           VARIABLES No reversal Reversal Relative difference

   Relative traded volume (short) 4.286 4.688 9.4%

   Relative bid-ask spread (short) 1.064 1.171 10.1%

   Relative traded volume (long) 4.143 4.794 15.8%

   Relative bid-ask spread (long) 1.086 1.120 3.1%

Table 2 depicts the Relative traded volume and the Relative bid-ask spread on the
event day in comparison to their respective average of the 20 days prior to the event
day. The figures calculated are divided between if the particular event is followed
by a reversal or not. Also, a distinction between long and short time reversals
has been made. The relative difference is the size difference of Relative traded
volume/Relative bid-ask spread when the potential overreactions are followed by
reversals and when they are not.

                                   33
Table 3: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Negative potential over-
reaction and short time reversals.

 VARIABLES Negative potential overreaction (short time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0303*
                                                         (1.466)
                                                   0.000247 - 0.0604

 Relative bid-ask spread -0.0105
                                                          (-0.117)
                                                        -0.141 - 0.120

 Report 0.115
                                                         (0.666)
                                                        -0.136 - 0.366

 Result indications 0.342
                                                         (1.186)
                                                       -0.0773 - 0.762

 News -0.111
                                                          (-0.524)
                                                        -0.419 - 0.197

 Dividend record date 0.367*
                                                         (1.514)
                                                      0.0145 - 0.720

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Constant 0.0426
                                                         (0.222)
                                                        -0.236 - 0.322

 Observations 82
 R-squared 0.063
          Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 85% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.15

Table 3 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
negative potential overreaction and short time reversals on a 15% significance level.
Relative traded volume and Dividend record date are statistically significant at the
given level. Since their signs are positive, the conclusion is that these two factors
increase the probability of short time reversals after a negative potential overreac-
tion.

                                   34
Table 4: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Negative potential over-
reaction and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Negative potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0320*
                                                         (1.533)
                                                    0.00164 - 0.0624

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.00465
                                                       (0.0531)
                                                       -0.123 - 0.132

 Report 0.216
                                                         (1.268)
                                                      -0.0319 - 0.465

 Result indications 0.597**
                                                         (2.258)
                                                       0.212 - 0.981

 News -0.115
                                                          (-0.655)
                                                       -0.369 - 0.140

 Dividend record date 0.373*
                                                         (1.539)
                                                      0.0205 - 0.726

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                              -
                                                                              -

 Constant 0.0215
                                                         (0.112)
                                                       -0.258 - 0.301

 Observations 82
 R-squared 0.089
         Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 85% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.15

Table 4 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
negative potential overreaction and long time reversals on a 15% significance level.
Relative traded volume and Dividend record date are statistically significant at the
given level. The causational event Result indications is statistically significant on
a 5% level. Since their signs are positive, the conclusion is that these three factors
increase the probability of long time reversals after a negative potential overreaction.

                                   35
Table 5: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Negative potential over-
reaction and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Negative potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0320
                                                         (1.533)
                                                    -0.00959 - 0.0737

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.00465
                                                       (0.0531)
                                                       -0.170 - 0.179

 Report 0.216
                                                         (1.268)
                                                       -0.124 - 0.556

 Result indications 0.597**
                                                         (2.258)
                                                      0.0703 - 1.123

 News -0.115
                                                          (-0.655)
                                                       -0.463 - 0.234

 Dividend record date 0.373
                                                         (1.539)
                                                       -0.110 - 0.856

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                              -
                                                                              -

 Constant 0.0215
                                                         (0.112)
                                                       -0.361 - 0.404

 Observations 82
 R-squared 0.089
         Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 95% confidence interval below
                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 5 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
negative potential overreaction and long time reversals on a 5% significance level.
Only the causational event Result indications is statistically significant on a 5%
level. As showed in Table 4, since the sign is positive the conclusion is that the
factor increases the probability of long time reversals after a negative potential over-
reaction.

                                   36
Table 6: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Positive potential overre-
action and short time reversals.

 VARIABLES Positive potential overreaction (short time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0235
                                                         (0.629)
                                                       -0.0759 - 0.123

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.102
                                                         (1.113)
                                                        -0.142 - 0.346

 Report -0.585***
                                                           (-5.125)
                                                         -0.888 - -0.281

 Result indications -0.683***
                                                           (-3.343)
                                                         -1.226 - -0.140

 News -0.262
                                                           (-1.137)
                                                        -0.873 - 0.350

 Dividend record date (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Constant 0.711**
                                                         (2.547)
                                                       -0.0308 - 1.453

 Observations 68
 R-squared 0.146
          Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 99% confidence interval below
                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
positive potential overreaction and short time reversals on a 1% significance level.
Report and Result indications are statistically significant at the given level. Since
their signs are negative, the conclusion is that these two factors decrease the prob-
ability of short time reversals after a positive potential overreaction.

                                   37
Table 7: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Positive potential overre-
action and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Positive potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0712**
                                                         (2.388)
                                                     -0.00805 - 0.150

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.0291
                                                         (0.381)
                                                        -0.174 - 0.232

 Report -0.368***
                                                          (-3.336)
                                                       -0.662 - -0.0749

 Result indications -0.365*
                                                          (-1.703)
                                                        -0.933 - 0.204

 News -0.269
                                                          (-1.180)
                                                        -0.876 - 0.337

 Dividend record date (omitted) -

 Environment change (omitted) -

 Constant 0.509**
                                                         (2.256)
                                                      -0.0906 - 1.108

 Observations 68
 R-squared 0.110
         Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 99% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 7 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
positive potential overreaction and long time reversals on a 1% significance level.
Report is statistically significant at the given level whereas Relative traded volume
and Result indications are significant at the 5% and 10% level respectively. Nega-
tive signs for Report and Result indications indicates that these causational events
decrease the probability of reversals whereas the positive sign of Relative traded vol-
ume indicates that higher Relative traded volume increases the probability of long
time reversals after a positive potential overreaction.

                                   38
Table 8: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Positive potential overre-
action and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Positive potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0712**
                                                         (2.388)
                                                      0.0116 - 0.131

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.0291
                                                         (0.381)
                                                        -0.124 - 0.182

 Report -0.368***
                                                          (-3.336)
                                                        -0.589 - -0.148

 Result indications -0.365*
                                                          (-1.703)
                                                      -0.792 - 0.0633

 News -0.269
                                                          (-1.180)
                                                        -0.725 - 0.187

 Dividend record date (omitted) -

 Environment change (omitted) -

 Constant 0.509**
                                                         (2.256)
                                                      0.0579 - 0.960

 Observations 68
 R-squared 0.110
         Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 95% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 8 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
positive potential overreaction and long time reversals on a 5% significance level. As
previously stated in Table 7, Relative traded volume is statistically significant at the
given level whereas Report and Result indications are significant at the 1% and 10%
level respectively. Negative signs for Report and Result indications indicates that
these causational events decreases the probability of reversals whereas the positive
sign of Relative traded volume indicates that higher Relative traded volume increases
the probability of long time reversals after a positive potential overreaction.

                                   39
Table 9: Linear Probability Model: Regression analysis. Positive potential overre-
action and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Positive potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0712**
                                                         (2.388)
                                                      0.0214 - 0.121

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.0291
                                                         (0.381)
                                                      -0.0986 - 0.157

 Report -0.368***
                                                          (-3.336)
                                                        -0.553 - -0.184

 Result indications -0.365*
                                                          (-1.703)
                                                      -0.722 - -0.00716

 News -0.269
                                                          (-1.180)
                                                        -0.650 - 0.112

 Dividend record date (omitted) -

 Environment change (omitted) -

 Constant 0.509**
                                                         (2.256)
                                                       0.132 - 0.885

 Observations 68
 R-squared 0.110
         Robust t-statistics in parentheses and 90% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 9 presents the results of the Linear Probability Model regression analysis of
positive potential overreaction and long time reversals on a 10% significance level.
As previously stated in Table 7, Result indications is statistically significant at the
given level whereas Report and Relative traded volume are significant at the 1% and
5% level respectively. Negative signs for Report and Result indications indicates that
these causational events decreases the probability of reversals whereas the positive
sign of Relative traded volume indicates that higher Relative traded volume increases
the probability of long time reversals after a positive potential overreaction.

                                   40
Table 10: The Probit Model: Regression analysis. Negative potential overreaction
and short time reversals.

 VARIABLES Negative potential overreaction (short time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0951*
                                                         (1.651)
                                                      0.0122 - 0.178

 Relative bid-ask spread -0.0316
                                                          (-0.121)
                                                        -0.408 - 0.345

 Report 0.459
                                                         (0.771)
                                                        -0.399 - 1.317

 Result indications 1.078
                                                         (1.301)
                                                        -0.114 - 2.271

 News -0.385
                                                          (-0.444)
                                                        -1.634 - 0.863

 Dividend record date 1.191*
                                                         (1.583)
                                                       0.108 - 2.275

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Constant -1.441**
                                                          (-2.084)
                                                        -2.436 - -0.446

 Observations 82
          Robust z-statistics in parentheses and 85% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.15

Table 10 presents the results of the Probit Model regression analysis of negative
potential overreactions and short time reversals on a 15% significance level. Relative
traded volume and Dividend record date are statistically significant at the given level.
Since this is in line with the results received using the Linear Probability Model the
results are robust.

                                   41
Table 11: The Probit Model: Regression analysis. Negative potential overreaction
and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Negative potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.100*
                                                         (1.747)
                                                      0.0176 - 0.183

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.0127
                                                       (0.0548)
                                                       -0.321 - 0.346

 Report 0.749
                                                         (1.271)
                                                      -0.0995 - 1.598

 Result indications 1.788**
                                                         (2.040)
                                                       0.526 - 3.049

 News -0.545
                                                          (-0.752)
                                                       -1.589 - 0.499

 Dividend record date 1.218*
                                                         (1.619)
                                                       0.135 - 2.300

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                              -
                                                                              -

 Constant -1.511**
                                                          (-2.195)
                                                        -2.502 - -0.520

 Observations 82
         Robust z-statistics in parentheses and 85% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.15

Table 11 presents the results of the Probit Model regression analysis of negative po-
tential overreactions and long time reversals on a 15% significance level. Relative
traded volume, Result indications and Dividend record date are statistically signifi-
cant at the given level. Since this is in line with the results received using the Linear
Probability Model the results are robust.

                                   42
Table 12: The Probit Model: Regression analysis. Positive potential overreaction
and short time reversals.

 VARIABLES Positive potential overreaction (short time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.0650
                                                         (0.652)
                                                       -0.0786 - 0.209

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.279
                                                         (1.225)
                                                       -0.0488 - 0.606

 Report -0.845*
                                                           (-1.622)
                                                       -1.596 - -0.0951

 Result indications -1.187*
                                                           (-1.851)
                                                         -2.109 - -0.264

 News (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Dividend record date (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Constant -0.164
                                                           (-0.272)
                                                        -1.032 - 0.704

 Observations 65
         Robust z-statistics in parentheses and 85% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.15

Table 12 presents the results of the Probit Model regression analysis of positive
potential overreactions and short time reversals on a 15% significance level. Report
and Result indications are statistically significant at the given level. Since this is
in line with the results received using the Linear Probability Model the results are
robust.

                                   43
Table 13: The Probit Model: Regression analysis. Positive potential overreaction
and long time reversals.

 VARIABLES Positive potential overreaction (long time reversal)

 Relative traded volume 0.224*
                                                         (1.885)
                                                      0.0529 - 0.395

 Relative bid-ask spread 0.0845
                                                         (0.437)
                                                        -0.194 - 0.363

 Report -0.280
                                                          (-0.531)
                                                        -1.039 - 0.479

 Result indications -0.211
                                                          (-0.323)
                                                        -1.153 - 0.730

 News (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Dividend record date (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Environment change (omitted) -
                                                                               -
                                                                               -

 Constant -0.817
                                                          (-1.296)
                                                      -1.724 - 0.0903

 Observations 65
         Robust z-statistics in parentheses and 85% confidence interval below
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 13 presents the results of the Probit Model regression analysis of positive
potential overreactions and long time reversals on a 15% significance level. Only
Relative traded volume is statistically significant at the given level. This is partly
in line with the results received using the Linear Probability Model.

                                   44
2 Appendix

Construction and Calculation of Fama-French Factors

In March each year, from 2005 to 2014, all stock listed on OMXS are divided
into two groups dependant on if they are smaller or bigger than the median value
in terms of size, i.e. ME. The group with the smaller stocks (including the median
stock) is denoted with an ”S” and the bigger ones with a ”B”. At the same time,
all stocks are divided into groups, dependant on their book-to-market value, i.e.
BE/ME. The bottom 30% stocks with the lowest BE/ME are divided into a group
denoted with an ”L” for low. The middle 40% of BE/ME value are given an ”M”
for medium. The remaining 30% of the firms with the highest BE/ME value are
divided into the group ”H” for high. Finally, six portfolios (S/L, S/M, S/H, B/L,
B/M, B/H) are constructed as shown in the 2 × 3 matrix below. The reason for
dividing BE/ME into three categories while ME in two is that Fama and French
(1992a) have shown that BE/ME has a stronger explanatory value than ME.

                       Table 14: Fama-French Portfolios

                            BE/ME
                                Low Medium High
                         Small S/L S/M S/H
                 ME
                         Big B/L B/M B/H

       After the yearly classifications of portfolios was made, all stocks on OMXS,
which are analysed daily, are given their portfolio classification one year ahead,
meaning that there are sixty different portfolios in total during the ten years of
interest. Daily value-weighted returns (based on ME) are calculated for each of the
portfolios.
      After the portfolio construction and the determination of the daily value-
weighted returns, the Fama and French factors SMB and HML can finally be de-
termined. SMB stand for the return of a portfolio of small stocks in excess of the
return on a portfolio of large stocks. HML is the return of a portfolio that includes
stocks with a high BE/ME value in excess of the return of the portfolio of stocks
with a low BE/ME value. The return of the small portfolio is,

                            1
                     RS =  (RS/L + RS/M + RS/H ) (29)
                       3
For the big portfolio the return is,

                            1
                    RB =  (RB/L + RB/M + RB/H ) (30)
                       3
The returns of the high and low portfolios are,

                                1
                        RH =  (RS/H + RB/H ) (31)
                          2

                                   45
                                1
                         RL =  (RS/L + RB/L) (32)
                          2
In the final step the factors SMB and HML could be determined on a daily basis.

                         SM B = RS − RB (33)

                        HM L = RH − RL (34)
Finally, the last factor in the Fama and French Three-Factor Model is the MRP.

                            M RPt = rm,t − rf,t−1 (35)

Robustness Test of Fama-French Three Factor Model

In order to check the robustness of the determined Fama-French factors, i.e. HML,
SMB and MRP, the same procedure as in Fama and French (1993) is used. Instead
of creating six portfolios, as was the procedure when determining the Fama and
French factors, 25 portfolios are created. In March each year, from 2005 to 2014,
all stock listed on OMXS are divided into five groups based on ME and five groups
based on BE/ME. Portfolios are constructed as the intersections between the ME
and BE/ME groups, which resulted in a 5 × 5 matrix, i.e. 25 portfolios in total are
constructed on a yearly basis. For example, one portfolio includes the stocks with
the lowest ME and the lowest BE/ME.
      Daily value-weighted returns (based on ME) are calculated for each of the
portfolios and further the excess return of each of the portfolios are determined as
the difference between the expected return and the risk-free rate. When the excess
return is determined for each of the 25 portfolios every year a regression is made
in order to determine the quarterly betas for each of the factors in the Fama and
French Three-Factor Model. Note that quarterly betas are used throughout the
whole thesis.

                           M RP          SM B          HM L
   E[ri,t] − rf,t−1 = αi,t + βi,t M RPt + βi,t SM Bt + βi,t HM Lt + i,t (36)

In order to make the cross-sectional robustness test, a second pass regression is
made, where the left hand side of the regression is the average excess return of each
portfolio throughout the period of interest.

                           M RP ˆM RP    SM B ˆSM B    HM L ˆHM L
    E[ri,t] − rf,t−1 = λ0,t + λt βi,t + λt βi,t + λt βi,t + αi,t (37)

                                   46
         Table 15: Robustness test of Fama-French Three Factor Model

                     VARIABLES Values

                         M RP
                         λt -0.00350**
                                               (-2.539)

                         SM B
                        λt 0.000220**
                                              (2.169)

                        HM L
                         λt 0.000190
                                              (0.975)

                       Constant -0.0139***
                                               (-10.10)

                       R-squared 0.447
                         Robust t-statistics in parentheses
                   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                2
From the table above, the R  value is satisfactory but the t-value of the constant
term in the second pass regression implies that the model is rejected for the Swedish
market since the constants on a statistically significant level are separated from zero.

                                   47