  Does the current influenza activity generate stock
                market responses?

                             An analysis of US data from 1997-2015

                                             1                     2
                       Björn Norrby & Ida Florestedt
                               Bachelor Thesis
                      Stockholm School of Economics

                                                           th
                             May 18 , 2015
                                  Abstract

This paper investigates if the release of influenza activity information during influenza seasons on the
US aggregate level, from 1997 to 2015, generates any stock market responses. The hypothesis is that
certain companies (i.e. heath insurance companies/pharmacies) might disadvantage/advantage from
an unexpected mild/severe influenza season. We have tested the hypothesis by conducting event
studies on historical dates when the seasonal influenza hit the US, but find no indication of influenza
activity generating any stock market responses. The null hypothesis cannot be rejected on most
seasons and the CAARs frequently trend in the wrong direction. Perhaps focusing on a state wise level
and examining the accounting reports following an influenza season, will shed more light on where the
missing costs/revenues are located. If not, perhaps the cost/revenues are too small and/or too
uncertain to generate any significant stock market responses. In the end, the aim with this paper is to
illuminate a previously unexplored topic in the financial markets, with the hope of leaving the door a
bit more open than it was before, and thereby encouraging further research on the topic.

Keywords: influenza season, influenza epidemic, event study, stock market reaction

Tutor: Irina Zviadadze, Assistant Professor

Acknowledges: We would like to thank our tutor Irina Zviadadze for providing us with valuable input
and guidance. We also want to thank Per-Olov Edlund for his support regarding the statistical
methods used in this thesis. All errors are our own.

1
 22949@student.hhs.se
2
 22701@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents
1. Introduction......................................................................................................................................... 2
2. Related literature ................................................................................................................................ 4
3. Background.......................................................................................................................................... 5
   3.1 What is the Influenza? ................................................................................................................... 5
   3.2 How the intensity of the common flu is measured? ..................................................................... 6
   3.3 Sources providing information about Influenza activity ............................................................... 6
   3.4 Characteristics of the average influenza season ........................................................................... 6
4. Estimating the costs associated with the seasonal influenza ............................................................. 8
5. Influenza exposure depending on industry ......................................................................................... 9
    5.1 Industry categorization ............................................................................................................... 11
6. Hypothesis ......................................................................................................................................... 13
7. Data ................................................................................................................................................... 15
8. Method .............................................................................................................................................. 15
   8.1 Event study .................................................................................................................................. 16
   8.2 Event window .............................................................................................................................. 19
   8.3 Performed event studies ............................................................................................................. 20
     8.3.1 Drop-outs of companies when running the regressions ...................................................... 21
9. Results ............................................................................................................................................... 21
   9.1 Results from “NEG”-industries .................................................................................................... 21
   9.2 Results from “STRONG POS”-companies .................................................................................... 24
  9.2 Results from “STRONG NEG”-companies .................................................................................... 26
    9.3 Robustness test ........................................................................................................................... 29
10. Limitation and suggestions for future research .............................................................................. 29
   10.1 The event studies are performed on aggregate level instead of state level............................. 29
   10.2 Previous research on the economic impact of the influenza is overestimated ........................ 30
   10.3 The available information is too uncertain to be used for trading ........................................... 30
   10.4 Suggestions for future research ................................................................................................ 31
11. Conclusion ....................................................................................................................................... 31
12. Appendix.......................................................................................................................................... 33
   12.1 CAARs season 1997-2015, “NEG”-industries............................................................................. 33
  12.2 CAARs season 1997-2015, “STRONG POS”-companies ............................................................. 35
  12.3 CAARs season 1997-2015, “STRONG NEG”-companies ............................................................ 37
   12.4 Adjusted Z-BMP statistics calculations ...................................................................................... 39
13. References ....................................................................................................................................... 41

                                                                                1
1. Introduction

According to the efficient markets hypothesis, it is impossible to “beat the market” since stock
market efficiency causes existing share prices to always reflect and incorporate all relevant
information (Investopedia, LLC 2015). In this thesis, the statement’s verity will be tested by
investigating if information about the current influenza activity generates any stock market
reactions. It is to our belief that influenza seasons affect certain companies’ costs and
revenues, creating an opportunity for aware traders to short and long certain shares to reflect
and incorporate all relevant information into the share prices. However, if the efficient market
hypothesis is correct, the share prices should already be adjusted to reflect these cost and
revenues. The aim of this thesis is thus to investigate if the efficient market hypothesis is
correct or if there possibly still exists an arbitrage opportunity to make money on the release
of influenza activity.

Previous research has showed that when influenza activity is higher than normal, costs
increases through loss of sales, paid sick leave and loss of productivity for companies whose
labor and/or customers are ill. The estimated costs for the annual seasonal influenza varies
depending on research study but has been estimated to be significant in most cases. A report
from (Molinari, Noelle-Angelique M 2007) estimated the annual costs of the influenza to be
$111.75 billion (95% confidence interval, $54.14, $191.81) ($2015). For companies selling
influenza related products (i.e. pharmacies), the effects of the seasonal influenza are the
opposite. The CNBC wrote in an article from 2014 (CNBC News Friday 3 Jan 2014) stating that
pharmacies sales increased with 9.2% during the 2013-2014 influenza season due to an
increase in sales of over-the counter medicines and tissues. The same article also wrote that
Walgreens pharmacies administrated almost 1 million more flu shots during the influenza
season than what they did one year earlier.

As the seasonal influenza seems to have a significant impact on some industries it is our belief
that information about influenza activity would be valuable for traders. We have therefore
chosen to study information provided on influenza activity in order to investigate any
potential trading based on this information.

The US National Public Health Institute “The Centers of Disease Control and Prevention” (CDC)
provides weekly updated information about the current influenza activity in the US. The
information is provided through the influenza activity measurement “Percentage of
hospitalized patients with Influenza like Illness” (ILI). Even though not all persons infected will
be hospitalized, the measurement is commonly used in related research as an indicator of the
overall influenza activity in US.

Receiving this information, traders become aware of the intensity of the seasonal influenza
and can easily reason around what impact a severe or mild seasonal influenza will have on a
specific industry/company. In order to reflect this impact they can short or long shares
depending on if a company will profit or disadvantage from the current influenza activity.

                                                                                2
This thesis aim is thus to investigate how and if influenza activity rates are used by traders.
The research question is explored by looking at historical information provided on influenza
activity rates (ILI-rates) and then investigating the abnormal returns on share prices during
influenza epidemics. The abnormal returns are investigated through performing event studies
on influenza seasons from 1997 to 2015. The event studies are made on a selection of S&P
500 companies divided into categories based on the effect the influenza is believed to have
on the companies. The execution of the event studies are based on the article “Event Studies
in Economics and Finance” (MacKinlay,A.Craig 1997) where abnormal returns during a specific
event window are identified by estimating companies normal returns and then investigating
any deviations from this return. If the influenza activity rates are used for trading we would
thus expect positive or negative abnormal returns during the influenza seasons where the
Influenza activity rate is very low or high, since this deviation from the average influenza
intensity would be unexpected to the market.

With this thesis we hope to be able to contribute to the research on the impact of influenza
epidemics on the financial markets in a way that has previously not been explored. We want
to, in contrast to the research that has been made more purely on the socio economic burden
associated with the influenza, rather investigate the practical financial use of knowing when
these impacts will emerge. We also believe that our research question will help contribute to
the research on the Efficient Market Hypothesis.

Looking at the results from our event studies we see no implications of influenza activity rates
being used for trading. For most performed event studies we generate insignificant results,
making it impossible to reject the null hypothesis stating that CAAR=0 during the event
window. Even though we do find evidence of abnormal returns occurring during some of the
influenza epidemics, the abnormal returns seem to appear randomly and to not have any
connection to the presented influenza rates during that season. We draw this conclusion as
negative abnormal returns occur for industries that reasonably should be positively affected
during a seasonal influenza and vice versa.

Since the results did not show that the information about influenza activity generates any
stock market reactions, the question thus becomes, why not? Did we do something wrong
when performing the event studies? Is there possibly an arbitrage opportunity to make money
on information about influenza activity? Is the cost/revenues associated with the seasonal
influenza too small to affect share prices or is it perhaps too difficult to estimate the
costs/revenues that will occur for the affected companies?

Personally, we believe that the reason to why we did not find any implications of influenza
activity rates being used for trading is most in line with the two last possibilities (the
cost/revenues being too small and/or too uncertain too estimate). This, as the previous
research’ estimations on cost and revenues occurring due to the seasonal influenza being
inadequate, presenting numbers ranging from $3-8 billion (Liang Mao, Yang Yang, Youliang
Qiu and Yan Yang 1981) up to $268.71 billion (Meltzer MI, Cox NJ, Fukuda K. 1999) ($2015).

                                                                                3
Also, we believe that the larger numbers presented might have been overestimated, including
costs, such as projected statistical life values for deaths, that possibly not fully would be
reflected and incorporated into security prices on the financial markets.

For future research we thus leave an open door to investigate where these costs and revenues
are shown. Our suggestion to future research is to investigate the possibility of the
cost/revenues being shown in the quarterly reports after an influenza season. If not, then
perhaps the impacts are too small and previous research estimations has been overestimated.
If yes, do we have an arbitrage opportunity?

2. Related literature

Trading behavior based on information about influenza activity is an unexplored topic, hence
there is little to none related literature on the specific topic. However, there is previous
research that explores the costs associated with the seasonal influenza and on the Swine Flu
pandemic in 2009. Also some articles investigates the increase in sales that some industries
might experience (CNBC News Friday 3 Jan 2014). These researches become relevant for this
thesis in order to understand what effect we expect to see on the financial markets during an
influenza epidemic.

Many of the previous studies focus on the cost-benefits associated with vaccination against
the seasonal flu (Nichol,K.L. 2009) (Bridges, Carolyn Buxton 2000) other studies focus on the
cost-benefits on paid sick leave plans contra no paid sick leave (Puhani, Patrick A 2010) (Colla,
Carrie H 2014). Some studies focus mainly on the direct medical costs (Fairbrother, Gerry
2010) but most of them try to split up the costs between direct and indirect costs (Molinari,
Noelle-Angelique M 2007) (Mao, Liang 2012). In our case we care about both the direct
medical costs and the indirect costs associated with productivity loss from work absence,
working while ill (i.e., presenteeism days) and cost associated with death (using projected
statistical life values).

Also, we have found a study from (Karve, Sudeep 2013) that investigates the direct and
indirect costs associated with the Swine Flu in 2009. Even though, we are not particularly
interested in looking into the effects of the Swine Flu, we find the presented results to be
useful when trying to estimate the impact of a seasonal influenza epidemic with a similar level
of severity.

The above mentioned studies’ estimations of the annual average cost associated with the
seasonal influenza seem to vary a lot, presenting numbers ranging from $3-8 billion (Liang
Mao, Yang Yang, Youliang Qiu and Yan Yang 1981) up to $268.71 billion (Meltzer MI, Cox NJ,
Fukuda K. 1999) ($2015). The great variation is due to the researches including different costs
aspects and/or using different methods for estimations, which makes it difficult to know what
estimations are most accurate. Consequently, in order for us to calculate the average cost
associated with a seasonal influenza epidemic on the financial markets we will have to
extrapolate information from all the studies and estimate the total economic burden by

                                                                                4
ourselves. This processes of estimating the cost is described in section “4. Estimating the costs
associated with the seasonal influenza”.

Regarding the industries that might profit from the influenza the research, in contrast to the
cost perspective, is almost non consisting, but there are articles that investigate trading
strategies (Thomson Reuters Jan 21, 2013) during seasonal influenza epidemics and other
articles that investigate what products are boosted in sales during an influenza epidemic
(CNBC News Friday 3 Jan 2014). These articles become important for this research paper in
order to understand what industries are positively affected by the influenza season and in
what way. We will investigate this topic further below in the section “5. Influenza exposure
depending on industry”.

3. Background

To provide an overview of the central definitions used in this research paper, the following
section will present relevant background information. General information about the
influenza and where information about it is released will firstly be presented. Secondly, we
will look at the characteristics of the average influenza season, and lastly, we will present and
reflect on the costs/revenues associated with the seasonal influenza and what industries are
most likely exposed to these costs/revenues. The last two parts will be based on previous
literature and conclusions being drawn from it.

3.1 What is the Influenza?

The influenza is a virus spread and a contagious illness. When discussing the influenza, one
                                                                3
often refers to either the Pandemic Flu or the Seasonal Flu. The pandemic and the seasonal
influenza are different in both severity and frequency of occurring. The pandemic influenza is
more severe in its nature and occurs when the influenza virus has gone through mutations
and changes its structure. The virus thus becomes much more dangerous to people infected
as they have no immunity for the virus and thus can be spread faster. The pandemic,
                                                                                                                                     th
compared to the seasonal influenza, is rare and only occurred three times during the 20
century; The Spanish Flu (1918), the Asian Flu (1957) and the Hong Kong Flu (1998). Our most
recent pandemic influenza outbreak was the so called Swine Flu (H1N1) virus that occurred in
2009 (Metropolitan Emergency Managers Committee 2010).

The influenza virus is spread between humans and the symptoms come on quickly and result
in the individual feeling too unwell to continue with their usual activities. Symptoms are
usually shown about 1 to 4 days after being infected, and one can infect other about 1 day
before symptoms are shown and up to 5-7 days after becoming sick. As a result one can infect
other without being aware of themselves being infected (CDC 2015).

3
 In this research paper we will always spell out if we are referring to the seasonal or pandemic influenza. The
word “flu” will only be used in names such as the “Swine Flu”.

                                                                                5
3.2 How the intensity of the common flu is measured?

Influenza activity is measurement through the unit “Percentage of hospitalized patients with
Influenza like Illness (ILI)”. Even though, not all persons infected will be hospitalized, the
measurement becomes a good indicator of the overall public influenza activity and the current
ILI can be compared to the national baseline of 2% (CDC 2015). Almost all related literature
on the seasonal influenza uses the ILI-rate as the base line indicator for estimating the total
economic burden/spread of the influenza within a region.

3.3 Sources providing information about Influenza activity

There are two sources providing information about the current Influenza activity; The Centers
of Disease Control and Prevention and Google Flu trends.

The Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is the US National Public health institute
with the mission to protect the public health. In order to accomplish its mission, CDC conducts
critical science and delivers health information. The CDC provides a weekly update on the
current ILI rate in the US, on both nationwide aggregate level and State level. The revealed ILI
rates are based on information provided by the U.S. Outpatient Influenza-like Illness
Surveillance Network (ILINet), consisting of more than 2900 outpatient health care providers
in all 50 states. The influenza activity rates are compiled and released every Friday, thus
making the revealed data 1-2 weeks old. CDC has been providing this information every week
since 1997 (CDC 2015).

The other source providing this information is the Google Flu trends. Google Flu trends was
released in 2008 and provides information about influenza activity based on aggregated
Google Search Data. Google has found that people feeling ill tend to google their symptoms
which make certain search queries great indicators of Influenza activity. Google Flu trends has
been successful with estimating the current ILI rate, but its information have multiple times
deviated from numbers delivered by CDC. This has resulted in Google Flu trends updating their
models almost annually in order to make it more accurate (Google Flu Trends 2015). Due to
the fact that Google Fu trends has been showing inaccurate ILI numbers several times we have
chosen to not include this data in our research paper. This, as we believe that the market
would find Google Flu trends ILI-rates too uncertain to base their trades on.

3.4 Characteristics of the average influenza season

By looking at all influenza seasons occurring from 1997 to 2015 we have been able to compile
some of the characteristics of the average influenza season. The compiled characteristics are
based on ILI-rates presented by CDC. Each year’s influenza season is identified through the
highest ILI-rate presented that year. The length of each influenza season has been defined as

                                                                                6
                                                                 4
the time from when the ILI first crosses the baseline of 2%  until it returns back below the
baseline. Presented in Figure 1 and Graph 1 are some of the characteristics of the average
seasonal influenza. As we are interested in the characteristics of the seasonal influenza, the
2009 pandemic (Swine Flu) has been excluded. The characteristics are thus based on 17
influenza seasons from 1997-2015.

                                                 As can be seen from Figure 1, the
                                                     seasonal influenza peaks in the period
                                                    December-Mars, with a majority of the
                                                  seasons peaking in December. Graph 1
                                                    illustrates the development curve for
                                                      the average seasonal influenza. It
                                                   peaks at an ILI-rate of around 4.5%,
                                                    lasts for about 16 weeks and the time
                                                          for it to reach its peak is approximately
                                                          as long as the time it takes for it to go
Figure 1: The graph illustrates the distribution of the seasonal  back to the baseline level again.
influenza peak-dates. The graph is based on 17 seasons
occurring from 1997-2015.
                                                   The characteristics of the average
influenza season is important in order to identify unexpectedly mild or severe seasons,
regarding its intensity. In this paper a mild and a severe influenza season are referred to as
when the peak ILI-rate is below respectively above one standard deviation from the average
influenza curve. These characteristics are important when investigating what the market is

           Graph 1: This graph illustrates the average influenza activity curve. Approximately 68%
           out of all annual influenza seasons are captured between the “min” curve and the “max”
           curve (the grey area). If an influenza season peaks above the “max” or below the “min”
           curve they are regarded to be severe respectively mild seasons. The graph is based on 17
            influenza seasons occurring from 1997-2015.
expecting of the seasonal influenza.

4
  ILI-rates lower than 2% is regarded as normal ILI-rates according to CDC. Above 2% is regarded as an influenza
epidemic.

                                                                                7
4. Estimating the costs associated with the seasonal influenza

In order to understand what effect we expect to see on the financial markets during the
seasonal influenza we have to estimate the costs associated with the influenza. As mentioned
earlier, previous research cost estimations vary a lot from each other since they chose to
include different types of costs. In this section we will thus discuss what costs are relevant for
the scope of this research paper.

Later in this research paper, we will calculate the cumulative abnormal average returns (CAAR)
for specific industry groups during the different influenza seasons. In order to do that, we will
focus on the indirect costs and the direct medical costs associated with the annual influenza.

The direct medical costs will mostly affect the health insurance companies in contrast to the
indirect costs that would affect a broader industry selection of companies. These costs should
be reflected in the future expected cash flows when calculating the present value of security
prices.

A large part of the estimated costs from previous research constitutes of the costs from
projected life values from deaths. When determining whether to include these costs or not,
we have to reason about if this cost should affect the pricing of company securities. If a severe
non expected pandemic influenza hits the US and results in the death of a large percentage of
the population, then both productivity losses in the form of lost workers and losses in
consumption are expected in the future. The results thus should be a decrease in the value of
the companies affected. Even though, this is an extreme and unlikely case, it demonstrates
that it is reasonable to consider the costs associated with deaths when investigating the
effects on the financial markets.

As we are interested in the costs that are above or below expected it becomes interesting to
compare the costs of a severe/mild influenza season, with the costs of an average influenza
season.

THE CDC estimates that the average number of hospitalizations and missed workdays
associated with the seasonal influenza every year is estimated to 200 000 and 111 million
respectively, with an attack rate from 5% to 20% (CDC 2015).

According to the most cited study (Molinari, Noelle-Angelique M 2007) within the topic of the
economic burden of an average seasonal influenza hitting the US market, the total cost is
$111.75 billion (95% confidence interval, $54.14, $191.81). This is based on an estimated
27.18 million people (8.5% of the population) getting sick every season. The major part of
these costs (about 65%) is due to death and the rest is medical costs and costs associated with
work absenteeism. What is interesting to consider with this research paper is that the costs of
presenteeism (costs of working while ill) are not considered in this study. A study from 2009
(Nichol,K.L. 2009) estimates that employees on average work for more than 4 days while still
symptomatic with the median level of work effectiveness being 70%–75%. This implies that

                                                                                8
not all relevant costs are included and the total cost of $111.75 billion might be even higher
when considering the cost for presenteeism.

In order to estimate the economic burden occurring when the US is hit by a severe (20% attack
rate) influenza we investigate the costs associated with the 2009-pandemic which had an
attack rate of 20.0% (approximately 60 million cases). This, as it could be useful when
estimating the economic burden occurring when the US is hit by a severe influenza (20% attack
rate). In a study from 2013 (Karve, Sudeep 2013) they calculated the relative higher economic
burden between the regular seasonal influenza in 2005-2006 with the pandemic in the 2009.
The total costs associated with influenza-related productivity loss (not including deaths) were
4.6 times higher between the two seasons. Some reasons for the costs developing faster than
the estimated cases of influenza (≈2.5x cases; ≈4.6x productivity costs) are the loss of
mobility to prevent the spread of the pandemic. With the 2009 pandemic being low in severity,
the costs were dominated by productivity losses due to illness and social distancing
interventions, such as closing of schools and workplaces (Kelso,J.K. 2013). Interestingly, the
closing of schools and workplaces during the pandemic were done in a cost-beneficial
purpose, whereas if the interventions had not been done, the costs would have been even
larger (Mao, Liang 2013). However, the use of interventions is not a regular procedure when
considering the seasonal influenza, even though they may have similar, or even higher, attack
rates. This implies that the indirect costs may be larger relatively speaking for a severe
seasonal influenza than they were for the pandemic in 2009. For example, another season
that had similar ILI rates as the pandemic season of 2009, was the severe influenza season of
2012-2013 with adults missing an estimated 230 million workdays due to infection (CNBC
News Friday, 3 Jan 2014). This makes us believe that it is possible that the costs associated
with productivity losses on a severe seasonal influenza can be 4.6 times higher than a regular
season.

As can be seen by the presented numbers, the differences in costs between a severe and mild
season of influenza can vary very much. During a severe season, with many deaths, missed
workdays, presenteeism days and hospitalizations days the costs could indeed go above $200
billion. This would comprise approximately 1% of the entire S&P 500 market capitalization
(S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC April 30, 2015). Focusing only on industries with a higher exposure
to the costs associated with the seasonal influenza, the relative impact should be even higher.

5. Influenza exposure depending on industry

In order to choose what industries to investigate, it becomes relevant to reflect on what
industries reasonably should be most affected by the influenza. Considering that companies
have different main sources of income and are dependent on different inputs, it is reasonable
to think that the impact of the seasonal influenza may vary dependent on the industry.
Industries can either profit from the seasonal influenza, or disadvantage from it, but the risk
exposure should vary depending on industry.

                                                                                9
The companies that profit from the seasonal influenza would reasonably do so by an increase
in sales from selling influenza related products. CNBC wrote an article about the 2014
influenza and stated that pharmacy companies increased their sales with 9.2% during the most
severe influenza month, thus strengthening our assumption (CNBC News January 7th 2015).

In contrast, the companies that would disadvantage from the seasonal influenza would either
experience increased costs through, for example, loss of productivity, loss of sales and/or
increased paid sick leave costs as a result of ill staff and/or customers.

In the same article mentioned earlier, CNBC wrote that while the pharmacy companies benefit
from seasonal influenza, health insurance companies take a hit. This as the health insurance
companies has to pay for medicine costs and medical costs from hospitalizations during the
influenza season.

As the influenza virus spreads between humans it is reasonable that staff dense industries
should be more exposed to the indirect costs associated with the seasonal influenza, as the
virus can be spread faster. Also, the nature of the work should have an impact on the exposure
to the indirect costs. For industries where the workers perform manual work, so called “blue
collar”-industries, this exposure should be larger. This as physical work is more difficult to
perform ill and also since the companies’ revenues are more dependent on the physical
presence and productivity of their workers. Also, a study on vaccination rates made on
occupational groups show that white-collar industries have a 35 % higher vaccination
coverage compared to blue-collar industries (Caban-Martinez, Alberto J 2010), which would
imply a higher risk for blue-collar workers becoming ill.

Some industries may also be affected by the seasonal influenza trough a decrease in sales as
a result of their customers becoming ill. Citigroup concluded in a 2005 report a trading strategy
in the event of an avian flu outbreak. The report stated that investors should short companies
whose revenues come from malls, casinos, air travel, and tourism. Analysts were also bearish
on labor-intensive industries and countries with "inflexible" labor laws (most of Europe)
because companies not being able to easily fire workers if demand for their products fall
(Thomson Reuters Jan 21, 2013). Even though this trading strategy applies for a pandemic
influenza, we believe it indicates what industries are more exposed to the risk of a severe
influenza season. The impact of a seasonal influenza may be smaller but the distribution of
where the effects are shown should be similar.

                                                                               10
5.1 Industry categorization

Based on this information we have categorized each industry after the impact we assume the
seasonal influenza to have on that industry. The industries have been divided into three
categories shown below;

    1. Broad industry selection of companies believed to be negatively affected by the
       seasonal influenza (NEG) – Here we have included all industries whose business
       operations are believed to have inputs with a higher relative exposure to influenza
        illness than other industries, thus making these industries more negatively affected by
       the seasonal influenza compared to other industries. In order to ease the reading, this
       category of industries/companies will be referred to as “NEG”-industries.
    2. Companies that are assumed to be strongly positively affected by the seasonal
       influenza (STRONG POS) – Here we have include companies whose business
       operations have a strong correlation with illness and which would be very positively
       affected by the seasonal influenza. In order to ease the reading, this category of
       industries/companies will be referred to as “STRONG POS”-companies.
    3. Companies that are assumed to be strongly negatively affected by the seasonal
      influenza (STRONG NEG) - Here we have included companies whose business
       operations have a strong correlation with illness and which would be very negatively
       affected by the influenza. In order to ease the reading, this category of
       industries/companies will be referred to as “STRONG NEG”-companies.

Category 1: (NEG)

  Construction, Manufacturing, Retail trade*      • Productivity losses due to work
                                                absteeism and preesenteism
       *(Exception: Pharmacies and Drug Stores)
                                                        (working while ill)
              Air Transportation                 • Decreases in sales

     Direct Health and Medical Insurance
                                               • Increases in costs
                    Carriers

        Art, Entertainment, Recreation
                                               • Decreases in sales
    Accommmodation and Food Services

Table 1: This table shows what industries are included in the broad selection of companies that are believed to
be negatively affected by the seasonal influenza (“NEG”-industries). The right column describes what impact the
seasonal influenza is assumed to have on the industry/company.

Based on the previous information, the included companies should reasonably be negatively
affected by the seasonal influenza through either productivity losses, decreases in sales or
increases in costs. The included companies’ business operations are believed to have inputs
that have a higher exposure to the seasonal influenza than a “general” company on the
market, but lower than the more narrow industry selections below.

                                                                               11
Category 2: (STRONG POS)

             CVS Pharmacies
                                               • Increases in sales
         Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc.

Table 2: This table shows what companies are included in the narrow selection of companies believed to be
strongly positively affected by the seasonal influenza (“STRONG POS”-companies). The right column describes
what impact the seasonal influenza is assumed to have on the companies.

For the “STRONG POS”-companies we have included only pure-pharmacy companies.
Pharmacies incorporated in other retail chains, such as Walmart Pharmacies, were excluded
since the pharmacies is such a small part of their total sales and also because of the assumed
negative effect that is believed to affect the other parts of their businesses. Pharmaceutical
companies were also excluded, as influenza medicines are a very small part of their total
revenues. Finally, Rite Aid Pharmacies was excluded because of the company being under
financial distress for several of the included periods in this study. This resulted in only two
companies being included for the positive selection group; CVS Pharmacies and Walgreens
Boots Alliance Inc. These two companies are the major players when considering the US
Pharmacy industry, encompassing approximately 42% of the total US market (Storify Aug
2014).

Category 3: (STRONG NEG)

     Direct Health and Medical Insurance
                                               • Increases in costs
                    Carriers

Table 3: This table shows what companies are included in the narrow selection of companies believed to be
strongly negatively affected by the seasonal influenza (“STRONG NEG”-companies). The right column describes
what impact the seasonal influenza is assumed to have on the companies.

When choosing the “STRONG NEG”-companies, we made the selection based on the NAICS
(North American Industry Classification System) codes representing the “Direct Health and
Medical Insurance Carriers” (NAICS code: 524114). We excluded companies such as “Dental
insurance carriers”, that are also included in 524114, because they are not believed to be
negatively affected by the seasonal influenza.

                                                                               12
6. Hypothesis

𝐻0: 𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 = 0 (when ILI-rate is as expected)

𝐻1: 𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 ≠ 0 (when ILI-rate is low or high)

The efficient market hypothesis (EMH) states that share prices always incorporate and reflect
all relevant information in the market. If the EMH holds, we would thus expect that the
information provided on influenza activity should be reflected in share prices as increased
influenza activity may lead to an increase in costs or sales depending on the business of the
companies and industries.

The seasonal influenza occurs on an annual basis and usually hits the market in the period
December-February every year. The intensity of the seasonal influenza peaks around 4.5 %
every year and it is therefore reasonably to say that the aggregated costs for it should be
approximately equally large every season. Since the seasonal influenza has these
characteristics it should be expected by the market. According to the EMH, this means that
share prices already are adjusted to reflect the effects of the average seasonal influenza.

However, we should be able to find abnormal returns for the years where the influenza activity
was very low or very high compared to the average seasonal influenza. This, as the effects on
companies for those years would be larger or smaller than what was expected and thus the
                                                                                      5
previous adjustment in share prices would not be sufficient to reflect it.

Based on this, we have formulated the hypothesis showed above, which states that we expect
to have abnormal returns during the influenza season were ILI-rates are very low or very high.
Very low respectively very high ILI-rates are defined as mild respectively severe influenza
seasons and occur when the ILI-rate peaks below respectively above one standard deviation
from the average influenza curve (for further explanation of a mild and severe influenza
season see Graph 1 under section “3.4 Characteristics of the average influenza season”).

Depending on the industry and the specific influenza season’s ILI-rate we expect to have
positive or negative abnormal returns during the event window for the season. Companies
who are positively affected by the seasonal influenza, i.e. pharmacies, would be expected to
show negative abnormal returns for mild seasons and positive abnormal returns for severe

5
 One could argue that if the average seasonal influenza was expected by the market every year then, no changes
would affect the share prices for the mild or severe seasons as well, due to these being averaged over time to fit
the long run expected cost/profit. However, the discussion then becomes how long of a time horizon the average
investor has. Furthermore, other possibilities to question if they are expected by the market are new vaccination
policies and effectiveness changing over time and institutional changes over time such as paid sick leave contra
no paid sick leave. Moreover, other effects such as a higher density of people with bigger cities and more
cramped production within agriculture creating a faster spreading and more aggressive mutation possibilities for
the influenza virus over time, may not be expected by the market. However, the scope of this research paper is
to explore if there are any stock market reaction due to influenza activity and we will leave further discussion of
how the average influenza may or may not be expected by the market to the reader.

                                                                               13
seasons. This is as the sales would increase more than expected for the severe seasons and
less than expected for the mild seasons.

For the companies who are negatively affected by the influenza we would expect the opposite,
positive abnormal returns during mild seasons and negative abnormal returns during severe
seasons. This is, as the costs would increase more than expected for the severe seasons and
less than expected for the mild seasons.

Presented in Graph 3, the estimated CAAR (Cumulated Abnormal Average Return) is
illustrated based on this hypothesis. For further explanation on CAAR see section “8.1 Event
study”.

         Graph 2: The graph illustrates the assumed CAAR for a company who would be negatively
          affected by the influenza. For a company who would be positively affected by the influenza,
         the graph would show the opposite. Thus, the green and blue line would switch places. The
           x-axis shows days, and the y-axis shows the CAAR (Cumulated Abnormal Average Returns)
          in %. For further explanations on CAAR see section “8.1 Event study”.

                                                                               14
7. Data

For this research paper we have limited our focus to the US market. The reason for this is that
the US market has the most complete data for historical released ILI-rates.

Regarding the choice of data used for the market model proxy we decided to use index data
from the S&P 500. The S&P 500 captures approximately 80% of the coverage of available
market capitalization and thus becomes the most representative index for the US market (S&P
Dow Jones Indices LLC April 30, 2015).

Considering that we are only focusing on the US market regarding influenza seasons, we want
major companies exposed to the total wideness of an influenza epidemic, affecting the entire
nation. Therefore, we choose to use larger companies with the major part of their operational
business in the US market, thus making the S&P 500 constituents good candidates for our
event studies. All stock market data and index data are collected from the COMPUSTAT
database.

The influenza activity rates have been collected from CDC’s database (CDC 2015). As CDC has
ILI information since 1997 we will conduct our study on the period 1997 until 2015 in order to
capture as many seasons as possible. From the period 1997-2015 the US experienced 18
influenza epidemics of which 16 seasons have been included for this research. The influenza
epidemics 2002-2003 and 2008-2009 has been excluded due to the market instability
occurring from the internet bubble bursting in 2002 and the financial crisis in 2008. The great
volatility in share prices makes it difficult to perform correct event studies for those seasons.

8. Method

In this section we lay out the empirical framework used to investigate if the release of
influenza activity generates any stock market responses. First, the average seasonal influenza
was calculated using historical influenza periods from 1997 to 2015. Once the average
influenza curve was estimated we split up the different seasons between mild, medium and
severe seasons. In this section we will estimate the trading strategy used by the market on
influenza activity information. By combining the information from influenza activity and the
estimated trading strategy we can locate the event window and the estimation window. We
then calculate the normal and abnormal returns during the event to see if any interesting
stock market responses are generated. Investigations on stock market responses are made on
the “NEG”-, “STRONG POS”- and ”STRONG NEG”-industry selections. Because of event-date
clustering we choose to use the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic (Kolari, James W 2010) that
accounts for event-induced volatility, serial correlation and cross-sectional correlation. Finally,
we show our results period-wise and regarding the level of severity of the influenza.

                                                                               15
8.1 Event study

In order to investigate the market’s reaction to the release of influenza activity information
we perform a so-called event study. This is done by identifying several historical periods when
information about increased influenza activity were released and then studying what happens
to security prices during these periods. In finance and accounting research, event studies have
been applied to a variety of firm specific and economy wide events for over 50 years and is a
common tool used to identify stock market responses to distinct event types. The conduction
of our event study is based on the article “Event Studies in Economics and Finance”
(MacKinlay,A.Craig 1997), which summarizes how an event study should be performed and
potential biases done in event studies.

To identify any stock market responses during our event we first have to calculate the normal
performance of the stock. MacKinlay suggest several different methods to estimate the
normal performance. One of the simpler and more common used models for this is the CAPM
(Capital Asset Pricing Model), specified as following:

                             E(ri) = rf + αi + βmkt,i(rmkt − rf) + εi

ri = logarithmic stock return for security i

rf = risk free rate

αi = performance of security i after accounting for the systematic risk

βmkt,i = measure of the systematic risk

rmkt = return of the market

As a proxy for the market return we have chosen to use the S&P 500 index. The daily risk free
rate is collected from the Fama/French database (Kenneth R. French 2015). As specified on his
website, this is the simple daily rate that, over the number of trading days in the month,
compounds to a 1-month T-Bill rate from Ibbotson and Associates, Inc.

The abnormal returns are then calculated:

                         ARi,t = ri,t − [rf,t + αi + βmkt,i(rmkt,t − rf,t)]

ARi,t = abnormal return for security i on day t

rf,t = risk free rate on day t

αi = performance of security i after accounting for the systematic risk on day t

βmkt,i = estimated using the CAPM

rmkt = estimated using the CAPM

As MacKinlay suggests we use an estimation window of 120 days before the event window.
The event window is not included in the estimation window to prevent the event from

                                                                               16
influencing the normal performance model parameter estimates. By regressing each security’s
excess return (security i’s return on day t minus the risk free rate) with the market excess
return, within the estimation window, we can estimate each security’s beta and alpha. By then
using these estimates in the event window we can estimate each security’s normal
performance during the event window. The abnormal return is then calculated by taking the
actual return minus the estimated normal return for each security and day in the event
window.

However, to see if there are any actual stock market responses occurring because of the event
we need to test if the abnormal returns are significantly different from zero. In our case, having
a long event window, we are not especially interested with each abnormal return on a stand-
alone basis, but more interested in the cumulated abnormal return (CAR) during the event.
The formula calculating the CAR for each security is:

                                               T2
                           CARi = ∑ ARi,t
                                             t=T1+1

CARi = cumulated abnormal return for security i

T1 = the latest day in the estimation window

T2 = the latest day in the event window

ARi,t = abnormal return for security i on day t

Furthermore, there are many securities in the sample and we are interested in the total
cumulated abnormal effect among all securities as a group during the entire event window.
Therefore, we have to calculate the cumulated abnormal average return (CAAR). The formula
for calculating the CAAR is as follows:

                                                 T2
                                1
                       CAAR =   ∑ CARi
                                              𝑁
                                              t=T1+1

CAAR = cumulated abnormal average return for all securities as a group during the event window

N = number of securities in the event

The hypothesis test now becomes:

                                H0 = CAAR

                                H1 ≠ CAAR

By rejecting the null hypothesis (H0) we can say that there indeed is a significant stock market
response during the distinct event.

To test the null hypothesis we need a test statistic to test the CAAR against. Specifically in our
case we have event-date clustering, because of the seasonal influenza (the event) occurring

                                                                               17
at the same time for all the firms (securities). This poses a problem leading to cross-sectional
correlation of the abnormal returns and distortions from event-induced volatility changes.
Cross-sectional correlation emerges when studies focuses on an event which occurs for
several firms at the same day. Event-induced volatility changes, on the other hand, is a
phenomenon common to many event types and also becomes a problem when events are
clustered. Consequently, both issues introduce a downward bias in the standard deviation,
thus overstating the t-statistic. This leads to a falsely over-rejection of the null hypothesis.
There have been several attempts to address these statistical issues, with one of the latest
solutions for solving them being the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic developed by (Kolari, James
W 2010). This test statistic accounts for both the event-induced volatility, serial correlation
and cross-sectional correlation, hence making it a good test statistic for testing our null
              6
hypothesis.

6
 To see the calculations for the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic see Appendix “12.4 Adjusted Z-BMP test statistics
calculations”.

                                                                               18
8.2 Event window

As information on influenza activity is released solely through the current ILI it becomes
impossible for the market to know in advance how large the influenza activity will become
and for how long it will last. However, looking at the characteristics of the average seasonal
influenza, we have been able to form an assumption about traders reasoning. From section
“3.4 Characteristics of the average influenza” we know that the average seasonal influenza
curve is formed as a normal distribution curve with 6-8 weeks long tails and peaking one time
in the middle, on average at an ILI-rate of 4.5%. These two characteristics together make it a
reasonable assumption to say that when a lower ILI-rate compared to the previous week is
revealed (red dot in Graph 3), the market knows the severity of that year’s seasonal influenza.
This as, by looking at the first half of the seasonal influenza curve, easily can calculate the
length and intensity of the later half.

          Graph 3: This graph demonstrates at what time the market knows the severity of the
            seasonal influenza. The point is here shown as the red dot and is the first released lower
            ILI-rate compared to the previous week of the influenza period. It is possible for the traders
           to, by this point in time, know the severity of the whole period, as area 1 is approximately
           as large as area 2. (The curve is for explanatory purpose regarding the trading strategy
             on ILI-rates and do not represent correct numbers considering the length of the tails and
            height of the curve.)

Given that our assumption is correct, it should not occur any trading on influenza activity
information after the market knows that the influenza season has had its peak. This means
that the last date of the event window should be set equal to the date at the red dot for all
influenza seasons used in our event study.

However, the first date of the chosen event window is not as easy to decide since the ILI
trading trigger may vary between traders. In order to capture all potential trades on the ILI
information, we strive to make the start date as early as possible. However, longer event
windows come at the cost of lower significance levels when running the regressions. The
choice of the event window’s length thus has to be a compromise that captures as many
potential trades due to the event as possible, but without immediately generating too low
significant results in our event studies.

                                                                               19
By looking at the historical influenza seasons we have come to the conclusion that, around 6
weeks before the season hits its peak, it starts becoming obvious that the seasonal influenza
is present. This as, the revealed ILI-rate increases faster compared to earlier weeks and the ILI
is at least 1 percentage point above the national baseline of 2%. Going shorter than 6 weeks
strengthens the risk of losing valuable information from stock market responses caused by the
event.

Because of the above mentioned reasons we have decided that our event window will be set
to 6 weeks (or 30 trading days) before the first revealed lower ILI point. The event window is
demonstrated graphically in Graph 4.

          Graph 4: This graph illustrates the method for identifying the event window for each
          seasonal influenza epidemic. The event window is chosen from the first reveled lower ILI
           rate compared to the previous week, and 6 weeks earlier. (The curve is for explanatory
            purpose regarding the trading strategy on ILI-rates and do not represent correct numbers
            considering the length of the tails and height of the curve.)
8.3 Performed event studies

To see if there are any significant stock market responses due to the seasonal influenza we
have chosen to run event studies on the three different industry/company selections
mentioned in section “5.1 Industry categorization”; “NEG”, “STRONG POS” and “STRONG
NEG”.

The three event studies will be done for each and every of the 16 included influenza seasons
occurring from 1997 to 2015. The pandemic of 2009 (Swine Flu) has been included in the event
studies and been classified as a severe influenza season. This as the Swine Flu was unexpected
by the market due to the fact that no one new if or how large the impact would be if it hit the
US. This implies that the market would react to the Swine Flu first when the ILI-rates were
released of its presence, thus making it possible to accurately calculate the costs/revenues
from it.

                                                                               20
All the event studies are done on an individual basis for each season in able to investigate if
there are any differences between mild, normal and severe seasons. This implies that we will
run a total of 48 regressions: 16 on the “NEG”-industry selection, 16 on the “STRONG POS”-
companies and 16 on the “STRONG NEG”-companies. The pandemic of 2009 (Swine Flu) is
included to see if there are any differences between this special event and the other “regular”
events.

8.3.1 Drop-outs of companies when running the regressions

As mentioned under the section “7. Data” we choose to look at S&P 500 companies under the
period 1997 to 2015. When running the regression on the “NEG”-industries we first dropped
all the companies being classified as not being part of the affected industries using the NAICS
codes collected from the COMPUSTAT database. Next we dropped all companies not having
30 active trading days in the event window or not having 120 trading days in the estimation
window. Finally, we winsorized the returns to the 1-percentile and 99-percentile level.
Winsorization is done to limit extreme values in the statistical data to reduce the effect of
                            7
possibly spurious outliers. However, this is done by first checking that no returns in the event
window is affected, due to the risk of losing important stock market responses occurring
during the event.

After the drop-outs there are 275 to 366 companies in the “NEG”, 2 companies in the
“STRONG POS” and 10 to 16 companies in the “STRONG NEG” depending on season.

9. Results

The main result in this research is that traders do not seem to trade on information about
influenza activity in the US. First we present the results for the ”NEG”-industry selection, next
the results for the “STRONG POS”-companies and lastly the “STRONG NEG”-companies.

9.1 Results from “NEG”-industries

After performing the event studies on the industries that were assumed to be negatively
affected by the seasonal influenza, “NEG”-industries, we conclude that there are not any
significant stock market responses due to the release of ILI-rates.

                                                                8
Of the 16 included seasons we have 2 mild, 10 medium  and 4 severe. During the mild
influenza seasons the cost should be unexpected lower than the market has anticipated and

7
 For example, when checking our data we had one security price that went from 325 to 32.5 and back to 325 on
three consecutive days. This generated extreme values in the return variable which were due to wrong values
from the COMPUSTAT database. One could argue that trimming or trunking then would be a better choice of
action, but then the risk is that we lose important information regarding volatility for a specific security, which
later on is used to estimate the standard deviation in the event window. In the end, winsorizing and trimming
usually generates similar results.
8
 Medium seasons are referred to as the ”regular” average influenza season. See section ”4. Characteristics of
the average influenza season” for more explanations on mild, medium and severe seasons.

                                                                               21
therefore the CAARs should be positive. The opposite should apply for the severe seasons,
and the medium seasons should not generate any CAARs at all. Therefore, according to our
hypothesis we want to reject the null hypothesis on 2 seasons due to positive CAARs, 4
seasons due to negative CAARs, and on 10 seasons we do not want to be able to reject it at
all. However, our results show that we only can reject the null hypothesis for 1 out of 16
seasons. The season we could reject the null hypothesis for was during a mild seasons, with a
                                     9
rejection in the right direction.

Even though the rejection rates between the seasons are not as expected we further
investigate if the CAARs are generated in the right direction regarding if the season were mild,
medium or severe. As shown in Graph 5, the average CAAR for all the 16 seasons combined
show a slight increase of less than 1%. This implies that the seasonal influenza already is
incorporated in the pricing of securities. However, when then looking closer between if the
seasons were mild, medium or severe we conclude that the mild seasons on average have
positive CAARs, with the low and severe seasons on average having negative CAARs. This
implies that the release of influenza activity does not generate any stock market responses.

Graph 5: This graph shows the results for the event studies made on the “NEG”-industries. The results are
presented as average CAAR for all seasons combined, for the medium seasons, the severe seasons and the mild
seasons. The averaged CAAR for all seasons combined indicates that the information of influenza activity is
already incorporated in the pricing of securities. However, looking at the CAAR averaged for medium seasons we
see a slight positive trend and for the mild and severe seasons we see a slight negative trend. This implies that
the release of influenza activity does not generate any stock market responses.

9
 We are only looking at the 95% level of significance when talking about rejection. Therefore, the adjusted Z-
BMP test statistic must take a value of (-1.96 < adj Z-BMP < 1.96) not to be rejected, take a value of (adj Z-BMP
< -1.96) to be rejected due to a negative CAAR and take a value of (1.96 < adj Z-BMP) to be rejected due to a
positive CAAR.

                                                                               22
Furthermore, to understand if there is any relation between the CAARs and the level of
influenza activity released during an influenza season we plotted the adjusted Z-BMP test
statistic for the CAARs corresponding to each season against the peak ILI-rate measured during
that season. The higher peak ILI-rate during a season implies a higher unexpected cost during
that season, which would lead to a more negative CAAR and thus a more negative value of the
adjusted Z-BMP test statistic. In contrast, a lower peak ILI-rate would lead to lower
unexpected costs, a more positive CAAR and thus a more positive value of the adjusted Z-BMP
test statistic. The relationship between the value of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic and the
peak ILI-rate should then be a line leaning downwards from the top left corner to the bottom
right corner of the graph. As shown in Graph 6, the slope of the line is leaning in the right
direction, but the explanation value is very low, which implies further that ILI-rates are not
affecting the pricing of securities.

Graph 6: This graph shows the relationship between the value of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic and the peak
ILI-rate for each season from 1997 to 2015 for the “NEG”-industries. When a mild influenza season occurs “NEG”-
industries are believed to incur lower unexpected costs and therefore generate positive CAARs, in contrast to
severe season, where the opposite is believed to happen. This implies positive values of the adjusted Z-BMP test
statistics for mild seasons and negative values of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistics for severe seasons. We thus
expect a trend in the relationship between the test statistics and the peak ILI-rates from the top left corner to
the bottom right corner. Even though we have a slight trend in the right direction the explanation value of the
                       2
trend is very low with a 𝑅  value of 0.046. This implies that ILI-rates are not affecting the pricing of securities.

                                                                               23
9.2 Results from “STRONG POS”-companies

When look at the “STRONG POS”-companies, believed to be affected in a strong positive way
due to the seasonal influence, we use the same procedure as with the “NEG”-industries.
However, due to “STRONG POS”-companies being believed to be effected in a positive way
from increased sales during the seasonal influenza, we want the results to be in the opposite
direction compared to the “NEG”-industries. Out of 16 seasons we want to see 2 negative
CAARs (due to lower unexpected sales from a mild season), 4 positive CAARs (due to higher
unexpected sales from a severe season) and 10 CAARs to be zero (due to nothing unexpected
happening during a medium season). When looking at our results we can reject the null
hypothesis for 6 out of 16 seasons. However, the rejections of the null hypothesis is during 2
severe seasons and 4 medium seasons and with the rejection being in the wrong direction for
one of the severe seasons.

Once again, taking a closer look at the CAAR averaged over all the seasons together we actually
see a slight increase of almost 3%. However, as shown in Graph 7, the split up between CAARs
generated during mild, medium and severe seasons indicates that the release of influenza
activity has nothing to do with the stock market responses shown in the CAARs averaged for

Graph 7: This graph shows the results for the event studies made on the “STRONG POS”-companies. The results
are presented as average CAAR for all seasons combined, for the medium seasons, the severe seasons and the
mild seasons. The averaged CAAR for all seasons combined indicates that the information of influenza activity
does generate stock market reactions in the right direction. However, splitting up the CAARs between mild,
medium and severe seasons we see that the medium seasons generate the positive CAARs and that mild and
severe seasons more or less do not generate any CAARs at all. This implies that it is not the release of influenza
activity that is generating the positive CAARs during medium seasons.
                                                                               24
all seasons together. The severe and mild seasons show CAARs being quite steady around the
zero mark with only the medium influenza seasons generating steady positive CAARs.

Furthermore, as done with the “NEG”-industries, we look at the relationship between the
value of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic and the peak ILI-rate for each season. We should, in
contrast to the “NEG”-industries graph, expect a positive trend between the two. When an
unexpected severe influenza season occurs it should generate unexpected increases in sales
for the “STRONG POS”-companies and therefore generate positive CAARs, hence giving
positive values of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic, with the opposite occurring for an
unexpected mild influenza season. As seen in Graph 8, we in fact see a slight positive relation
between the two, however, the explanation value is, as it was with the “NEG”-industries, also
here very low. This implies further that ILI-rates are not affecting the pricing of securities.

Graph 8: This graph shows the relationship between the value of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic and the peak
ILI-rate for each season from 1997 to 2015 for “STRONG POS”-companies. When a mild influenza season occurs
“STRONG POS”-companies are believed to have lower unexpected sales and therefore generate negative CAARs,
in contrast to severe season, where the opposite is believed to happen. This implies negative values of the
adjusted Z-BMP test statistics for mild seasons and positive values of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistics for severe
seasons. We thus expect a trend in the relationship between the test statistics and the peak ILI-rates from the
bottom left corner to the top right corner. Even though we have a slight trend in the right direction the explanation
                                  2
value of the trend is very low with a 𝑅  value of 0.0439. This implies that ILI-rates are not affecting the pricing of
securities.

                                                                               25
9.2 Results from “STRONG NEG”-companies

Lastly the results from the “STRONG NEG”-companies, that are the companies believed to be
affected in a strong negative way due to the seasonal influenza, show that we only have 1 out
of 16 seasons where the null hypothesis can be rejected. This was for a medium season that
showed a positive CAAR. According to our hypothesis we want to see 2 positive CAARs (due
to lower unexpected costs from a mild season), 4 negative CAARs (due to higher unexpected
costs from a severe season) and 10 CAARs to be zero (due to nothing unexpected happening
during a medium season). Looking further at the CAARs averaged for all seasons together we
see a slight negative trend of 1% to 2% (see Graph 9). However, showing the averaged CAARs
split into mild, medium and severe seasons we do see a big negative trend for the severe
seasons, as proposed by our hypothesis. On the other hand, the mild seasons do not show any
trend what so ever and the CAARs are quite steady around the zero mark.

Graph 9: This graph shows the results for the event studies made on the “STRONG NEG”-companies. The results
are presented as average CAAR for all seasons combined, for the medium seasons, the severe seasons and the
mild seasons. The averaged CAAR for all seasons combined indicates slight negative CAARs for the “STRONG NEG”-
companies. However, splitting up the CAARs between mild, medium and severe seasons we see that severe
seasons generate strong negative CAARs but that mild seasons more or less do not generate any CAARs at all.

To further investigate why the severe seasons generate such negative CAARs but mild seasons
have quite steady CAARs around the zero mark, we split up the four severe seasons to look at
them separately as shown in Graph 10. All these seasons were very severe with peak ILI-rates
ranging from 7% to 8%. We see that the two seasons 1998-1999 and 1999-2000 both show
large downturns that seem to recover almost fully respectively more than fully, before the
influenza season has reached its peak. From section “8.2 Event window” the last day in the

                                                                               26
event window is the first day when a lower peak ILI-rate is released compared to the previous
week. This means that we do not want to see a recovery effect, and instead no movement at
all in the CAARs during the last days of the event window. The season of 1999-2000 is a bit
special in the case that CDC reported an unexpected high count of deaths attributed to
pneumonia and influenza (P&I). However, later that season they stated the P&I figures had to
be interpreted with caution due to changes in the case definition that may be contributing to
higher estimates of P&I mortality than in previous seasons (CDC 2015). This could have
induced an overreaction and a rebound effect in the pricing of health insurance companies
(“STRONG NEG”-companies). Though, that this rebound would take a positive CAAR before
the season reached its’ peak, is highly unlikely. This implies that we might have captured some
other event during these seasons, causing the health insurance companies to drop and
recover in price. Furthermore, the season of 2003-2004 did not show any significant decreases
at all. Despite these results, the most interesting result is the one for the 2009 pandemic
season. Here we see a steady and long decrease in the CAAR with a slight flattening in the end,
exactly what our hypothesis proposes. The severity of the pandemic was large, but compared
with the other seasons it was quite similar. However, the media attention surrounding the
pandemic was much larger. With a regular influenza season hardly attracting any media

Graph 10: This graph shows the CAARs for the “STRONG NEG”-companies (health insurance companies) during
the most severe influenza seasons. The two seasons 1998-1999 and 1999-2000 both show big decreases in the
CAARs that seem to recover almost fully respectively more than fully before the season has reached its’ peak ILI-
rate. The season of 2003-2004 shows small changes in the CAAR mostly surrounding the zero line. These three
seasons imply that it is not the ILI-rate affecting security prices in the health insurance companies, with the two
first seasons’ event window probably capturing some other event during the seasonal influenza. The most
interesting season is the pandemic, where we see a steady decrease in the CAAR, with a slight flattening of it in
the end of the event window. The huge difference in media attention during this season, in comparison to other
regular influenza seasons, might be the cause of these differences between the severe seasons’ CAARs.

                                                                               27
coverage, the pandemic was closely monitored. This might have induced a higher level of fear
in the market, with the most obvious exposed companies to the costs associated with the
pandemic, taking the largest hit.

As done with the “NEG”-industries and “STRONG POS”-companies, we look at the relationship
between the value of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic and the peak ILI-rate for each season.
We should expect to see a negative trend between the two. When an unexpected severe
influenza season occurs it should generate unexpected increases in costs for the “STRONG
NEG”-companies and therefore generate negative CAARs, hence giving negative values of the
adjusted Z-BMP test statistics, with the opposite occurring for an unexpected mild influenza
season. As Graph 11 shows, we in fact see a slight negative trend that both is more negative
and has a higher explanation value than the “NEG”-industries. However, this is mainly due to
an “outlier” season. Trimming the graph from this “outlier” season makes the explanation
value go from 0.1442 down to 0.0664, slightly higher than the 0.046 shown in the “NEG”-
industries, but still very low. This implies that ILI-rates are not affecting the pricing of
             10
securities.

Graph 11: This graph shows the relationship between the value of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic and the peak
ILI-rate for each season from 1997 to 2015 for “STRONG NEG”-companies. When a mild influenza season occurs
“STRONG NEG”-companies are believed to have lower unexpected costs and therefore generate positive CAARs,
in contrast to severe season, where the opposite is believed to happen. This implies positive values of the adjusted
Z-BMP test statistics for mild seasons and negative values of the adjusted Z-BMP test statistics for severe seasons.
We thus expect a trend in the relationship between the test statistics and the peak ILI-rates from the top left
corner to the bottom right corner. As shown by the graph we both have a more negative trend and a higher
explanation value than shown in the “NEG”-industries. However, this is mainly due to an “outlier” season.
                                                     2
Trimming the graph from this “outlier “ season makes the 𝑅  go from 0.1442 down to 0.0664, slightly higher than
the 0.046 shown in the “NEG”-industries, but still very low. This implies that ILI-rates are not affecting the pricing
of securities.

10
  To see all the CAARs and adjusted Z-BMP test statistic values for each influenza season on a stand-alone basis
see Appendix sections “12.1 CAARs seasons 1997-2015, “NEG”-industries”, “12.2 CAARs seasons 1997-2015,
“STRONG POS”-companies” and “12.3 CAARs seasons 1997-2015, “STRONG NEG”-companies”.

                                                                               28
9.3 Robustness test

For robustness, we redid all 46 event studies for the “NEG”-industries, “STRONG POS”-
companies and “STRONG NEG”-companies but with an extended estimation window of 180
days to investigate if our results varied in any significant way. As expected, the results did not
change in any significant way, and were still very insignificant, with CAARs trending in the
wrong direction, as proposed in our hypothesis.

10. Limitation and suggestions for future research

Since our results showed no indication of trading based on ILI-rates it becomes important to
understand the implications of our results and what future research can contribute with to
bring more understanding to this topic. It is possible that the information on ILI-rates are not
used for trading, but it is also possible that we are missing something in this research paper.
In order to understand the implications of our results, it is important to understand the
limitations of our research to see what we potentially have missed and to understand what
needs to be done next.

The following section will firstly present the limitations with our research paper and next
present what future research can do to help further understand why our research paper
showed the results it did.

10.1 The event studies are performed on aggregate level instead of state level

The main potential bias in our study is that our event studies are performed on aggregate US
level. The aggregate US ILI-rate used in this paper is an average of ILI-rates on state level. Some
states may have little to none exposure to the seasonal influenza while other states has a
widespread epidemic. This means that several companies may have their operations in a state
where the ILI-rate is very low, but they have been included due to high ILI-rates in the rest of
the country. Even though, ILI-rates are released state-wise, there is no database that compiles
where US companies have their business operations, making it impossible for us to perform
event studies on state level. For this reason, some stock market reactions from several
companies may happen before or after our selected event window, due to their exposure to
the seasonal influenza depending on where their business operations are located.

This bias is a large issue for our research credibility, but it is important to consider that a lot
of the information needed is very difficult, or in some cases impossible, to receive. Many
companies’ information about revenue distribution between states are not available for the
public. One possibility would be to manually investigate and estimate every company’s
relative business exposure between states, but this would be very time consuming, and
probably quite unreliable. The forming of a trading strategy on companies believed to be
strongly affected from the seasonal influenza, when regarding business exposure on state
level, may be a possibility, but is left for future research.

                                                                               29
10.2 Previous research on the economic impact of the influenza is overestimated

As previously mentioned in the section “2. Related literature”, the estimations of the total
economic burden associated with the seasonal influenza vary a lot between different research
papers. The high variations in the cost estimations indicate that they may be overestimated
and that the impact of the seasonal influenza on companies may be smaller than what
previous research papers have suggested. Furthermore, the inclusion of projected statistical
life values for deaths in the cost estimations might possibly not fully be reflected and
incorporated in the pricing of securities. If this is the case, the reason to why we see no
indications of trading on ILI-rates occurring may be because of the costs/revenues being too
small to show any significant impact on the pricing of securities.

10.3 The available information is too uncertain to be used for trading

Another limitation with our research, and alternative interpretation, is that the information
provided is too uncertain to be used for trading. First, almost all previous research papers uses
the CDC ILI data as a gold standard when estimating the costs. However, this source has
potential biases of its own. First of all, only about 1800 out of the 2900 health care sentinels
provide ILI surveillance data any given week. Also, each health care sentinel serves areas that
vary in population size/density, which may lead to a skew in reporting. Additionally, increased
media attention of an influenza season may lead to health care sentinels reporting more
potential ILI cases than they would have otherwise. Furthermore, when previous research
papers estimate the total number of infected cases, hospitalizations and deaths occurring
each influenza season on an aggregate level, they use different types of multipliers, which
makes the cost estimations even more uncertain.

Moreover, the selection of companies that are believed to either strongly profit or
disadvantage from the seasonal influenza, are based on news articles or different analysts’
estimations. The lacking of research based sources on these companies, in conjunction with
the exposure to the seasonal influenza being highly dependent on where their business
operations are located, makes the estimations of the costs/revenues for the affected
companies very uncertain.

All these reasons imply that trader’s may think that the information provided is not sufficient
and too unreliable to be used for trading. If this is the case, the implication of this research
would be that no trading occurs because it is yet not possible, since the information is too
uncertain.

                                                                               30
10.4 Suggestions for future research

As discussed previously the amount of people being affected by the market and its cost impact
is significant and does affect the market. The total costs of the impact, however, is up for
discussion. For future research we suggest that the costs/revenues are investigated through
accounting reports released after the influenza, instead of investigating it through the
financial markets during the event.

We did not find any significant stock market reactions, but as mentioned in the previous
section, screening the believed strongly positively/negatively affected companies on a state-
wise level, might yield more significant results. Additionally, if no stock market reactions are
found during the event, the believed costs/revenues might instead be reflected in the
quarterly reports following the influenza season. By comparing the expected EBITDA with the
actual EBITDA, in the quarterly reports following an unexpected mild/severe influenza season,
one should capture the operational costs/revenues not reflected and incorporated in the
share prices during the event. If nothing is found here, it might imply that the costs/revenues
are too small or that the bigger part of the costs, associated with deaths, is spread over time,
making the leftover costs too small to be captured during the event.

11. Conclusion

We have examined if the release of influenza activity generated any significant stock market
responses in the US during the influenza seasons from1997 to 2015. By using the historical
influenza periods from 1997 to 2015 we calculated the average seasonal influenza and used
this to estimate a potential trading strategy on ILI-rates released from the CDC. Our hypothesis
was, that if an unexpected severe seasonal influenza hit the US, this would generate negative
or positive abnormal returns depending on company. For companies exposed to the costs
associated with illness we would expect to find negative abnormal returns (productivity losses
due to ill workers or paid sick leave costs) and positive abnormal returns would be found for
companies who would experience an increase in sales (i.e. pharmacies). Other companies,
such as health insurance companies, would disadvantage from the severe season, due to
higher costs associated with increased insurance payouts from illness. The opposite was
proposed for an unexpected mild seasonal influenza hitting the US. The classification for a
mild respectively severe influenza season was when the peak ILI-rate was below respectively
above one standard deviation from the average seasonal influenza curve. We tested our
hypothesis by performing event studies on all seasons from 1997 to 2015 (excluding the 2002-
2003 and 2008-2009 season due to market instabilities generated from the internet bubble
bursting and financial crisis).

After running 48 regressions for all seasons regarding different industries/companies believed
to be either positively/negatively affected from the seasonal influenza we conclude that we
did not find any significant stock market responses generated from the release of influenza
activity. The null hypothesis (𝐻0: 𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 = 0) was randomly rejected and many times, the

                                                                               31
abnormal returns were in the wrong direction. When looking at the relationship between the
value of the test statistic for the CAARs and the peak ILI-rates for each season, we could see
an indication of the believed costs/revenues being generated as proposed in our hypothesis.
                                                                       2
However, the explanation value of these findings were very low (𝑅  ≈ 6% − 8%). This
further implies that ILI-rates were not affecting the pricing of securities.

Additionally, we found a strong negative decrease in the CAAR during the pandemic in 2009
for companies believed to be strongly negatively affected (health insurance companies) due
to a severe influenza season. These companies dropped about 13% during the pandemic, but
however, showed unexpected movements during other severe influenza seasons. The
increased media coverage of the pandemic, in comparison with the regular seasonal influenza,
might be the underlying cause for creating the large downturn in health insurance companies
during this specific event. If this is the case, it implies that the media attention on the seasonal
influenza might be a cause for creating stock market responses instead of the actual ILI-rates
released by CDC.

For future research we suggest to conduct the event studies on a state level, by first estimating
every companies’ operational business exposure on state level. This, as one can more
accurately account for the cost/revenues associated with seasonal influenza between
companies. If no stock market responses are found on state level, then maybe they are
reflected in the quarterly reports following the seasonal influenza. By comparing the expected
EBITDA with the actual EBITDA, in the quarterly reports following an unexpected mild or
severe influenza season, one should capture the operational costs/revenues not reflected and
incorporated in the share prices during the event. If not, then perhaps the impacts are too
small and previous research estimations has been overestimated. However, with this research
paper we have illuminated a previously unexplored topic in the financial market, and now we
leave the door slightly more open than it was before, and thereby hope to inspire further work
on this topic.

                                                                               32
12. Appendix

12.1 CAARs season 1997-2015, “NEG”-industries

Influenza class Medium Severe Severe Medium Medium Severe Medium Low
Season 97-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 03-04 04-05 05-06
Companies 366 365 348 342 346 351 350 346
Z-BMP 2,817 -3,124 1,414 1,559 7,980 0,358 -0,3283 2,1969
average corr 0,008 0,019 0,014 0,035 0,018 0,013 0,0112 0,0158
Adjusted Z-BMP 1,450 -1,089 0,574 0,426 2,944 0,151 -0,1474 0,8574
Appendix 1: The graphs show the CAAR for each season from 1997 to 2006 for the “NEG”-companies (excluding
season 2002-2003). The table shows descriptive statistics for each season’s event study. The adjusted Z-BMP test
statistic is calculated using the regular Z-BMP test statistic and the average of the sample cross correlation of the
estimation periods abnormal returns (average corr).

                                                                               33
Influenza class Medium Medium Severe Medium Low Medium Medium Medium
Season 06-07 07-08 Swine Flu 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15
Companies 333 321 305 299 293 284 278 275
Z-BMP 1,979 1,289 -1,930 1,478 -3,709 -0,956 -0,624 2,596
average corr 0,013 0,017 0,034 0,018 0,023 0,015 0,012 0,013
Adjusted Z-BMP 0,861 0,505 -0,561 0,583 -1,314 -0,412 -0,301 1,204
Appendix 2: The graphs show the CAAR for each season from 2006 to 2015 for the “NEG”-companies (excluding
season 2008-2009). The table shows descriptive statistics for each season’s event study. The adjusted Z-BMP test
statistic is calculated using the regular Z-BMP test statistic and the average of the sample cross correlation of the
estimation periods abnormal returns (average corr).
                                                                               34
12.2 CAARs season 1997-2015, “STRONG POS”-companies

Influenza class Medium Severe Severe Medium Medium Severe Medium Low
Season 97-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 03-04 04-05 05-06
Companies 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Z-BMP 7,192 4,037 -0,668 4,652 1,445 -6,278 0,6199 1,7365
average corr 0,126 0,474 0,351 0,508 0,492 0,392 0,2199 0,3889
Adjusted Z-BMP 6,338 2,412 -0,463 2,657 0,843 -4,150 0,4957 1,1518
 Appendix 3: The graphs show the CAAR for each season from 1997 to 2006 for the “STRONG POS”-companies
 (excluding season 2002-2003). The table shows descriptive statistics for each season’s event study. The adjusted
 Z-BMP test statistic is calculated using the regular Z-BMP test statistic and the average of the sample cross
 correlation of the estimation periods abnormal returns (average corr).

                                                                               35
Influenza class Medium Medium Severe Medium Low Medium Medium Medium
Season 06-07 07-08 Swine Flu 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15
Companies 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Z-BMP -14,197 2,060 0,603 -2,320 -1,904 1,621 0,054 10,781
average corr 0,714 0,509 0,450 0,417 0,042 -0,062 0,288 0,315
Adjusted Z-BMP -5,798 1,175 0,371 -1,488 -1,826 1,725 0,040 7,783
Appendix 4: The graphs show the CAAR for each season from 2006 to 2015 for the “STRONG POS”-companies
(excluding season 2008-2009). The table shows descriptive statistics for each season’s event study. The adjusted
Z-BMP test statistic is calculated using the regular Z-BMP test statistic and the average of the sample cross
correlation of the estimation periods abnormal returns (average corr).
                                                                               36
12.3 CAARs season 1997-2015, “STRONG NEG”-companies

Influenza class Medium Severe Severe Medium Medium Severe Medium Low
Season 97-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 03-04 04-05 05-06
Companies 10 12 10 11 12 15 16 16
Z-BMP 0,059 -1,242 -0,623 -0,757 0,492 0,484 -0,671 -0,198
average corr 0,070 0,053 0,124 0,179 0,136 0,098 0,108 0,109
Adjusted Z-BMP 0,044 -0,962 -0,401 -0,410 0,290 0,299 -0,391 -0,115
Appendix 5: The graphs show the CAAR for each season from 1997 to 2006 for the “STRONG NEG”-companies
(excluding season 2002-2003). The table shows descriptive statistics for each season’s event study. The adjusted
Z-BMP test statistic is calculated using the regular Z-BMP test statistic and the average of the sample cross
correlation of the estimation periods abnormal returns (average corr).

                                                                               37
Influenza class Medium Medium Severe Medium Low Medium Medium Medium
Season 06-07 07-08 Swine Flu 10-11 11-12 12-13 13-14 14-15
Companies 14 12 12 12 12 12 12 11
Z-BMP 4,559 -3,054 -3,686 0,951 -1,106 0,926 -1,389 -0,942
average corr 0,141 0,162 0,282 0,129 0,175 0,148 0,201 0,243
Adjusted Z-BMP 2,509 -1,677 -1,542 0,571 -0,587 0,527 -0,693 -0,442
Appendix 6: The graphs show the CAAR for each season from 2006 to 2015 for the “STRONG NEG”-companies
(excluding season 2008-2009). The table shows descriptive statistics for each season’s event study. The adjusted
Z-BMP test statistic is calculated using the regular Z-BMP test statistic and the average of the sample cross
correlation of the estimation periods abnormal returns (average corr).

                                                                               38
12.4 Adjusted Z-BMP statistics calculations

The following calculations are based on the research platform “Event Study Tools” (Event
Study Tools 30 Mar 2015).

First we calculate the standard deviation over the estimation window as following:

Mi = the count of non missing return values in the estimation window for firm i

T0 = the earliest day of the estimation window

T1 = the latest day of the estimation window

ARi,t = abnormal return for firm i on day t

We then calculate the forecast error corrected standard deviation from (Mikkelson and Partch
1988). The Mikkelson and Partch correction adjusts the test statistic for each firm for serial
correlation in the returns. The correction term for the market model is as follows:

Li = the count of non missing return values in the event window for firm i

T2 = the latest day of the event window

R̅m = the mean of the market returns in the estimation window

Rm,t = the market return at day t

The regular Z-BMP test statistics for testing 𝐻0: 𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 = 0 is given by:

                                                                               39
Where 𝑆𝐶𝐴𝑅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ is the averaged standardized cumulated abnormal returns across the N firms,
with standard deviation:

Finally, to account for cross-sectional correlation between firms, due to event-date clustering,
the adjusted Z-BMP test statistic for testing 𝐻0: 𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 = 0 is given by:

                                                                    1 − 𝑟̅
                               𝑎𝑑𝑗 𝑧𝐵𝑀𝑃 = 𝑧𝐵𝑀𝑃√
                                                      1 + (𝑁 − 1)𝑟̅

   r̅ = the average of the sample cross correlation of the estimation periods abnormal returns

                                                                               40
13. References

© 2015, I., LLC, . Available:
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/efficientmarkethypothesis.asp [05/14, 2015].

BRIDGES, C.B., THOMPSON, W.W., MELTZER, M.I., REEVE, G.R., TALAMONTI, W.J., COX, N.J.,
LILAC, H.A., HALL, H., KLIMOV, A. and FUKUDA, K., 2000. Effectiveness and cost-benefit of
influenza vaccination of healthy working adults: a randomized controlled trial. Jama,
284(13), pp. 1655-1663.

CABAN-MARTINEZ, A.J., LEE, D.J., DAVILA, E.P., LEBLANC, W.G., ARHEART, K.L.,
MCCOLLISTER, K.E., CHRIST, S.L., CLARKE, T. and FLEMING, L.E., 2010. Sustained low
influenza vaccination rates in US healthcare workers. Preventive medicine, 50(4), pp. 210-
212.

CDC, 2015-last update, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/index.htm.

CNBC NEWS, January 7th 2015-last update, Flu boosts drug store sales, but others take a hit.
Available: http://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/flu-boosts-drug-store-sales-
insurers-may-take-hit-n2814512015].

CNBC NEWS, Friday, 3 Jan 2014-last update, Flu blues: Season could hit business hard this
winter. Available: http://www.cnbc.com/id/101306804.

COLLA, C.H., DOW, W.H., DUBE, A. and LOVELL, V., 2014. Early Effects of the San Francisco
Paid Sick Leave Policy. American Journal of Public Health, 104(12), pp. 2453-2460.

EVENT STUDY TOOLS, 30 Mar 2015-last update, Significance tests
Dr. Simon Müller
PhD in Maths (Stuttgart). Available: http://www.eventstudytools.com/.

FAIRBROTHER, G., CASSEDY, A., ORTEGA-SANCHEZ, I.R., SZILAGYI, P.G., EDWARDS, K.M.,
MOLINARI, N., DONAUER, S., HENDERSON, D., AMBROSE, S. and KENT, D., 2010. High costs
of influenza: direct medical costs of influenza disease in young children. Vaccine, 28(31), pp.
4913-4919.

GOOGLE FLU TRENDS, 2015-last update. Available:
https://www.google.org/flutrends/intl/en_us/about/how.html.

KARVE, S., MISURSKI, D., MEIER, G. and DAVIS, K.L., 2013. Employer-incurred health care
costs and productivity losses associated with influenza. Human vaccines &
immunotherapeutics, 9(4), pp. 841-857.

                                                                               41
KELSO, J.K., HALDER, N., POSTMA, M.J. and MILNE, G.J., 2013. Economic analysis of
pandemic influenza mitigation strategies for five pandemic severity categories. BMC public
health, 13, pp. 211-2458-13-211.

KENNETH R. FRENCH, 2015-last update, Data Library. Available:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

KOLARI, J.W. and PYNNÖNEN, S., 2010. Event study testing with cross-sectional correlation
of abnormal returns. Review of Financial Studies, , pp. hhq072.

KOLARI, J.W. and PYNNÖNEN, S., 2010. Event study testing with cross-sectional correlation
of abnormal returns. Review of Financial Studies, , pp. hhq072.

LIANG MAO, YANG YANG, YOULIANG QIU AND YAN YANG, US Congress: Office of Technology
Assessment: Cost-effectivness of Influenza Vaccination. GPO, Washington, DC; 1981. .

MACKINLAY, A.C., 1997. Event Studies in Economics and Finance. Journal of Economic
Literature, 35(1), pp. 13-39.

MAO, L., 2013. Cost-effectiveness of workplace closure and travel restriction for mitigating
influenza outbreaks: a network-based simulation, Proceedings of the Second ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on the Use of GIS in Public Health 2013, ACM, pp. 77-84.

MAO, L., YANG, Y., QIU, Y. and YANG, Y., 2012. Annual economic impacts of seasonal
influenza on US counties: spatial heterogeneity and patterns. Int J Health Geogr, 11, pp. 16.

MELTZER MI, COX NJ, FUKUDA K., The economic impact of pandemic influenza in the United
States: priorities for intervention. Emerg Infect Dis 1999;5(5):659–71. .

METROPOLITAN EMERGENCY MANAGERS COMMITTEE, 2010-last update, Pandemic vs.
Seasonal Flu:
What’s the Difference?. Available:
http://www.preparemetrokc.org/know_the_risks/difference.pdf2015].

MIKKELSON, W.H. and PARTCH, M.M., 1988. Withdrawn security offerings. Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 23(02), pp. 119-133.

MOLINARI, N.M., ORTEGA-SANCHEZ, I.R., MESSONNIER, M.L., THOMPSON, W.W., WORTLEY,
P.M., WEINTRAUB, E. and BRIDGES, C.B., 2007. The annual impact of seasonal influenza in
the US: measuring disease burden and costs. Vaccine, 25(27), pp. 5086-5096.

NICHOL, K.L., D'HEILLY, S.J., GREENBERG, M.E. and EHLINGER, E., 2009. Burden of influenza-
like illness and effectiveness of influenza vaccination among working adults aged 50-64

                                                                               42
years. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of
America, 48(3), pp. 292-298.

PUHANI, P.A. and SONDERHOF, K., 2010. The effects of a sick pay reform on absence and on
health-related outcomes. Journal of health economics, 29(2), pp. 285-302.

S&P DOW JONES INDICES LLC, April 30, 2015-last update. Available:
http://us.spindices.com/idsenhancedfactsheet/file.pdf?calcFrequency=M&force_download=
true&hostIdentifier=48190c8c-42c4-46af-8d1a-0cd5db894797&indexId=340 [05/14, 2015].

STORIFY, Aug 2014-last update, Walgreens Competitive Advantage. Available:
https://storify.com/Abarrett2/walgreens-competitive-advantage.

THOMSON REUTERS, Mon Jan 21, 2013, Jan 21, 2013-last update, Flu-conomics: The next
pandemic could trigger global recession. Available:
http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/01/21/us-reutersmagazine-davos-flu-economy-
idUSBRE90K0F820130121.

                                                                               43