 The innovative characteristics of
           target firms:
An analysis of Swedish data from
          1998 to 2014

                           1                                 2
Patrik Gunnvald   & Victor Sylwander

           Bachelor Thesis in Finance

        Stockholm School of Economics

              Tutor: Cristina Cella

                    May 18, 2015

 1
  22625@student.hhs.se
 2
  22626@student.hhs.se
Abstract

This paper investigates firm-specific innovative characteristics of ac-
quired companies using descriptive statistics and regression analysis.
This is done on a data sample on Swedish acquisitions among listed
firms from the time period 1998 to 2014. The sample was narrowed
down to include only transactions where the acquirer changed from
holding a minor stake to a major stake and thus having controlling
interest. Descriptive statistics is used to find differences in innovation
output and property between the target firms and firms not partici-
pating in M&As. The probit regression is used to find the probability
of becoming a target firm given certain innovative characteristics. A
discussion of assumptions and sample bias is made. The analysed char-
acteristics are R&D expenses over total sales and intangible assets (ad-
justed by extracting goodwill) over total assets. The quotas are used
in order for us to compare firms with different size. Results are robust-
ness checked and the model’s fit is assessed. First, we show that R&D
expenses lowers the probability of a firm becoming a target. Second,
we show that the target firms within health care, technology and con-
sumer discretionary have higher quotas of intangible assets compared
to the non-target benchmark within the same industry. The targets’
innovative property was however lower than the benchmark for the re-
maining industries. Industry- and time effects are controlled for in the
regression but also discussed separately.
ii Contents

   Contents

     1 Introduction 1
         1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
         1.2 Aim of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
         1.3 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

     2 Theoretical framework 7
         2.1 Previous research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
         2.2 Mathematical background and application . . . . . . . 10
               2.2.1 Briefly about hypothesis testing . . . . . . . . . 10
         2.3 Regression analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
               2.3.1 Linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
               2.3.2 Probit regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

     3 Data 24
         3.1 Acquisition of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
         3.2 Processing of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
         3.3 Final sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

     4 Methodology 27
         4.1 Choosing relevant target data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
         4.2 Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
              4.2.1 Research & Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
               4.2.2 Intangible assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
         4.3 Descriptive statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
         4.4 Regression model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
               4.4.1 Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
               4.4.2 Possible sample selection biases . . . . . . . . . 34
               4.4.3 Final probit model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
               4.4.4 Measurements of fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

     5 Results 36
         5.1 Characteristic results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
              5.1.1 R&D Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
               5.1.2 Intangible assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
         5.2 Industry and time effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
               5.2.1 Time effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
CONTENTS iii

         5.2.2 Industry effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
   5.3 Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

6 Conclusions & discussion 50
   6.1 R&D Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
   6.2 Intangible assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
   6.3 Industry, size and time effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

7 Suggestions for further studies 56

8 Appendix A, Tables 58

9 Appendix B, Correlation 62

10 Appendix C, Code 64

11 References 66
                                                                 1

1 Introduction

There are many reasons for companies to conduct M&As. It could
be to smother competition, to share costs or to get hands on some
recent development in technology. However, in a market there are al-
ways trends. To be able to chart these trends could prove valuable for
shareholders, investors or other market participants. While studying
M&As, there are many different patterns one could examine. Macroe-
conomic factors and post merger firm performance is something that
researchers constantly investigate. In this study however, the aim is to
map the intangible property and research & development expenses of
Swedish firms in order to more accurately distinguish the target firms.
As technology, process improvements and innovation becomes more of
a differentiating factor with modern firms, we found it interesting to
investigate if this has an affect on the M&A landscape.The fact that
Sweden is often placed at the very top when it comes to R&D and in-
novation was another argument for us choosing the topic (Bloomberg,
2015). According to a recent article in SvD, the Swedish government
has increased the research- and innovation budget by almost 10 bil-
lion per year during the last decade (SvD, 2015).On the other hand,
statistics from OECD show that the gross domestic spending on R&D
has decreased slightly (0.4 percentage points) during the last 15 years
(OECD Data).

With the aim to study innovative property and its affect on Swedish
M&A’s, this study is divided into two main areas; the targets’ R&D
2 1 Introduction

      expenses and intangible assets. To analyse the target firms and the po-
      tential innovative characteristics within these firms, descriptive statis-
      tics and probit regression models are used. The probit regression is
      useful when the outcome of our interest is binary; the innovation ex-
      penses and properties potential influence on the firm becoming a target
      or not. Control variables for years and industries are used to remove
      potential biases in the regression.

      The paper is structured in the following manners: To begin with, a
     general background on the Swedish M&A landscape and the innova-
      tion development will be presented. Secondly, previous research on the
     topic and a mathematical background of hypothesis testing, ANOVA
      test and regression analysis is provided. A description of the data is
     then followed by the methods used in the study. Assumptions of the
      characteristics and how the descriptive data and regression analyses
      are applicable on these items are presented in this section. The results
      section contains both descriptive results as well as regression results.
      Finally, the conclusion section summarizes the results, discusses impli-
      cations and potential further research on the topic.

    1.1 Background

      In Corrado and Hulten’s article in the Conference Board, reports from
     US-based firms show that investments in intangible assets and R&D
      activity have almost doubled during the last two decades. The rapid ex-
      pansion is described as a key feature of the recent US economic growth.
1.1 Background 3

In an article in Bloomberg, Peter Coy describes the new look on re-
search & development expenses and intangible assets, as they nowa-
days are included in the gross domestic product of the US. As firms
like Facebook, Twitter and Google are the key players of todays econ-
omy; the promotion of innovative activity becomes more important.
In our research, Swedish M&As between 1998-2014 will be analyzed,
and the characteristics of target firms will be explained. Numerous
studies of M&A characteristics and drivers have been made before but
our approach will be concentrated to the innovation climate in Sweden.

In the Journal of Finance, Bena and Li finds that, in the US, there
are some technological and innovative overlaps between acquiring and
target firms. Their findings are focused on number of patents and R&D
costs. Further, they evaluate how these asset complementaries affect
the outcome of the merger. Inspired by this article, the focus of this
paper will be characteristics that distinguishes target firms in Swedish
M&As. Since the US-study, by Bena and Li, showed significant results
(e.g. targets having synergies with the acquirer) we found it interesting
to chart and extend their study, but focusing on the Swedish market
and its innovation landscape which was not touched upon in their study.

In the last 17 years, 1257 mergers, acquisitions and changes in minor-
ity interests has been conducted between Swedish firms. Of these 1257
observations, we only kept deals where the acquirer owned less than
50% prior to the deal and more than 50% after the deal. This makes
4 1 Introduction

      sense when looking thoroughly into the data as many deals are share
      buybacks, minority stakes or capital increases. Including smaller cap-
      ital increases would probably skew our results as firms perform these
      on daily basis. Further, the M&As studied are the ones were both ac-
      tors are Swedish firms, mainly because trends differ between different
      markets. Only listed and delisted target firms were kept as retrieving
      detailed financial information of private firms are sometimes very diffi-
      cult. We also want to reduce the noise due to difference in regulation,
      corporate environment etc. that may arise when including acquirers
      acting in foreign markets. Finally, compared to the rest of Europe,
      the Swedish M&A market has remained fairly stable the last 10 years
      (Vinge, 2013).

      The transactions in the Eurozone has remained fairly stable during the
      last 10 years, except some years of peaking numbers. Most deals in
     Sweden were made during 1999 and this could perhaps be explained
      by the Information Technology bubble during the turn of the century
      but the Eurozone debt crisis during 2009-2011 caused a slight drop in
      transactions. The sectors with most transaction activity are healthcare,
      energy, telecoms and media. All these sectors are driven by both pri-
      vate equity firms and corporates. With the financial market changing,
      the bids from the private equity firms dropped, facilitating the cor-
      porate acquisitions. However, the private equity firms dominated the
      market in the years of 2005-2008, but changing availability on price
      and financing as well as lack of experience in volatile times is a chal-
1.2 Aim of the paper 5

lenging factor for the private equity firms. Macroeconomic factors are
probably affecting the M&A’s in Sweden and we will therefore control
for these variables when performing our tests.

The goal is to find intangible property and innovation expenses within
the target firms and analyse if these could affect the probability of the
firm being acquired. These characteristics would, as previously stated,
be essential to keep track of the actors on the Swedish market. Our
findings could help these actors to foresee upcoming as well as charting
the Swedish innovation-driven M&A’s (KPMG, 2014).

1.2 Aim of the paper

The aim of this paper is to study firms’ innovative characteristics and
whether that affect firms prospects of becoming a target in a M&A
transaction. The focus is on the target of the transaction as this is
relevant from a shareholder perspective since targets in M&A can be
bought at a substantial premium (Evans and Mellen, 2010). These in-
novative characteristics are divided into two main areas: R&D expenses
and intangible assets.

1.3 Limitations

The study is conducted on Swedish firms, where both the target and the
acquirer are Swedish. This selection is made for several reasons; Swe-
6 1 Introduction

      den prominent role as a innovative country, the greater acknowledge of
      firms intangible assets during the last decade, as well as mitigating the
      risk that the firm was bought by a non Swedish firm for other reasons
      such as tax rules and regulations.

      Furthermore this paper only deal with transactions where an acquirer
      went from a minority to a majority stake, as this makes it more plau-
      sible that the acquirer via controlling interest of the target firm is
      interested in its innovations such as R&D, patents software or similar.
                                                                 7

2 Theoretical framework

2.1 Previous research

The previous literature and research within M&As have been important
in the shaping of our work. The main topic in earlier work (Harford,
2005) has been macro-level changes and characteristics, as high indus-
try liquidity or technological shocks, that affects the amount of mergers
and acquisitions. They conclude that the liquidity component causes
M&A activity to cluster, even though industry shocks do not occur.
Further on Maksimovic, Phillips and Yang (2012) compare public and
private firms and their activity during and after M&A waves. For in-
stance, the public firms acquisitions realize higher productivity gains
when their stock is liquid and highly valued.

Many research papers are examining the drivers of M&As on a macro-
level and also the performance and results of firms after certain industry
shocks and waves of M&A activity. However, few papers examine the
innovative firm characteristics and their impact on the possibility of
upcoming M&As. Bena and Li studied the innovation and technology
overlap between firms by using a patent-merger data set in their article
Corporate Innovations and Merger and Acquisitions, written 2011. The
paper is confined to the US market and includes data until 2006 and
they examine the relationship between the acquirer and the target and
what combination of technological overlap that creates M&As. The
focus in their paper lays within the information asymmetry between
8 2 Theoretical framework

      participating firms and they test this by using a dataset of patents and
     R&D expenses.

     Asset complementaries between M&A participants are discussed in
      (Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008)) where they find a relationship be-
      tween acquirer and target market-to-book ratios. (Hoberg and Philips
      (2010)) examines asset similarities and find that post-merger stock re-
      turns are higher when the target is less similar to the acquirer’s closest
      rivals. (Phillips and Zhdanov (2013)) uses R&D, acquisitions and firm
      size to determine if firms are increasing their R&D if they are consid-
      ered becoming a target.

      In Webb’s How to acquire a company, a number of reasons for acqui-
      sition are brought up. Management, diversification and corporate psy-
      chosis are brought up but few traits are measurable. Organic growth
      is stated as an unquestioned trait of acquisition but it is more difficult
      to measure. In our study we focus on innovative property and if this
      can lead to a firm becoming a target.

      Corporate governance changes and relative valuations are studied in
      Shleifer and Vishny: Stock market driven acquisitions, 2001 as well as
      in Holmstrom and Kaplan: Corporate governance and merger activity
      in the US; making sense of the 1980s and 1990s, 2001. They find that
      the changes in the managerial climate affected the M&A activity in the
      US as well as that higher stock market valuation periods are followed
2.1 Previous research 9

by merger waves.

In conclusion, one can say that previous literature aims their research
on industry and macro-level impact on M&As and the performance and
results that follows after the deal. Our study includes past innovation
output as we also analyse the intangible assets. Using a descriptive
statistics and a probit regression on solely Swedish firms, we provide
new information applicable to the Swedish innovation development and
M&A climate.

Our paper is closely related to Bena and Li’s study but instead of
analysing the information asymmetry and overlap between M&A par-
ticipants, we investigate the innovative characteristics within Swedish
target firms. We are also using data until 2014, which means we will
capture the period when firms were highly valued based on their intan-
gible assets. Sweden is also argued to be one of the most innovative
countries in the world according to the Global Innovation Index rank-
ing, which increases the relevance of our study. Hopefully, our findings
will contribute and add sense to the research of the Swedish M&A
landscape and also show if actors could foresee upcoming M&A’s in
the future.
10 2 Theoretical framework

     2.2 Mathematical background and application

     2.2.1 Briefly about hypothesis testing

      When one shall test a hypotesis one usually have a so called null hy-
     potesis, H0 and an alternative hypotesis, H1. Then one decides upon
     a significance level usually denoted α. Common significance levels are
      0.10, 0.05 and 0.01 respectively.

      We have chosen α = 0.05 in this study for our tests, this means that we
      at most can accept a risk of 5% of committing a so called type I error -
      rejecting the null hypothesis when it is in fact true (Stock and Watson,
      2012). Thus any outcomes from tests where p-values are above 0.05
      will make us keep the null hypothesis.

      The null hypothesis is usually stated such that ”there is no difference”,
      ”the variable does not have any explanation value” or ”the slope pa-
      rameter is zero” in hypothesis testing or linear regressions. Note that
      if one wants to test the null hypothesis that two mean values of firm
     A and firm B are equal, i.e. μA = μB , this can be reformulated as
     μA − μB = 0 (”there is no difference”).

      Depending on what the aim is to test, you can perform a one-tailed
      (one-sided) test or a two-tailed (two-sided) test and the null hypothe-
      ses has to be set up accordingly. Again considering two samples from
      our firms A and B, a typical one-tailed test will be ”mean of firm A is
2.2 Mathematical background and application 11

less then mean of firm B”, with the following hypotheses:
H0 : μA < μB against
H1 : μA > μB
A two-tailed test is generally ”something is equal to...” instead of ”less/-
more than”. Again with our two firms as an example you would want
to test ”mean of firm A is equal to mean of firm B”, with the following
hypotheses:
H0 : μA = μB against
H1 : μA ≤ μB

Figure 1: An example showing the difference between one and two-sided
           tests
12 2 Theoretical framework

     2.3 Regression analysis

      This section will briefly discuss some mathematics and terminology of
      the linear and probit regression models. The linear regression is a good
      starting point to explain and understand as much of the terminology
      and characteristics are transferable to the probit regression model.

     2.3.1 Linear regression

      A linear regression model is:

                 Yi = β0 + β1X1i + β2X2i + . . . + βkXki + ei, (1)

     where
      i is the number of observations, i = 1, . . . , n
      Yi is the dependent variable, or explained variable;
      Xji is the independent variable, explanatory variable, covariate or con-
        trol variable,
      j is the number of covariates, j = 1, . . . , k
      β0 is the intercept;
      βj are the slope parameters, regression coefficients or beta coefficients,
      note that some simply use the word coefficients but in this paper the
      term beta coefficient will be used.
       ei is the error term related to observation i.

      Shortly about the interpretation of this equation:

         • Yi is the observation of something e.g. wage, the price of a car,
2.3 Regression analysis 13

      the score on a test etc.

   • Xji are the variables that should explain the changes in Yi.

   • If Yi is the observed (wage) in a sample, then one would prob-
      ably like to include explanatory variables, or control variables,
      (age), (years of education) and more. Note that including other
      (uncorrelated) control variables ”purges” the effect of e.g. (age)
      on (wage). If one would not include (years of education) as a
      control variable, the beta coefficient for (age) might be unexpect-
     edly high and have a bigger impact on (wage) when most of the
      effect is due to education rather than sheer age. This is a form
      of omitted variable bias.

   • The beta coefficient βm represents the expected change in Yi for
     one unit change in Xm given all other control variables Xj , j  6= m
      are held constant.

   • As is evident from Equation 1, the intercept β0 represents the
      expected value of Yi given Xj = 0 for all j

    • ei is the error term for observation i, or the part of Yi that is still
      unexplained in the equation given the values of all βj Xji and β0.

Note that sometimes the true (unobserved) model is denoted with β as
coefficients while the estimated beta coefficients are denoted βˆ. Also

the error ei refers to the difference between the observed Yi and the
(unobservable) true model while the difference between Yi and the es-
14 2 Theoretical framework

      timated model is called residual and usually denoted ˆui.

      The model is estimated using the Ordinary Least Squared (OLS) Esti-
     mator which minimizes the sum of squared residuals (Stock and Wat-
      son, 2012). More formally we have that the OLS estimators βˆ0, βˆ1, . . . , βˆk

       are the values b0, b1, . . . , bk that minimizes

                        n
       ∑
                                                                     2
                         (Yi − b0 − b1X1i − . . . − bkXki) , (2)
                             i=1

      and the residual, ˆui is as earlier mentioned defined as

                             uˆi = Yi − Yˆi, where (3)

                        Yˆi = βˆ0 + βˆ1X1i, . . . , βˆkXki (4)

      For linear regression analysis and specifically the OLS estimation to be
      valid, some assumptions must hold (these are formulated a bit differ-
      ently in different textbooks, these are mainly from Kennedy and Lang).

     Underlying assumptions

        1. Yi and Xji are independent and identically distributed across ob-
           servations and Yi have a linear relationship with Xji. As formu-
           lated in Kennedy p. 93 ”the conditional expectation of the de-
           pendent variable is an unchanging function of known independent
            variables. It is usually referred to as the model specification”.

         2. The expected value of the error term is zero, given the covariates,
2.3 Regression analysis 15

      i.e E[ei | X1i, X2i, . . . , Xki] = 0

   3. The error terms are independent and homoskedastic,

                                            2
      V ar[ei | X1i, X2i, . . . , Xki] = σ . Note that given assumption 2

                                           2                            2
      this could be rewritten as E[ei | X1i, X2i, . . . , Xki] = σ

   4. The error terms are identically distributed, usually an assumption
      of normally distributed error terms is made.

   5. No perfect multicollinearity

Common reasons for violating the assumptions
Kennedy elaborates further on common reasons to when these assump-
tions are violated and suggests practical remedies, for the interested
reader we refer to this textbook for further details. However it worth
mentioning some common setups where violations can be made. This
is something that both we as modelers have to keep in mind when con-
structing the model but it is also beneficial for the reader to think about
when reading this or other reports, as well as constructing own models.

Violation of assumption 2: is called endogeneity (Lang, 2013) and tech-
nically means that the error term is correlated with at least one of the
control variables. This might be due to several reasons such as

   • Sample selection bias, where the selection of data incurs a bias,
     e.g. if I want to examine the average income in Stockholm and
      choose ”random” people of the street, but the street itself might
16 2 Theoretical framework

            be in an upper class area. Another common bias is the self se-
            lection bias, which is reasonable to occur in e.g. sales of third
           party insurances. People buying those insurances are probably
           more prone to accidents and mishaps than a sample of the entire
           population.

        • Simultaneity, when not only X affects Y (which is desirable), but
          also Y affects X, an example would be if Y is supply and X is
          demand.

         • Omitted variable bias , explained earlier.

          • Measurement errors.

      Remedies include; reformulating the model, finding the omitted vari-
      able, adjusting for measurement errors (easy if it is a constant error)
      or employing an Instrumental Variable (IV) which is highly correlated
      with the endogenous variable (preferably perfect correlation, corr = 1)
      and almost uncorrelated (preferably uncorrelated, corr = 0) with the
      error term.

      Violation of assumption 3: is called heteroskedasticity, which means
     that the variance is dependent on Xi, i.e. the conditional distribution
      of ui given Xi is not constant. Heteroskedasticity is actually reasonable
      to assume in real world data. A remedy is to apply (White’s) robust
      standard errors.
2.3 Regression analysis 17

Violation of assumption 4: can be checked by calculating the standard
error for each observation and then graph the distribution of the stan-
dard errors and compare it to a normal distribution.

Violation of assumption 5: when the intercept and covariates or con-
trol variables are linearly dependent. It can appear if one is not careful
when implementing dummy variables, i.e. variables that are only as-
signed a 1 or 0. Consider again the example where Yi is the wage.
A modeler might expect the wage to be determined by gender and so
adds (male) and (f emale) as control variables. The problem is that
if we know that the person is a male so that (male) = 1, then we can
directly conclude that (f emale) = 0. Then beta coefficients cannot be
determined uniquely since adding an arbitrary number c to the beta
coefficients of both (male) and (f emale) and subtract it from the in-
tercept β0 we will get the same residual. Thus OLS estimation will not
work. Multicollinearity is often spotted by very high standard errors
or beta coefficients (Lang, 2013).

                                                                           2
As a final note there is a measurement of goodness of fit, R , which
tells how well the structural equation (right hand side of Equation 1)

                                        2
explains the variation in Y , 0 ≤ R  ≤ 1 where 0 is no explanation
and 1 is complete explanation and the underlying true model is found
(unrealistic in real world). However adding more control variables al-

                   2
ways increases R  which might lead to overly complex models (Stock

                                                                               2
and Watson, 2012). Instead it is desirable to use an adjusted R , or
18 2 Theoretical framework

         2
     Radj . This measurement of fit penalizes addition of new covariates so
      that the part of increased explained variance from the covariate must
      be higher than the penalty for adding it. Mathematically we have:

                 2    ESS      SSR
                R  =      = 1 −     , where (5)
                           T SS       T SS

             ∑n          ∑n
                                ˆ    ¯ 2                    ¯ 2
               ESS =     ( Y − Y ) , T SS =    (Yi − Y )        (6)
                                   i=1                          i=1

     and Y¯ the sample mean.

                        2         n − 1  SSR
                        Radj = 1 −                            (7)
                                n − k − 1 T SS

      where n is the sample size and k is the total number of control variables.

     2.3.2 Probit regression

      There are several real world scenarios where the outcome of interest
      is binary. This could be for example if a person becomes ill or not,
      if a person buys a product or not, or if a person passes an exam or
      not (where the score is ”irrelevant” as long as they pass, e.g. Swedish
      drivers license exam). It is natural to assign the dependent variable a
      binary outcome, such as 1 for ”buy”, ”pass” or 0 for ”not buy”, ”fail”
      and similarly. The name ”Probit” stems from the words Probability
      and unit. Most of the terminology, notation and assumptions in the
      linear regression also applies to the probit regression which is one of
      the reasons it is covered to the extent it is. However there are some
2.3 Regression analysis 19

important differences which will be covered later in this section.

Linear probability model
The linear (probability) regression to a binary event is still possible.
Using the same terminology as in that of the linear regression, consider
Equation 1. As shown in Stock and Watson (2012) in a binary setting
the expected value of Yi conditional on Xji becomes:

  P r(Y = 1 | X1, X2, . . . , Xk) = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + . . . + βkXk (8)

Note that this implies a change in interpretation of the beta coefficient,
namely that the beta coefficient represents the change in probability for
one unit change of the control variable, holding the others constant.

However applying a linear probability regression brings forth questions.
First and foremost that a probability outcome should be confined in
the interval I = [0, 1]. A linear probability model will allow for Y -vales
above 1 or below 0, which is not consistent with a probability measure.
This becomes evident when the regression line is fitted to the data.
As an example Stock and Watson (2012) have run a linear probability
regression on applications for mortgages and whether they are denied
a mortgage. When the mortgage is denied an observation Y = 1 is
made and thus when it is approved the observation Y = 0 is made.
The covariate used is the payment-to-income, or (P/I), ratio.

As is evident from Figure 2 even though a vast majority of the obser-
20 2 Theoretical framework

        Figure 2: The linear probit model, Figure source: Stock, Watson p. 425

      vations will render a probability value in the interval I, a P/I ratio
      below approximately 0.2 gives a negative probability (!) value and a
      P/I ratio above approximately 0.6 will yield a probability value above
      1. The fact that this is possible is a troublesome flaw of the model.

     Probit model
      The probit model deals with this problem of probabilities being outside
      of the allowed interval for a probability measure. The probit model
      uses a link that maps all outcomes or observations into the interval
      I = [0, 1], for the probit model this link is the cumulative standard
      normal function (there are other models such as the logistic, or logit,
      model that uses other links). The probit model does not use the OLS
     Estimator but a Maximum-Likelihood Estimator (MLE) to find the
      beta coefficients. It does require the same assumptions as stated for
2.3 Regression analysis 21

the linear regression (Garson, 2012).

Difference in assumptions:
The difference between the OLS linear regression model and the probit
model is that it does not assume a linear relationship between Y and
X, homoskedasticity or normally distributed variables. The MLE is
consistent and normally distributed in large samples, this means that
t-statistics and confidence intervals can be computed as in the linear
regression case.

Using the same notation we have that the Probit model is:

 P r(Y = 1 | X1, X2, . . . , Xk) = Φ(β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + . . . + βkXk) (9)

where Φ(z) is the standard normal cumulative function, z ∈ [−∞, +∞].
This is shown in Figure 3.
Shortly on the interpretation of the probit model:

    • The function Φ(z) maps any real value into the interval I = [0, 1].

   • The left hand side is the probability of the event Y = 1 in a
     sample. Consider the event Y = 1 representing a person getting
      a job. So an estimated probability P r(Y = 1 | X1, X2, . . . , Xk) =
      0.6 means that in a large sample, 60% of the people with the
      characteristics that generate a z-value that gives Φ(z) = 0.6 is
      expected to get a job.
22 2 Theoretical framework

           Figure 3: The probit model, Figure source: Stock, Watson p. 430

         • Implies from the above statement, a probability of 0.6 means that
           6 out of 10 observations is expected to be an event, i.e. Y = 1,
           the remaining 4 are non-events i.e. Y = 0.

         • The beta coefficient represent a change in z-value for a unit
           change of the corresponding covariate, all other covariates held
           constant.

         • It is not as straight-forward to interpret the beta coefficients ef-
            fect on the probability as it depends on the values of the other
            covariates. This can quickly be realized by studying the standard
           normal cumulative function where a ∆z = 0.1 has a bigger im-
           pact around z = 0 than for very large positive or negative values
            of z. Nonetheless a negative coefficient will lower the probability
2.3 Regression analysis 23

      and a positive one increases it.

Finally, without being too technical about the Maximum-Likelihood
Estimator, it maximizes the likelihood function. The likelihood func-
tion is a joint probability distribution of the data observed. The MLE
then ”wants” the observed data to reflect a sample of the underly-
ing distribution. The distribution changes as the unknown coefficient
changes, so the MLE simply determines the coefficients by maximizing
the likelihood that the sample was drawn from the underlying distribu-
tion, or likelihood function. In other words this distribution function
determines the coefficients that are most likely to have produced the
observed data.
24 3 Data

    3 Data

     3.1 Acquisition of data

     The data used in the study is collected from Zephyr and Bloomberg.
     The Zephyr database provided us with detailed information about
      Swedish mergers and acquisitions over the period 1998 - 2014. This
      gave us a list of 1257 mergers, acquisitions and changes in minority
      interest. The list includes from small stake increases to major stake
      and acquisitions of complete companies. In this thesis we focus on the
      innovative properties of R&D expenses and other intangibles such as
      patents and software and whether those properties are significant for
      targets in M&A transactions. It makes sense only to examine transac-
      tions where the acquirer moves from a non-controlling to a controlling
      interest. We thus narrowed down the results by only keeping acquisi-
      tions where the target firm was listed and where the acquirer owns less
     than 50% of the target firm before the deal and more than 50% when
      the deal is closed, or in any other way acquiring a major stake in the
      company. This gave us a list of 215 observations of target firms.

     From Bloomberg we obtained firm specific information about R&D as
      reported on the income statement, total sales, total assets, disclosed
      intangibles and goodwill. Disclosed intangibles includes patents, copy-
      rights and trade names but also goodwill, on which we decided to collect
      the goodwill amount separately and then subtract it from the disclosed
      intangible assets. Bloomberg provided us with data of both target and
3.2 Processing of data 25

benchmark firms.

Finally, we obtained the BICS classification industry for each firm by
sector (level 1). Where industries could not be found from Bloomberg,
Avanza was used.

3.2 Processing of data

The collected data from Bloomberg was exported into excel and struc-
tured. The dataset was checked for any obvious errors. Some obser-
vations had R&D expenses over total sales of less than zero, which is
not reasonable. For these datapoints efforts were made to backtrack
the value by using historical financial reports for the firms or retriev-
ing the information via alternative sources (homepages, news releases,
press releases etc.). If there were any uncertainties whether this would
be correct, the value was dropped (however there could still be obser-
vations for other characteristics which of course were kept). The same
procedure was done in cases where Bloomberg reported missing values
for the target firms, in order to keep as much information as possible
in our target sample. The benchmark consists of yearly information
(1998 - 2014) from the listed firms at OMXS; a total of 314 firms per
year. Once the data sample was cleaned and as much information as
possible collected and maintained the calculation of quotas was made.

Furthermore, as controls and dummy variables will be used in the re-
gression analysis, the final sample was extended in excel before import-
26 3 Data

      ing it into the statistical software. A dummy variable for each industry
     and each year was added.

     3.3 Final sample

      After checking for errors and completing missing info as much as pos-
     sible via annual reports etc. we arrived at a final sample of 151 R&D
      observations and 116 Intangible assets observations. As far as controls
     are considered, the entire target sample and benchmark sample have
      information about industry and year.

                 Figure 4: Showing the benchmark split by industries.

                    Figure 5: Showing the targets split by industries.
                                                                27

4 Methodology

4.1 Choosing relevant target data

For our target sample we assume that the data the year prior to the
acquisition is the relevant data to examine when acquirers shall find
their target. This is because of several reasons. First, it is the most
recent, complete data over the firm’s performance. Second it is rea-
sonable to believe that the decision to acquire another firm isn’t made
overnight. Which means that the acquirer probably have been follow-
ing the target over some time, and thus based their decision largely
on that data. Finally, the alternatives are much worse. Either one
would look two years prior to the acquisition announcement which is
both illogical and the data might be outdated, or one would look at
the data for the same year the acquisition is was made. This however
would theoretically be flawed if the acquisition was made earlier than
last December, but flawed enough for all acquisitions made when a
relatively large part of the year still remains. The above mentioned
statements is the rationale why, if an acquisition was made year t, we
look at the data of the target for year t − 1.

4.2 Characteristics

The characteristics examined were constructed such that they were in-
different of company size, this means that they are percentages or other
quotas in order to make the study apply in a broader context. As an
example, R&D Expenses were measured as total R&D expenses divided
28 4 Methodology

      by total sales. This makes it easier to compare the observations across
      different sized companies as the absolute value of total R&D would be
      limited to comparisons of R&D numbers of equally sized companies, or
      in other ways controlled for. Below follows a short description of our
      characteristics

     4.2.1 Research & Development

      The total research & development expenditure is a measurement, which
     includes R&D in profit and loss account and capitalized R&D during
     the period. As previously discussed, our R&D measurement is calcu-
      lated as total R&D expenses over total sales. Depending on accounting
      standards and the characteristics of the R&D expense, one can capi-
      talize the expenses on the balance sheet and then amortize the costs
      on the income statement, or if treated as a cost instead of an asset; the
     R&D appears directly on the income statement.

      The term R&D covers three activities: basic research, applied research
     and experimental development. Basic research could be experimental
     or theoretical work undertaken primarily to acquire new knowledge.
      Applied research is also original investigation undertaken in order to
      acquire new knowledge. It is directed primarily towards a specific prac-
      tical aim or objective. Experimental development however, is system-
      atic work, drawing on existing knowledge gained from research. Pro-
      duction of new materials, devices, installation of processes, systems and
      services are examples of typical experimental development. According
      to Swedish accounting legislation, research expenses must always ap-
4.2 Characteristics 29

pear as an expense on the income statement. Development expenses,
on the other hand, will be accounted for as an asset if the following
criteria are fulfilled:

   1. The development expenses can be finished and the asset can be
      used or sold.

   2. The firm’s intentions is to finish the development expenses and
      thereafter sell or use the asset.

   3. The firm has qualifications to sell or use the final asset.

   4. It is likely that the development expense will create revenues in
      the future.

   5. There are resources available for finishing the development and
      thereafter sell or use the asset.

   6. The firm can reliably measure the costs that stems from the asset.

4.2.2 Intangible assets

The intangible assets includes goodwill, patents, copyrights, trade names,
property rights and trademarks in the balance sheet. This item shows
innovation investments performed in the past that is still valuable to
the firm, and this is the main reason why we also want to include this in
our analysis. In contrast to R&D expenses, which only refers to the pe-
riod prior to the deal, the intangible assets will give another important
angle of the innovation analysis of the target firms.
30 4 Methodology

      Goodwill was the only item we did not want to include in the intangible
      assets. The amount we extract is acquired goodwill, i.e the excess price
      paid over the fair market value of assets in an acquisition accounted for
      by the purchase method. Since this item has nothing to do with the
      target’s innovation property, we decided not to include it in our analy-
      sis. Internally developed goodwill is not reported in the balance sheet
      since the company can not measure this reliably, therefore this item
      will not be extracted from the intangible assets (Redovisningsradet,
      2000).

      When it comes to measuring the intangible assets, Swedish accounting
      legislation says the firms must be able to measure the asset in reli-
      able manners. Otherwise, the item can not be classified as an assets
      in the balance sheet. Some intangible assets have active markets that
      allows the firm to easily determine the value, but many times, this is
      not the case. Guidelines are provided from the accounting council but
      one could argue that the valuation is still more or less an approxima-
      tion (Redovisningsradet, 2000). Potential errors in the valuation could
      be exploited by the acquiring firm but if this is a driver of the deal
      is difficult to determine. What values would imply that the asset is
      undervalued? If the acquirer has information of the assets true value,
      the firm could indeed use this information to buy undervalued assets.
      This is something our data will not reveal and no further analysis will
      therefore be made on this topic.
4.3 Descriptive statistics 31

4.3 Descriptive statistics

The data sample is examined thoroughly and descriptive statistics is
produced and graphed. Standard statistics such as mean, median, min-
imum and maximum values are available for each variable, year and
industry for the data sample. These are complemented with industry
distributions in both the target and benchmark sample, M&A activity
by year, M&A activity within industries over time, mean values of the
characteristics both over time and by industry. Tables and graphs are
mainly presented in the Results section as well as in Appendix. These
results are analyzed to see the characteristics of our samples and sub
samples, which in turn is used to draw conclusions on whether targets
and benchmark firms differ and about the significance of innovative
properties for becoming a target.

4.4 Regression model selection

As described in Section 2.3 there are different types of regression models
and it is important to acknowledge the differences and interpretations
of any chosen model. In our data sample we want to examine whether
innovative characteristics affect a firm of becoming a target. In our
sample we have both targets and benchmark firms and so the obser-
vations of Y are binary, Y = 1 if the firm is (was) a target and 0
otherwise. The, for many well-known, OLS regression has shortcom-
ing when it comes to modelling binary outcomes. The OLS regression
however serves as a good starting point of describing the terminol-
32 4 Methodology

      ogy, function and interpretation in a regression analysis. Thereafter
      by showing differences to other models, these new models are easier
      explained and understood and also why it has a section in the math-
      ematical background. However a linear probability model regression
     on a binary variable Y does not map all outcomes into the interval
      I = [0, 1] where probability measures are defined.

     We therefore choose the probit model which is more suitable in our
      case. The probit model uses a link function that maps any real num-
      ber into the desired interval I. We are aware of the fact that the probit
      model is only one model in a larger family of generalized linear models
      which will be used to check robustness. As mentioned in Section 2.3,
      the probit model has less stringent assumptions. However we still have
     to have indenpendent observations which we argue is fulfilled. One
      merger in one firm has little to do with a merger of another firm and
      Figure 10 does not show any strong dependence. If there are height-
      ened activity in certain industries or years, this will be remedied by
      imposing controls as will be described in more detail in the next sec-
      tion. Furthermore the assumption of no perfect multicollinearity must
      be withheld. This assumption is checked via a different methods: first,
     one dummy variable for the yearly controls and one dummy variable
      for industry is kept in the benchmark, second the standard errors are
      checked for any anomalies, the sign and size of the coefficients are com-
      pared with the descriptive statistics of the data sample to see that they
      are reasonable and finally a correlation matrix is presented in appendix.
4.4 Regression model selection 33

The assumption of linear dependence between Y and X does not need
to be fulfilled, but there has to be linearity between the independent
variables and the logit of the dependent. This assumptions is fulfilled
by the model construction, please see Section 2.3.2 and Section 4.4.3.

4.4.1 Controls

The focus of this study is to see if it is possible to find innovative char-
acteristics among target firms. However we are aware of that there are
e.g. research heavy industries. If they are overrepresented in the target
sample compared to the benchmark sample, results might show that
R&D affects the probability of becoming a target to a larger extent
than it really does where the main reason might have been a consoli-
dation in the industry. Industry controls are therefore added.

It is also reasonable to assume that M&A activity can vary over time
due to swings in macroeconomic or other factors. We investigate how
M&A activity vary over time, both for the sample as a whole an within
industry. In the regression it is therefore warranted to add dummy
variables to control for time. We leave one industry dummy and one
year dummy out, this means that that effect will be in the intercept.
Furthermore it does also mean that a beta coefficient for e.g. a year
dummy represents the probability (or z-value) change with respect to
the year dummy in the intercept. The benchmark year in our model is
chosen to be close to the average yearly M&A activity, the benchmark
industry was chosen to be as close to 0 as possible in Figure 11. The
34 4 Methodology

      benchmark year is 2013 and the benchmark industry is industrials (due
      to few observations on utilities). Finally, as the number of targets in our
      sample is quite small we want to avoid adding more control variables if
      possible. This lead to the decision of constructing our covariates, R&D
      expenses and intangible assets, as quotas instead of absolute values to
      at least to some extent control for size of the firm. We are aware of
      the fact that there might be a difference in these quotas that depend
      on size that is not controlled for.

     4.4.2 Possible sample selection biases

      The data sample consists of only listed, or previously listed companies
      for the reason of better accessible data. It is possible that certain tech
      start-ups or other companies whose research or software starts to get
      traction, get’s bought. It is hard to approximate in which way the
      pendulum swings when not including private firms, but this should be
      kept in mind.

      We have also limited the study to include transactions of a Swedish
      firm, by a Swedish firm. This might bias the sample in different ways;
      in a bidding war between a Swedish firm and a large multinational over
      a tech company, the large international firm might have an advantage.
      We do not have data on this but an article in SvD that was published a
      week prior to this paper, suggests that many innovative, Swedish firms
     ends up in the hands of non-Swedish companies (SvD, 2015)
4.4 Regression model selection 35

4.4.3 Final probit model

Summing this section up, our probit model is:

P r(Y = 1 | X) = Φ(β0 + β1(R&D) + β2(Intangibles)

              + β3(1997) + β4(1998) + . . . + β18(2012)

              + β19(Communications) + β20(Cons.Discr.) + β21(Cons.Staples)

              + β22(Energy) + β23(F inancials) + β24(HealthCare) + β25(M aterials)

               + β26(T echnology) + β27(U tilities)) (10)

where X denotes the vector of covariates and control variables.

4.4.4 Measurements of fit

       2
The R  as defined in Equation 5 does not translate into the probit
model, thus alternative ways of evaluating the fit of the model is needed.
We implement two such measurements, one is the amount of correctly

                                                                       2
predicted variables, the other one is McFadden’s Pseudo R
36 5 Results

    5 Results

     5.1 Characteristic results

     5.1.1 R&D Expenses

     OECD reports a decline in gross domestic spending on R&D and we
      notice a similar decline in Figure 9, describing the full sample R&D
      quota over the period. During 1999-2001 we can see a peak in the
     R&D expenses on the total sample and worth noticing was the same
     peak in M&A activity during approximately the same years. Compar-
      ing this to the average intangible asset quota on Figure 10, we can
      see that the development over the 15 year period is almost the oppo-
      site. When R&D spending peaked, the intangible assets declined. The
     industry with the highest R&D over sales quota is not surprisingly
      the health care industry with 0.538, followed by an average of 0.2000
      within the technology industry. The health care industry is known for
     heavy R&D spending since new pharmaceuticals and medications are
      constantly developed and invented. The second highest number in the
      technological industry is also not that surprising since our time period
     includes the IT-bubble where large spendings on R&D probably were
     made.

      To complement our previous analysis a probit regression was run. As
      can be seen from Table 5, R&D quota is statistically significant on a
      1% level and almost on a 0.1% level too. The marginal effect is -0.173
      which means that increases in R&D quota, ceteris paribus, lowers the
5.1 Characteristic results 37

probability of becoming a target by 17.3%. As explained in Section 2.3
it is not as straight forward of interpreting the actual change in proba-
bility from the beta coefficient alone as it depends on other coefficients
too. So this marginal is calculated by entering the average value to all
other covariates, then by changing R&D quota by one unit, how much
does this affect the probability. Note that the marginal effect is not
the coefficient, but rather the equivalent of a beta coefficient in a linear
regression. The coefficients themselves are not reported in the table as
they are not easily interpreted on a stand alone basis (see Section 1,
probit regression for details). Recall that a probability of 0.6 should be
interpreted as ”in a large sample, 60% of the observations are expected
to be targets, i.e. observed ones, and the remaining 40% observed ze-
roes”, however we will loosely speak of it as ”probability of becoming
a target”.

Figure 6: The full sample’s (both targets and benchmark) R&D Expenses
          quota over time in blue and the average in red.
38 5 Results

            Table 1: R&D Expenses quota by industry for the full sample.

               Industry Average R&D quota
                Communications 0.034
                 Consumer Discretionary 0.011
                 Consumer Staples 0.005
                Energy 0.014
                 Financials 0.025
                 Health Care 0.538
                 Industrials 0.058
                 Materials 0.035
                 Technology 0.200
                  Utilities 0.004
                 Grand Total 0.111
5.1 Characteristic results 39

5.1.2 Intangible assets

The intangible assets quota has varied over time and fluctuates around
our sample’s long term average of approximately 0.08 as shown in Fig-
ure 7. The quota seem to have followed the boom and bust of the
IT-era in the late 90’s and early 2000, thereafter it has experienced a
steady increase.

Figure 7: The full sample’s (both targets and benchmark) intangible assets
          qouta over time in blue and the average in red.

When split by industry the highest quotas belong to the health care
industry, followed by communications and technology with quotas of
0.17, 0.15 and 0.12 respectively. Notably the top duo in the R&D quota,
health care and technology, is again represented here in the top 3. The
industry is the second highest when it comes to intangible assets which
could be explained by the assets being concentrated to large Swedish
communication firms, according to OECD:s technology and industry
outlook (OECD Science, 2014). All average quotas can be found in
40 5 Results

      Table 2. It should also be mentioned that very few observations are
      made in the utilities sector.

            Table 2: Intangible assets quota by industry for the full sample.

              Industry Average int. assets quota
              Communications 0.15
              Consumer Discretionary 0.07
              Consumer Staples 0.08
              Energy 0.09
               Financials 0.03
              Health Care 0.17
               Industrials 0.05
               Materials 0.03
              Technology 0.12
                Utilities 0.00
              Grand Total 0.08

     When comparing Figure 6 and Figure 7 there seems to be an inverse
      relation. The average intangible asset quota of the total sample has
      developed in the opposite way to R&D expenses over time. Statisti-
      cally the correlation between the two is approximately -0.555 which
      will be touched upon later in the discussion even though correlation is
      a statistical measure and does not in itself imply causality.

      The result from the regression showed a marginal effect of approxi-
      mately 0.003. Since this is very small it suggests that intangible assets
      does not have a large effect on the probability of becoming a target.
      Note however that the p-value is high, 0.946, which means that it is far
      from being statistically significant since this reflects a high risk of com-
5.1 Characteristic results 41

mitting a type I error. For further details about hypothesis testing we
refer to Section 2.2.1. The intangible assets were investigated further
by graphing the average intangible assets by industry, split into target
and benchmark which can be seen in Figure 8. The mean values for
each industry is similar for all industries except Energy, showing that
intangible assets does not differ between benchmark and target, which
would indicate that this is not a reason for becoming a target in an
M&A transaction.

  Figure 8: Benchmark and target intangible assets qouta, by industries
42 5 Results

     5.2 Industry and time effects

     5.2.1 Time effects

      The data sample contains the targets of M&A transactions in the pe-
      riod 1998 to 2014. In order to get more unbiased estimates of the effect
      of R&D expenses as well as intangible assets in a regression, it is im-
      portant to impose control variables. It is reasonable to believe that the
      frequency of M&A transactions can vary over time and if so, it has to
      be controlled for.

                       Figure 9: Target observations over time.

     As shown in Figure 9, the Swedish M&A activity has remained fairly
      stable during the last 15 years. M&A reports also describes the past
      years as stable with exception of the booming years of 2006-2008 (Vinge,
      2013). Since our data only includes Swedish firms acquiring other do-
      mestic firms, the numbers will be slightly different. The years 2006-
      2008 are not showing particularly high frequencies. One explanation,
      which will be discussed later on, could be the fact that most Swedish
5.2 Industry and time effects 43

firms were being targeted by foreign acquirers. The amount of transac-
tions in Sweden were highest during 1999. Figure 10 shows that during
this year, most deals were made within the financial sector, witch the
technology sector also being partially affected. For other industries and
years the activity was relatively evenly spread out over time.

Figure 10: Target observations over time, split by industry. The overall
            activity is quite stable over time with exception of the years 1999-
           2000 and 2002-2003. During these years activity was especially
           strong in the financials and technology industry.

The regression results show significance on the 0.1% level for the years
1999, 2000 and on the 1% level for 2002, 2003 and 2006. In addition
there were three more years significant on the 5% level and yet another
three on the 10% level, details can be found in Table 5. Recall that
2013 serves as a benchmark year. The years around the IT-era as well
as 2002-2003 constitute a solid period where the year had a significant
effect on the probability of becoming a target, compared to 2013. Note
that 2013 was by no means a low activity year in our sample, still during
44 5 Results

     the mentioned years the probability of becoming a target compared
      to 2013 was approximately 7.9% to 10.7%. Of course these yearly
      covariate results cannot be used to find other targets since obviously
      those days have passed. However it purges the other covariates and
      gives a hint on that timing is not irrelevant.
5.2 Industry and time effects 45

5.2.2 Industry effects

The industry variation is investigated firstly by graphing the distri-
butions of the industries but also over industries This is As shown in
Figure 4 and Figure 5, the sample is spread out across different in-
dustries. If it was the case that industry did not matter at all one
would expect the targets to follow a similar distribution to that of the
benchmark, given a large number of observations. Figure 11 shows that
over the entire period, the targets differ from the benchmark when it
comes to industry distribution. Some industries are approximately rep-
resented in the same frequency, but Energy, Financials, Materials and
Technology stands out.

              Figure 11: Target vs benchmark by industries.

Most deals were made within the financial sector and as mentioned
46 5 Results

      above, with a spike in transactions in 1999. In the technology sector,
     many deals were made during 2002-2003, and this is the second in-
      dustry that was overrepresented among the target firms. There is a
      possibility to include combined dummy variables for these occasions.
      That is if one believes that there is an extra effect of the combination of
      being a financial firm that specific year. However this is not included in
      our model with regard to the controls that already exists and bearing
      in mind that the target observations in our sample are limited.

      The regression analysis further confirmed this picture as Technology
      was statistically significant on a 0.1% level showing a average marginal
     effect of approximately 0.050 meaning that being a technology firm
      increased probability of becoming a target by 5% compared to Indus-
      trials. The analysis also strengthened the earlier results of Financials
      becoming targets, being significant on a 10% level with a marginal ef-
      fect of of 2.8%. Finally the health care sector was significant on a
      5% level with an increase in probability of roughly 4.5% of becoming
      a target. It should be mentioned that there were very few observa-
      tions of utilities during the target period which might explain the large
      marginal effect. However the p-value is very high, almost 1, so there is
      still no point in analyzing the marginal effect. We emphasize to always
      bear the significance from the regression results in mind.
5.2 Industry and time effects 47

                  Table 3: Target vs benchmark mean

        Industry R&D Other Intangibles
        Communication 13% 38%
        Consumer Discretionary 23% 28%
        Consumer Staples 14% 17%
        Energy 0% 0%
        Financials 0% 8%
        Health Care 11% 44%
        Industrials 5% 33%
        Materials 0% 50%
        Technology 3% 32%
        Utilities 0% 0%

   Table showing number of target observations above benchmark
 means. I.e. a number of 23% means that 23% of target observations
was found above the benchmark mean. The system used to partition
                   the firms into industries is BICS.

Notice however that quite a substantial amount of target firms reported
0 in R&D, while some relatively large quotas were found in the bench-
mark sample. This increases mean value for the benchmark which has
an impact on these numbers. The R&D measure is especially exposed
to this as the R&D quota is defined as R&D expenditure over total
sales. For firms being research intense but might rely on venture cap-
ital rather than sales, or in any other way having a small sales figure,
this quota can get large.
48 5 Results

     5.3 Robustness

      In order to check the robustness of our results we employ a logistic
      regression to our data sample. It differs from the probit regression in
      the sense that the link that maps any value on the real axis into the
      interval I = [0, 1] differs. Instead of the standard normal cumulative
      function Φ in the probit model, the logistic model has the function

                                              1
            P r(Y = 1 | X1, X2, . . . , Xk) = −(β +β X +...+β X ) . (11)
                                            1 − e   0  1  1     k  k

      The cumulative function in RHS has slightly flatter tails than that of
      the standard normal cumulative function. The coefficients are found
      using MLE, as they are in the probit model. The results are similar
      to those of the probit regression, with the same covariates being sim-
      ilar. The year dummies 1998 and 2003 both increased in significance
      level from 10% and 1% to 5% and 0.1% respectively. Technology also
      increased from 1% to 0.1% in the logit regression. The p-values and
      marginal effects also changed but the conclusions from the probit re-
      gression still remain. Notably R&D expenses marginal effect decreased
      from -17.3% to 26.2%. Overall, many of the marginal effects increased
      in absolute value compared to the probit regression but the sign and
      significance strengthened the earlier results. For details please see Ta-
      ble 6.

      With the estimated coefficients, the probit model’s ability to predict
      observations correctly can be assessed. Taking one observation, calcu-
     late the RHS of Equation 10 with the predicted value, and compare
5.3 Robustness 49

it to the LHS. If the right hand side of the equation is 0.5 or greater
when LHS is observed as a 1, then it is correctly predicted. Similarly if
RHS is calculated as less than 0.5 and LHS is 0, then it’s also correctly
predicted.

          Table 4: Summary statistics: Predicted probit model.

                       Measure Value
                        Min. 0.000
                         1st Quantile 0.015
                       Median 0.036
                      Mean 0.050
                         3rd Quantile 0.070
                       Max. 0.319

   Statistics of the data sample using the predicted probit model to
                      calculate the observations.

As Table 4 shows, the median and mean reflects quite well the original
sample, but the maximum is 0.319. This means that the model does
not predict any targets in our data sample, rendering it will always
predict non-event observations correctly and event observations, i.e.
targets incorrectly. As our sample has a low portion of targets, this
will probably not be a fair measure. Instead we employ McFadden’s

           2
Pseudo R to determine the fit of the model.

                       2              ln(Lmodel)
                  RM cF adden = 1 −                        (12)
                                       ln(L0)

where Lmodel is the likelihood of the model and L0 the likelihood with-
out any covariates, i.e. using only the intercept, which gives a measure

                                          2
of error reduction. Our reported RM cF adden is approximately 0.556.
50 6 Conclusions & discussion

    6 Conclusions & discussion

    6.1 R&D Expenses

      As earlier mentioned, the total sample R&D expenditures and intangi-
      ble assets during our time frame was almost the opposite to each other.
      A possible interpretation of the relationship between these graphs (Fig-
     ure 6 & 7) could be explained by the IT-bubble during the turn of
     the century. Large amounts were probably spent on research and de-
      velopment since many firms saw their value rising quickly from rapid
      growth within the IT-sector. When the bubble collapsed during 2002,
      the R&D spendings declined substantially and the intangibles started
      to increase. Perhaps the large spendings finally paid off to the firms
     with high R&D expenses? One must have in mind that other R&D
     intensive industries might push the overall spendings up and down.
      Health care has the highest quota of all industries and it was probably
      not affected the same way as technology firms during the IT-bubble.
      Something is however increasing the spendings again as they are now
      back at the same levels as before the bubble. Perhaps we are enter-
      ing a even more R&D intensive period within the health care industry?

      The results are showing that the characteristic is actually decreasing
      the possibility of becoming a target and strengthening the conclusion
      Bena and Li had in their paper, which suggests that even though Bena
      and Li studied the US, the pattern persist in Sweden too and might be
      more general. Another important aspect is that Bena and Li’s results
6.1 R&D Expenses 51

does not include observations from 2006- and onwards. Potential differ-
ences in the results would have been expected since we include a period
in Sweden where many hyped firms have been acquired. However, the
results are similar and the conclusion from this could be that acquiring
companies are not targeting R&D intensive firms. Once again does
this measure only capture the selected period’s innovative input and
not past investments.

Before comparing the results of our study with previous literature we
should have in mind the following:

   • The most R&D intensive industries are technology and health
      care. Sweden is one of the most R&D intensive countries since
      there are many firms within the high-technological industry, as
     defined by OECD. In R&D expenses compared to GDP, Swe-
      den is one of the top-five countries (SCB, 2011). Sweden’s R&D
      intensive industries and firms should however give us higher val-
      ues in both target and benchmark firms, not only in the bench-
     mark. Another explanation to differences between the studies
      could be that the R&D intensive acquisitions have been Swedish
      firms acquiring foreign companies like AstraZeneca and Pharma-
     cia&Upjohn’s merger with Monsanto. Our data only consists of
      listed acquirers and targets in Sweden; therefore these acquisi-
      tions are not included in the sample.

   • Different accounting regulations between Sweden and the U.S.
     The US GAAP says that internal research and development ex-
52 6 Conclusions & discussion

            penditure is expensed as it is incurred, unlike IFRS where inter-
            nal development expenditure is capitalized if specific criteria are
           met. This could be a potential explanation of the larger amount
           of R&D expenses within U.S target firms (KPMG, 2013).

     6.2 Intangible assets

      When looking at the descriptive statistics of our second quota, intangi-
      ble assets, some numbers are similar to the R&D data. The industries
      with the highest quotas are about the same, when looking at the en-
      tire sample. However, Figure 8 shows that intangible assets in target
      firms, within the health care industry, have even higher quotas than
      the benchmark. Past research (that has been capitalized) and inno-
      vative property seems to be valuable to acquirers as the target firms
      have higher values. Comparing this to our findings within the R&D
     quota, where target firms actually had lower R&D expenses than the
      benchmark, raises many questions. Are the some acquirers preferring
      past innovation output before recent R&D activity or is it some other
      driver that causes these numbers to differ? Or is it obvious that verified
      innovation output, reported as assets, are more attractive than recent
      R&D activities that perhaps could result in nothing but expenses?
     The industries with higher values in targets compared to benchmark
     were health care, communications and consumer discretionary. Why
      are these industries containing target firms with higher intangible quo-
      tas? Health care and communications are indeed R&D intensive indus-
      tries but something is pushing the target firms above the benchmark.
6.2 Intangible assets 53

One explanation could be that the intangible property that shows up
in the balance sheet of the target firms, within these industries, are
easier to measure and value properly. Perhaps a verified patent within
the health care industry is more likely to have a correct value than a
patent within the energy industry? If the acquirer is aware of the true
value of the acquired assets, the overall M&A driver might be pushed
towards the intangible assets and their value, making highly innova-
tive firms becoming more attractive. The same intangible asset in an
energy-classified firm might not be as attractive since the acquirer is
not sure of the true value of the asset. As discussed earlier, intangible
assets are indeed difficult to measure and firms might not always have
guidelines of how to measure the asset properly. Since intangible assets
are a huge part of the health care industry, evaluating these might be
done in a more correct way than in any other industry.

To summarize the descriptive output of the intangible quota one can
say that some industries stood out, but overall does it seem that in-
tangible property is not a key driver of M&As. Some industries have
higher quotas within the target firms and a plausible explanation of
this could be the difficulties of measuring intangible property correctly.
The regression analysis showed very little marginal effect of the intan-
gible asset quota, but though the p-value was too high to be significant.
The sample was split into a benchmark and a target sample, thereafter
split by industry to investigate this further. This showed that split by
industry, the target and benchmark had similar mean values of intangi-
54 6 Conclusions & discussion

      ble assets which is in line with the low marginal effect of our regression
      analysis.

     6.3 Industry, size and time effects

      In the probit model, time and industry effects were controlled for. As
     shown in our results quite a lot of the years were significant. Even
     though the main reason for including them is to purge the R&D and
      intangible covariates, additional conclusions can be drawn. The period
      years 1999-2000 and 2002-2003 all showed an increase in probability of
      7.9%-10.7% to become a target compared to 2013. These years have of
      course passed so this won’t explicitly help detection of new targets, it
      does however show that the period and timing does matter. All these
      years were statistically significant on the 0.1-1% level. This suggests
      that if investors are looking to identify possible targets, certain time
      periods are extra favourable.

      The peaking probability of becoming a target during these years could
      be affected by the IT-bubble. The bubble only lasted until 2001 and
      hyped firms with high expectations and returns were probably popular
      during this time. When the bubble popped and firms value were drop-
      ping, some firms could still be exploited but now for another reason:
      after the bust acquirers now had a better chance of buying firms at
      discount. As an example Ericsson B shares was traded for 830 SEK at
      its peak in early 2000 but could be bought for only 3.8 SEK at a shares
      issue two years later.
6.3 Industry, size and time effects 55

Our sample did not show the same M&A activity as was described in
Vinge’s M&A report where Sweden had booming years during 2006-
2008. Again, our sample only includes Swedish acquirers buying Swedish
targets which might affect the sample.

As for industries most notably being a technology, health care of fi-
nancial firm had a statistically significant effect of increasing the prob-
ability of becoming a target compared to the benchmark industrials.
They are also among those who were most frequently bought and had
high intangible assets quota. Whether this is a result of the innovative
properties themselves, consolidation in the market or general hype is
harder to tell. Figure 10 does indeed show some spikes around the turn
of the millenium, but the interest for firms in these industries still per-
sisted. The answer to the increased probability of becoming a target
for those sectors might be a combination of the above stated factors.
56 7 Suggestions for further studies

    7 Suggestions for further studies

      Additional research of the characteristics of M&As would be of high
      value to investors, shareholders and for other academic research fields.
      Deeper knowledge into the target traits, for example organic growth,
     would be important to many M&A participants. The increase in vol-
     ume of a relatively unchanged service or product is a widely known
      source of profit. Measuring and collecting data regarding the organic
      growth might shed further light on which firms that might be acquired.
      Another suggestion for future research is the Swedish acquiring firms’
      characteristics, especially one theory that Michael Webb brought up in
     How to acquire a company. He claims that firms with over-committed
      in areas or industries that are prone to cyclical variation might want to
      diversify or by other means mitigate their cyclical pattern by acquiring
      other firms. Finally, one would like to examine not only whether the
      firm is going to become a target, but also if it will be a target in a
      bidding war as these wars might push the market price of the target
      higher.
57
58 8 Appendix A, Tables

    8 Appendix A, Tables

                            Table 5: Probit regression results.

        Independent variable p-value Statistical significance Avg. marginal effect
        Intercept 0.000 *** -0.204
       R&D expenses quota 0.003 ** -0.173
       Intangible assets quota 0.946 N 0.003
        1997 0.097 . 0.064
        1998 0.051 . 0.063
       1999 0.000 *** 0.102
       2000 0.000 *** 0.088
       2001 0.624 N 0.017
       2002 0.003 ** 0.071
       2003 0.001 ** 0.075
        2004 0.093 . 0.042
       2005 0.103 0.041
       2006 0.001 ** 0.059
       2007 0.021 * 0.052
        2008 0.061 . 0.043
       2009 0.375 N 0.021
       2010 0.124 N 0.032
       2011 0.813 N -0.006
       2012 0.307 N -0.027
      2013 BM BM BM
       Communication 0.405 N 0.017
       Consumer Discretionary 0.181 N 0.020
       Consumer Staples 0.155 N 0.033
       Energy 0.213 N -0.044
        Financials 0.057 . 0.028
       Health Care 0.042 * 0.030
      Industrials BM BM BM
       Materials 0.814 N -0.006
       Technology 0.002 ** 0.046
       Utilities 0.986 N -0.249

       Marginal effects, p-values and significance. ”BM” is for Benchmark
        among dummy control variables. Significance levels: ”***” 0.1%,
       ”**” 1%, ”*” 5%, ”.” 10%, ”N” no significance (higher than 10%).
                                                               59

                     Table 6: Logit regression results.

 Independent variable p-value Statistical significance Avg. marginal effect
 Intercept 0.000 *** -0.190
 R&D expenses quota 0.001 ** -0.262
 Intangible assets quota 0.719 N 0.014
 1997 0.065 . 0.072
 1998 0.034 * 0.071
 1999 0.000 *** 0.107
 2000 0.000 *** 0.090
 2001 0.533 N 0.023
 2002 0.001 ** 0.079
 2003 0.001 *** 0.082
 2004 0.057 . 0.051
 2005 0.070 . 0.049
 2006 0.001 ** 0.066
 2007 0.015 * 0.060
 2008 0.042 * 0.051
 2009 0.283 N 0.029
 2010 0.103 N 0.038
 2011 0.929 N -0.002
 2012 0.353 N -0.028
 2013 BM BM BM
 Communication 0.403 N 0.017
 Consumer Discretionary 0.186 N 0.021
 Consumer Staples 0.139 N 0.033
 Energy 0.207 N -0.059
 Financials 0.062 . 0.028
 Health Care 0.030 * 0.045
 Industrials BM BM BM
 Materials 0.743 N -0.008
 Technology 0.001 *** 0.050
 Utilities 0.986 N -0.423

Beta coefficients, p-values and significance. ”BM” is for Benchmark
 among dummy control variables. Significance levels: ”***” 0.1%,
”**” 1%, ”*” 5%, ”.” 10%, ”N” no significance (higher than 10%).
60 8 Appendix A, Tables

                         Figure 12: Summary statistics

                         Figure 13: Summary statistics
                                               61

Figure 14: Summary statistics

Figure 15: Summary statistics
62 9 Appendix B, Correlation

    9 Appendix B, Correlation

            Figure 16: Correlation between covariates, part 1 of 2.
                                                           63

Figure 17: Correlation between covariates, part 2 of 2.
64 10 Appendix C, Code

    10 Appendix C, Code

     blu <- attach(Probit_data2_controls_v9)
     Y <- cbind(Target)
     X <- cbind(RnDqouta, OtherIntqouta, X1997, X1998, X1999, X2000,
                X2001, X2002, X2003, X2004, X2005, X2006, X2007, X2008,
                X2009, X2010, X2011, X2012,
                 Communication, Consumer.Discretionary, Consumer.Staples,
                  Energy, Financials, Health.Care, Materials, Technology, Utilities)

     #Base case: Industry: Industrials Year: 2013
     summary(Y)
     summary(X)

     #Probit model coefficients
     probit <- glm(Y ~ X , family = binomial (link="probit"))
     summary(probit)

     #Logit model coefficients
     logit <- glm(Y ~ X , family = binomial (link="logit"))
     summary(logit)

     #Odds ratio
     exp(logit\$coefficients)

     #Probit model average marginal effects
                                                                65

ProbitScalar <- mean(dnorm(predict(probit, type= "link")))
ProbitScalar * coef(probit)

#Logit model average marginal effects
LogitScalar <- mean(dlogis(predict(logit, type= "link")))
LogitScalar * coef(logit)

#Probit model predicted probabilities
pprobit <- predict(probit, type="response")
summary(pprobit)

#McFadden’s Pseudo R-squared
probit0 <- update(probit, formula = Y ~ 1)
McFadden <- 1-as.vector(logLik(probit)/logLik(probit0))
McFadden
66 11 References

    11 References

      [1] Andrade, G. Mitchell, M. and Stafford, E. (2001) New Evidence and
      Perspectives on Mergers, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15,
      p. 103-120

      [2] Bena, J. and Li, K (2011) Corporate Innovations and Mergers and
      Acquisitions

      [3] Bloomberg Index Methodology, Global Fixed Income Family, avail-
     able at http://www.bloombergindexes.com/content/uploads/sites/3/2013/05/Index-
      Family-Methodology.pdf, accessed at 16 April, 2015

      [3] Bloomberg, 2015 The Bloomberg Innovation Index, available at
     http://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-innovative-countries/, accessed
     at 11 May, 2015

      [3] Curtis, G. (2009) Trademarks Of A Takeover Target, available at
      http://www.investopedia.com/articles/stocks/07/takeover target.asp? accessed
     at 9 May, 2014

      [4] Dagens Industri, Tio heta uppko¨pskandidater, available at http://www.di.se/artiklar/
      2014/4/8/tio-heta-uppkopskandidater/, accessed 27 April, 2014

      [5] Fama, E. and French, K (1992) The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
     Returns, The Journal of Finance, Vol. XLVII No.2, p. 427-465
                                                                67

[5] Evans, F. and Mellen, C (2010) Valuation for M&A: Building Value
in Private Companies, Second edition, Wiley and Sons Inc. ISBN: 978-
0-470-60441-0

[5] Garson, G. D. (2012). Probit Regression and Response Models.
Asheboro, NC: Statistical Associates Publishers.

[6] Harford,J (2005). What drives merger waves?, Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 77, p 529-560

[10] Kennedy, P. (2003) A Guide to Econometrics, Sixth edition, Black-
well Publishing Ltd.

[11] KPMG (2013) IFRS Compare to US GAAP: An overview, available
at http://www.kpmg.com/CN/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/IFRS-
compared-to-US-GAAP-An-overview-O-201311.pdf, accessed 11 May,
2014

[12] KPMG (2014) 2014, M&A Outlook Survey Report, available at
http://www.kpmgsurvey-ma.com/pdf/2014%20MA%20Outlook%20Survey.pdf,
accessed 8 May, 2014

[13] KPMG (2010) The Determinants of M&A Success, available at
http://www.kpmg.com/ NZ/en/IssuesAndInsights/
68 11 References

      ArticlesPublications/ Documents/Determinants-of-MandA-Success- report.pdf,
      accessed at 6 May, 2014

      [14] Lang, H. (2013) A Brief Introduction To Regression Analysis, KTH
      Mathematics, div. of Mathematical Statistics.

      [15] Maksimovic, V. Phillips, G. and Yang, L. (2013) Private and
      public merger waves, The Journal of Finance, Vol. LXVIII No.5, p.
     2177-2217

      [16] OECD Data. Research and Development (R&D),
      available at https://data.oecd.org/rd/gross-domestic-spending-on-r-d.htm,
      accessed at 8 May, 2015

      [16] OECD Science. (2014) Technology and Industry Outlook 2014,
     available at http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/science-
      and-technology/oecd-science-technology-and-industry-outlook-2014/sweden sti outlook-
      2014-76-en#page1 , accessed at 7 May, 2015

      [16] Redovisningsradet. (2000) RR 15, Immateriella Tillgangar,
      available at http://www.bfn.se/redovisning/radet/RR/RR15.pdf accessed
     at 4 May, 2015

      [17] SCB (2011) Appendix till: Forskning och utveckling inom
      fo¨retagssektorn 2011, available at http://www.scb.se/Statistik/UF/UF0302/2011A01F/
                                                                69

UF0302 2011A01F SM UF14SM1301.pdf, accessed at 11 May, 2014

[18] Stock, H. and Watson, J. (2012) Introduction to Econometrics,
Third Edition. Harlow, Pearson Education Limited.

[19] SvD (2015) Varfor stannar inte tillvaxtforetagen?, available at
http://www.svd.se/opinion/brannpunkt/varfor-stannar-inte-tillvaxtforetagen 4553560.svd,
accessed 11 May, 2014

[19] Vinge (2013) Vinge Q&A: Private equity and the Swedish M&A
Market, available at http://www.vinge.com/Global/Bilagor%20till%20nyheter%20etc/
Vinge-QandA.pdf, accessed 9 May, 2014

[20] Webb, M (1974) How to Acquire a Company, Gower Press,
ISBN 0-7161-0247-1