 Underpricing in IPOs and the Effects of IPO
       Cyclicality and Owners’ Investment
                Philosophy

                                          †                                ‡
          Andersson, K. Jonatan & Andersson, E. Rasmus
                          May 16, 2016

                                Bachelor Thesis

                             Department of Finance

                        Stockholm School of Economics

                                 Abstract
We examine underpricing levels in initial public offerings (“IPOs”) using a sample consisting of 50
private equity-backed, 50 venture capital-backed and 113 non-sponsored IPOs. The sample is col-
lected using offering data from firms listed on the UK Main Market, International Main Market
and AIM on the London Stock Exchange, between the years of 2006-2015. We compute first day
returns and compare the results between our three subgroups. Also, we measure the effect of IPO
cyclicality and owners’ investment philosophy by comparing first day returns across subgroups in
different periods of IPO activity and distinguishing between two types of owner focus, respectively.
Our findings show that private equity-backed IPOs experience the lowest level of underpricing,
followed by venture capital-backed IPOs. In periods of high market activity, venture capital-backed
IPOs experience significantly higher levels of underpricing. Financially focused private equity firms
achieve a lower level of underpricing than their operationally focused counterparts; the opposite is
found to be true for venture capital firms. Our results substantiate the hot issue market theories
and the relative power of participants in IPO deals, in a European equity market setting.
Keywords: Initial Public Offering (IPO), Underpricing, European Equity Capital Markets, IPO Cy-
clicality, Investment Philosophy

Acknowledgement: We would like to thank our tutor, Dong Yan, for valuable input and comments during the
process of writing. We would also like to thank Per-Olof Edlund for helpful assistance and advice on statistical
matters.

† 22969@student.hhs.se
‡ 22999@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents
1 Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1
2 Relevant Literature, Previous Research and Hypotheses ............................................. 3
   2.1 Relevant Literature and Previous Research ................................................................. 4
      2.1.1 Previous Research on IPO Underpricing ............................................................... 4
     2.1.2 Previous Research on Underpricing in Venture Capital-backed IPOs .................... 5
      2.1.3 Previous Research on IPO Cyclicality.................................................................... 7
     2.1.4 Previous Research on Investment Philosophy ....................................................... 8
   2.2 Summary and Hypotheses ..........................................................................................10
3 Model of IPO Underpricing .............................................................................................13
   3.1 The Original Model ......................................................................................................13
   3.2 Additions to the Original Model ...................................................................................14
   3.3 Relative Effect of Control Variables .............................................................................14
4 Data ..................................................................................................................................14
   4.1 Data Criticism .............................................................................................................16
   4.2 Variable Description ....................................................................................................17
5 Methodology ....................................................................................................................20
   5.1 First-day Returns ........................................................................................................20
   5.2 Market Period Definition ..............................................................................................22
   5.3 Test Statistics .............................................................................................................22
6 Results and Analysis ......................................................................................................25
   6.1 Descriptive Statistics ...................................................................................................25
   6.2 First Day Returns ........................................................................................................28
7 Conclusion.......................................................................................................................39
8 References .......................................................................................................................44
1 Introduction
Private equity and venture capital firms have long been a mainstay of equity capital markets in the
United States. As is observable from the increasing number of investment companies with ever-
larger funds, we have seen such investors firmly establishing a position also on the European equity
capital markets (Levis, 2011). In the US in 2003, private equity-backed IPOs accounted for 43% of
total IPO volume, while that number amounted to only 9% in Europe. In 2013, corresponding
figures were 50% and 48%, respectively, thus representing a staggering increase of 39 percentage
points in Europe over the 10 year period (PwC, 2013).

A private equity (“PE”) firm is an investment manager that invests in the private equity of operating
companies that are not publicly traded on a stock exchange. The various investment strategies
employed by PE firms vary widely, but may include leveraged buyouts (“LBOs”), venture capital
(“VC”), growth capital, distressed investments and mezzanine capital (Mogilevsky and Murgulov,
2012; Private Company Knowledge Base, 2016). PE firms typically comprise small teams which
emphasize the recruitment of professionals with backgrounds from mainly investment banks, but
also, to a lesser extent, management consulting firms and strategy consulting firms in particular.
VC firms, on the other hand, invest money to seed early-stage, emerging growth enterprises that
are generally much younger, more high-growth and smaller than their PE counterparts (Private
Company Knowledge Base, 2016). Hence, VC investments are also more risky; too risky for seek-
ing funding on the standard capital markets or to obtain regular bank financing. VC firms are
usually structured in a similar way as PE firms, but their professionals have different skillsets. In-
stead of having backgrounds in finance, many VC professionals either have a background in tech-
nology, working as a scientist or a researcher, or have an industry background, working at a large
corporation or a start-up (Mogilevsky and Murgulov, 2012). Often, VC professionals possess a
distinct expertise within one or a few specific areas, which allows them to understand and separate
groundbreaking business ideas from the average start-up. While private equity firms also highly
value business acumen, their investments in more mature companies reduce the need for invest-
ment professionals to have start-up, doctoral or industry experience, instead relying to a greater
extent on operational advisors/industry experts.

Because PE and VC firms realize their returns when exiting their investments, the exit process is
one of the most critical stages in the investment process (Sinha et al., 2005). As the initial public
offering (“IPO”) is one of the main exit methods for PE and VC firms (Levis, 2011), one would
expect to see a significant share of the academic IPO literature to be focused on VC- and PE-

                                    1
backed IPOs and particularly on the underpricing of offerings and differences in underpricing lev-
els when comparing such IPOs. Furthermore, as PE investors have grown more and more im-
portant in the European equity markets, one would expect to see recent literature narrow in on this
topic. However, this is not truly the case, and notably not in Europe.

Mogilevsky and Murgulov find that PE-backed IPOs in the US experience a significantly lower
level of underpricing than VC-backed and non-PE/non-VC (“non-sponsored”) IPOs. Megginson
and Weiss (1991) state that the underpricing of VC-backed IPOs is less than that of non-sponsored
IPOs as the presence of venture capitalists in the issuing firm acts as a certification of the quality
of the issue through the venture capital firm’s investment in financial and reputational capital.
Gompers (1996), Lee and Wahal (2004) suggest that VC firms look forward to creating a reputation
for the firm in the market that will benefit them in the future in terms of increased demand for
future fundraising and thus higher management fees. In order to achieve this future profitability
and take future portfolio companies public, VC firms are willing to incur the upfront loss from
underpricing.

Previous literature has scoured through the topics presented above, and there have been studies
examining differences in underpricing levels between PE-backed, VC-backed and non-sponsored
IPOs. Studying previous works, we note the dominance of US markets as the subject of signifi-
cantly more studies than their European counterparts. Consequently, we identify a gap in existing
studies and proceed to anchor this paper in the conventional owner-underpricing analysis on the
European market. Having laid the groundwork, we refine the analysis by focusing on venture cap-
ital and the relation between underpricing in initial public offerings and equity capital market activ-
ity. Furthermore, we extend the regression models of previous literature to analyze underpricing
differences by categorizing PE and VC firms as either primarily financially focused or primarily
operationally focused. This addition is vital for our paper to constitute an important contribution
to the existing financial literature – because of a range of difficulties in obtaining reliable data, few
studies have been done focusing on this area. Our aim is for this study to provide a new angle while
acting as a point of reference for future studies which doubtlessly are needed to encompass the
various, too often neglected, qualitative elements of key stakeholders and their effects on under-
pricing in IPOs.

                                    2
In order to collect our sample, we look at all successful listings on the London Stock Exchange
(“LSE”), including the Alternative Investment Market (“AIM”), the UK Main Market and the In-
ternational Main Market between November 2006 and December 2015 (inclusive). We subse-
quently manually classify each listing as PE-backed, VC-backed or non-sponsored. Our findings
show that PE-backed IPOs experience a significantly lower level of underpricing than both VC-
backed and non-sponsored. Additionally, our results indicate that VC-backed IPOs are significantly
less underpriced than non-sponsored IPOs, but experience a higher level of underpricing than PE-
backed IPOs. Our first finding provides further support of the theory put forward in 1982 by
David Baron in which Baron states that the informational advantage investment banks experience
in relation to the IPO firm leads to the IPO discount of the issuer’s stock. However, our results
contradict the signaling theory put forward by Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), Allen and Faulhaber
(1989) and Welch (1989). According to the aforementioned authors, the issuer has an advantage in
terms of information and uses the IPO discount as a tool to signal the quality of the issue to the
market. If this was the case, and quality signaling was the driving pricing method in IPOs, we would
expect to see an increasing level of underpricing as the information advantage of the issuing firm
increases. In our sample, this is not true. Our second finding relating to a lower degree of under-
pricing for VC-backed IPOs in relation to non-sponsored IPOs provides further support for Meg-
ginson and Weiss’ (1991) certification theory as well as the grandstanding theory put forward by
Gompers (1996) and further supported by Lee and Wahal (2004).

Regarding the effects of highly active equity markets on the underpricing of VC-backed IPOs, our
findings provide further supportive evidence of the hot issue markets theory formulated by Ros-
setto (2008). The findings are suggestive of VC-backed firms experiencing higher underpricing in
times of high market activity. Our fourth finding establishes a link between the focus of owners
and the IPO underpricing levels when their holdings are listed on a stock exchange. In short, PE
firms deemed to be primarily financially focused owners, rather than operationally focused, tend
to experience lower underpricing levels. For VC firms, operationally focused owners deliver the
lowest underpricing levels when they list their holdings.

2 Relevant Literature, Previous Research and Hypotheses
In an attempt to provide context, we proceed by outlining, comparing and contrasting previous
studies and their theories on underpricing and IPO cyclicality. A broad range of literature is avail-
able and, therefore, it is critical to bring coherence. Thus, this section culminates in the presentation
of our hypotheses and the relevance of this study in the setting of previous literature.

                                    3
2.1 Relevant Literature and Previous Research
The phenomenon of underpricing in initial public offerings (IPOs) was first documented by Ib-
botson (1975) and has later been the topic of a number of research articles. Both Ibbotson (1975)
and Ritter (1984) failed to provide any definitive reason for IPO underpricing; since then, a wide
range of theories have been developed in efforts to explain why the underpricing phenomenon
exists.

2.1.1 Previous Research on IPO Underpricing
The theoretical explanations for IPO underpricing can be separated into six distinct categories.
First, Baron and Holmström (1980), and Baron (1982), suggest that underpricing is an effect of the
information asymmetry regarding market conditions that exists between the security issuer and the
underwriter. Second, Allen and Faulhaber (1989) and Grinblatt and Hwang (1989) develop an ex-
planation based on the signaling theory, suggesting that underpricing is a way of sending credible
signals to investors assuring the high quality of the firm, since only high quality firms would be able
to recoup the upfront cost of the underpricing signal from subsequent issues. Third, both Chem-
manur (1993), and Booth and Chua (1996) propagate for an information generation cost theory which
suggests that in order for firms to encourage a wider subscription (reiterated by Datar and Mao in
their 2006 article) and because outside investors face costs to generate information about the firm,
underpricing must exist. Fourth, there is the institutional explanation and the theory of deliberate under-
pricing, to which a number of articles can be said to belong. Tinic (1988), Hughes and Thakor (1992),
Hensler (1995), Ruud (1993) and Taranto (2003) describe the trade-off between potential litigation
costs pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933 and upfront costs comprised of IPO underpricing.
Hunt-McCool et al. (1996) proved that firms deliberately underprice, an explanation to which was
offered by Prabhala and Puri (1998), arguing that deliberate underpricing is conducted by the un-
derwriter to reduce the ex-ante uncertainty associated with an IPO. Fifth, the behavioral imperfection
theory developed by Loughran and Ritter (2002) and supported by Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003)
argues that underpricing is partly an effect of overly enthusiastic investors causing the market value
of the company to surpass the fundamental value in an offering. Sixth, a range of contributors
including Brennan and Franks (2005), and Booth and Chua (1996) put forward the idea of under-
pricing as a means of retaining control, since underpricing attracts a dispersed group of new owners
which will be less likely to forcefully pursue objectives that clash with those of the pre-IPO owners.

Arguably the most prominent theory, information asymmetry has been the focus of much research.
Ljungqvist’s survey conducted in 2004 did indeed conclude that a theory of information asymmetry

                                    4
offers the best explanation for the underpricing phenomenon. The presence of PE and VC firms
will affect the information asymmetry between parties in such IPOs, and is therefore of particular
interest for this paper.

In an early study of the effect of information asymmetry in IPOs and the principal-agent conflict
effect on underpricing, Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1989a) conclude that self-underwritten IPOs
show similar levels of underpricing, as do non-sponsored IPOs. In that case, the principal is in fact
the same party as the agent. Looking to the second prominent study within this area, Ljungqvist
and Wilhelm (2003) find support for less underpricing in cases where the underwriter had a signif-
icant pre-IPO stake in the company. Furthermore, the authors found that the underpricing levels
are proportionate to the pre-IPO stake held by the underwriter in the firm, meaning there is a
proven incentive to minimize underpricing if the underwriter owns shares in the issuing firm.

An alternative way to reduce information asymmetry is proposed by Carter and Manaster (1990)
and Michaely and Shaw (1994). Since an exact measurement of the firm’s intrinsic value is unknown
to investors, the hiring of a prestigious advisory firm offers a “certification” of the quality of the
firm and reduces the uncertainty over the firm’s true intrinsic value. Prestigious underwriters are
thus unlikely to manage offerings by low quality firms in the cases where reputational capital is
important (Ljungqvist, 2004). Intuitively, a certification by a prestigious advisor that cares about its
reputation ought to decrease IPO underpricing. There is indeed empirical evidence of this (Beatty
and Welch, 1996), but overall, studies have yielded mixed results that have varied over time. Beatty
and Welch show that an inverse relationship between reputable advisors and underpricing is in fact
in place since the 1980’s. An explanation is hitherto offered by Loughran and Ritter (2004), who
suggest that underpricing levels have increased because banks have become more mindful of re-
taining clients that bring in recurring revenue by offering them options to earn abnormally large
returns on IPO issues in the short term. Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012) argue this is in line with
the evolving business of banks – more revenue than ever is now derived from services other than
advisory.

2.1.2 Previous Research on Underpricing in Venture Capital-backed IPOs
Various studies have focused on the causes of IPO underpricing in venture-capital backed IPOs.
As a result, there are six broadly defined theories offering different explanations. While the follow-
ing explanations are different than those introduced above, there are many commonalities across
the closely related genres of underpricing research. (Abraham and Joseph, 2015.)

                                    5
First, the certification theory (discussed above) brought forward by Megginson and Weiss (1991)
yielded empirical results supporting a lower level of underpricing for firms backed by venture cap-
italists, and has been influential in explaining the underpricing phenomenon. Second, Gompers
(1996) and Lee and Wahal (2004) presented the grandstanding theory, which suggests it is beneficial
for VC firms to underprice offerings in order to make it easier to bring its future portfolio compa-
nies public, make the VC firm more reputable and raise more funds, thus earning higher manage-
ment fees in the future.

A third theory, the conflict of interest theory, was theorized by Gompers and Lerner (1999) and Hamao
et al. (2000). Studies of VC-backed offerings in Japan showed that when the venture capital firm’s
parent company acted as underwriter – as was often the case in Hamao’s sample, since VC firms
in Japan are often part of larger financial institutions – a conflict of interest with regards to pricing
of the issue arose. This resulted in investors demanding higher underpricing as a compensation for
potentially losing out on future equity upside because of the underwriter’s bias to set a high issue
price. Fourth, the trade-off theory presented by Habib and Ljungqvist (2001) suggests that a firm
aspiring to roam the public arena faces a trade-off between marketing costs and underpricing in
the equity offering. Prestigious underwriters reduce underpricing, but cost more to mandate. Thus,
if the IPO issue is large enough, it makes sense to employ a relatively pricy underwriter in an effort
to reduce underpricing. Since VC firms regularly retain little post-IPO ownership (Abraham and
Joseph, 2015), they are usually incentivized to choose a reputable underwriter rather than face a
larger underpricing.

In 2008, Rossetto proposed the hot issue markets theory, which argues that the extent of the under-
pricing in a VC-backed IPO depends on the presence of “hot issue markets” or “IPO windows”.
In hot issue times, many firms look for public funding simultaneously and also experience a higher
level of underpricing, on average, than during what could be labeled “cold issue times” (Ibbotson
and Jaffe, 1975; and Ritter, 1984). During such IPO windows, VC-backed IPOs show greater un-
derpricing than non-sponsored IPOs; however, during other times, the initial day returns for VC-
backed IPOs are significantly less than those of non-sponsored IPOs. Sixth, the timing theory was
put forward by Lerner (1995). His study showed that VC firms are more capable of timing IPOs
than regular firms, resulting in lower underpricing. Furthermore, Lerner acknowledged the fact that
venture capitalists are more likely to list their firms during market peaks, preferring private financ-
ing in times of low equity market valuations.

                                    6
2.1.3 Previous Research on IPO Cyclicality
Numerous studies have illustrated the cyclical nature of IPOs and how the market is flooded with
companies waiting to go public in booming markets, enjoying high stock market valuations (Ibbot-
son, 1975; Ritter & Welch, 2002; Schöber, 2008). Similar studies have been done on the how un-
derpricing differs in various stock market conditions (Ibbotson & Jaffe, 1975; Ritter, 1984;
Loughran & Ritter, 2004; Levis, 2011). In their 2004 study, which focused on comparing the un-
derpricing during the hot market period of 1999-2000 with the cold market period in the three
subsequent years, Loughran and Ritter found substantial evidence that underpricing also tends to
increase in booming market conditions. Loughran and Ritter found that the average first day return
in the hot market period was 65%, compared to an average of 11.7% in the cold market period.
Bergström et al. (2006) as well as Levis (2011) found that the underpricing in sponsored-backed
IPOs was less volatile with the market conditions than those IPOs being backed by a venture
capital firm or having a non-financial owner.

When it comes to the cyclicality of PE-backed IPOs specifically, previous literature does not offer
unanimous results. Bergström et al. (2006) found that fewer PE-backed companies go public in
booming market conditions, while Schöber (2008) found the opposite.

As IPO timing is decided by senior executives in the boardroom, the most widely popular theories
for describing IPO cyclicality are market timing theories (Schöber, 2008). The pseudo market timing
theory, based on the premise that more firms go public in booming markets, is arguably the most
widespread line of thought. In this theory, managers’ decision to raise equity financing is uncorre-
lated to their predictions of future returns. Rather, the pseudo market theory is based on empirical
evidence showing that specific stock price levels (“trigger prices”) are used by management to de-
termine when it is appropriate to use equity financing (Schulz, 2003). In a study covering 15 coun-
tries, Loughran, Ritter & Rydkvist (1994) showed that the total number of IPOs increases in tan-
dem with the level of the general stock market in all countries but one.

When it comes to the key determinants that prospective public companies face in their IPO jour-
ney, Ritter & Welch found in their 2002 survey of the IPO literature that market conditions is the
singularly most critical factor. Pástor and Veronesi, who introduced the term “optimal IPO timing”
in 2005, suggested in their study that CEOs tend to await favorable market conditions before pur-
suing an IPO.

                                    7
Similarly, PE firms take into account the IPO windows as they evaluate different exit strategies for
their portfolio holdings. Naturally, a PE firm may divest a portfolio company ahead of its planned
holding period through an IPO given an especially attractive valuation, but may also hold onto a
company a bit longer than initially anticipated if the IPO window is closed (and no lucrative
trade/secondary sale opportunity presents itself). In a study by Cao (2011), it was shown that PE
firms generally reduce their holding periods in times with favorable IPO conditions.

On the whole, there is not yet a perfect explanation for variation in underpricing levels in VC-
backed IPOs. The certification theory has hitherto proved the most popular, but fails to explain
statistically significant cases of higher underpricing in VC-backed IPOs during specific conditions.
Similarly, the other models do not offer fully compelling reasoning that holds true for all cases.
Countering other research in the area, Chemmanur and Loutskina argued that perhaps a whole
new model was needed, and developed an alternative approach for analyzing venture capital in-
volvement in 2007. The authors argue for the need of another measurement to better capture the
dynamics of VC-backed IPO underpricing; hence, they introduce a new way to measure returns –
the offer price to intrinsic value ratio. Alas, their model has yet to gain a foothold.

2.1.4 Previous Research on Investment Philosophy
In the 1980s and 1990s, returns for private equity investors were heavily dependent on the private
equity firm’s financial engineering skills. However, as credit is neither as cheap nor as accessible as
during the years leading up to the Great Recession, the entire industry is undergoing a radical
change. Limited partners (“LPs”) nowadays require their General Partners (“GPs”) to add value in
more sophisticated and sustainable ways beyond that of financial engineering techniques. The shift
in private equity value creation is illustrated in Figure 1 below (Brigl, Herrera, Meerkatt, Liechten-
stein, Prats, and Rose, 2008).

                                    8
Figure 1 – Breakdown of Value Creation in Private Equity

According to Brigl, Herrera, Meerkatt, Liechtenstein, Prats and Rose (2008), 46% of gross IRR for
private equity firms is generated through sales growth, 10% through EBIT margin improvements,
21% through EBIT multiple expansion, and 23% through net debt and corresponding leverage
effects. In a private equity survey conducted in 2008, 77% of the respondents named “operational
value improvement” as the single most crucial value creation driver for the coming five years. Also,
54% of the respondents believed that “operational value improvement” had become increasingly
more important over the last five years.

As the private equity industry experiences a radical shift in how value is created for LPs, one would
expect to see an increasingly larger share of private equity-related academia to be focused on which
role an investment manager’s investment philosophy plays in the value creation process. Unfortu-
nately, we do not identify any previous literature which explicitly focuses on how underpricing
levels differ between operationally and financially focused private equity firms. However, in closely
related fields, we identify relevant literature. In a paper from 2009, Hemptinne and Hoflack (2009)
identify that an increasing number of private equity firms have put in-house operations teams or
operating partners, rather than external advisors and industry experts, in place. Hemptinne and
Hoflack (2009) also find that utilizing operating partners as “firefighters” may result in better-per-
forming portfolio companies. However, the authors note that it does not necessarily create a sus-
tainable operational value in the long-term. Seemingly, our perspective is novel.

                                    9
2.2 Summary and Hypotheses
Much research has indeed been dedicated to finding explanations for underpricing in IPOs, and
the scope has often been wide. A large majority of the work has been conducted using US data,
which means that there are topics in Europe not covered by existing research. Furthermore, au-
thors (including Mogilevsky and Murgulov) have not tested specifically for how underpricing dif-
fers between non-sponsored and VC-backed offerings. Some papers have argued that differences
between the two categories are not major, others have dedicated focus to PE-backed companies
and were thus not required to further test differences between the VC and non-sponsored catego-
ries, and still more have studied VC-backed firms in exclusion. We believe there is a clear distinction
between underpricing levels not only when comparing non-sponsored IPOs with sponsored IPOs,
but also when contrasting between sub segments of private financing – primarily, private equity
and venture capital. While more niched sub segments may prove interesting to study, the predica-
ment of proving eventual differences on a statistically significant level is likely to be hard to over-
come. Based on the reasoning above, we gather there is an opportunity to make a relevant contri-
bution to existing literature by focusing on non-covered areas of research. In this paper, we there-
fore initially seek to prove that PE-backed firms exhibit lower levels of underpricing than IPO
firms that are backed by other owner types. Furthermore, we provide reasoning regarding differ-
ences in the size and age between our three categories and also further compare European under-
pricing levels in VC-backed IPOs with the two other categories, and seek to offer plausible expla-
nations and reflective commentary on why or why not the results differ when comparing them to
US studies. Moreover, this paper aims to shed some light on the effects of changes in market
sentiment. We isolate the market climate effect and specifically study how the presence of hot issue
markets affects underpricing levels across our three firm categories. Lastly, we address the differ-
ences in financial sponsors’ value creation style in an attempt to uncover further reasons to differ-
ences in IPO underpricing. Specifically, we distinguish between operationally focused and finan-
cially focused VC and PE firms.

Looking at PE-backed companies, especially in relation to non-sponsored and VC-backed compa-
nies, it is a fair assumption to make that the private equity firm is more informed than the typical
owner of the issuing firm. This depends on a number of factors. First, private equity firms are to a
greater extent more involved in the managerial aspects of running a firm than their venture capital
counterparts. Second, the degree of financial expertise that private equity firms possess is signifi-
cantly greater than that of typical owners and in most cases also trump that of VC firms. The

                                    10
primary reason for this is that private equity firms repetitively invest in companies, amass experi-
ence and expertise through the management of the companies over a substantial time period, usu-
ally 3-7 years, and then divest each of their investments (Rossetto, 2008). An important method of
exit is the listing of the portfolio company on a stock exchange, which, over time, works to facilitate
tighter connections with underwriters. Also, private equity firms with many professionals who have
experience from leading investment banks naturally have closer affiliation with banks than VC
firms with primarily entrepreneurs and industry experts in their teams. Therefore, in the setting of
initial public offerings, private equity firms are in an especially beneficial position information-wise.

We proceed to formulate a hypothesis relating to the degree of underpricing in IPOs of private
equity-backed companies. As it is hard to argue that private equity-backed issuers are not going to
be more informed than “ordinary” issuers and venture capital-backed issuers (Wright and Robbie,
1998), we advance a case in which the informational advantage of the issuing private equity firm is,
compared to other issuers, strengthened. Academics that argue that underpricing is an outcome of
high quality issuers signaling their quality to the markets would anticipate that the more informed
the issuer is, the more it will use underpricing as a method to signal the high quality of the issue.
Hence, we would expect to see higher levels of underpricing in IPO firms backed by private equity
investors (Allen and Faulhaber, 1989). The other breed of academics argue that the investment
bank’s informational advantage and incentives leads to underpricing would anticipate a lower level
of underpricing in private equity-backed IPOs as the informational advantage is reduced or even
eliminated, and incentives more aligned between the investment bank and the issuer (Baron, 1982).
Hence, the approach taken in regards to the asymmetry problem dictates the likely effect on the
actual underpricing. As we shift the informational advantage from the lead underwriter (the invest-
ment bank) to the client, which is in line with the latter approach to information asymmetry, we
arrive in the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis (1): The level of underpricing in private equity backed IPOs is significantly lower than that of venture
capital-backed and non-sponsored IPOs.

There are, however, a number of other factors that influence the level of information asymmetry
in an IPO. Larger firms commonly experience a greater degree of public scrutiny, analyst coverage
and media coverage than smaller firms, which could be subject to the “neglected firm effect” re-
sulting in a relatively lower level of information asymmetry for larger firms in relation to smaller
firms. Hence, the size of the firm may serve as a representation for the ex-ante uncertainty of an

                                    11
IPO (Beatty and Ritter, 1986). As private equity firms tend to acquire more mature and established
companies, we anticipate that PE-backed companies are larger (measured by total assets) at the
time of the IPO than VC-backed and non-sponsored firms. Also, we expect VC-backed firms to
be, on average, smaller than the other subgroups. Could this be verified, it would be in line with
previous research.

Applying similar reasoning regarding firm age, we would naturally expect more information to be
publicly available for older firms than for younger firms. Previous IPO literature has indeed indi-
cated that a company’s age plays an important role in reducing the level of information asymmetry
and hence also the degree of underpricing (Ritter, 1984; Muscarella and Vetsuypens, 1989; Meg-
ginson and Weiss, 1991). We believe this to be true also with our dataset.

Previous literature offers a number of perspectives on why VC-backed firms should showcase
higher, or lower, underpricing levels. While this has changed over time and more recent studies
show that VC-backed IPOs are underpriced to a greater extent than that of other types of firms
(Lee and Wahal, 2004; Abraham and Joseph, 2015), it is not clear whether this holds true within
the European capital markets, or if the certification theory (Megginson and Weiss, 1991) and timing
theory (Lerner, 1995) instead prevails. It is clear, however, that venture capital firms in general have
less financial expertise than their private equity counterparts, but a minority of venture capital pro-
fessionals share similar backgrounds as private equity professionals. In our sample, the average
percentage of top management with financial backgrounds is 65.7% for our PE sample, while that
number amounts to 44.2% for our VC sample. That statistic is certainly lower, on average, for non-
sponsored firms, and thus merits higher underpricing levels for non-sponsored IPOs. The highly
important aspect of investment professionals’ experience and backgrounds lets us arrive at our
second hypothesis:

Hypothesis (2): Venture capital-backed IPOs exhibit a lower level of underpricing than that of non-sponsored IPOs,
but a significantly higher level of underpricing than that of PE-backed IPOs.

In their summary of previous research within the VC-backed IPO underpricing area, Abraham and
Joseph (2015) speak of venture capitalists’ preference for exiting via an IPO. In the US, this led to
a higher level of underpricing in VC-backed IPOs. Rossetto (2008), Ibbotson and Jaffe (1975) and
Ritter (1984) all showcased similar evidence, but found this phenomenon to be especially true in
periods of high IPO activity. As European capital markets have grown more and more similar to

                                    12
their American counterparts in terms of venture capital activity, we hypothesize this phenomenon
to prevail in Europe as well, allowing us to formulate our third hypothesis:

Hypothesis (3): In “hot issue markets”, venture capital-backed companies conducting an IPO tend to experience a
higher level of underpricing than both private equity-backed and non-sponsored firms.

We believe that dividing investment firms (PE/VC) into two groups based on their overarching
focus and investment philosophy could contribute to explaining differences in underpricing. Spe-
cifically, we distinguish between operationally focused and financially focused investment firms,
regardless of their preferred investment stage. As financially focused firms can be assumed to have
a deeper financial expertise than their operationally focused counterparts, we believe that these
firms will be able to reduce the information advantage that investment banks in general have over
their IPO clients. If true, portfolio companies with a financially focused sponsor owner exiting via
an IPO should experience a lower level of underpricing compared with their operationally focused
counterparts. Hence, our fourth, and perhaps most important, hypothesis is:

Hypothesis (4): Sponsor-backed companies with a financially focused owner exiting via an IPO will experience a
lower level of underpricing than their operationally focused counterparts.

3 Model of IPO Underpricing
In this section we begin with introducing the original model used in previous literature to measure
the level of underpricing in an equity offering. We subsequently introduce our additions to the
original model and provide an explanation for our extended underpricing model. Finally, we look
at the relative effects of our control variables on the adjusted initial returns.

3.1 The Original Model
We employ an extended version of the original model to better account for discrepancies in offer-
ing and firm characteristics. In the original model, the first day stock returns for subscribing inves-
tors are used as a proxy for IPO underpricing, yielding the following equation:

                                                                                    𝑃𝑖,1−𝑃𝑖,0
                                          𝑈𝑃𝑖 =         ,                                       (1)
                                                                                                  𝑃𝑖,0

where 𝑃𝑖,1 is the closing price on the first day of trading in the aftermarket and 𝑃𝑖,0 is the offer
price collected manually from IPO prospectuses and admission documents.

                                    13
3.2 Additions to the Original Model
In order to properly account for the effects of venture capital or private equity backing in a public

                                                                                         1
listing, we deem it necessary to control for a range of variables , yielding an extended OLS regres-
sion equation estimated as:

𝑈𝑃1 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1 𝑃𝐸 + 𝛼2 𝑉𝐶 + 𝛼3 𝐿𝑁_𝐴𝐺𝐸 + 𝛼4 𝐿𝑁_𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐸𝑇𝑆 + 𝛼5 𝐿𝑁_𝑃𝑅𝑂𝐶𝐸𝐸𝐷𝑆 +
                                                                                                 (2)
𝛼6 𝑀𝐾𝑇_𝑆𝐻𝐴𝑅𝐸 + 𝛼7 𝑅𝑂𝐴 + 𝛼8 𝑅𝐸𝑇𝐴𝐼𝑁𝐸𝐷 + 𝛼9 𝐴𝐼𝑀 + 𝛼10 𝑀𝐴𝐼𝑁_𝑀𝐴𝑅𝐾𝐸𝑇 +

                                                  𝑏
𝛼11 𝑂𝑊𝑁𝐸𝑅_𝐹𝑂𝐶𝑈𝑆 + 𝑒𝑖

3.3 Relative Effect of Control Variables
In line with Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012), we construct an additional regression model to ac-
count for the combined relative effects of the control variables on the adjusted initial returns, which
are calculated as in Habib and Ljungqvist (2001). The initial returns equation is thus adjusted to
reflect the true loss of wealth to the issuer by accounting for the post-IPO dilution of ownership,
yielding the following equation:

                                                            𝑃𝑖,1−𝑃𝑖,0
𝑈𝑃𝐴𝐷𝐽1 = (1 − %𝑅𝐸𝑇𝐴𝐼𝑁𝐸𝐷) ∗                                                                 (3)
                                                                        𝑃𝑖,0

where 𝑈𝑃𝐴𝐷𝐽1 is defined as the adjusted initial return.

Habib and Ljungqvist argue that using the adjusted initial return metric more accurately captures
the effects from what is actually “left on the table” by the issuer in the IPO, and thus, the retained
ownership stake is of the utmost importance in this approximation. The OLS regression for ad-
justed initial returns becomes the following:

𝑈𝑃𝐴𝐷𝐽1 = 𝛼0 + 𝛼1𝑃𝐸 + 𝛼2𝑉𝐶 + 𝛼3𝐿𝑁𝐴𝐺𝐸 + 𝛼4𝐿𝑁𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐸𝑇𝑆 + 𝛼5𝐿𝑁𝑃𝑅𝑂𝐶𝐸𝐸𝐷𝑆 +
                                                                                                     (4)
                                                                                                                                                                      𝑏
      𝛼6𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑆𝐻𝐴𝑅𝐸 + 𝛼7𝑅𝑂𝐴 + 𝛼8𝐴𝐼𝑀 + 𝛼9𝑀𝐴𝐼𝑁_𝑀𝐴𝑅𝐾𝐸𝑇 + 𝛼10𝑂𝑊𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐹𝑂𝐶𝑈𝑆 + 𝑒𝑖

4 Data
Our sample of IPOs on the LSE is collected from LSE’s website. In order to capture periods of
both high and low IPO market activity, and hence also avoid any bias towards either period, we

1 Please see section 5 − Variable Description for more information

                                    14
include floatations between 2006 and 2015. From this dataset, we manually classify listings as PE-
backed, VC-backed or non-sponsored. If a company has been listed previously and subsequently
delisted before relisting (as in the case of secondary buyouts), we exclude this observation from
our dataset. The reason is that more information will be available for this company in relation to
companies going public for the first time, given the filing requirements of a public company, which
will reduce the information asymmetry between the issuer and the market and might skew the
dataset. Companies are only classified as PE-backed or VC-backed if the company was backed at
the time of the listing. We have also excluded all types of REITs, equity investment instruments,
investment companies, investment entities, non-equity investment instruments, all types of invest-
ment trusts and other types of special purpose acquisition vehicles (SPACs) for comparability rea-
sons. All listings that are not classified as IPOs by the LSE (i.e. seasoned equity offerings, re-listings
on other stock exchanges etc.) are also excluded from our sample.

The initial listing return data is collected from Yahoo! Finance, which covers the vast majority of
publicly traded stocks on all of the world’s stock exchanges. The daily Yahoo! Finance data covers
daily opening and closing prices as well as individual tickers. The data also contains daily closing
prices, adjusted for stock splits and dividend payments where any dividend payment is assumed to
be re-invested on the ex-distribution date.

We collect basic information about each IPO firm, such as year of incorporation, from each com-
pany’s webpage. From the IPO prospectus/admission document, we collect data regarding the
company’s pre-IPO size (measured as total assets), pre-IPO profitability (defined as last fiscal year’s
pre-IPO Earnings before Interest and Taxes (EBIT) over the company’s average total asset base
during the last fiscal year prior to the IPO, i.e. ROA calculated with an average asset base), pre-
IPO shareholders’ post-IPO ownership, total proceeds (measured using the sum of both primary
and secondary issues) as well as which underwriter(s) managed the offering.

In order to classify a PE or VC firm as financially or operationally focused we use senior management’s
previous assignments and jobs as a proxy for the corporate culture and primary value creation
strategy. If a majority of the senior management comes from a finance oriented background, we
label that PE or VC firm as financially focused, and vice versa. We obtain this data from the com-
pany’s team biographies available at each company’s webpage, and complement this information
with press releases and articles about firm executives. Since it is not possible to gather such detailed

                                    15
information about top management going back in time, we use the current constellation of profes-
sionals as a proxy also when looking at IPOs that occurred back to 2006. This is reasonable since
one could credibly assume that an investment firm’s focus has not radically changed going back
just a few years. Supportive of this line of thought is the fact that firms’ funds often have a lifespan
of 10 years, or more, which matches our sample. This is important because a firm’s value creation
strategy is specified in the contract between LPs and GPs at the time of capital commitment, and
this contract does not warrant the execution of strategies outside of the set boundaries.

Our final dataset, which combines the LSE data, Yahoo! Finance data, basic company information
from each company’s website and the data gathered from the prospectus/admission document,
includes a total of 213 IPOs during the time period stretching from November 2006 to December
2015. Of the 213 total observations, 50 are classified as PE-backed, 50 as VC-backed and 113 as
non-sponsored. Our final dataset represents approximately 4% of our initial dataset from LSE
containing 5,292 issues.

4.1 Data Criticism
Although we consider our sample to be both sufficiently comprehensive and exhaustive in order
for us to test our hypotheses in a proper way, we are aware of the potential lacunas in our dataset.
This section features a discussion where we outline the main points of potential criticism.

First, one might consider our sample set to be inconclusive. Since our initial dataset consisted of
5,292 issues and our final dataset contains 213 issues, our sample size is definitely one point of
criticism. Mainly, this relates to the process of data collection. Notable is that, out of our initial
5,292 issues, 2,126 issues were classified by the London Stock Exchange as “Not IPO”, meaning
they were either re-admissions, re-listings from other stock exchanges or seasoned equity offerings
(SEOs). Of the remaining 3,166 observations, 786 IPO firms are different types of investment
trusts (Real Estate Investment Trusts, Venture Capital Investment Trusts etc.), Investment Com-
panies, Investment Entities, non-equity investment instruments and equity investment instruments
that went public in order to raise money for their future operations. Hence, they could not be
considered operational at the point of time of the IPO and have thus been excluded. Furthermore,
we excluded all other stock exchanges (e.g. the Specialist Fund Market (SFM) and the Professional
Securities Market (PSM)) on the London Stock Exchange except the AIM, UK Main Market and
the International Main Market, lowering our total number of observations by a further 50 obser-
vations. Of the remaining sample of 2,330 IPOs, we excluded all IPOs where we were not able to

                                    16
obtain the necessary information about the company and/or the offering. We rely only on first-
hand information.

Second, there is a diminutive risk that some PE-backed IPOs have been erroneously classified as
VC-backed, and vice versa. When collecting our data and classifying our observations as PE-
backed, VC-backed or non-sponsored, we excluded every observation where we experienced the
slightest uncertainty with regards to the ownership structure pre-IPO. We mitigated this potential
issue by only classifying IPOs from the first-hand information found in the prospectuses, admis-
sion documents or the PE/VC firms’ website, as we deemed these to be the most credible sources.
Some may also argue that the distinction between venture capital and private equity is vague. How-
ever, we only include PE-backed IPOs in which the PE firm held a controlling stake pre-IPO and
as VC firms very seldom hold controlling stakes, this potential concern is mitigated.

Another point of criticism regarding our data is whether our final sample set is representative of
the entire population. This concern arises primarily from the fact that our final sample constitutes
roughly 4% of our initial population. Hence, it might be the case that our entire sample is skewed
in either direction. However, as our results are statistically significant at conventional alpha levels
and are in line with previous research, we acknowledge support for stating that our sample is in
fact not skewed.

4.2 Variable Description
In this section we define the key variables used in our empirical tests and provide a brief initial
hypothesis of each variable’s effect on our regression model.

Private Equity – “PE”
PE is a dichotomous variable where unity means that the IPO was backed by a private equity firm
and zero means it was not. Previous research by Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012) suggest that PE-
backing should decrease the level of underpricing, at least in the US market where their research
was conducted. We believe that a negative relationship should exist between this variable and un-
derpricing also in Europe.

Venture Capital – “VC”
VC is a dichotomous variable where unity means that the IPO was backed by a venture capital firm
and zero means it was not. Previous research by Megginson and Weiss (1991) suggests that VC-

                                    17
backing should decrease the level of underpricing, while a more recent study by Lee and Wahal
(2004) suggests the contrary. We hypothesize that a negative relationship between this variable and
underpricing should exist, but should be less pronounced than the expected negative relationship
displayed by the PE variable.

The Age of the Issuing Firm – “LN_AGE”
This variable is the natural logarithm of 1 + the age of the issuing firm (in years) and is used to
control for the level of information asymmetry in the offering. For older, more established firms,
we expect more information to be available which should reduce the level of information asym-
metry and subsequently the underpricing in the issue. This hypothesis was confirmed in a study by
Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1989) in which the authors showed that the older the firm, the lower
the initial listing return. This variable has also been used for control purposes in a number of stud-
ies, including Ritter (1984), Megginson and Weiss (1991), and Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012).
We hypothesize that PE-backed firms on average are older and more established than their VC-
backed and non-sponsored counterparties. Furthermore, VC-backed firms should be smaller than
the two other sub groups.

The Size of the Issuing Firm – “LN_ASSETS”
This variable is the natural logarithm of the GBP value of pre-IPO total assets for the IPO firm.
Beatty and Ritter (1986) find that the level of underpricing decreases with a decreased level of
information asymmetry. We expect more information to be publicly available the larger the firm is
and hence we use the firm’s size, measured by total assets, as a proxy for ex-ante uncertainty.

The Size of the Offering – “LN_PROCEEDS”
This variable is the natural logarithm of the GBP value of the total proceeds raised from the offer-
ing (including both primary and secondary offerings). Beatty and Ritter (1986) argue that the
smaller the offering is, the more speculative it is and thus initial returns should be higher. Hence,
we hypothesize the coefficient of LN_PROCEEDS to be negative.

The Issuing Firm’s Profitability – “ROA”
Return on assets (ROA) is used as a measure of firm performance and profitability pre-IPO. While
other metrics could be used, a measure of profitability attributable to both debt and equity investors
has been so widely used by previous studies that it could be said to have become the standard
within IPO underpricing research. We define the variable as Earnings before Interest and Taxes

                                    18
(EBIT) over total assets, calculated using the average asset base. For firms with high profitability,
we expect reduced information asymmetry as we expect greater confidence in high-performing
firms. Hence, we believe that better performing firms will have lower levels of underpricing which
results in a negative coefficient for this variable.

Underwriter Reputation – “MKT_SHARE”
MKT_SHARE is the lead underwriter’s market share in the year of the IPO and serves as a proxy
for the underwriter’s reputation. As our data only contains European samples, we use the under-
writers’ market share in the EMEA region in the year of the IPO. If the issue was led by a syndicate
of multiple joint global coordinators (JCGs), we use the weighted average market share. Previous
research from Carter and Manaster (1990) as well as Booth and Smith (1986) document that repu-
table underwriters provide a certification of the issue quality and that higher quality underwriters
reduce the level of underpricing. Hence, we hypothesize that there should be a negative coefficient
between this variable and the initial listing returns.

Insider Retention – “RETAINED”
This variable measures the percentage of total shares held in the firm post-IPO by the firm’s pre-
IPO shareholders. We expect to see a negative relationship between the number of shares offered
in the issue and the level of underpricing (i.e. the more shares that are offered, the lower the level
of underpricing). We expect this to be the case as the firm’s pre-IPO owners stand to lose more
from underpricing (as they are selling their shares at a discount) and thus should put in more effort
as they sell more in order to reduce the level of underpricing as a means of maximizing their own
return on investment (Habib and Ljungqvist, 2001).

Stock Exchange Differences – “AIM”
AIM is a dichotomous variable where unity represents a listing on the AIM. We expect smaller,
younger, technology-related firms and hence higher risk firms to list on the AIM. Given these firm
characteristics, we expect a higher level of information asymmetry for these IPOs and a positive
coefficient in relation to underpricing. Since firms that are sponsored by venture capitalists are
generally smaller than other firms, a relatively large number of VC-backed firms in our sample have
listed on the AIM.

                                    19
Stock Exchange Differences – “MAIN_MARKET”
MAIN_MARKET is a dichotomous variable where unity represents a listing on the International
Main Market or the UK Main Market. We expect larger, older and more established firms to list
on the Main Market stock exchanges, and hence we predict a lower level of information asymmetry
and subsequently lower first day returns for these IPO firms. The variable is used to control for
different levels of underpricing across different stock exchanges.

Focus of the Principal Owner – “OWNER_FOCUS”
The variable is included in order to account for the different levels of financial expertise when
considering investment professionals’ backgrounds. It is a dichotomous variable and unity repre-
sents that the firm is deemed to be financially focused, and operationally focused if the contrary is
true. We hypothesize that IPO companies with a financially focused PE/VC owner should expe-
rience a lower level of underpricing than IPO companies with an operationally focused PE/VC
owner.

5 Methodology
This section is dedicated to describing the framework used in this study’s empirical tests.

5.1 First-day Returns
While the measurement of initial returns has varied across prior studies, this paper employs a
straight forward calculation. Previously, returns calculations have varied across i) post-IPO time
measurement periods, ii) aftermarket stock price quotes and iii) whether or not authors have ad-
justed the initial return for market movements.

First, we use the first day closing price instead of any other time period as the impact of any new
information reaching the market would impact returns in ways that would be difficult to control
for. This conforms to recent trends in finance literature; earlier studies more often used longer time
periods for returns calculations (Schöber, 2008).

Second, there is the question of which aftermarket stock price quote to use. In order to provide a
relevant contribution to existing literature, and to generate comparable results, it is paramount that
our measurement method is aligned with that of other studies. Instead of using the closing bid
price (Ritter, 1984; Beatty & Ritter, 1986), we resort to the first day closing price, which resonates
with studies made by Lowry & Schwert (2002), Loughran & Ritter (2004), and Otchere et al. (2013).

                                    20
Third, we have chosen not to adjust initial returns for market movements, which according to
Beatty and Ritter (1986) is reasonable since the market movements are very small compared to
average initial returns. This methodology is supported by Schöber (2008). The calculation of initial,
first-day, returns thus becomes the following:

                                                          𝑃𝑖,1 − 𝑃𝑖,0
                                             𝑅𝑖 =                                                     (5)
                                                                           𝑃𝑖,0

For the testing of differences in underpricing levels between our three sub-samples (see hypotheses
1-4), we create four subgroups (g) consisting of i) all IPO samples, ii) PE-backed IPOs, iii) VC-
backed IPOs and iv) non-sponsored IPOs. Moreover, we use three different time periods (a); the
first stretches across our entire sample from 2006-2015, the second counts samples belonging to
periods of hot issue markets (high IPO market activity), and the third accounts for samples be-
longing to periods of low or medium IPO market activity. For our last test, whether IPO firms
backed by a financially focused sponsor experience lower levels of underpricing than those backed
by an operationally focused sponsor, we divide our sample into six subgroups consisting of: i) all
IPOs backed by a financially focused sponsor, ii) all IPOs backed by an operationally focused
sponsor (non-sponsored IPOs assumed to be operationally focused), iii) PE-backed IPOs backed
by a financially focused sponsor, iv) PE-backed IPOs backed by an operationally focused sponsor,
v) VC-backed IPOs backed by a financially focused sponsor, and vi) VC-backed IPOs backed by
an operationally focused sponsor. Using an equal weighting, we calculate the average first day re-
turns for each group as follows:

                                                                                                 𝑛𝑔,𝑎
                                       𝑒𝑤     1
                                        𝑅𝑔,𝑎 =    ∑ 𝑅𝑖                                    (6)
                                                                         𝑛𝑔,𝑎
                                                                   𝑖=1

where 𝑛𝑔,𝑎 is the number of initial public offerings in each sample group during a given period of

                         𝑒𝑤
market activity and 𝑅𝑔,𝑎 is the equal weighted first-day return for group g in time period a.

Adding to the widespread measure of first day returns on an equal-weighted basis, we proceed to
also plot the value-weighted first day returns. This allows the reader to establish a perception of
how varying sizes in our IPO samples affect average returns across the subgroups. Weights are
assigned to each offering based on the first day opening market capitalization as a percentage of

                                    21
the total opening market capitalization for the matching subgroup. The value-weighted averages

                                                 𝑣𝑤
for group g in time period a, 𝑅𝑔,𝑎, are calculated as follows:

                                                                              𝑛𝑔,𝑎
                                                                                                               𝑔,𝑎
                                                 𝑣𝑤            𝑃𝑖,1            𝑤𝑖
                                  𝑅𝑔,𝑎 = ∑ (    − 1) ∗                                    (7)
                                                                       𝑃𝑖,0             𝑛𝑔,𝑎
                                                     𝑖=1

                                                      𝑔,𝑎        𝑚𝑐𝑖,0
                                           𝑤𝑖    = 𝑛𝑔,𝑎                                             (8)
                                               ∑ 𝑖=1 𝑚𝑐𝑖,0

          g,a
Where wi   is the weighting for observation 𝑖 in group 𝑔 in time period 𝑎, and mci,0 is company
𝑖’s market capitalization at market opening on day 0.

5.2 Market Period Definition
According to Jaffe (1975) and Ritter (1984), “hot issue markets” are characterized by an increased
level of underpricing and a clustering of firms going public in the same time period. Rossetto (2008)
documented that the level of underpricing in VC-backed IPOs depends on whether the issue mar-
ket could be characterized as “hot” or not. In hot issue markets, VC-backed IPOs experience a
higher level of underpricing than non-sponsored firms, but on the contrary, the level of underpric-
ing in VC-backed firms in Rossetto’s study was significantly lower than non-sponsored firms with-
out the presence of a hot issue market.

We apply the approach suggested by Schöber (2008) and proceed to classify the IPO activity in any
given year, using the total sample of 213 IPOs on the London Stock Exchange, as high (low) if the

                                                                                                                                                                th
total number of IPOs in that year in Europe is above the 75th percentile value (below the 25
percentile value) of the ten years included in our sample (2006-2015). Listings in other years were
classified as medium IPO activity. Applying this methodology, we define the IPO activity in years
2009, 2011 and 2012 as low; 2008, 2010, 2013 and 2015 as medium; and 2006, 2007 and 2014 as
high.

5.3 Test Statistics
A number of tests are employed in order to statistically verify our results, and in extension, our
hypotheses. Variables are tested in unpaired, unmatched t-tests and by running a linear regression
model in order to establish the coefficients, p-values and contributions of each variable in our
underpricing regression models.

                                    22
The descriptive statistics reward the reader with an introduction to our dataset, IPO statistics and
an insight into the most IPO-intense industries. The first day returns section firmly establishes the
phenomenon of underpricing in IPOs across the three subgroups: PE-backed firms, VC-backed
firms and non-sponsored firms. We pair each subgroup with each distinct period of IPO activity
(high period and medium/low period) and also provide average first day returns on a value-
weighted basis. As for more detailed information on the complete set of our variables, table 6
provides an overview that gives us several indications of potential differences in firm characteristics
between the three groups.

In order to corroborate the results indicated in table 6, we proceed to employ a two-sided t-test to
test whether the differences in average first day returns between the subgroups are significantly
different from zero. We match each subgroup with each of the other subgroups, creating three
pairs. All variables in the main regression model are tested, apart from the MAIN_MARKET var-
iable which is excluded in order to avoid any collinearity with the AIM variable. These test se-
quences allow us to establish a substantiated claim with regards to the fact that average underpricing
levels for our subgroups are, as it seems, significantly different from each other.

Further, in table 8, we show the Pearson bivariate correlation coefficients between all variables.
This is done in order to clearly display the relationships between our regression variables, and
capacitates us to draw early conclusions about which variables may display collinearity. It also pro-
vides indications that facilitate an augmented discussion regarding the relationship between certain
firm details and corresponding offering characteristics.

The analysis conducted above may be seen as the prologue to what is naturally the most important
part of this study: our regressions. We essentially run six separate regressions, three regressions for
each of the two different dependent variables. First, a linear ordinary least squares (OLS) regression
is completed. All explanatory variables are included, except for MAIN_MARKET (reasoning pro-
vided above), and the dependent variable is first set to the initial return using the original equation,

          𝑃𝑖,1−𝑃𝑖,0
𝑅𝑖 =        . Second, we eliminate outliers in each of our variables as a means of robustness.
               𝑃𝑖,0
While it decreases our sample size, it reduces the tendency of our dataset to become skewed to-
wards one way or the other, and significantly increases the model’s explanatory value. Third, the
robust model is corrected by omitting the LN_ASSETS variable, which displays high collinearity
with the LN_PROCEEDS variable.

                                    23
We run a similar OLS regression with the same explanatory variables a second time, but now use

                                                                    𝑃𝑖,1−𝑃𝑖,0
the adjusted initial return metric, 𝑅𝑖 =         ∗ (1 − 𝑅𝐸𝑇𝐴𝐼𝑁𝐸𝐷), as a proxy for underpricing.
                                                                                𝑃𝑖,0
The adjustment for retained ownership helps us better understand the wealth loss to the issuer, so
we re-do the above analysis with this, more nuanced, dependent variable. Similar to the second
regression described in the paragraph above, we run the linear regression with eliminated outliers,
still using the adjusted initial return metric as a proxy for IPO underpricing. The regression model
is run a third time with the LN_ASSETS variable omitted to avoid collinearity.

Results from the regression models enable us to bring forward evidence that can verify our first
and second hypothesis, as well as drawing other interesting conclusions. This means we can estab-
lish an informed view on underpricing in PE-backed and VC-backed IPOs relative to each other
as well as non-sponsored IPOs.

Hypothesis 3, which aims to unravel the connection between highly active IPO markets and an
increased underpricing in venture capital-backed IPOs, is investigated by running t-tests that test
the differences in average first day returns between high and medium/low periods of IPO activity
for each subgroup.

The fourth and final hypothesis seeks to establish a proven connection between the focus of
PE/VC firms’ investment philosophy and underpricing levels. We run t-tests to see whether there
is a significant difference in means for the PE and VC subgroups depending on owner focus. In-
vestment philosophy is divided into two categories: operationally focused and financially focused
owners. Results indicate whether there is a statistically significant difference in means between
operationally and financially focused owners for PE and VC firms in our sample, however not for
the total sample.

                                    24
6 Results and Analysis
6.1 Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 – Annual Distribution of IPOs by Number of IPOs and Average Total Assets
                         Total Average Total Assets (GBPm)
 Year   Total PE VC NS Total PE VC NS
  2006 2 2 0 0 57 57 NA NA
  2007 2 2 0 0 249 249 NA NA
  2008 2 0 0 2 1,010 NA NA 1,010
  2009 2 0 2 0 1 NA 1 NA
  2010 10 0 5 5 100 NA 11 189
  2011 6 0 3 3 9,176 NA 7 18,346
  2012 12 0 8 4 1,173 NA 8 3,502
  2013 46 6 6 34 407 1,755 5 241
  2014 83 21 18 44 310 1,011 19 94
  2015 48 19 8 21 1,178 1,009 4 1,779
 Total 213 50 50 113 816 1,013 11 1,077

The total IPO sample of 213 IPOs constitutes 50 private equity-backed (PE), 50 venture capital-backed (VC) and 113
non-sponsored IPOs listings on the London Stock Exchange between 2006 and 2015. Average total assets is calculated
using the average asset base for the last fiscal year prior to the IPO.

Non-sponsored companies (GBP 1,077m) pursuing an IPO are, on average, larger than their PE
(GBP 1,013m) and VC (GBP 11m) counterparts, measured in terms of total assets prior to the
IPO. The disproportionately high value of average total assets in 2011 for the subgroup NS is
attributable to the IPO of Glencore, one of the world’s largest commodity trading and mining
companies, which had an average total asset base of GBP 51,112m at the time of the IPO.

                                    25
Table 2 – Percent of IPOs by Activity Period and Subgroup
          IPO     IPO Sample Distribution (%) Average Total Assets (GBPm)
      Activity  Total PE VC NS Total PE VC NS
         High 41 50 36 39 302 874 19 94
  Medium/low 59 50 64 69 1,170 1,188 6 1,704
          Total 100 100 100 100 816 1,031 11 1,077

Companies are further divided into subgroups by IPO activity and the distribution of IPOs in percent. IPO activity

periods are calculated as follows: the top quartile of the 10 years (defined as >75th percentile) is categorized as “high”,

the bottom quartile (defined as <25th percentile) is categorized as “low”) and the two midmost quartiles are defined as

“medium”. The high (medium/low) activity period includes the following years: 2006, 2007 and 2014 (2008-2013,
2015).

As illustrated in table 2 above, a PE-backed IPO is more likely to occur in a high activity IPO
period than its NS and VC-backed counterparts. This is in line with what Schöber (2008) docu-
mented on the US market, but contradicts what Bergström et al. (2006) found to be true on the
Paris Stock Exchange and London Stock Exchange, implying that PE-backed IPOs have become
relatively more common on the London Stock Exchange since Bergström et al. performed their
study. In high IPO activity periods, IPO firms are generally smaller, using average total assets prior
to the IPO as a proxy for firm size, than firms conducting IPOs in the medium/low periods. This
is true also for PE-backed and NS IPOs, however to a greater extent for the latter. For the NS
IPOs, this is largely attributable to the Glencore IPO in 2011 (a year characterized with me-
dium/low activity). On the contrary, VC-backed firms are significantly larger in high IPO market
activity periods (GBP 19m) than in medium/low activity periods (GBP 6m).

 Table 3 – Number of IPOs per Stock Exchange and Subgroup
                                           Number of IPOs
          Stock Exchange     Total PE VC NS
                     AIM 134 8 48 78
 International Main Market 6 1 1 4
          UK Main Market 73 41 1 31
                      Total 213 50 50 113

The table above illustrates the distribution of IPOs across different stock exchanges and subgroups in our sample.

The table above illustrates the sample distribution per stock exchange and subgroup. As illustrated,
the AIM stock exchange has experienced the highest number of flotations (134) followed by the

                                    26
UK Main Market (73) and the International Main Market (6). For VC-backed listings, the AIM
accounts for a grand total of 96% of all listings. For non-sponsored listings, the AIM also accounts
for the vast majority of total listings (69%). However, for PE-backed IPOs, the UK Main Market
has been the most popular exchange, accounting for 82% of all listings. As larger companies gen-
erally list on the Main Market stock exchange rather than on smaller exchanges such as the AIM,
this finding is in line with our expectations that PE firms in general are larger than their VC and
NS counterparts.

Table 4 – Most Common Sector by Stock Exchange and Subgroup
                                           Number of IPOs
          Stock Exchange     Total PE VC NS

                                 Software & IT      Travel &      Software & IT   Software & IT
                   AIM
                                       Services          Leisure          Services          Services

                                                   General
 International Main Market NA               Media NA
                                                             Retailers

                                 Commercial       Travel &         General
           UK Main Market                                             Oil & Gas
                                      Services          Leisure          Retailers

                              Software & IT     Travel &     Software & IT  Software & IT
                      Total
                                   Services         Leisure         Services        Services
The table above illustrates the most common sector by stock exchange and subgroup. Industry classifications are
derived from the London Stock Exchange.

For PE-backed IPOs, the most common sector across all stock exchanges is Travel & Leisure.
Looking at the most common sector for PE-backed IPOs, we find that the list is crowded by
sectors within the consumer/retail space, which does not come as a surprise as this industry has
long been one of the most PE-crowded (PwC, 2013). For VC-backed IPOs, which are concentrated
on the AIM exchange, the most common sector is Software & IT Services. As venture capital firms
historically have employed a technology-oriented focus, this finding is in line with our expectations.

                                    27
6.2 First Day Returns
Table 5 – First day returns for each Subgroup and IPO Activity Period

                             Total PE VC NS
 Average                            10.95*** 3.91*** 9.40*** 14.76***
 (%, equal-weighted)
 Average                             6.52*** 11.63*** 18.53** 13.11***
 (%, value-weighted)
 High period average               10.37*** 1.96 13.98*** 13.68***
 (%, equal-weighted)
 Medium/low period average       11.45*** 6.31*** 6.86*** 15.45***
  (%, equal-weighted)
 Total Observations 213 50 50 113

Value-weights are calculated using market capitalization at the time of the IPO (using open prices). The high period
includes 2006, 2007 and 2014, with the remaining years in our sample being classified as medium/low. The alpha levels
refer to two-sided t-tests in which it is tested whether the means are different from zero, where alpha levels of 10
percent (*), 5 percent (**) and 1 percent (***) are illustrated. When calculating the value-weighted average returns for
PE and VC-backed IPOs, we have excluded extreme outliers, resulting in a sample size of 47 PE-backed IPOs and 45
VC-backed IPOs.

The sample experiences positive first day returns across all subgroups over our period of study
(2006-2015), which is in line with most previous studies, regardless of how the first day return is
calculated. This finding provides evidence that all subgroups experience underpricing, regardless
of the IPO activity period. These findings are also statistically significant at reasonable alpha levels
(disregarding the high period PE average t-test). Using the equal-weighted first day return of our
entire sample, we find that the average first day return is substantially lower than the 15-18% inter-
val that Jenkinson & Ljungqvist (2001) find to be true in the vast majority of industrialized coun-
tries. For this discrepancy, we see two possible explanations. The first one ties into the theories of
asymmetric information and the second to changing market dynamics over time. First, within the
group of countries which could be categorized as “industrialized”, there are large differences with
regards to how well functioning capital markets each country has. UK, which is considered to be
Europe’s financial hub, will most likely have one of the best functioning capital markets within the
group of countries which are categorized as industrialized (and should hence have a lower average
first day return as the asymmetric information gap is tightened). Second, since Jenkinson &
Ljungqvist performed this study in 2001, one could assume that financial markets generally have
undergone a positive development over time as regulation, reporting standards, transparency and
governance have all improved. Hence, one could assume that the average underpricing should be
less today than 15 years ago. Supportive of this argument are two more recent studies performed

                                    28
by Schöber (2008) and Cao and Lerner (2009), whom presented average equal-weighted underpric-
ing levels of 9.91% and 12.88%, respectively.

The first day equal-weighted return for the PE sample of 3.91% could be compared to the findings
of previous studies done on the European markets in which both first day returns are calculated
using a similar approach as the one we apply, and PE-backed IPOs have been categorized based
on similar reasoning as ours. Bergström et al. (2006), Levis (2011) and Sevonius and Hertervig
(2014) all performed studies examining first day returns for PE-backed IPOs in Europe. The stud-
ies found initial first day returns of 9.3%, 9.1% and 6.0%, respectively. One possible explanation
for the differences could be the different time periods studied; Bergström et al.’s sample is from
1992-2005, Levis’ from 1994-2004 and Sevonius and Hertervig’s from 1997-2010. As our results
are most in line with Sevonius and Hertervig’s, it is interesting to note that our sample shares the
largest overlap, which however is still rather small, in terms of time period with these authors’
study. Bergström et al. and Levis use samples from earlier time periods, which could provide a
possible explanation to our different findings.

Bergström et al. (2006) also employ a value-weighted approach when calculating first day returns
for their two subgroups in their sample, namely PE-backed IPOs on the Paris and London Stock
Exchange. Their value-weighted first day returns on the two subgroups amount to 7.24% and
7.32%, respectively, which is rather low in comparison to our value-weighted first day return for
PE-backed IPOs of 11.63%. As our PE-backed observations on average are larger than the VC-
backed and non-sponsored IPOs, PE-backed IPOs with a high level of underpricing are rewarded
a relatively higher weight than their counterparts, providing a possible explanation to our higher
first day returns on a value-weighted basis.

                                    29
Table 6 – Firm and Offering Characteristics per Subgroup

 Variable Statistics PE VC NS
                                Mean                        3.91                 9.40                 14.76
                                 Median                       5.53                  9.75                 10.00
  Initial Return
                                  Std. Dev.                      6.19                  10.25                 16.70
  (percent)
                                 Minimum                    (11.32)                (16.00)                (8.00)
                               Maximum                   18.52                35.71               117.10
                                Mean                        1.78                 4.18                 5.61
                                 Median                       2.08                  2.80                  3.06
  Adjusted Initial Return
                                   Std. Dev.                      3.63                   5.07                   8.25
  (percent)
                                  Minimum                    (10.84)                (5.00)                 (4.04)
                               Maximum                   10.63                18.21                53.67
                                Mean                        31.8                 12.6                 20.4
                                 Median                       23.3                   7.8                   10.0
 Age
                                   Std. Dev.                      34.3                   24.4                   49.9
  (years)
                                 Minimum                     1.4                   0.0                   0.0
                               Maximum                   166.6                174.4                497.3
                                Mean                       354.5                 35.3                 167.1
                                 Median                      223.1                 11.1                  25.2
 IPO Proceeds
                                  Std. Dev.                     412.6                  70.2                  622.5
  (£ millions)
                                 Minimum                    17.5                  0.7                   0.5
                                Maximum                  2,160.0               360.1               6,193.5
                                Mean                       1,031.0                11.0                1,076.7
                                 Median                       411.1                  5.1                   13.5
  Pre-IPO Assets
                                   Std. Dev.                     1,457.8                 17.8                  5,995.4
  (£ millions)
                                 Minimum                    38.1                  0.0                   0.0
                                Maximum                  6,038.6                94.1               51,111.6
                                Mean                        4.21                 1.36                 2.26
                                 Median                       4.93                  1.19                  1.19
 Underwriter Market Share
                                   Std. Dev.                      2.67                   1.27                   2.66
  (percent)
                                Minimum                    0.15                 0.10                 0.00
                               Maximum                   8.91                 7.79                11.90
                                Mean                        9.63                 7.46                 13.11
                                 Median                       8.26                  2.75                  9.42
 ROA
                                  Std. Dev.                     11.38                 28.72                 27.19
  (percent)
                                  Minimum                    (43.35)                (42.45)                (48.02)
                               Maximum                   32.61                73.45                97.22
                               Mean                       50.44                60.69                64.74
                                Median                      55.15                64.30                68.52
 Retained Ownership
                                  Std. Dev.                     20.27                 21.72                 21.81
  (percent)
                                Minimum                    0.00                 0.00                 0.00
                               Maximum                   81.20                92.40                97.74
                                Mean                        2.24                 1.06                 1.61
                                 Median                       2.00                  0.91                  1.15
  Offer Price
                                   Std. Dev.                      1.45                   0.69                   2.02
  (£)
                                Minimum                    1.00                 0.08                 0.01
                               Maximum                   11.50                2.67                13.25
                               Mean                      65.71                44.25
 Firm Focus                    Median                      64.58                50.00
  (percent, variable only applicable for    Std. Dev.                      23.95                  34.37              Not Applicable
  investment companies)                Minimum                      0.00                   0.00
                              Maximum                 100.00              100.00
                             Total Observations 50 50 113

Table 6 provides a comprehensive overview of firm and offering characteristics in our sample.
From these statistics we note that PE-backed IPO firms in our sample are, as per median values
above, 15 years older than VC-backed IPO firms and 13 years older than non-sponsored IPO
firms. Firms backed by private equity players on average also raise significantly larger proceeds
(£223m versus £11m and £25m for VC-backed and non-sponsored, respectively) and have much

                                    30
larger asset bases pre-IPO compared to the other categories. Perhaps most interestingly, mean
underpricing figures are significantly different between the three subgroups, which is in line with
expectations. As per the original underpricing model and median values, PE-backed firms show
the lowest level of IPO underpricing at an average of 5.53%, compared to 9.75% for VC-backed
firms and 10.00% for non-sponsored firms. The adjusted initial return yields similar results, how-
ever at a much lower underpricing level, and is thus supportive of both hypothesis (1) and (2).

Table 7 – Difference in Mean Tests of Firm and Offering Characteristics for PE-backed,
VC-backed and Non-sponsored IPOs
                                                         T-statistic
 Variable
                                       (PE, NS) (PE, VC) (NS, VC)
 Initial Return (percent) -5.664*** (0.000) -3.030*** (0.003) -2.523** (0.013)
 Adj. Initial Return (percent) -3.245*** (0.001) -1.956* (0.053) -1.398 (0.164)
 Age (years) 1.693* (0.093) 3.239*** (0.001) -1.348 (0.180)
 IPO Proceeds (£ millions) 2.267** (0.025) 5.393*** (0.000) -2.219** (0.028)
 Pre-IPO Assets (£ millions) -0.241 (0.810) 4.545*** (0.000) -1.950* (0.054)
 Underwriter Market Share (percent) 4.304*** (0.000) 6.808*** (0.000) -2.919*** (0.004)
 ROA (percent) 1.081 (0.282) 1.196 (0.237) 0.648 (0.518)
 Retained Ownership (percent) -4.056*** (0.000) -2.441** (0.017) -1.095 (0.276)
 Offer Price (£) 2.255** (0.026) 5.206*** (0.000) -2.585** (0.011)
 Owner Focus (% financial) 19.400*** (0.000) 3.623*** (0.000) 9.103*** (0.000)
Table 7 illustrates t-statistics and p-values (in parenthesis) for the difference in means between the subgroups (PE, VC
and NS IPOs). *, ** and *** resembles results significant at an alpha level of 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01, respectively.

Our findings presented in the table above indicate that there is a statistically significant difference
in the level of underpricing between the three subgroups. This is especially true when looking at
the first day return calculated in accordance with equation 1. On average, the first day return for
PE-backed IPOs (3.91%) is significantly lower than that of VC-backed IPOs (9.40%), which in
turn is significantly lower than that of non-sponsored IPOs (14.76%). Hence, we find further sup-
port for our first and second hypothesis.

The results presented in the table above suggest that the differences in both proceeds raised in the
IPO and total pre-IPO assets are statistically significant between the three subgroups. PE-backed
companies going public raise considerably more, on average, than their counterparts (median pro-
ceeds of £223.1m versus £11.2m and £25.2m for VC-backed and non-sponsored firms, respec-
tively). In contrast to the findings of Megginson and Weiss (1991), the lowest average amount

                                    31
raised is found in VC-backed IPOs (median proceeds of £11.1m). A similar pattern could be seen
with regards to total pre-IPO assets. Private equity-backed IPOs have, by far, the largest median
asset base (£411.1m), while venture capital-backed IPOs have a median asset base of £5.1m and
non-sponsored IPOs £13.5m. These results are in line with our expectations and previous studies,
e.g. Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012). The logical reasoning for this finding is rather intuitive. Pri-
vate equity players, generally speaking, tend to invest in companies which are both mature and
operate in relatively stable markets. Subsequently, the portfolio companies may be exited through
IPOs. These IPOs and the PE-backed companies are larger than their counterparts.

The average age of the IPO firms in each subgroup may also offer a partial explanation for the
considerably smaller size of VC-backed companies. As we expect firms that have been operating
for a long time period to be larger in terms of total assets, we would expect these firms to raise
larger amounts in their IPOs. Our findings indicate that there is a statistically significant difference
between PE-backed firms and non-sponsored firms in terms of age. This may explain the differ-
ences in offering size between the two subgroups. Hence, the results are in line with our expecta-
tions that there would be a significant difference in company age between PE-backed and non-
sponsored firms. Furthermore, VC-backed IPO firms are significantly younger than both of their
counterparts. Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1989a) found that a negative relationship existed be-
tween the age of the firm and the first day returns. As the average underpricing is larger for NS
firms than VC-backed firms, our sample does not support this prediction.

Habib and Ljungqvist (2001) highlight the importance of examining the ownership percentage that
pre-IPO shareholders retain in the company post-IPO. The authors argue that the larger stake sold
in the IPO by the pre-IPO holders, the more concerned these owners will be about how much
money is left on the table in the offering (i.e. the level of underpricing). Table 6 illustrates that, on
average, non-sponsored firms retain the largest stake in the company post-IPO. This finding is in
line with our predictions, as non-sponsored firms do not have a principal owner whose primary
aim is to utilize the IPO as a divestment opportunity. Following Habib and Ljungqvist’s reasoning,
we would expect to see a relatively lower level of underpricing in non-sponsored IPOs in compar-
ison to PE-backed and VC-backed IPOs, which however is not the case in our sample. Further-
more, there is a statistically significant difference in the average percentage of retained ownership
between PE-backed and non-sponsored IPOs, PE-backed and VC-backed IPOs, and between
non-sponsored and VC-backed IPOs in our sample.

                                    32
Table 8 – Variable Correlation Matrix – Pearson Bivariate Correlation

                 Initial   Adj. Ini-                            LN_   LN_PRO  MKT_          RETAIN- OWNER
Variable         Return  tial Return PE VC LN_AGE ASSETS  CEEDS  SHARE ROA    ED   _FOCUS
Initial Return 1.00
Adj. Initial Return 0.81 1.00
PE (0.27) (0.18) 1.00
VC (0.06) (0.02) (0.31) 1.00
LN_AGE (0.11) (0.04) 0.31 (0.18) 1.00
LN_ASSETS (0.24) (0.18) 0.50 (0.33) 0.39 1.00
LN_PROCEEDS (0.20) (0.04) 0.52 (0.29) 0.38 0.72 1.00
MKT_SHARE (0.12) (0.12) 0.36 (0.24) 0.26 0.54 0.64 1.00
ROA (0.19) (0.06) 0.05 0.02 0.05 0.23 0.10 0.06 1.00
RETAINED (0.03) (0.39) (0.25) 0.01 (0.11) (0.03) (0.29) 0.02 (0.06) 1.00
OWNER_FOCUS (0.20) (0.14) 0.66 0.08 0.15 0.31 0.27 0.13 0.03 (0.19) 1.00

In table 8, we have tabulated the Pearson bivariate correlations between dependent as well as ex-
planatory variables. A negative correlation between the explanatory variables and the dependent
variables (initial return and adjusted initial return) means that the larger the explanatory variable,
the smaller the initial return (lower level of underpricing), and vice versa. Correlation coefficients
between the PE variable and initial returns as well as adjusted initial returns match expectations –
negative correlations of -0.27 and -0.18 respectively suggest that PE-backed firms experience lower
IPO underpricing. Conversely, non-sponsored firms have a positive correlation with the two de-
pendent variables of 0.28 and 0.18 respectively, suggesting that non-sponsored firms experience
higher IPO underpricing. From the table above, we also gather that the larger a firm is, the likelier
it is to raise a large amount of proceeds in an IPO (positive correlation of 0.72). Also, larger firms
tend to employ underwriters with a large market share (often equivalent to more prestigious and
thus more expensive advisors). This seems logical because more prestigious underwriters do not
advise on offerings that are below a certain size. The positive correlation of 0.10 between total IPO
proceeds and return on assets reveals that relatively more profitable companies manage to raise
larger proceeds in an offering. However, firms with larger assets are even likelier to raise large
proceeds, which can be seen through the correlation coefficient of 0.23 between ROA and LN_AS-
SETS.

Examining the variable OWNER_FOCUS, it is evident by a positive correlation of 0.27 with the
proceeds variable that companies which are owned by investment firms (PE/VC firms) that are
primarily financially oriented tend to be able to raise larger proceeds. A mild positive correlation
between owner focus and underwriter market share furthermore suggests that underwriters with a
large market share are more likely to advise owners with financial ties. This result indicates that the
importance of the owner’s connections with financial advisors, at least when examining financially

                                    33
focused investment firms, is not to be easily dismissed. Intriguingly, a near-zero correlation be-
tween financially oriented investment firms and their return on assets signifies that while they em-
ploy the best underwriters and raise more proceeds, their companies are not more profitable than
others. In line with expectations, it also seems like financially oriented owners are keener to cash
out than are their more operationally focused brethren – on average, they keep a smaller stake in
the company post-IPO (correlation of -0.19).

Table 9 – Main Regression Results: Initial Returns and Adjusted Initial Returns Exam-
ined with Three Different Underpricing Models
 Panel A Standard UP Model Adjusted UP Model Adj. UP Model (2)
 Intercept 0.212 (3.29)*** 0.018 (0.30) 0.058 (0.91)
 PE -0.099 (-2.66)*** -0.068 (-2.63)*** -0.090 (-3.15)***
 VC -0.070 (-2.73)*** -0.007 (0.34) -0.004 (-0.20)**
 LN_AGE 0.000 (0.03) -0.010 (-1.05) -0.018 (-1.74)*
 RETAINED -0.092 (-1.88)* -0.036 (-0.94) -0.064 (-1.55)
 LN_ASSETS -0.003 (-0.76) -0.010 (-2.02)** Omitted
 LN_PROCEEDS -0.008 (-0.90) 0.033 (3.97)*** 0.025 (3.02)***
 MKT_SHARE 0.584 (1.13) 0.045 (0.13) 0.240 (0.62)
 ROA -0.000 (-2.28)** 0.046 (1.35) 0.051 (1.35)
 AIM 0.019 (0.58) 0.078 (3.18)*** 0.075 (2.76)***
 OWNER_FOCUS 0.014 (0.44) 0.001 (0.05) 0.005 (0.21)
 Model F 3.83*** 5.54*** 5.65***

 Adjusted R2 0.118 0.255 0.223

 N 213 134 147
 Panel B
 Intercept -0.001 (-0.05) -0.063 (-2.12)** -0.063 (-2.26)**
 PE -0.029 (-1.54) -0.025 (-1.47) -0.029 (-1.74)*
 VC -0.025 (-1.91)* -0.009 (-0.65) -0.006 (-0.45)
 LN_AGE 0.002 (0.37) -0.000 (-1.27) -0.011 (-1.88)*
 LN_ASSETS -0.005 (-2.54) -0.007 (-2.35)** Omitted
 LN_PROCEEDS 0.014 (3.25)*** 0.032 (6.42)*** 0.027 (6.11)***
 MKT_SHARE -0.087 (-0.34) -0.184 (-0.78) -0.195 (-0.87)

                                    34
Table 9 (cont.) – Main Regression Results: Initial Returns and Adjusted Initial Returns
Examined with Three Different Underpricing Models

 ROA -0.000 (-0.14) 0.021 (0.90) 0.024 (1.06)

 AIM 0.035 (2.15)** 0.075 (4.89)*** 0.076 (5.05)***

 OWNER_FOCUS 0.004 (0.23) 0.003 (0.20) 0.002 (0.10)

 Model F 2.85*** 6.51*** 7.15***

 Adjusted R2 0.073 0.272 0.252

 N 213 134 147

Cell values represent unstandardized regression coefficients for individual variables. The corresponding t-statistics are
shown within parenthesis. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the first day return, measured as the return in percent
between the offer price and the first trading day’s closing price. In Panel B, the dependent variable is the adjusted first
day return, measured as the first day return multiplied with (1-%RETAINED), where RETAINED is the percentage
owned in the company post-IPO by pre-IPO shareholders. PE is a dichotomous variable where the value 1 represents
that the IPO firm was PE-backed, and zero if it was not. VC is a dichotomous variable where the value 1 represents
that the IPO firm was VC-backed, and zero if it was not. LN_AGE is the natural logarithm of 1 + the firm’s age in
years at the point of time of the IPO. Where the date of company incorporation is not explicitly provided, the company
is assumed to have been founded midyear. LN_ASSETS is the natural logarithm of the total pre-IPO assets, measured
in GBPm. LN_PROCEEDS is the natural logarithm of the total IPO proceeds, measured in GBPm. MKT_SHARE
is the lead underwriter’s market share in the year of the IPO, measured in percent. ROA is the pre-IPO return on
assets, calculated using Earnings before Interest and Taxes over the pre-IPO average asset base. RETAINED is the
percent owned in the company post-IPO by pre-IPO shareholders. AIM is a dichotomous variable where the value 1
represents companies listed on the AIM exchange. *, ** and *** resembles results significant at an alpha level of 0.10,
0.05 and 0.01, respectively. OWNER_FOCUS is a dichotomous variable where the value 1 represents that the owner
(in the case of the firm being PE or VC-backed) is primarily financially focused.

The results of our main regressions are presented in table 9 above. In the first column we present
our findings using the standard underpricing model, defined in equation 4. In the second column,
we present the results from the adjusted underpricing model in which we have excluded outliers.
In the rightmost column, we present our results using the adjusted underpricing model where we
have excluded the variable LN_ASSETS in order to avoid any collinearity with LN_PROCEEDS.
In all three models we excluded MAIN_MARKET to avoid any collinearity with AIM. Further-
more, in Panel A and B have we present our findings using the initial return and adjusted initial
return, respectively, as the dependent variable.

The second column in Panel A uses the standard underpricing model and has a relatively unim-

                                                                      2
pressive explanatory power of 11.8% (adjusted R ). However, we note that the PE variable has a
negative correlation coefficient of -0.099 at a 1% significance level. This is hard evidence that PE-

                                    35
backed firms conducting an IPO, on average, experience lower underpricing levels than other
firms. Regarding VC-backed firms, we see that our VC variable has a negative correlation coeffi-
cient of -0.070 at a 1% significance level. The correlation coefficient for our VC variable is however
less pronounced than that for our PE variable, providing support for our second hypothesis.

Panel A also illustrates the results as we run the two other underpricing models. First, we note that
the adjusted underpricing model has significantly higher explanatory power, which jumps from
11.8% to 25.5%, as we increase robustness by eliminating outliers (see column three). While we
cannot draw any conclusions regarding VC-backed firms from the adjusted underpricing model,
our PE variable still has a negative correlation coefficient of -0.068 at a 1% significance level. This
holds true also when the standard underpricing model is further adjusted (see column four) – the
PE variable has a negative coefficient of -0.090 at the same significance level. Consequently, Panel
A provides further evidence in line with our first hypothesis.

When running the third underpricing model, the VC variable is once again significant – this time
at the 5% level – and has a coefficient of approximately zero. The two adjusted underpricing mod-
els thus provide some evidence, however less than in the PE case, in line with our second hypoth-
esis.

Previous literature (Habib and Ljungqvist, 2001, among others) has often come to the conclusion
that a larger ownership stake retained by the pre-IPO owners should reduce underpricing in initial
public offerings. Our results indicate the opposite. At the 10% level, a larger retained ownership
stake appears to reduce the level of underpricing in our sample.

While the standard underpricing model provides no conclusive evidence of any effect on the un-
derpricing level depending on the size of proceeds, our adjusted models do. At a 1% significance
level and coefficients of 0.025 and 0.033 respectively, results indicate that the larger the proceeds
raised in the IPO, the higher the level of underpricing. Applying the result to the traditional supply
and demand curve, our result should stand tall. However, there are other perspectives. Larger firms
tend to raise larger amounts of proceeds in their IPOs, as evident by the correlation of 0.72 between
LN_ASSETS and LN_PROCEEDS in Table 8. This means that an IPO raising large proceeds is
likely to have been conducted by a large firm. For large firms, we expect more public information
to be available, as larger firms have a relatively larger direct effect on people’s lives than smaller
firms, in turn warranting increased media and analyst coverage. This should let larger firms price

                                    36
their IPOs closer to the true value as the asymmetric information gap is narrowed. Applying this
reasoning, our result is counter-intuitive. It also contradicts the conclusions of Beatty and Ritter
(1984). The pair provides reasoning consistent with the theory of smaller offerings being more
speculative than larger ones, which is their key argument in explaining why the proceeds variable
should have a negative coefficient.

In addition to Panel A, results are shown of a regression with the same explanatory variables but
with “adjusted initial return” as the dependent variable instead of “initial return” (see equations 3
and 5, respectively). We argue, in line with several previous studies (including Habib and Ljungqvist,
2001, and Mogilevsky and Murgulov, 2012), that the adjusted initial return variable better captures
the loss of wealth to pre-IPO shareholders as it displays underpricing levels weighted with the
percentage of stock ownership sold. Results prove to be less significant for most variables, and the
explanatory power of the standard underpricing model decreases from 11.8% to a weak 7.3%.
However, the adjusted model reacts more positively to our robustness measures, producing ex-
planatory levels of 27.2% and 25.2% compared to 25.5% and 22.3% when using the initial return
metric. We see that the coefficient of our PE variable is still negative, in line with expectations,
however less so than when using the initial return metric. Also, the proceeds variable is still signif-
icant at the 1% level and produces mild, positive correlations of 0.014 – 0.032.

Table 10 – T-tests of Differences in Average First Day Returns between High and Me-
dium/Low period for each Subgroup

                          Total PE VC NS

 IPO Activity Period High L/M High L/M High L/M High L/M
 Standard Underpricing    10.37% 11.45% 1.96% 6.31% 13.98% 6.86% 13.68% 15.45%
 Model
 Diff 1.08% 4.36% 7.12% 1.77%

 T-statistic -0.555 -2.210** 2.387** -0.567

 P-value 0.579 0.032 0.024 0.572

 Adjusted Underpricing    4.19% 4.63% 0.90% 3.36% 6.44% 2.85% 5.14% 5.92%
 Model
 Diff 0.44% 2.46% 3.59% 0.78%

 T-statistic -0.458 -1.693* 2.244** -0.512

 P-value 0.647 0.098 0.034 0.610

 Total Observations 87 126 25 25 18 32 44 69

                                    37
Table 10 illustrates t-statistics and p-values for the difference in means between the subgroups (High vs. Medium/low
IPO activity periods) for each subgroup (PE-backed, VC-backed and non-sponsored IPOs). *, ** and *** resembles
results significant at an alpha level of 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01, respectively.

The table above illustrates how the averages in first day returns are affected by the IPO activity
period at the time of listing. On average for the total sample, underpricing levels tend to be lower
in high IPO activity periods, however, these findings are not statistically significant at any conven-
tional level. For PE-backed firms going public, we find statistically significant evidence that under-
pricing levels are lower in high IPO activity periods. On the contrary, our results indicate that VC-
backed firms experience higher underpricing levels in high IPO activity periods, providing support
for our third hypothesis that VC-backed IPOs experience higher levels of underpricing in high
IPO activity periods. Hence, our findings for the VC-backed IPOs are in line with the hot issue
market theory put forward by Rossetto (2008) as well as with the findings of Ibbotson and Jaffe
(1975) as well as Ritter (1984).

Table 11 – Comparing the First Day Returns for Financially vs. Operationally Focused
Owner Firms

                                 Total PE VC

 Financial / Operational Focus F O F O F O
 Standard Underpricing Model 10.37% 11.45% 1.96% 6.31% 13.98% 6.86%
 Diff 1.08% 4.36% -7.12%
 T-statistic -0.555 -2.210** -2.387**
 P-value 0.579 0.032 0.024
 Adjusted Underpricing Model 4.19% 4.63% 0.90% 3.36% 6.44% 2.85%
 Diff 0.44% 2.46% -3.59%
 T-statistic -0.458 -1.693* -2.244**
 P-value 0.647 0.098 0.034
 Total Observations 55 158 39 11 16 34

Table 11 illustrates t-statistics and p-values for the difference in means between the subgroups (financially focused vs.
operationally focused owner firms) for each applicable subgroup (PE-backed and VC-backed IPOs). *, ** and ***
resembles results significant at an alpha level of 0.10, 0.05 and 0.01, respectively.

The table above illustrates how the average first day returns differ depending on whether the prin-
cipal owner (in the case of PE-backed and VC-backed firms) is financially or operationally focused.
For non-sponsored IPOs, we have assumed the companies to be operationally focused. In the

                                    38
aggregate, our tests provide no statistically significant evidence of different underpricing levels de-
pending on owner focus. However, for PE-backed IPOs we find evidence that owners who are
financially focused contribute to a lower level of underpricing at conventional significant levels.
Interestingly, we find the contrary to be true for VC-backed IPOs. Hence, we find some support
for hypothesis (4) that financially focused firms experience lower levels of underpricing, however
this is only true for our PE sample. On a second note, we find that the majority of the PE firms
are financially focused and the contrary to be true for VC-backed firms, as was previously hypoth-
esized.

7 Conclusion
The existing financial literature on the topic of IPO underpricing is extensive and many prominent
authors among the likes of Jay Ritter, from the University of Florida, and Tim Loughran, from the
University of Notre Dame, have developed well-founded theories on why public offerings are un-
derpriced. Unfortunately for perfectionists, an all-explaining theory has not yet been uncovered. It
is likely that market gyrations, local variations in capital market structures and abstruse relationships
between investment banks and owners bog down such attempts. Mindful of this struggle, it is our
belief that the academia needs to conduct research on a more local level. It is not appropriate to
conduct all studies on the US capital markets and assume an extrapolation of the results there may
be correctly extended to other regions in the world. Also, we suggest the incorporation of more
qualitative metrics. Studying the value creation philosophies of owners in a European market set-
ting is something we believe firmly strengthens the breadth of possible explanations for the under-
pricing phenomenon. Certainly, interesting conclusions may also be drawn from the more tradi-
tional hypotheses laid forward by previous authors but applied in a European setting.

In line with the findings of Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012), we find significant evidence that PE-
backed IPOs on average experience a substantially lower level of underpricing than concurrently
listed VC-backed and non-sponsored IPOs. These results are statistically significant at an alpha
level of 1% for all three of our regression models. We also find that larger firms tend to employ
more prestigious underwriters, i.e. underwriters with a relatively large market share. Since the PE-
backed IPOs in our sample are the largest firms measured by total assets pre-IPO, we find further
support for the trade-off theory developed by Habib and Ljungqvist (2001).

Moreover, our results support the theory that Baron put forward in 1982, namely that the infor-
mational advantage investment banks in general have over their IPO clients is strongly mitigated

                                    39
or even eliminated in the case of private equity clients. We find the same to be true for venture
capital clients, but to a less extent. However, as predicted, our findings do not support the signaling
theory which argues for a higher level of underpricing in private equity-backed IPOs (Allen and
Faulhaber, 1989; Grinblatt and Hwang, 1989). The grandstanding theory is also rejected since the
PE-backed IPO sample indeed experiences lower levels of underpricing compared to non-spon-
sored IPOs. This proved valid also for VC-backed IPOs.

Our findings relating to hypothesis (1) extend the current research on the relative power of differ-
ent parties in an IPO. If we assume that investment banks can alter the level of underpricing,
depending on i) how lucrative the selling client (the firm going public, and its owners) is in relation
to the buying client (institutional investors subscribing for shares in the IPO), and ii) how knowl-
edgeable the selling client is, we can interpret our results in a more nuanced fashion. Assuming the
aforementioned is true, we make an implicit assumption that investment banks will choose to please
the most lucrative client by altering the underpricing level to this client’s benefit. Hence, if the
institutional clients subscribing for shares in the IPO are more lucrative in the context of future
investment banking business opportunities than the private equity firm that divests a holding
through an IPO, the investment bank will choose an underpricing level that benefits the institu-
tional clients relatively more than the private equity firm. As this theory requires extensive statistical
testing and empirical data-gathering, we are not able to draw any ultimate conclusion, but it is
definitely one very interesting area for future IPO underpricing literature and research.

In Table 7, we find that venture capital-backed IPOs experience relatively higher underpricing than
private equity-backed IPOs (at 1% significance level) and relatively lower underpricing than non-
sponsored IPOs (at 5% significance level), using the standard underpricing model. Switching the
dependent variable to the adjusted initial return metric, we find that PE-backed IPOs are still sig-
nificantly less underpriced than are VC-backed (at the 10% level). We also conclude that VC-
backed IPOs tend to experience lower underpricing levels than non-sponsored IPOs even when
using the adjusted metric – however, this cannot be statistically verified at any conventional alpha
level.

Our findings with regards to hypothesis (2) are consistent with our expectations and thus, we can
verify our hypothesis in full with the standard initial return metric and in part when using the
adjusted initial return metric. This conclusion is in line with the findings relating to the certification
theory brought forward by Megginson and Weiss (1991).

                                    40
We reason that the results show support for the trade-off theory (Habib and Ljungqvist, 2001).
Since VC-backed IPOs are proven to be much smaller than their PE counterparts, it does not make
economic sense for VC firms to mandate the most expensive underwriters. Because it does make
sense for private equity firms, this difference could prove a valid explanation to why VC-backed
IPOs experience a higher underpricing level than do PE-backed IPOs.

In line with the hot issue market theory put forward by Rossetto (2008), we find statistically signif-
icant evidence that VC-backed IPOs experience substantially higher levels of underpricing in high
IPO activity periods. Our results are significant at an alpha level of 5% when looking at both the
standard initial return metric and our adjusted initial return, further providing support that this
theory is applicable in the European markets as well. We do note a certain skewedness in our data
in relation to testing the hot issue market theory, which should be observed. It conforms to our
selected years in the sample dataset and the relative intensity of IPO activity that year – in our
sample, we have more VC-backed and non-sponsored companies going public in times of low or
medium active IPO markets. However that may be, our results are in line with expectations. One
possible explanation is that venture capitalists are eager to list their portfolio companies, since this
is perhaps the best way of improving reputational capital, and they are simply given more chances
in high activity periods. Further, better reputational capital increases the likelihood of larger future
fund raisings, and thus higher future management fees for the VC firm, which may prove a legiti-
mate reason as to why VC firms would accept higher upfront costs in the form of IPO underpric-
ing.

Furthermore, our results indicate that the level of underpricing decreases further for PE-backed
IPOs in hot issue markets, compared to low/medium periods. As markets are booming, and in-
vestor appetite for IPOs increases, one would assume that higher risk companies that might not
be able to go public during lower activity periods will take the chance in high activity periods to
utilize the momentum in the market. Hence, a possible explanation for why private equity-backed
IPOs experience a lower degree of underpricing in high issue markets could be that as the market
is flooded with higher risk companies going public (such as VC-backed firms), risk averse investors
will pay a higher price, i.e. a lower level of underpricing, for lower-risk offerings, such as private
equity-backed firms going public. Obviously, one would need to perform multiple empirical tests
to verify this explanatory statement. Nevertheless, we believe it is an interesting area of future
research.

                                    41
Regarding hypothesis (4), the vast majority of PE firms in our sample are financially focused (39
vs 11), while the majority of VC firms are operationally focused (34 vs 16). We do not find statis-
tically significant evidence that financially focused firms achieve a lower level of underpricing than
their operationally focused counterparts. However, for our sample of financially focused PE firms
taking portfolio companies public, we find statistically significant evidence, at an alpha level of 5%
for the initial return metric and 10% for the adjusted initial return metric, that these IPOs achieve
a lower level of underpricing than their operationally focused counterparts. Interestingly, we find
the opposite to be true for VC-backed IPOs at a 5% alpha level. While these apparent differences
may simply be the result of fewer number of observations within the less-dominant category for
PE and VC firms respectively, we reveal some interesting takeaways that we argue should encour-
age future research within the area. First, our results entice thoughts of what might be the proper
value creation style – is there a uniform, best-in-class investment philosophy that works across-
the-board? According to this study, the answer is no. Owners that focus on creating value through
financial adjustments appear to prevail within private equity. Venture capitalists with the same fo-
cus leave a lot more money on the table, experiencing much higher underpricing levels than their
operationally focused peers. Considering the far-reaching differences between venture capital and
private equity, one might argue that our results are not surprising. VC firms need to be able to take
bets on operational business models which have not yet experienced a breakthrough in customer
adoption rates, so there is a greater need for understanding the technology, its implications and
who might make use of it. For PE firms, targets have had their breakthrough and are often well-
functioning corporations with leading market positions. These companies may benefit more from
adjusting their debt levels, replacing managers or acting as a platform for consolidation strategies
rather than having experienced investment professionals who sincerely and profoundly grasp their
business model. Certainly, these ideas validate further research and we are enthusiastic about the
prospect of understanding differences in owner focus on a deeper level.

This paper provides a contribution to the relatively sparse existing literature in the setting of IPO
underpricing on European capital markets. We present empirical evidence backed up by existing
theories that confirms much of the research done on US capital markets. Furthermore, this study
provides additional reasoning behind the underpricing phenomenon, how it differs between dif-
ferent owner types and which effects IPO cyclicality has on underpricing. Finally, we have made
some initial research regarding owner focus type and how this might affect underpricing in initial
public offerings. There is much more to be done within this relatively unexplored area of financial

                                    42
literature, but it is our hope that our study will shed some light on the fundamentals of the effects
of investment philosophy on underpricing in IPOs.

                                    43
8 References

    1. Abraham, N. and Joseph, A. (2015). “Underpricing of Venture Capital IPOs: A Journey
        Through History”, International Journal of Management Research and Business Strategy, Vol. 4, No.
        4, pp. 83-92

    2. Allen, F., and Faulhaber, G. (1989). “Signaling by Underpricing in the IPO Market”, Journal
        of Financial Economics, Vol. 23, Issue 2, pp. 303-323

    3. Baron, D. (1982). “A model of the demand for investment bank advising and distribution
        services for new issues”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 37, pp. 955-976

    4. Baron, D. and Holmström, B. (1980). “The Investment Banking Contract for New Issues
        under Asymmetric Information: Delegation and the Incentive Problem”, The Journal of Fi-
        nance, Vol. 5, Issue 5, pp. 1115-1138

    5. Beatty, R. and Welch, I. (1996). “Issuer Expenses and Legal Liability in Initial Public Of-
        ferings”, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 39, Issue 2, pp. 545-602

    6. Beatty, R.P. & Ritter, J.R. (1986). “Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing
        of initial public offerings”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1–2, pp. 213-232

    7. Bergström, C., Nilsson, D. & Wahlberg, M. (2006). “Underpricing and Long-Run Perfor-
        mance Patterns of European Private-Equity-Backed and Non-Private-Equity-Backed
        IPOs”, Journal of Private Equity, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 16-47

    8. Booth, J.R. & Smith II, R.L. (1986). “Capital raising, underwriting and the certification
        hypothesis”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 261-281

    9. Booth, J.R. and Chua, L. (1996). “Ownership dispersion, costly information, and IPO Un-
        derpricing”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 41, pp. 291-310

    10. Brennan, M. J. and Franks, J. (2005). “Underpricing, Ownership and Control in Initial Pub-
        lic Offerings of Equity Securities in the UK”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 45, No. 3,
       pp. 391-413

    11. Brigl, M., Herrera, A., Meerkatt, H., Liechtenstein, H., Prats, M., Rose, J. (2008) ”The ad-
       vantage of persistence – How the best private equity firms beat the fade”, The Boston Con-
        sulting Group and IESE Business School

    12. Cao, J. (2011). “IPO timing, buyout sponsors’ exit strategies, and firm performance of
       RLBOs”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 1001-1024

    13. Cao, J. and Lerner, J. (2009). “The Performance of Reverse Leveraged Buyouts”, Journal of
        Financial Economics, Vol. 91(2), pp. 139-157

    14. Carter, R. B. and Manaster, S. (1990). “Initial Public Offerings and Underwriter Reputa-
        tion”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 45, pp. 1045-1067

    15. Chemmanur, T. J. (1993). “The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings: A Dynamic Model with
        Information Production”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 285-304

                                    44
16. Chemmanur, T. J. and Loutskina, E. (2007). “The role of venture capital backing in initial
    public offerings: Certification, screening or market power”, Working Paper, Boston College

17. Datar, V. and Mao, D. Z. (2006). “Deep Underpricing of China’s IPOs: Sources and Im-
    plications”, International Journal of Financial Services Management, Vol. 1, No. 2/3, pp. 345-362

18. Gompers, A. (1996). “Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry”, Journal of Financial
    Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 133-156

19. Gompers, A. and Lerner, J. (1999). “Conflict of interest in the issuance of public securities:
    Evidence from venture capital”, Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 1-28

20. Grinblatt, M. and Hwang, C. Y. (1989). “Signaling and the Pricing of New Issues”, The
    Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 393-420

21. Habib, M. and Ljungqvist, A. (2001). “Underpricing and Entrepreneurial Wealth Losses in
    IPOs: Theory and Evidence”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 433-458

22. Hamao, Y., Packer, F. and Ritter, J. R. (2000). “Institutional affiliation and the role of ven-
    ture capital: Evidence from initial public offerings in Japan”, Pacific Basin Finance Journal,
    Vol. 8, pp. 529-558

23. Hemptinn, C., Hoflack, V. (2009). “The value of in-house operations teams in private eq-
    uity firms.”, INSEAD Independent Study Project, pp. 8-44

24. Hensler, D. A. (1995). “Litigation Cost and Underpricing of Initial Public Offerings”, Man-
    agerial and Decision Economics, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 111-128

25. Hughes, pp. and Thakor, A. (1992). “Litigation Risk, Intermediation, and the Underpricing
    of Initial Public Offerings”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 709-742

26. Hunt-McCool J., Koh S. C. and Francis B. B. (1996). “Testing for Deliberate Underpricing
    in the IPO premarket: A stochastic frontier Approach”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 9,
   pp. 1251-1269

27. Ibbotson, R.G. (1975). “Price performance of common stock new issues”, Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 235-272

28. Ibbotson, R.G. & Jaffe, J.F. (1975). “Hot issue markets”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 30, No.
    4, pp. 1027-1042

29. Jenkinson, T. and Ljungqvist, A. (2001). “Going Public: The Theory and Evidence on How
    Companies Raise Equity Finance”, Oxford University Press

30. Lee, pp. M. and Wahal, S. (2004). “Grandstanding, Certification and the Underpricing of
    Venture Capital Backed IPOs”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 73, pp. 375-407

31. Lerner, J. (1995). “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms”, The Journal of
    Finance, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 301-318

                                 45
32. Levis, M. (2001). “The Performance of Private Equity-Backed IPOs”, Financial Management,
    Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 253-277

33. Ljungqvist, A. (1999). “IPO Underpricing, Wealth Losses and the Curios Role of Venture
    Capitalists in the Creation of Public Companies”, Working Paper, Oxford Financial Research
   Centre

34. Ljungqvist, A. and Wilhelm, W. J. (2003). “IPO Underpricing in the Dot-Com Bubble”,
    The Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 723-752

35. London Stock Exchange, (2016). “New Issues and IPOs on the London Stock Exchange”,
    londonstockexchange.com, Retrieved 24 January

36. Loughran, T. & Ritter, J. (2004). “Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed over Time?”, Fi-
    nancial Management, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 5-37

37. Loughran, T. & Ritter, J. (2002). “Why Don’t Issuers Get Upset about Leaving Money on
    the Table in IPOs?”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 413-443

38. Loughran, T., Ritter, J.R. & Rydqvist, K. (1994). “Initial public offerings: International in-
    sights” Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 165-199

39. Lowry, M. & Schwert, G.W. (2002). “IPO market cycles: Bubbles or sequential learning?”,
    The Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 3, pp. 1171-1200

40. Megginson, M. & Weiss, K.A. (1991). “Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial Public Of-
    ferings”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, No. 3, pp. 879-903

41. Michaely, R. and Shaw, W. H. (1994). “The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings: Tests of
    Adverse-Selection and Signaling Theories”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 279-
   319

42. Mogilevsky, V. & Murgulov, Z. (2012). “Underpricing of private equity backed, venture
    capital backed and non-sponsored IPOs”, Investment Management and Financial Innovations,
    Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 47-59

43. Muscarella, C. J. and Vetsuypens, M. R. (1989a). “A Simple Test of Baron’s Model of IPO
    Underpricing”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 24, pp. 125-135

44. Otchere, I., Owusu-Antwi, G. & Mohsni, S. (2013). “Why are stock exchange IPOs so
    underpriced and yet outperform in the long run?”, Journal of International Financial Markets,
    Institutions and Money, Vol. 27, pp. 76-98

45. Pástor, Ľ. & Veronesi, pp. (2005). “Rational IPO waves”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, No.
    4, pp. 1713-1757

46. Prabhala and Puri (1998). “How does underwriter price support affect IPOs? Empirical
    evidence”, Working Paper, Yale University

                                 46
47. PricewaterhouseCoopers (2014). “The return of private equity backed IPOs in Europe”,
   PwC.com

48. Private Company Knowledge Base (2016). PrivCo.com, Retrieved 7 April

49. Ritter, J.R. “The ‘hot issue’ market of 1980”, Journal of Business, pp. 215-240

50. Ritter, J.R. & Welch, I. (2002). “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations”, The
    Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, No. 4, pp. 1795-1828

51. Rossetto, S. (2008). “The Price of Rapid Exit in Venture Capital-Backed IPOs”, Annals of
    Finance, Vol. 4, pp. 29-53

52. Ruud, J. R. (1993). “Underwriter Price Support and the IPO Underpricing Puzzle”, Journal
    of Financial Economics, Vol. 34, No. 2, pp. 135-152

53. Schulz, P. (2003). “Pseudo Market Timing and the Long-Run Underperformance of IPOs”,
    The Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 483-517

54. Schöber, T. (2008). “Buyout-Backed Initial Public Offerings”, Dissertation (No. 3479), De-
    partment of Business Administration, University of St. Gallen

55. Sevonius, J. and Hertervig, J. (2014). “The performance of Nordic buyout-backed IPOs”

56. Sinha, A., Gonzalez, W. and Aase, J. (2005). “Beyond M&A and IPOs: Exploring Alterna-
    tive Liquidation/Financing Options for Venture Capital Firms and Their Portfolio Com-
    panies”, Journal of Private Equity, Vol. 8, pp. 41-55

57. Taranto, M. (2003). “Employee Stock Option and the Underpricing of Initial Public Offer-
    ings”, Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania

58. Tinic, S. (1988). “Anatomy of initial public offerings of common stock”, The Journal of Fi-
    nance, Vol. 43, pp. 789-822

59. Welch, I. (1989). “Sequential Sales, Learning and Cascades”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 47,
    No. 2, pp. 695-732

60. Wright, M. and Robbie, K. (1998). “Venture Capital and Private Equity: A Review and
    Synthesis”, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, Vol. 25, pp. 521-570

61. Yahoo! Finance (2016). finance.yahoo.com, Retrieved 21 February

                                 47