        Firm complexity and IPO underpricing

                                    Bachelor Thesis

                   Stockholm School of Economics

                                   Department of Finance
                                      Tutor: Dong Yan

                                  May 2016

                                 Edward Ekbom
                                  22779@student.hhs.se

                                          Niklas Skytting
                                  23086@student.hhs.se

                                       Abstract
 The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the relationship between information
 production and firm complexity during initial public offerings.
 By studying 528 U.S. IPOs during the time period 2000-­‐‑2015 we find support for our claim
 that increased  complexity  contributes to increased underpricing which  may serve to
 diminish the effect additional underwriting managers have on the  level  of underpricing
 present in initial public offerings. Additionally, we find that factors such as age help
 reduce the amount underpricing, a result which is explained by more public information
 being available for older firms and the ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty regarding the firm value is thus
 reduced. Finally,  we find that issuers backed  by venture capital  do in fact experience  a
 higher degree of underpricing than unbacked firms do.
 We suggest that initial public offerings in firms exhibiting high degrees of complexity will
 generally experience more underpricing.

Key words:  complexity, underpricing, initial public offerings,  ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty.

Acknowledgements: We want to thank our tutor Dong Yan for her commitment and
guidance in the development of this thesis.
Contents

   1. Background and introduction......................................................................................................... 2
      1.1 Sources of IPO Underpricing ..................................................................................................... 4
      1.2 Firm complexity .......................................................................................................................... 6
     1.3 Theories on how to reduce uncertainty regarding firm value ........................................... 8
   2. Hypotheses ....................................................................................................................................... 13
   3. Data collection and summary statistics ...................................................................................... 15
      3.1 Data collection ........................................................................................................................... 15
     3.2 Summary  statistics  ................................................................................................................... 15
   4. Methodology ..................................................................................................................................... 18
     4.1 Dependent and independent variables  ................................................................................ 18
     4.2 Interaction between information production and firm complexity ............................... 23
   5. Results ............................................................................................................................................... 26
      5.1 Main regression results ........................................................................................................... 26
      5.2 Age effects on underpricing .................................................................................................... 29
    5.3 Venture capital and private equity backing as sources of certification and monitoring
      ............................................................................................................................................................. 29
     5.4 Interaction between firm complexity and information production ............................... 32
     5.5 Tests for multicollinearity between the explanatory variables  ...................................... 36
    5.6 Robustness checks by dropping Total Assets due to high correlation and insignificant
      results ................................................................................................................................................ 38
   6. Conclusions....................................................................................................................................... 39
   7. Limitations and future research................................................................................................... 41
   References  ............................................................................................................................................ 42

                                          1
1. Background and introduction

Underpricing in initial public offerings (“IPO”) is a  well-­‐‑known  and well documented
phenomenon that researchers have been trying to grasp for a long time. Although
underpricing has remained relatively stable, with the exception of two large spikes in 1999
and 2003, the resulting amounts of money foregone by owners are staggering. Between 2001

and 2015 a total of $53bn was left on the table as a result of IPO underpricing1  These vast

sums are cause for further research in why IPO underpricing arise.
      Corwin and Schultz (2005) and Hu and Ritter (2007) find that an increased number
of managing underwriters in an IPO will reduce  underpricing. They argue that the reduced
underpricing stems from the information production hypothesis, which states that a larger
number of managing underwriters will serve to more efficiently produce information in
order  to  accurately  price  the  IPO.  However,  even  though  the  number  of  managing
underwriters has increased over time, from averaging  around one in the early 1980’s  to
averaging around six in 2015, underpricing seems to remain constant, or  increase very
slightly over time. In addition, over the last five years or so, the number of technology and
biotechnology IPOs as a percentage of the total number of IPOs has increased quite
significantly.
                   Figure 1: Money left on the table (underpricing)
     This graph plots the aggregate amount of money foregone by investors due to underpricing per year
                                     between 2001 and 2015

    12

    10

     8

     6

     4

     2

     0

                                                 Aggregate amount left on the table (USDbn)

1
 Jay Ritter of the University of Florida has compiled a comprehensive database of IPO and underpricing
related statistics. Jay R. Ritter IPO Data 2015,
https://site.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/files/2016/02/IPOs2015Underpricing.pdf

                                          2
   Figure 2: Technology and Biotech IPOs       Figure 3: Number of underwriting
    This graph plots the share of technology and                    managers
  biotechnology IPOs to total IPOs during the period       This graph plots the number of managers and
                    2001 to 2015                         percentage share of IPOs with more than 1
                                                      underwriting manger during the period 2000 and
                                                              2015

  80%                                            8                                      100%

                                                                                   80%
  60%                                             6

                                                                                   60%
  40%                                             4
                                                                                   40%

  20%                                             2
                                                                                   20%

   0%                                         0                                   0%

                         Tech % of total                                                 % with >1 Bookrunners
                         Biotech % of total                                                # of Managers (mean)
                          Tech & Biotech % of total

       We argue that the results from previous studies are lacking in  explaining why
underpricing has not decreased while the average number of underwriting managers in the
syndicates has increased. This paper seeks to complement previous research within this area.
Although the increased number of managing underwriters, through better information
production, will serve to reduce underpricing, earlier findings do not incorporate their
qualitative  ability to produce  accurate  information. We argue that as firms become more
complex (e.g. technology and biotechnology companies) it becomes increasingly difficult for
managing underwriters, the issuing firms’ management and investors to comprehend the
firm, its environment and its true value. Increased firm complexity may  thus offset the
information production benefits of having a larger number of managing underwriters in the
IPO syndicate and consequently increase the underpricing relative less complex firms.
      By studying 528 U.S. IPOs between 2000 and 2015 we find support for our claim that
increased complexity in fact contributes to increased underpricing and may serve to diminish
the effect additional underwriting managers have on the amount of underpricing present in

                                          3
initial public offerings. Additionally, our results indicate that factors such as age help reduce
the amount underpricing, a result which  is explained by more public  information being
available for older firms, and thus the ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty regarding the firm value is reduced.
Finally, in contradiction  of  our hypothesis but in line with findings by  Gompers (1996) and
Lee and Wahal (2004), we find that issuers backed by venture capital and private equity firms
do in fact experience a higher degree of underpricing than do unbacked firms.

1.1 Sources of IPO Underpricing

The listing of a company’s shares on a regulated market is a way for firms to raise capital to
finance its operations and new projects. These funds are commonly raised through primary
and secondary offerings, serving as sources of capital and liquidity to the issuing firm.
Assuming that the price agreed by market participants on an open stock exchange represents
the true value of the company, large degrees of underpricing indicates that the price at which
the shares are sold in the IPO is below the true value of the firm. The sources of underpricing
is a controversial area and various theories have  been presented in order to explain its
existence. Explanations range from theories of adverse selection, discrepancies in incentives
between principals and agents (known as moral hazard) and information asymmetries both
between different investors and between the issuer and underwriting investment banks. This
study will focus on  Information  Asymmetry  and  Ex-­‐‑Ante Uncertainty  as the explanations of
why underpricing occurs. Further, complexity inherent in the issuing firms’ operations is
discussed in order to  shed  additional  light on the existence of uncertainty regarding the
issuing firms’ true value.

1.1.1 Information Asymmetry

According to Rock’s Winner’s curse theory, IPO underpricing arises as a result of asymmetric
information and rationing. The theory assumes that there are two types of investors: an
informed group which possess perfect knowledge about the realized offering value and one
group of investors which is uninformed. Due to  their  superior knowledge of the firm’s value,
informed  investors will only subscribe to issues where the expected aftermarket price
surpasses the offering price. Those investors who are uninformed however do not possess
superior information and will bid randomly across all issues. Considering a good issue where

                                          4
the offering price is set below its true value, the informed investors will crowd out the
uninformed investors. In the reverse case, the informed investors withdraw from the market
leaving the uninformed investors with a disproportionately large amount  of overpriced
shares. This phenomenon is referred to as the “Winner’s Curse”. As a result of the information
asymmetry, uninformed investors will on average lose money by participating in IPOs and
thus leave the IPO market unless they are sufficiently compensated. However, the sole
participation of informed investors is not enough to satisfy the supply of the IPO market.
Participation by uninformed investors is thus necessary to satisfy the supply of issued shares
and the underwriter must discount the issue in the form of underpricing in order to increase
the probability of being able to sell the whole issue. This theory has received strong empirical
support and is acknowledged by Keloharju (1993) and Koh and Walter (1989).

1.1.2 Ex-­‐‑Ante Uncertainty

Another  widely acknowledged hypothesis put forth by Beatty and Ritter (1986) states that
an increase in the ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty regarding the issuing firm’s true value, as determined
by the closing price on the first day of trading following the offering, increases the required
underpricing.  The  model  acts  as  an  extension  of  Rock’s  “winner’s  curse“-­‐‑theory  of
underpricing.
       The choice made by an outside investor to engage in information production of the
issue can be regarded as an investment in a call option on the IPO. The investor will exercise
if the information production indicates an estimated true value exceeding the strike price i.e.
the offered share price. The value of exercising the option increases with the uncertainty
regarding the valuation which motivates more investors to be informed. Consequently, an
increase in the number of informed investors exacerbates the “winner’s curse” and thus the
underpricing.
       Considering the imperfect allocation of information, uninformed investors face the
risk of receiving  a disproportional allocation of overpriced IPO’s and issuers intentionally
underprice in order to ensure participation and full subscription. An increase in ex-­‐‑ante
uncertainty will thus result in a higher degree of downside risk for the uninformed investor,
raising the required underpricing accordingly.

                                          5
1.2 Firm complexity

The  information  production  hypothesis  predicts  that  a  larger  number  of  managing
underwriters included in the underwriting syndicate will serve to reduce IPO underpricing.
However, information production as a means to reduce underpricing ultimately depends on
the underwriting managers’ ability to comprehend the  issuer and its environment. This
understanding is necessary in order to produce information which adequately reflects the
true nature of the  issuer and will ultimately lead to an accurate valuation of the issuing firm.
Increased firm complexity makes it increasingly difficult for underwriting managers as well
as investors to evaluate the issuer, reducing the effectiveness of information production as a
mitigating factor to underpricing. Taken into account that firms exhibit different degrees of
complexity, the prevalence of underpricing should differ between issuers depending on their
respective complexity. In other words, a higher degree of  issuer complexity increases the ex-­‐‑
ante uncertainty related to the  issuer’s value. This consequently results in a larger pricing
discount demanded in the primary market in the form of underpricing.
       Cohen and Lou (2012) find that when firms become more complex, investors fail to
process available  information  as quickly and to the same extent as they would when
evaluating less complex  firms.  The frictions to incorporate available information into the
firm’s value thus grow more pronounced with firm complexity. The authors’ results are found
by studying how the same piece of information affect the share price development of  public
firms of differing complexity. It is therefore not a case of information asymmetry but rather a
result of how different firm characteristics (viz.  complexity) affect the ability of investors to
relate to  available information.  This in turn affects the  investors’ ability  to form an opinion
regarding how the  information  should be translated into  firm value.  Essentially,  it is this
characteristic of firm complexity  that  affects the ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty surrounding the value
of the firm. Analogous to these findings, we argue that the higher ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty
stemming from higher firm complexity will affect investors’ view on companies prior to going
public. Ultimately the difficulty in incorporating available information in the evaluation of the
firm will lead investors to require a greater discount on the offer price of more complex firms
in comparison to  the  offer price of a less complex firm. Hence, more complex firms will
experience a greater degree of underpricing.

                                          6
1.2.1 Internal vs external complexity

There are numerous dimensions in which an  issuer  can be considered  complex. Markarian
and Parbonetti  (2007) make the distinction between internal and external complexity of
firms. These two sources of complexity and their respective implications are discussed
below.

Internal complexity

The internal complexity of an issuing firm refers to the business  itself and the internal
organizational processes. More complex firm structures and processes make the firm harder
to understand and  to evaluate from a valuation perspective. Additionally, as the issuer’s
products and services become more technologically advanced, the difficulty in understanding
the business grows, resulting in higher complexity. Markarian and Parbonetti (2007) argues
that   higher   internal   complexity   results   in   difficulties   to   communicate   firm-­‐‑specific
information to outsiders, in relation to board of director composition. Following the same
reasoning, the investors who are considered outsiders in this respect should be unable to
accurately evaluate the business, processes and value of the issuer as the internal complexity
of the same issuer increases.
          In this paper R&D-­‐‑intensity, the percentage of intangible assets to total assets, and a
selection of Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codes, are used as proxies for internal
complexity.

External complexity

External complexity refers to factors  affecting the firm from the outside, i.e. the complexity
of the firm’s external environment. More sophisticated customers with rapidly changing
demands increases the difficulty in evaluating the firm’s ability to meet these demands in the
future and thus the  general  prospects of the business.  Also, more diversified firms with
comprehensively challenging competitive structures and operational and geographical
scopes  exhibit  increasing external complexity.  (Rose  and Shephard, 1997, Hermalin and
Weisbach, 1988 and Yermack, 1996).  Increased external complexity makes it more difficult
for both underwriting managers and investors to evaluate the firm which results in increased
ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty and thus underpricing.

                                          7
For the purpose of this study we choose to focus on the internal complexity of firms. As
previously noted, external complexity occurs as a result of market  forces  where the issuer
operates.  However, information regarding market conditions and characteristics should be
readily available for outsiders (investors and underwriting managers) as well as insiders.
Thus, the ability to form an opinion of market forces as well as evaluate probabilities of
success in a specific market should not differ considerably between insiders and outsiders.
Internal complexity, on the other hand, stems from firm characteristics that may  only be
observable   to   insiders   and   increased   internal   complexity   results   in   difficulties   to
communicate firm-­‐‑specific information to outsiders. Therefore,  the  ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty
should be higher given a higher level of internal complexity  in comparison  to external
complexity. Indicators of internal rather than external complexity will thus be utilized to
identify complex firms.

1.3 Theories on how to reduce uncertainty regarding firm value

1.3.1 Certification
The process of bringing a highly complex firm public is associated with significant difficulties
regarding  communication  of  firm  quality  to  investors.  As  the  literature  recognizes
information asymmetry among investors where one group has access to more information
than another group regarding the firm’s true value, the presence of venture capital and
private equity  firms could be perceived as a signal of quality as capital markets recognizes
their monitoring roles. Private equity and venture capital firms are considered active owners
and act as a third party certification of the issuing firm’s true value, thus reducing information
asymmetry and underpricing (Megginson and Weiss, 1991 and Barry et al., 1990). However,
subsequent  literature  on the area presented by Rossetto (2008), Gompers (1996) and Lee
and Wahal (2004) argue that venture capital backed IPO’s experience a higher degree of
underpricing in comparison to non-­‐‑venture  capital-­‐‑backed IPO’s. The venture capital firms
are willing to bear higher costs of underpricing since venture capital returns and their
abilities to raise future funds depend on the firms’ abilities to take their companies public.

                                          8
      Gompers (1996) provide two explanations to the observed results. Firstly, the
establishment of reputation is of considerable importance in order to raise capital for
subsequent funds. Relatively young venture capital firms which have not yet established a
reputation have an incentive to bring their portfolio companies public early since it acts as a
signal of quality. Consequently, less mature companies are brought public and venture capital
firms face a higher degree of underpricing.
       Secondly, investors recycle capital between different assets. By taking the portfolio
companies public earlier, venture capital firms return cash to investors which can be used to
invest in newly established funds. The recycling of assets thus motivates early IPOs since it
allows venture capital firms to raise capital for later investments.
       In addition to private equity and venture capital sponsorships as potential sources of
certification, the age of the issuing firm may serve to alleviate some of the uncertainty
regarding firm value experienced by outsiders. Although privately held, firms that have been
present in the market during a longer period of time are more likely to have proven their
business concept to outsiders and possible investors.  In addition, the amount of media
coverage and other publically available information about the company increases  as firms
grow older  (Ljungqvist, 2007 and Chemmanur, 1993). Thus, as firms age, outsiders have a
greater possibility to assess the future prospects of the firm in question. Therefore, increased
age should serve to reduce the uncertainty surrounding the firm and the discount demanded
by investors to acquire shares.

1.3.2 Monitoring
Theoretically, the concentration of ownership may directly affect the value of a firm as a
result of improved corporate governance. An ownership structure characterized by larger
and more concentrated shareholders should have an effect of reducing the free rider problem
associated with firm monitoring (Shleifer and Vishny, 1986 and Demsetz and Lehn, 1985).
This theory is generally referred to as the monitoring hypothesis. However, a more
concentrated shareholder structure also contributes with a higher incentive among the
respective owners to provide valuable advice and potentially improve the firm’s utilization
of corporate resources. This aspect of the monitoring theory might prove particularly helpful
in complex firms. Investors who are larger, more experienced and more inclined to provide

                                          9
useful advice and insights could serve to alleviate some uncertainty regarding firms that
exhibit higher complexity.  As investors are uncertain regarding  the value and prospects of
the firm, the presence of experienced owners could serve as a sign of quality.
       The notion that there exists a positive relationship between the benefit of monitoring
and the firm’s size has received empirical support (Hertzel and Smith, 1993 and Vishny,
Morck, Shleifer, 1988). Firms of smaller size tend to be relatively more illiquid, exhibit higher
growth rates and have a more managerial ownership structure in comparison to larger firms.
In this case, when investors are more concerned about the firm’s ability to satisfy its future
growth prospect, the certification  signaling  effects  should be stronger than the monitoring
effects. In contrast, the relative importance of monitoring should be higher in larger firms as
they are more liquid and have a more dispersed ownership structure. Taken this into account,
venture capital firms could  be seen as active investors contributing to the monitoring of the
firm and thus reducing the information asymmetry.

1.3.3 The role of underwriting syndicates in IPOs

Information production

In the process of an initial public offering, it is the task of the underwriting managers to value
and assign a price to the issuing firms’ offered shares. The information production hypothesis
as presented in Corwin and Schultz (2005) is founded on the idea that underwriting
managers during the IPO process receive and then relate to information from the market
regarding the issuing firm. During the period from the IPO filing date to the determination of
the final offering price,  the underwriting managers engage in conversations with their
respective customer base in order  to determine the market interest and demand  for  the
shares  offered.  Information  uncovered  by  syndicate  member  underwriters  is  then
communicated to the lead manager. As  underwriters differ in both customer bases  (e.g.
private or institutional investors)  and  geographical markets,  the inclusion of additional
underwriting managers with different customer bases and geographical markets help to
increase the information gathered in preparation for the final pricing of the shares offered in
the IPO. With additional information, the offering is likely to be more accurately priced and
thus reducing  the amount of money “left on the table”  as a result of underpricing. An

                                          10
increased syndicate size therefore implies improved information production and more
efficiently priced IPOs. Most benefits  of having larger syndicates therefore comes from
adding syndicate members with complementary attributes.
       Another aspect of information production is the information flow that goes in the
opposite  direction;  information  about  the  issuing  firm  might  be  conveyed  by  the
underwriting managers to the investors during “investor education”. By going on roadshows,
the issuing firms’ management present the company and the context of the IPO. Information
is  passed to investors  which may help to alleviate investor  uncertainty  regarding  the true
value and future prospects of the issuing firm. A larger number of underwriting managers
may thus contribute to a more exhaustive information base and presentation material about
the issuing firm.  Therefore, if a greater number  of syndicate members are included to
produce this material, investors may be better positioned to make well-­‐‑informed decisions
about the issuing firm’s true value, leading to less uncertainty and a lower required discount.
This has a counteracting effect on the underpricing stemming from ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty.
       Underpricing of shares in IPOs may be of more or less importance to the selling
shareholders. Depending on how much they stand to lose, the propensity of previous owners
to counteract underpricing varies. As put forward by Habib and Ljungqvist (2001) the level
of underpricing can be affected by the extent of the issuing firm’s promotion. Employing more
reputable underwriters, lawyers and accountants as well as conducting more extensive
investor education  in the form of longer management roadshows or listing the shares on
stock exchanges with investors of “higher quality” all constitute increased promotion. The
aforementioned actions are all costly, but might decrease the level of underpricing in the IPO.
Thus, there exists a trade-­‐‑off between the level of underpricing and the promotion of the
issue. Regarding more complex firms,  it might be the case that they experience higher
promotional costs due to the difficulties of investors to incorporate relevant information into
the value of the firm, and thus need more promotion. Given the above mentioned trade-­‐‑off it
is possible that complex firms’ optimal allocation of promotional costs and costs incurred due
to underpricing results in a level of underpricing which is above that of less complex firms.

                                          11
Competition between underwriters
Even after being selected as a member of the underwriting syndicate, competition amongst
the underwriting  managers is a possibility. The  competition between syndicate members
arises due to the managers’ desire to secure more senior roles in subsequent offerings by the
same issuer and to advance their respective industry reputation. This will help them reserve
better positions in future transactions. By “whispering in the ear” of the issuing firm,
syndicate members try to convey the picture that they might have done a better job than the
lead manager at securing a more accurate (often higher) issue price in the IPO. Issuers
receiving this positive pricing information are likely to pressure the book manager to revise
the target price upwards. Consequently, additional syndicate members participating in
intense intra-­‐‑syndicate competition will likely result  in IPO prices being pushed upward
which reduces  underpricing in comparison to issues characterized by a smaller amount of
syndicate members.

                                          12
2. Hypotheses

As argued above, different levels of complexity inherent in different issuers will result in
different levels of underpricing. Due to the increased ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty stemming from
higher firm complexity we thus arrive at our first and most central hypothesis:

H1 – Increased firm complexity will lead to more underpricing.

        Firm complexity as a source of IPO underpricing  ultimately results in  ex-­‐‑ante
uncertainty as well as underwriting managers’ and investors’ inability to accurately
comprehend and price the issuing firm. We argue that firms of greater age have had a longer
time to prove their business on the respective market and simultaneously provide investors
with a longer time to understand and evaluate the company. These firms will most likely
experience less underpricing in a potential IPO and the second prediction regarding IPO
underpricing is therefore:

H2  –  Because of less time to alleviate any ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty regarding their business
prospects, younger firms should suffer more underpricing than older firms.

       Following the line of the certification theory and the  uncertainty resulting from
complex firms, in the presence of complexity, potential investors might want some indication
of the issuers’ worth. When investors face difficulties in evaluating the issuing firm, they may
look elsewhere for clues indicating whether the investment is sound. Well renowned existing
owners who have previously been successful might in these cases serve as assurance to new
investors that the issuing firm does indeed constitute an attractive investment proposition.
Thus, our third hypothesis will be:

H3  –  Due to  certification and monitoring, venture capital and private equity-­‐‑backed firms
should experience less underpricing than do unbacked firms.

                                          13
       Previous studies have focused on the effect of  quantitatively  greater information
production and, to some extent, disregarded the  qualitative  aspects of the underwriting
syndicate’s  ability to produce accurate information. A larger number of managers included
in the syndicate has been proven to reduce underpricing. However, we argue that more ex-­‐‑
ante uncertainty derived from increased firm complexity will inhibit the benefit of including
additional underwriting managers and its decreasing effect on underpricing. Consequently,
the fourth and final hypothesis is:

H4  –  Because of the increased difficulty for underwriters, as well as investors, to evaluate
complex firms, the benefit of additional underwriting managers is lower in more complex firms
than in less complex firms.

                                          14
3. Data collection and summary statistics

3.1 Data collection

The data sample consists of IPO data for 3,542 U.S. IPOs being completed in the time period
of 2000-­‐‑2015. The primary data has been acquired from Thomson Reuter’s Security Data
Company’s (SDC) Global New Issues Database. The collected data consists of observations on
offer price, issue size,  underwriting  syndicate characteristics, firm specific information such
as Standard Industrial Classification (“SIC”) codes and historical stock price data.
      Research and Development Expenditures as a percentage of Net Sales has been
collected from Bloomberg’s database on company financials. Information regarding firm
incorporation dates (used to calculate firm ages at the time of the IPO) has been  acquired
from Bloomberg as well.
       A  total  number  of  704  observations  had  missing  information  on  stock  price
performance  after  issue  and  were  thus  excluded  from  the  sample.  Another  1,957
observations were excluded due to missing information on firm specific and accounting
information at the time of the IPO, such as firm age, total assets, intangible assets and R&D
Expenses. Finally, after the exclusion of issues on other exchanges than NYSE and NASDAQ,
the remaining data set consists of 528 IPOs. These IPOs, issued between 2000 and 2015 serve
as the final data sample used in our regression analysis.

3.2 Summary statistics

Table 1 below displays an overview of the sample characteristics for our 528 observations.
The average underpricing among the sample IPOs is 19 percent and the median is 10 percent.
Some outliers are present as the maximum and minimum observed values of underpricing is
326 percent and  -­‐‑80 percent respectively.
       The age of the sampled firms varies from newly formed firms to firms that have been
around for almost a century. The average age of our sample firms is 6 years while the median
is 5 years.

                                          15
       The average size of the funds raised in the IPO is USD 274 million and the average firm
size measured by total assets is USD 1,2bn. However, we do see some  variation in these
measures as well.
       The mean and median values for Intangible assets as a percentage of total assets are
28 percent and 20 percent respectively among our sample firms. The  corresponding values
for R&D Expenditures as a percentage of net sales are 204 percent and 5 percent respectively.
The considerably high maximum value, which also influences the mean value, reported for
the R&D variable might seem surprising at first glance. However after considering the nature
of the firms exhibiting these numbers, they seem less odd. A number of the sample firms
constitute biotechnology firms in a relatively early stage of their lives. It is not uncommon for
firms within this industry to not yet have any marketable products since many of these firms
are  still in the product developing phase. These products have to be approved before they
can be offered to consumers, resulting in these firms exhibiting neglectable sales and notably
high Research and Development costs.
      Lastly, the number of managers in the  IPO syndicates vary between 1 and 45
managers, with mean and median values of 8 percent and 6 percent respectively.

                                             Table 1.
                                      Sample descriptive statistics.

    This table illustrates the mean, minimum, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile and maximum values of underpricing
   (defined as the percentage change in price from the offer price to the closing price after the first day of trading), age in years
       (measured as the number of years from the incorporation date of the company until the date of the IPO), total assets
      measured in USD at the last balance day before the IPO, intangible assets as a percentage of total assets, R&D intensity
   (measured as total R&D expenditures as a percentage of net sales) and the number of managing underwriters included in the
         underwriting syndicate for our sample of 528 U.S. firms completeing an IPO between the years 2000 and 2015.

                                  Mean  Min  25th percentile  Median  75th percentile   Max
  Underpricing (%)                     19    -­‐‑80         0          10          27         326
 Age (Years)                         6     0         1          5          9          90
 Offer size (USDm)                   274    3         72         112         232       16,007
 Total assets (USDm)                 1,195   1         60         179         721       137,238
 Intangible assets (% of total assets)       28    0         5          20         48         98
 R&D intensity (R&D exp. % of Net Sales)   204    0         0          5          19        74,182
 # of managers                       8     1         4          6          9          45

                                          16
Table 2 below displays summary statistics of our sample’s underpricing development during
the time period 2000 and 2015.  Table 3 displays a summary of  our sample in terms of IPO
activity broken down per period.

                                           Table 2.
                              Overview of underpricing per year.
       This table illustrates the mean, minimum, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile and maximum values of
       underpricing per year for our sample of 528 U.S. firms completing an IPO between the years 2000 and 2015.
                                                 th                               th
    Year       Mean        Min     25  Percentile   Median   75  Percentile     Max
    2000         73           -­‐‑19          1.56          39           115          326
    2001         11           -­‐‑32          0.10           9            23           71
    2002          7            -­‐‑3           0.00           2            16           20
    2003         20           9          8.93          23           28           28
    2004         14           -­‐‑6           0.86           6            20           52
    2005          9           -­‐‑13          0.00           7            17           51
    2006         11           -­‐‑14          0.00           6            18           60
    2007         22           -­‐‑15          0.83          18           31           99
     2008          4            -­‐‑20          -­‐‑3.78           0            17           23
    2009         11           -­‐‑15          0.28           9            17           57
     2010          8            -­‐‑18          -­‐‑0.50           5            15           39
    2011         18           -­‐‑12          0.22          13           29           107
    2012         16           -­‐‑80          0.40          16           29           100
    2013         22           -­‐‑29          0.05          14           35           122
    2014         18           -­‐‑28          0.00          10           21           212
     2015         14           -­‐‑49          -­‐‑1.89          12           29           72

                                           Table 3.
                                Overview of no. of IPOs and offer size.
   This table illustrates the number of IPOs and the average offer size of our sample of 528 U.S. firms completing an IPO
    between the years 2000 and 2015, divided by the periods 2000-­‐‑2002, 2003-­‐‑2005, 2006-­‐‑2008, 2009-­‐‑2011 and 2012-­‐‑
                                                    2015.
    Year                  No. of IPOs                     Average offer size (USDm)
  2000-­‐‑2002                   53                                   145
  2003-­‐‑2005                   51                                   168
  2006-­‐‑2008                   67                                   171
  2009-­‐‑2011                  103                                  419
  2012-­‐‑2015                  254                                  291
    Total                    528                                  274

                                          17
4. Methodology

4.1 Dependent and independent variables

The stated hypotheses are tested by a regression analysis using an Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) regression. Possible sources of underpricing is the target of investigation and thus the
observed underpricing constitutes our dependent variable. This variable is defined as the
return (percentage change in price) between the offer price in the IPO and the closing price
after one day of trading.

                        Equation 1: Underpricing definition

                                                     𝑃,-./0,234  −  𝑃.6607
                             𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔  =
                                                                  𝑃.6607

       The analysis employs eleven independent variables in order to explain differences in
underpricing between the observed issuing firms. Out of these eleven explanatory variables
R&D Expenditures as a percentage of net sales is identified as the primary indicator of high
complexity. The argument is based on to two reasons. Firstly, the main usage of reported R&D
expenditures may in several cases be nearly impossible to identify by firm outsiders.
Secondly, the  task of evaluating the prospects of products, currently in the R&D phase and
their probability to reach the market is a considerably difficult task even for the firm’s
management. Outsiders with limited insight into privately held firms will thus face even
greater difficulty in appropriately evaluating the prospects of the firms’ products currently
being developed. We do acknowledge that R&D Expenditures is in no way an exhaustive
measure of complexity in a firm. Other indicators such as the length of the management
roadshow and management participation on the roadshow in connection with the IPO might
be included and prove to complement R&D intensity as an indicator of complexity. We do,
however, view R&D intensity as a straightforward and appropriate indicator for the purpose
of this study. Additionally, previous research (e.g. Markarian and Parbonetti, 2007) has found
that R&D-­‐‑related measures are good proxies for firm complexity.

                                          18
       In addition to the R&D intensity variable two other independent explanatory variables
are added: Intangible assets as a percentage of total assets and industry classification codes

(SIC-­‐‑codes)2. A  summary of the SIC-­‐‑codes used  in this study is displayed in  Table 4.

                                       Table 4.
                       3-­‐‑digit SIC Codes for Sampling of High-­‐‑Tech Firm.

     This table illustrate the eleven 3-­‐‑digit Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codes identified by Kile and
                     Phillips (2009) as most appropriate for sampling hihg-­‐‑technology firms.

         SIC-­‐‑Code                              Industry name
           283                                  Drugs
           357                         Computer and office equipment
           366                          Communication equipment
           367                      Electronic components and accessories
           382                  Laboratory, optic, measure, control instruments
           384                       Surgical, medical, dental instruments
           481                          Telephone communications
           482                      Miscellaneous communication services
           489                         Communication services, NEC
           737                   Computer programming, data processing, etc.
           873                      Research, development, testing services

      Firm size has in many cases been shown to exhibit a negative relationship to
underpricing. Smaller and unestablished firms often cause more uncertainty regarding the
firms’ prospects and value. In order to control for this  well-­‐‑known  source of underpricing
total assets of the firm (in USD) is included in the regression model. In addition, the size of
the offering (i.e. the offer price multiplied by the offered amount of shares) has been found
to have a positive relationship with underpricing (e.g. Loughran and Ritter, 2002). Therefore,
we also include a variable measuring the size of the offering (measured in USD).
       Furthermore, intertemporal differences in underpricing are controlled for by the
creation of two additional variables. The first representing the  year in which the IPO was
completed and the second a dummy variable for IPOs completed during the internet bubble.

2  Kile and Phillips (2009) investigate the SIC-­‐‑codes most commonly used to identify firms as being ”high-­‐‑
technology firms”. Their study develops a procedure which reduces the sampling errors when selecting
samples of high-­‐‑technology firms and finally results in a recommendation of eleven SIC-­‐‑codes the authors
consider optimal when sampling high-­‐‑technology firms.

                                          19
To answer the full range of our hypotheses, an additional four variables are included: the age
of the firm, the number of managers included in the underwriting syndicate, a venture capital
dummy and a private equity dummy.
       Outlined below is a detailed description of the respective independent variables used
in the regression:

RD_Dummy – Is a dummy variable measuring firm complexity in terms of the proportion of
R&D Expenditures to Net Sales. The variable takes the value of one (1) if the firm has a
proportion of R&D Expenditures to Net Sales in excess of the median value, and zero (0)
otherwise.

Int_Assets  –  Is a continuous variable measuring firm complexity in terms of the proportion
of intangible assets to total assets.

SIC_11_Dummy – Is a dummy variable indicating if the firm belongs to any of the eleven three
digit SIC-­‐‑codes identified by Kile and Phillips (2009) as being optimal for sampling high-­‐‑
technology firms.  We have chosen to look at high-­‐‑technology firms because of their high
internal complexity characteristics stemming from the high R&D nature of the offered
products and  the complications of managing the highly educated people necessary to carry
out   the   complex   tasks   undergoing   in   a   high-­‐‑technology   business   (Moornan   and
Swaminathan, 2003)

Ln_Offer_Size  –  Is the natural logarithm of the total amount of proceeds raised in  the IPO,
measured as the product of the offer price and the number of shares offered in the IPO.

Ln_Total_Assets – Is the natural logarithm of the sample firms’ total assets at the last balance
day before the IPO.

Year – Is simply the year in which the IPO was completed. This variable is included to control
for any variations over time, which historically have been significant.

                                          20
Internet_Bubble_Dummy  –  The large amounts of underpricing during the internet stock
bubble of the late 1990s and early 2000s is  documented by Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003)
and cause for concern when looking at causes for underpricing in a sample period spanning
these years. Due to this anomaly a  dummy variable is constructed  to control for the effect.
Since our sample starts in the year 2000, the dummy variable takes the value of one (1) if the
sample firm completed the IPO before the year 2001, and zero (0) otherwise.

Ln_age – Is the natural logarithm of the sample firms’ age at the time of their respective IPOs.
Age is measured as the number of days between the firm’s incorporation date and the firm’s
IPO. The variable is commonly utilized as a proxy for information asymmetry as older firms
are assumed to have provided the market with more information.

VC_Dummy – Is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the issuing firm is backed by a
venture capital-­‐‑firm in the IPO.

PE_Dummy – Is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the issuing firm is backed by a
private equity-­‐‑firm in the IPO.

No_Of_Mngrs  –  Is the total number of underwriting managers included in the underwriting
syndicate of the IPO. Both Corwin and Schultz (2005), and Ritter and  Hu (2007) found
evidence that an increased number of managing underwriters included in an IPO syndicate
will contribute to decrease underpricing. We therefore include this variable to account for
the effect on underpricing from the number of underwriters in the syndicate.

       Our main regression constructed for carrying out the tests of our hypotheses thus
looks like follows:

                                          21
                  Equation 2: Ordinary Least Squares Regression

         𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔  =  𝛼  +  𝛽4  𝑅𝐷_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽B  𝐼𝑛𝑡_𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  +  𝛽G  𝑆𝐼𝐶_11_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦
                          +  𝛽K  𝐿𝑛_𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒   +  𝛽P  𝐿𝑛_𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠   +  𝛽U(𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟)
                         +  𝛽Y  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽\  𝐿𝑛_𝐴𝑔𝑒  +  𝛽]  𝑉𝐶_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦
                         +  𝛽4_(𝑃𝐸_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦)  +  𝛽44  𝑁𝑜_𝑂𝑓_𝑀𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑠

       The final sample contains a number of outliers with regards to underpricing. As shown
in  Table 5, the mean and median underpricing in  our sample is 19 percent and 10 percent
respectively,  with  minimum  and  maximum  values  of  -­‐‑80  percent  and  326  percent
respectively. This  is graphically illustrated in  Figure 4. In order to correct for these

discrepancies the variable  Underpricing  is  winsorized,  by replacing values in the  1st and 99th

percentiles respectively. This procedure yields the marginally altered regression displayed
below.

 Equation 3: Ordinary Least Squares Regression with winsorized dependent variable

             𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑊𝑖𝑛
                        =  𝛼  +  𝛽4  𝑅𝐷_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽B  𝐼𝑛𝑡_𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  +  𝛽G  𝑆𝐼𝐶_11_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦
                          +  𝛽K  𝐿𝑛_𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒   +  𝛽P  𝐿𝑛_𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠   +  𝛽U(𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟)
                         +  𝛽Y  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽\  𝐿𝑛_𝐴𝑔𝑒  +  𝛽]  𝑉𝐶_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦
                         +  𝛽4_(𝑃𝐸_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦)  +  𝛽44  𝑁𝑜_𝑂𝑓_𝑀𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑠

                                             Table 5.
                                Underpricing sample characteristics.
  This table illustrates the mean, minimum, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile and maximum values of underpricing for
                       our sample of 528 U.S. firms completing an IPO between the years 2000 and 2015.
                                  Mean  Min  25th percentile  Median  75th percentile   Max
  Underpricing (%)                     19    -­‐‑80        0.03         10          27         326

                                          22
                          Figure 4: Underpricing per firm

  This graph illustrates the distribution of underpricing among our 528 U.S. sample IPOs between 2000 and
                                         2015

            300


            200


            100

        Underpricing (%)


            0


            100
             1000           2000           3000           4000           5000
                                                Issuing Firm ID

       However, the area of particular interest in this study is the interaction between
information production and ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty stemming from increased complexity.
Therefore, tests are carried out in order to resolve whether more complex firms exhibit less
benefits with regards to the observed underpricing from including additional managers in
the  underwriting  syndicate.  Additionally,  it  is  tested  whether  increased  information
production has a mitigating effect on the amount of underpricing derived from increased ex-­‐‑
ante uncertainty and firm complexity.

4.2 Interaction between information production and firm complexity

In order to discern the effects of increased firm complexity on underwriting managers’ ability
to produce accurate information, two variables representing information production and
firm specific complexity are interacted. Information production is proxied  by the amount of
managers included in each syndicate and the degree of complexity in the respective firms is

                                          23
proxied by R&D Expenditures to Net Sales. For the purpose of testing the above mentioned
interaction, the term  RD_Infoprod  is constructed by multiplying the dichotomous variable
RD_Dummy with the continuous variable No_Of_Mngrs. The coefficient of the interactive term
will thus represent the additional effect on underpricing of adding more underwriting
managers when a firm is classified as being complex. By including the interaction term in the
original regression analysis, the following equation is yielded:

        Equation 4: Ordinary Least Squares Regression with interactive term

𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑊𝑖𝑛
                =  𝛼  +  𝛽4  𝑅𝐷_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽B  𝑁𝑜_𝑜𝑓_𝑀𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑠  +  𝛽G  𝑅𝐷_𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑜𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑  +  𝛽K  𝐼𝑛𝑡_𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠
                +  𝛽P  𝑆𝐼𝐶_11_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽U(𝐿𝑛_𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒)  +  𝛽Y  𝐿𝑛_𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  +  𝛽\  𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟
                 +  𝛽]  𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑡_𝐵𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  𝛽4_  𝐿𝑛_𝐴𝑔𝑒

       To draw further conclusions regarding the effects that information production has on
the  reduction  of  underpricing,  stemming  from  increased  firm  complexity,  the  main
regression (Equation 2) is carried out on two separate groups. The groups are separated by
the amount of information production present in each IPO. Due to the lack of any appropriate
absolute measure of information production, the number of underwriters included in the
respective syndicates will serve as a proxy. The usage of this proxy has empirical support by
Corwin and Schultz (2005) as well as Ritter and Hu (2007) who note that a greater number
of underwriters leads to increased information production and thus reduced underpricing.
       Group 1 consists of firms with low information production  and Group 2 with firms
exhibiting  high  information  production.  The  firms  in  Group  1  have  an  amount  of

underwriters less than or equal to the 33rd  percentile, which in our sample represents five

underwriters. Group 2 consists of firms that have an amount of  underwriters greater than

the 67th  percentile, which in our sample amounts to eight underwriters. Summary statistics

for each of the two groups are displayed in Table 6 below.

                                          24
                                              Table 6.
                                Sample subgroup descriptive statistics.

     This table illustrates the mean, minimum, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile and maximum values of underpricing
    (defined as the percentage change in price from the offer price to the closing price after the first day of trading), age in years
  (measured as the number of years from the incorporation date of the company until the date of the IPO), total assets measured
  in USD at the last balance day before the IPO, intangible assets as a percentage of total assets, R&D intensity (measured as total
      R&D expenditures as a percentage of net sales) and the number of managing underwriters included in the underwriting
    syndicate for two subgroups of our sample of 528 U.S. firms completeing an IPO between the years 2000 and 2015. Group 1
   includes firms with less than or equal to the 33rd percentile number of managers included in the underwriting syndicates, in
   our sample this number corresponds to five managers. Group 1 includes firms with more than or equal to the 67th percentile
     number of managers included in the underwriting syndicates, in our sample this number corresponds to eight managers.
  Group 1 -­‐‑ No. of Managers ≤ 5
  N=228                         Mean  Min  25th percentile  Median  75th percentile   Max
  Underpricing (%)                     15    -­‐‑80         0           7          24         212
 Age (Years)                         7     0         2          6          10         36
 Offer size (USDm)                    90    3        45         79         111        495
 Total assets (USDm)                  154    1         34         78         202        1,291
 Intangible assets (% of total assets)        25    0         4          16          43         90
 R&D intensity (R&D exp. % of Net Sales)    433    0         1          10          29        74,182
 # of managers                       4     1         3          4          5          5

  Group 2 -­‐‑ No. of Managers ≥ 8
  N=186                         Mean  Min  25th percentile  Median  75th percentile   Max
  Underpricing (%)                     23    -­‐‑32         1          10          26         326
 Age (Years)                         5     0         1          4          7          90
 Offer size (USDm)                    548    20        122         257         477       16,007
 Total assets (USDm)                  2,760   9        222         874        3,001      137,238
 Intangible assets (% of total assets)        31    0         5          24          55         90
 R&D intensity (R&D exp. % of Net Sales)    37    0         0          0          7         3,805
 # of managers                       13    8         9          11         14         45

       The purpose of the test is to observe whether differences in information  production,
proxied by the number of managers included in the underwriting syndicate, affects the
observed underpricing derived from increased firm complexity.

                                          25
5. Results

The following section discusses the obtained empirical results in relation to our hypotheses
stated in part 2. Initially, the results from the main regression and overall findings are
presented in section 5.1. Section 5.2 and 5.3 treats results  relating to possible mitigating
factors  of underpricing in the face of increased complexity.  Section 5.2 will discuss how
increased firm age at the time of the IPO might decrease underpricing as ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty
is reduced with a more extensive track record of the firm. Section 5.3  discusses how the
backing of a venture capital of private equity sponsor might contribute with certification and
monitoring in order to reduce IPO underpricing when investors are faced with increased
uncertainty resulting from increased firm complexity. The results obtained by including the
interactive term in the regression is described in section 5.4 where we strive to identify some
explanatory factors to the occurrence of underpricing despite the presence of larger
underwriting syndicates. Finally, in section 5.5 and 5.6 we perform tests for multicollinearity
and check the robustness of our regression model, respectively.

5.1 Main regression results

In order to test the main hypothesis H1 outlined in part 2, we run an Ordinary Least Squares
(OLS) regression. The indicators of higher firm complexity (R&D-­‐‑intensity and  percentage of
intangible assets to total assets) show varying effects on the experienced underpricing for
our sample firms. The results from the main regression are illustrated in Table 7.
       In line with  hypothesis  H1  we find support that increased R&D Expenditures as a
percentage of net sales does increase the amount of underpricing. The regression coefficient
of the variable  RD_Dummy  exhibits a strongly positive value, significant at the one percent
level.
       Firms with a higher percentage of intangible assets to total assets experience a lower
degree of underpricing as our Intangible Assets Dummy variable exhibits a negative
coefficient value. The result contradicts hypothesis  H1  which implies that increasing the
value of a complexity indicator should increase underpricing. However, the coefficient is not
significant as it exhibits a P-­‐‑value of approximately 0.3. The conclusion that firms with a high
degree of intangible assets experience more underpricing can thus not be drawn.

                                          26
       Inconsistent with our predictions, the remaining complexity variable (SIC  –  codes)  is
negative,  indicating  that  firms  in  these  high-­‐‑technology  industries  exhibit  decreased
underpricing. The negative value of the High-­‐‑Technology coefficient is further puzzling since
it contradicts  our predictions as well as the results found by Loughran and Ritter (2004).
However, the coefficient is insignificant and the discrepancies in the slope might be explained
by sampling differences of high-­‐‑technology firms.
      Ln_Offer_Size  which measure the amount offered in the issue is in line with
predictions.  The coefficient of the  offer  size variable  exhibits a  positive value of 8.24  and a
significance level  of  one percent. This result indicates that larger offers tend to exhibit more
pronounced underpricing and is in line with previous findings by e.g. Loughran and Ritter
(2002).
       The notion that larger, better established firms exhibit less underpricing is in line with
previous literature. The negative relationship between total assets and underpricing could
be explained by investors being more comfortable investing in a firm that has been able to
reach a profitability level allowing them to accumulate a larger amount of capital and thereof
signal higher quality than a smaller firm. Investors should thus be less uncertain about the
value of a larger firm.

                                          27
                                                              Table 7.
      Ordinary Least Squares Regression of Underpricing on an R&D Dummy, Intagible Assets as a percentag of total assets, Industry
   Classification Dummy, Ln(Offer Size), Ln(Total Assets), Year of the IPO, Internet Bubble Dummy, Ln(Age), VC Dummy, PE Dummy and
                                    Number of Managers Included in the Underwriting Syndicate.

  The dependent variable is underpricing, defined as the percentage change in price from the offer price to the closing price after the first day of trading. The R&D Dummy
     takes the value of one if the percentage of R&D expenditures to net sales exceeds the median, and zero otherwise. Int. Assets (% of total assets) is the percentage of
  intangible assets of total assets at the last balance day before the IPO. The SIC Dummy takes the value of one if the firm is classified in accordance with any of the eleven
  Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codes identified by Kile and Phillips (2009) as the most appropriate to sample high-­‐‑technology firms, and zero otherwise. Ln(Offer
  Size) is the natural lograithm of the dollar value of the total offer in the IPO. Ln(Total Assets) is the natural lograithm of the dollar value of total assets on the last balance
 day before the IPO. Year indicates the year in which the IPO was completed. Internet Bubble Dummy is a dummy variable controlling for the large amounts of underpricing
observed during the internet bubble of 1999 and 2000. The dummy variable takes the value of one if the IPO was completed in the year 2000, and zero otherwise. Ln(Age) is
  the natural logarithm of the age of the firm at the time of the IPO, measured as the number of years between the firm incorporation date and the IPO. VC Dummy takes the
value of one if the firm was backed by a venture capital firm at the time of the IPO, and zero otherwise. PE Dummy takes the value of one if the firm was backed by a private
            equity firm at the time of the IPO, and zero otherwise. No. of Managers is the number of underwriting manger included in the underwriting syndicate.

                                   (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)

R&D Dummy                     15.93***        12.61***        12.56***        9.551***        9.708***        9.867***
                                  (3.316)        (3.387)        (3.378)        (3.687)        (3.678)        (3.694)
Int. Assets (% of total assets)             -­‐‑0.0828*         -­‐‑0.0555         -­‐‑0.0555         -­‐‑0.0345         -­‐‑0.0471         -­‐‑0.0453
                                 (0.0470)       (0.0450)       (0.0450)       (0.0457)       (0.0458)       (0.0463)
SIC Dummy                          -­‐‑3.668          -­‐‑3.691          -­‐‑3.745          -­‐‑4.523          -­‐‑4.477          -­‐‑4.414
                                  (3.140)        (3.237)        (3.271)        (3.226)        (3.244)        (3.272)
Ln(Offer Size)                     7.364**        7.397**        7.448**        6.589**        6.545**        8.242***
                                  (3.109)        (3.009)        (2.997)        (2.942)        (2.940)        (3.049)
Ln(Total Assets)                       -­‐‑2.009          -­‐‑2.148          -­‐‑2.177          -­‐‑1.625          -­‐‑1.973          -­‐‑1.327
                                  (1.740)        (1.707)        (1.699)        (1.683)        (1.737)        (1.755)
Year                                       0.629**        0.624**        0.691**        0.726***        0.601**
                                                 (0.272)        (0.273)        (0.269)        (0.275)        (0.285)
Internet Bubble Dummy                           47.15***        47.17***        48.00***        48.70***        56.02***
                                                 (12.07)        (12.08)        (11.95)        (12.01)        (12.85)
Ln(Age)                                                       0.147          -­‐‑0.158          -­‐‑0.229          -­‐‑0.355
                                                               (0.850)        (0.851)        (0.854)        (0.859)
VC Dummy                                                           7.434**        10.09***        9.015**
                                                                               (3.167)         (3.746)         (3.578)
PE Dummy                                                                      5.085*         4.291
                                                                                                (3.015)         (2.939)
No. of Managers                                                                                             -­‐‑0.915**
                                                                                                                                  (0.383)
Constant                            -­‐‑10.45         -­‐‑1,276**         -­‐‑1,268**        -­‐‑1,400***        -­‐‑1,470***        -­‐‑1,222**
                                  (8.787)        (544.7)        (546.0)        (538.5)        (549.9)        (569.1)

Observations                     528          528          528          528          528          528
R-­‐‑squared                        0.080         0.176         0.176         0.184         0.187         0.200
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                        28
5.2 Age effects on underpricing

The second hypothesis concerns the firm age’s effect on underpricing. In line with the
findings by Ljungqvist (2007) and Chemmanur (1993) a negative slope of the age coefficient
is observed. The result indicates the existence of a negative relationship between firm age at
the time of the IPO and the observed amount of underpricing. The coefficient value is
insignificant but the findings indicate a similar relationship to that stated by the theory that
uncertainty regarding firm value is negatively  related to  the age of the firm. The amount of
publically available information regarding the firm increases with firm age which in turn
enhances outsiders’ ability to assess the firm’s quality and prospects.

5.3 Venture capital and private equity backing as sources of certification
and monitoring

The third hypothesis relates to the certification and monitoring effects of venture capital and
private equity sponsors backing the issuing firm. Megginson and Weiss (1990) found a
negative relationship between venture capital backing and IPO underpricing. Our results
however contradict these findings as we observe a positive slope of the venture capital
dummy, significant at the five percent level. This indicates a positive relationship between
venture capital sponsorship and IPO underpricing. Our results are thus more in line with
Gompers (1996) and Lee and Wahal (2004) which find that venture capital backed IPOs
experience larger amounts of underpricing in relation to non-­‐‑sponsored IPOs. Gompers
(1996) provide two explanations to the observed results. Firstly, the establishment of
reputation is considerably important in order to raise capital for subsequent funds. Relatively
young venture capital firms which have not yet established a reputation thus have an
incentive to bring their portfolio companies public early since it acts as a signal of quality.
Consequently, less mature companies are brought public and venture capital firms face a
higher degree of underpricing.  Secondly, investors recycle capital between different assets.
By taking the portfolio companies public earlier, venture capital firms return cash to
investors which can be used to invest in newly established funds. The recycling of assets thus
motivates early IPOs since it allows venture capital firms to raise capital for later
investments.

                                          29
      The private equity variable is positive as well (although not significant) which
indicates the possibility of  a similar relationship between private equity-­‐‑backing and
underpricing as that found for venture capital backed firms. This result  contradicts our
hypothesis and the theories of certification and monitoring.  Although there exists little (to
our knowledge) research on the subject, a similar explanation as to the higher underpricing
exhibited by venture capital backed firms might be presented also for private equity backed
IPOs.  Similar to venture capital firms, private equity firms have an interest in establishing a
reputation as a successful investor and thus an incentive to complete successful IPOs of their
portfolio companies. Also capital recycling can  be argued to be a concern for private equity
firms which, in line with Gompers (1996), provide an additional explanation as to the
tendencies  of increased underpricing for private equity-­‐‑backed firms observed in our data.
         Furthermore, a t-­‐‑test is conducted on the differences in mean values between i)
venture capital-­‐‑backed and unbacked IPOs, and ii) private equity-­‐‑backed and unbacked IPOs.
The purpose of this test is to clarify if there exists a significant difference in underpricing
between the groups. The results obtained from  the t-­‐‑test are illustrated in  Table 8  and
indicate similar results as our OLS regression. No significant difference in underpricing
between private equity backed IPOs and non-­‐‑backed IPOs can be determined, although the
results indicate that private equity-­‐‑backed  firms  experience more underpricing than
unbacked IPOs do.
         The results obtained from the t-­‐‑test on venture capital-­‐‑backed IPOs confirm the
results generated from the OLS regression. The average amount of underpricing for venture
capital backed IPOs is approximately 26 percent in relation to approximately 11 percent for
non-­‐‑sponsored IPOs. These results are significant at the one percent level which corresponds
to the findings of Gompers (1996) and Lee and Wahal (2004).

                                          30
             Ha: diff > 0          Ha: diff > 0
                Pr(T > t) = 0.9997   Pr(T > t) = 0.8279



             Ha: diff != 0         Ha: diff != 0
                 Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0006Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.3443



             Ha: diff < 0          Ha: diff < 0
          H0: Mean (Non-­‐‑Backed) -­‐‑ Mean (VC Backed) = Diff = 0H0: Mean (Non-­‐‑Backed) -­‐‑ Mean (PE Backed) = Diff = 0
                Pr(T < t) = 0.0003   Pr(T < t) = 0.1721



               16.2030.9024.94-­‐‑6.32      16.2016.8815.602.85



Table 8.      6.29               6.29
             [95% Conf. Interval]20.5917.16-­‐‑22.67  [95% Conf. Interval]10.9010.47-­‐‑8.13




              25.2438.1435.12        25.2422.1223.17
            Std. Dev.            Std. Dev.



              2.502.611.984.16       2.501.521.312.79
          Std. Error                    Std. Error

      underpricing between Private Equity backed IPOs and non-­‐‑backed IPOs.
           Mean11.2525.7521.05####   Mean11.2513.8913.04-­‐‑2.64










   T-­‐‑test of differences in means of underpricing between Venture Capital backed IPOs and non-­‐‑backed IPOs, as well as the differences in means of
         Venture Capital Backed IPOsNon-­‐‑backed IPOsVenture Capital Backed IPOsCombinedDifferencePrivate Equity Backed IPOsNon-­‐‑backed IPOsPrivate Equity Backed IPOsCombinedDifference

              31
5.4 Interaction between firm complexity and information production

Our fourth and final hypothesis aims to unravel what effects firm complexity has on the
information  production in underwriting syndicates in IPOs. Although previous research of
Corwin and Schultz (2005) and Hu and Ritter (2007) find a negative relationship between
the number of underwriters and the amount of underpricing in IPOs, we believe that
increasing complexity in the issuing firm will diminish the effect that additional managers in
the underwriting syndicate has on underpricing. The results of including an interactive term
between complexity and information production in the regression is illustrated in Table 9.
We observe that information production, proxied by the number of managers included in the
syndicate, exhibits a negative relationship with the amount of underpricing and the slope of
the coefficient is significant at the one percent level. A greater number of underwriters results
in a higher degree of information production which reduces underpricing. Our results are
thus consistent with the findings of Corwin and Schultz (2005) and Hu and Ritter (2007). The
interactive term, however, has a positive slope (although not significant) which indicates that
the net effect is somewhat smaller. The interpretation of the interactive term’s effect on
information production is thus that including additional underwriting managers will reduce
underpricing. However, the benefit of including additional managers in the underwriting
syndicate experiences diminishing returns when complexity is introduced. This is in line with
our hypothesis and confirms that the reduction in underpricing, derived from increased
information production, is in fact diminished by more complexity inherent in the firm.

                                          32
                                       Table 9.
  Ordinary Least Squares Regression of Underpricing on an R&D Dummy, the number of
    managers included in the underwriting syndicate, Interaction Term Between R&D
 Dummy and the number of managers included in the underwriting syndicate, Intangible
   Assets as a percentage of total assets, Industry Classification Dummy, Ln(Offer Size),
   Ln(Total Assets), Year of the IPO, Internet Bubble Dummy and Ln(Age). Information
     Production is proxied by the amount of underwriting managers included in the
                               underwriting syndicate.
  The dependent variable is underpricing, defined as the percentage change in price from the offer price to the
   closing price after the first day of trading. The R&D Dummy takes the value of one if the percentage of R&D
  expenditures to net sales exceeds the median, and zero otherwise. No. of managers measures the amount of
   information being produced by the underwriting syndicate. The interactive term is the product of the R&D
 Dummy and the number of managers included in the underwriting syndicate. Int. Assets (% of total assets) is
 the percentage of intangible assets of total assets at the last balance day before the IPO. The SIC Dummy takes
  the value of one if the firm is classified in accordance with any of the eleven Standard Industry Classification
(SIC) codes identified by Kile and Phillips (2009) as the most appropriate to sample high-­‐‑technology firms, and
 zero otherwise. Ln(Offer Size) is the natural lograithm of the dollar value of the total offer in the IPO. Ln(Total
  Assets) is the natural lograithm of the dollar value of total assets on the last balance day before the IPO. Year
  indicates the year in which the IPO was completed. Internet Bubble Dummy is a dummy variable controlling
   for the large amounts of underpricing observed during the internet bubble of 1999 and 2000. The dummy
  variable takes the value of one if the IPO was completed in the year 2000, and zero otherwise. Ln(Age) is the
natural logarithm of the age of the firm at the time of the IPO, measured as the number of years between the firm
                                        incorporation date and the IPO.
                                                                              (1)

R&D Dummy                                                      9.792*
                                                                                (5.411)
No. of Managers                                                              -­‐‑1.188***
                                                                                (0.369)
Interaction Term Between R&D Dummy and Information Production               0.417
                                                                                (0.661)
Int. Assets (% of total assets)                                                      -­‐‑0.0563
                                                                              (0.0457)
SIC Dummy                                                                -­‐‑3.910
                                                                                (3.280)
Ln(Offer Size)                                                            9.183***
                                                                                (3.129)
Ln(Total Assets)                                                                 -­‐‑1.372
                                                                                (1.693)
Year                                                                 0.508*
                                                                                (0.288)
Internet Bubble Dummy                                                 53.54***
                                                                                (13.96)
Ln(Age)                                                                    -­‐‑0.0236
                                                                                (0.851)
Constant                                                                     -­‐‑1,037*
                                                                                (574.2)

Observations                                                         528
R-­‐‑squared                                                                  0.192
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                    33
       We believe however that there is significant merit to the information production
theory. Therefore, two additional regressions are carried out to identify any  differences in
severity of the effect from increased firm complexity on underpricing, based on the degree of
information production. The regression summarized in Table 10 is run in two separate
groups, one with a low degree of information production (group  1)  that has an amount of

underwriters less than or equal to the 33rd  percentile  and one with a high degree of

underpricing (group 2)  which has an amount of underwriters greater than the 67th

percentile.
       Group 1’s R&D Dummy exhibits a positive slope of  14.34 at one percent significance
level which is slightly higher than that of the total sample. In line with the information
production theory, the slope in group 2 has dropped down to 5.25, although not significant.
       Our results indicate a similar relationship to earlier findings that an increased number
of managers included in the underwriting syndicate reduces IPO underpricing and mitigates
the effect of increased complexity on underpricing. This result is in line with the information
production hypothesis.

                                          34
                            Table 10.
   Ordinary Least Squares Regression of Underpricing on an R&D
   Dummy, Intagible Assets as a percentage of total assets, Industry
  Classification Dummy, Ln(Offer Size), Ln(Total Assets), Year of the
             IPO, Internet Bubble Dummy and Ln(Age).
The dependent variable is underpricing, defined as the percentage change in price from
the offer price to the closing price after the first day of trading. The R&D Dummy takes
the value of one if the percentage of R&D expenditures to net sales exceeds the median,
and zero otherwise. Int. Assets (% of total assets) is the percentage of intangible assets
of total assets at the last balance day before the IPO. The SIC Dummy takes the value of
  one if the firm is classified in accordance with any of the eleven Standard Industry
      Classification (SIC) codes identified by Kile and Phillips (2009) as the most
appropriate to sample high-­‐‑technology firms, and zero otherwise. Ln(Offer Size) is the
  natural lograithm of the dollar value of the total offer in the IPO. Ln(Total Assets) is
 the natural lograithm of the dollar value of total assets on the last balance day before
   the IPO. Year indicates the year in which the IPO was completed. Internet Bubble
    Dummy is a dummy variable controlling for the large amounts of underpricing
 observed during the internet bubble of 1999 and 2000. The dummy variable takes the
value of one if the IPO was completed in the year 2000, and zero otherwise. Ln(Age) is
   the natural logarithm of the age of the firm at the time of the IPO, measured as the
   number of years between the firm incorporation date and the IPO. Regression (1)
     includes firms with N≤ 33rd percentile number of managers incldued in the
underwriting syndicate. Regression (2) includes firms with N≥ 67th percentile number
                 of managers incldued in the underwriting syndicate.
                                          (1)             (2)

R&D Dummy                         14.34***          5.248
                                          (4.852)          (6.271)
Int. Assets (% of total assets)                  -­‐‑0.108            -­‐‑0.0227
                                        (0.0713)         (0.0869)
SIC Dummy                             -­‐‑10.30*           3.824
                                          (5.226)          (6.123)
Ln(Offer Size)                           8.638*           5.300
                                          (5.125)          (5.654)
Ln(Total Assets)                             -­‐‑0.563             -­‐‑2.082
                                          (2.307)          (3.321)
Year                                   0.539          1.844***
                                          (0.395)          (0.547)
Internet Bubble Dummy                  -­‐‑17.20***          88.58***
                                          (4.390)          (33.39)
Ln(Age)                                  1.805*            -­‐‑1.936
                                          (1.024)          (1.860)
Constant                                    -­‐‑1,116           -­‐‑3,693***
                                          (792.6)          (1,092)

Observations                           228            151
R-­‐‑squared                               0.146            0.244
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                              35
5.5 Tests for multicollinearity between the explanatory variables

Although we have run VIF checks after each regression and found no cause for concern, we
complement the multicollinearity checks by testing for severe correlation between our
explanatory variables.  Table 11 below illustrate the results from this check. As can be seen,
the variables for total assets and the size of the offering experience quite strong correlation
of approximately 0.81. This magnitude of correlation between two of our explanatory
variables is large enough for us to alter our regression model somewhat in order to see if the
quality of the results can be improved upon.  In section 5.6 a robustness check in relation to
this possible multicollinearity is conducted.

                                          36
                                 s                             1
                                 No. of
                           Manager

                           PE                         1
                            Dummy                   0.1808

                           VC                      1
                                     Dummy                       -­‐‑0.6762-­‐‑0.1558

                                                   1
                                         Ln(Age)                      0.1785-­‐‑0.0821-­‐‑0.1385


                                                 1
                                                                       -­‐‑0.04590.115-­‐‑0.15180.3559
                         InternetBubbleDummy

                                              1
                                      Year                  -­‐‑0.5430.09460.1357
                                                                                            -­‐‑0.1577-­‐‑0.2077



                         Ln                1
                                 (Total               0.1956     0.51790.486
                                               Assets)                   -­‐‑0.1275-­‐‑0.0609-­‐‑0.3795
Table 11.

                         Ln              1
                                 (OfferSize)           0.80920.1286     0.34550.5349
                                                                                    -­‐‑0.0824-­‐‑0.1291-­‐‑0.1798

                                        1
                                SIC
                                                              -­‐‑0.242-­‐‑0.3944-­‐‑0.11720.13650.16440.4782-­‐‑0.4022-­‐‑0.139
                       Dummy


                                     1
                                  Int.                                    0.339
                                  AssetsDummy   -­‐‑0.17060.12010.23930.1228-­‐‑0.11360.0181-­‐‑0.27870.0624


                                   1
                                R&D         0.6781     0.19730.15510.5938-­‐‑0.19
                                           Dummy -­‐‑0.2652-­‐‑0.3562-­‐‑0.5228-­‐‑0.1531     -­‐‑0.5181

   Test of collinearity between the explanatory variables used in the main OLS regression model.
                                  the IPO, and zero otherwise. No. of Managers is the number of underwriting mangers included in the underwriting syndicate.







             day before the IPO. The SIC Dummy takes the value of one if the firm is classified in accordance with any of the eleven Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codesthe firm at the time of the IPO, measured as the number of years between the firm incorporation date and the IPO. VC Dummy takes the value of one if the firm was
       The table illustrate the collinearity between the explanatory variables used in our regression model. The R&D Dummy takes the value of one if the percentage of R&Dexpenditures to net sales exceeds the median, and zero otherwise. Int. Assets (% of total assets) is the percentage of intangible assets of total assets at the last balanceidentified by Kile and Phillips (2009) as the most appropriate to sample high-­‐‑technology firms, and zero otherwise. Ln(Offer Size) is the natural lograithm of the dollarin which the IPO was completed. Internet Bubble Dummy is a dummy variable controlling for the large amounts of underpricing observed during the internet bubble of
               value of the total offer in the IPO. Ln(Total Assets) is the natural lograithm of the dollar value of total assets on the last balance day before the IPO. Year indicates the year1999 and 2000. The dummy variable takes the value of one if the IPO was completed in the year 2000, and zero otherwise. Ln(Age) is the natural logarithm of the age ofbacked by a venture capital firm at the time of the IPO, and zero otherwise. PE Dummy takes the value of one if the firm was backed by a private equity firm at the time of(obs=528)R&D DummyInt. Assets DummySIC DummyLn(Offer Size)Ln(Total Assets)YearInternet Bubble DummyLn(Age)VC DummyPE DummyNo. of Managers

                                      37
5.6 Robustness checks by dropping Total Assets due to high correlation
and insignificant results

Since the total assets variable is insignificant and  highly correlated with the offer size
(0.8092) we re-­‐‑run our main OLS regression after dropping  the variable Ln(Total Assets) in
order to see if our results change. As can be seen in Table 12  below,  the coefficients change
somewhat in magnitude, however the overall findings and interpretation of the results do
not change.

                                                             Table 12.
   Robustness test of main Ordinary Least Squares Regression after dropping variable Ln(Total Assets). Regression of Underpricing is run
   on an R&D Dummy, Intagible Assets as a percentag of total assets, Industry Classification Dummy, Ln(Offer Size), Year of the IPO, Internet
             Bubble Dummy, Ln(Age), VC Dummy, PE Dummy and Number of Managers Included in the Underwriting Syndicate.
     The dependent variable is underpricing, defined as the percentage change in price from the offer price to the closing price after the first day of trading. The R&D Dummy
        takes the value of one if the percentage of R&D expenditures to net sales exceeds the median, and zero otherwise. Int. Assets (% of total assets) is the percentage of
     intangible assets of total assets at the last balance day before the IPO. The SIC Dummy takes the value of one if the firm is classified in accordance with any of the eleven
    Standard Industry Classification (SIC) codes identified by Kile and Phillips (2009) as the most appropriate to sample high-­‐‑technology firms, and zero otherwise. Ln(Offer
    Size) is the natural lograithm of the dollar value of the total offer in the IPO. Year indicates the year in which the IPO was completed. Internet Bubble Dummy is a dummy
   variable controlling for the large amounts of underpricing observed during the internet bubble of 1999 and 2000. The dummy variable takes the value of one if the IPO was
    completed in the year 2000, and zero otherwise. Ln(Age) is the natural logarithm of the age of the firm at the time of the IPO, measured as the number of years between the
       firm incorporation date and the IPO. VC Dummy takes the value of one if the firm was backed by a venture capital firm at the time of the IPO, and zero otherwise. PE
     Dummy takes the value of one if the firm was backed by a private equity firm at the time of the IPO, and zero otherwise. No. of Managers is the number of underwriting
                                                               mangers included in the underwriting syndicate.
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)

  R&D Dummy                     17.34***        14.11***        14.12***        10.39***        10.65***        10.49***
                                    (3.054)        (3.109)        (3.106)        (3.524)        (3.491)        (3.508)
  Int. Assets (% of total assets)            -­‐‑0.0983**        -­‐‑0.0713*        -­‐‑0.0713*         -­‐‑0.0438         -­‐‑0.0555         -­‐‑0.0508
                                   (0.0454)       (0.0433)       (0.0432)       (0.0442)       (0.0450)       (0.0454)
  SIC Dummy                          -­‐‑3.126          -­‐‑3.125          -­‐‑3.108          -­‐‑4.139          -­‐‑4.036          -­‐‑4.122
                                    (3.230)        (3.319)        (3.361)        (3.301)        (3.322)        (3.346)
  Ln(Offer Size)                     5.048***        4.938***        4.931***        4.689***        4.328***        6.886***
                                    (1.624)        (1.600)        (1.593)        (1.561)        (1.564)        (1.945)
  Year                                       0.568**        0.570**        0.659**        0.681**        0.564**
                                                  (0.272)        (0.272)        (0.269)        (0.273)        (0.283)
  Internet Bubble Dummy                           46.66***        46.66***        47.71***        48.22***        56.11***
                                                  (12.09)        (12.09)        (11.94)        (12.00)        (12.83)
  Ln(Age)                                                        -­‐‑0.0540          -­‐‑0.332          -­‐‑0.420          -­‐‑0.487
                                                                 (0.865)        (0.869)        (0.875)        (0.876)
  VC Dummy                                                          8.158***        10.41***        9.164**
                                                                                (3.130)         (3.745)         (3.570)
  PE Dummy                                                                      4.072         3.585
                                                                                                  (2.824)         (2.741)
  No. of Managers                                                                                             -­‐‑0.966**
                                                                                                                                    (0.378)
  Constant                            -­‐‑10.55         -­‐‑1,154**         -­‐‑1,157**         -­‐‑1,334**         -­‐‑1,378**         -­‐‑1,148**
                                    (8.653)        (542.7)        (543.8)        (537.0)        (546.0)        (564.8)

  Observations                     528          528          528          528          528          528
  R-­‐‑squared                        0.076         0.171         0.172         0.182         0.184         0.198
  Robust standard errors in parentheses
  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                          38
6. Conclusions

The  purpose of this study is to further investigate the effects of information production on
underpricing in initial public offerings. Corwin and Schultz (2005) and Hu and Ritter (2007)
find that a larger number of underwriting managers included in the syndicate will serve to
reduce underpricing. These results, it is argued, stems from the increased information
production present in underwriting syndicates with a larger number of underwriting
managers.
       Our contribution to the theory is the inclusion of an additional factor, which we argue
will work in opposite direction and increase the level of underpricing  –  firm complexity.  By
looking at a sample of 528 U.S. initial public during the time period of 2000-­‐‑2015 we find
support that initial public offerings completed by firms that exhibit a higher degree of
complexity suffer from larger amounts of underpricing than less complex firms do. Our main
hypothesis H1 is thus confirmed.
       Cohen and Lou (2012) find that higher complexity inherent in a firm will serve to
increase the frictions in the processing of information relating to the firm in question. Due to
limited resources and capabilities, investors evaluating a more complex firm will experience
greater  difficulties  in  understanding  and  processing  information  regarding  the  firm.
Consequently, updating and incorporating the information into the valuation of the firm will
be more time consuming and will not be done at same extent relative to the valuation of a
less complex firm. This characteristic of complexity contribute to increasing the uncertainty
regarding firm value and thus results in higher underpricing.
       Our findings can thus be explained by complexity’s association with a higher degree
of ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty. This reasoning is in line with  the findings of  Beatty and Ritter (1986)
regarding the firm’s business, future prospects and value. If investors cannot understand or
adequately evaluate the firm’s business, they will require a discount on the price at which
they invest.
      We do however find strong support that some firm characteristics may work as
mitigating factors of underpricing which confirms our hypothesis H2. When adding a variable
representing firm age at the time of the IPO, the results show that older firms tend to
experience less underpricing than younger firms. In accordance with Ljungqvist (2007) and

                                          39
Chemmanur (1993) we argue that a firm’s ability to prove their business model to the public
and the amount of publically available information regarding the company  increases with
firm age. These factors contribute to reduce ex-­‐‑ante uncertainty regarding firm value and
consequently underpricing.
       No support is found for the hypothesis that venture capital and private equity firm
backed firms should experience less underpricing in comparison to unbacked firms. In fact,
we find that firms sponsored by venture capital firms experience a higher degree of
underpricing relative unsponsored firms. This could potentially be explained by the findings
presented by Gompers (1996) and Lee and Wahal (2004). In order for young venture capital
firms to establish a track record  they are willing to underprice the offering if it results in
successfully completing the IPO quickly. Furthermore, venture capital firms may use an IPO
as a way to recycle the capital tied up in their current portfolio companies. By taking the firm
public, they return cash to their investors who are then able to provide capital in subsequent
capital raisings.  Similar tendencies are found for firms backed by private equity sponsors in
our regression model. These tendencies however are not significant.
      Finally, our concluding remarks are regarding the joint effects of information
production and firm complexity on IPO underpricing. In line with our hypothesis H4 we
observe that the negative relationship between the number of underwriters and IPO
underpricing  diminishes in the face of high firm complexity. The quality of the information
produced by the underwriting syndicate is thus adversely affected by higher complexity.
Furthermore, we find that complex firms do benefit from including additional underwriting
managers in the syndicate, in line with the information production theory. Accordingly,
increased firm complexity has a lesser impact on firms with a higher degree of information
production. Our findings are thus in line with Corwin and Schultz (2005) and  Hu and Ritter
(2007) who argue that a greater number of underwriting managers serve to produce better
information  which  consequently  reduces  ex-­‐‑ante  uncertainty  and  thereby  limits  the
underpricing in the respective firm.

                                          40
7. Limitations and future research

As mentioned earlier, we have chosen to focus on indicators of internal complexity as
possible explanatory variables for underpricing. It would be interesting for further research
to include the effects of external complexity and compare the two to see  which has the
greatest impact on underpricing.
        Furthermore, R&D Intensity, Intangible  assets and SIC-­‐‑codes have been selected as
indicators of internal complexity. It might be valuable to add more indicators for complexity
such as the length of management road shows and management participation on road shows.
However, our applied proxies for complexity are recognized and most commonly utilized in
previous research.
       Lastly, Habib and Ljungqvist (2001) mention  that the level of underpricing can be
affected by the extent of issuing firm’s promotion of the issue and there exists a trade-­‐‑off
between the level of underpricing and the promotion of the issue. Given this trade-­‐‑off, it is
possible  that  the  optimal  allocation  of  promotion  costs  and  costs  incurred  due  to
underpricing results in a level of underpricing which is above that of less complex firms. This
might explain our findings that firms exhibiting more complexity generally experience
greater underpricing. Although we do not have any support for this claim it would be an
interesting area for further research  to study the optimal allocation of these costs  in
accordance with  the trade-­‐‑off theory.  It could provide  additional insights into the causes of
underpricing of complex firms.

                                          41
References

Beatty, R. & Ritter, J. 1986, "Investment Banking, Reputation, and the Underpricing of Initial
Public Offerings",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 15, no. 1-­‐‑2, pp. 213-­‐‑232.

Chemmanur, T.J. 1993, "The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings: A Dynamic Model with
Information Production",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 285-­‐‑304.

Cohen, L. & Lou, D. 2012, "Complicated firms", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 104, no. 2,
pp. 383-­‐‑400.

Corwin, S. & Schultz, P. 2005, "The Role of IPO Underwriting Syndicates: Pricing,
Information Production, and Underwriter Competition", The Journal of Finance, vol. 60, no.
1, pp. 443-­‐‑486.

Gompers, P. 1996, "Grandstanding in the Venture Capital Industry", Journal of Financial
Economics,  vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 133-­‐‑156.

Habib, M. & Ljungqvist, A. 2001, "Underpricing and Entrepreneurial Wealth Losses in IPOs:
Theory and Evidence",  The Review of Financial Studies,  vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 433-­‐‑458.

Hermalin, B. & Weisbach, M. 1988, "The determinants of board composition", RAND Journal
of Economics,  vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 589-­‐‑606.

Hu, W. & Ritter, J. 2007, Multiple Bookrunners in IPOs, UFRGP.

Keloharju,  M. 1993, "The winner's curse, legal liability and the long-­‐‑run price performance
of initial public offerings in Finland",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 251-­‐‑
277.

Kile, C. & Phillips, M. 2009, "Using Industry Classification Codes to Sample High-­‐‑Technology
Firms: Analysis and Recommendations", Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, vol. 24,
no. 1, pp. 35-­‐‑58.

Koh F & Walter T 1989, "A direct test of Rock's model of pricing of unseasoned issues",
Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 251-­‐‑272.

Lee, P.M. & Wahal, S. 2004, "Grandstanding, Certification and the Underpricing of Venture
Capital Backed IPOs",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 375-­‐‑407.

Ljungqvist, A. 2007, "IPO Underpricing" in Handbook of Corporate Finance, ed. E. Eckbo, 1st
edn, North-­‐‑Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 375-­‐‑422.

Ljungqvist, A. & Wilhelm, W. 2003, "IPO Pricing in the Dot-­‐‑com Bubble",  The Journal of
Finance,  vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 723-­‐‑752.

                                          42
Loughran, T. & Ritter, J. 2004, "Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed Over Time?", Financial
Management,  vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 5-­‐‑37.

Lowendahl, B. & Revang, O. 1998, "Challenged to Existing Strategy Theory in a
Postindustrial Society",  Strategic Management Journal,  vol.  19, no. 8, pp. 755-­‐‑773.

Markarian, G. & Parbonetti, A. 2007, "Firm Complexity and Board of Director Composition.",
Corporate Governance: An International Review,  vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1224-­‐‑1243.

Megginson, W. & Weiss, K. 1991, "Venture Capital Certification in Initial Public Offerings",
The Journal of Finance,  vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 879-­‐‑903.

Moorman, C. & Swaminathan, V. 2003, "Value Creation in Hi-­‐‑Tech Alliances: The Role of
Resource Strength, Resource Fit, and Resource Transfer", Working Paper.

Ritter, J.R. 2016, 8 January 2016-­‐‑last update, IPO Data  [Homepage of University of Florida],
[Online]. Available: http://site.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter [2016, April 8].

Rose, N. & Shepard, A. 1997, "Firm Diversification and CEO Compensation: Managerial
Ability or Executive Entrenchment?", RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 489-­‐‑514.

Yermack, D. 1996, "Higher Market Valuations of Companies with a Small Board of
Directors",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 185-­‐‑211.

                                          43