          Giving CSR a run for its money *

                                                       1                      2
                          Sean Nordqvist & Daniel Raber

                              Bachelor Thesis in Finance

                           Stockholm School of Economics

                                  May 16, 2016

                                Abstract

  *This paper studies the link between Corporate Social Performance (CSP) and Corporate

Financial Performance (CFP). We find no indication of an existing relationship between CSP

and accounting/market-based CFP when using an aggregated CSP score, in support of neutrality

theory. When expanding our analysis by disaggregating CSP into environmental, social and

corporate governance (ESG) domains, we observe that results differ depending on what CSR

rater is used to measure CSP. We compare two major CSR raters, MSCI KLD and Thomson

Reuters ASSET4, and show that there is moderate convergent validity between the two, which

could be a major reason why results in this field have over the past 35 years been heterogeneous.

Building on legitimacy theory, our results suggest that companies in polluting industries have

more to gain financially from adopting environmental practices than do companies in non-pol-

luting industries. After using numerous econometric techniques to partially account for potential

endogeneity, our results do not change significantly.

  Keywords:  Corporate Social Responsibility, Corporate Financial Performance, Endogeneity,

Convergent Validity, Legitimacy Theory

   * We would like to thank our tutor Daniel Metzger for his insightful comments and support during the process of
   writing this thesis. We also extend our gratitude to Giovanni Battista Derchi (University of Lausanne) for his
   helpful guidance. Lastly, we thank MSCI for giving us access to the MSCI ESG KLD STATS database. All errors
   are our own.
   1
    23003@student.hhs.se
   2
    23054@student.hhs.se
                                       1
Table of contents

  1    Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 3
  2    Previous Literature .......................................................................................................... 6
  3    Addressing Endogeneity................................................................................................. 13
  4    Theories and Hypothesis ................................................................................................ 19
  5    Data and Methodology .................................................................................................. 25
  6    Empirical Results and Analysis ..................................................................................... 35
  7    Conclusions and Discussion ........................................................................................... 41
  8    Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research ........................................................ 43
  9    Tables ............................................................................................................................ 45
  10     Appendix .................................................................................................................... 58
  11     References .................................................................................................................. 59
  12     MSCI data disclaimer................................................................................................. 65

List of abbreviations

 CFP                Corporate financial performance

 CSP*                Corporate social performance

 CSR                Corporate social responsibility

 ESG                Environmental, Social, Governance

 FE                  Fixed effects

 IV                   Instrumental Variable

 OVB               Omitted-variable bias

 R&D               Research and development

 RE                Random effects

 ROA               Return on assets

 ROE               Return on equity

 SUR                Seemingly unrelated regressions

*CSP is used interchangeably with CSR score and CSR rating in this paper

                                       2
1   Introduction

1.1    CSP and CFP - a complicated relationship

  Since the release of Howard Bowen’s book ”Social Responsibilities of the Businessman” in

1953, corporate social responsibility has grown to become an increasingly integral part of today’s

business world. Corporate social responsibility, or CSR, is a self-governing mechanism that firms

adopt in order to ensure that their business is conducted in a responsible manner and has a

positive impact on society. CSR is measured based on environmental, social and governance

(ESG) aspects of a firm’s business activities. Today, many investors screen investment decisions

based on the extent to which a firm is socially responsible, and firms that do not take CSR

seriously are often subject to public criticism and scrutiny (TIME, 2012).

  The decision for a firm to adopt CSR is not entirely clear. Opponents of CSR argue, in line

with Friedman (1970) and shareholder theory, that the managerial fiduciary duty is to maximize

shareholder value rather than focusing on meeting the demands of other stakeholders. Propo-

nents, however, claim that a stakeholder-theory type of view created by being socially responsible

will lead to advantages that can ultimately translate into improved financial performance for a

firm. Thus, much of the CSR related research has centered on trying to establish a link between

a firm’s corporate social performance (CSP) and its corporate financial performance (CFP). The

findings of these studies are heterogeneous suggesting positive, negative, neutral and even bidi-

rectional relationships (e.g. Vance, 1975; McGuire et al., 1988; Waddock and Graves, 1997;

Orlitzky et al., 2003). According to Ullmann (1985), the mixed findings are mainly due to three

reasons: (a) a lack in theory, (b) inappropriate definition of key terms and (c) deficiencies in

empirical databases currently available. Building on this reasoning by Ullmann (1985), this study

re-examines the link between CSP and CFP but during recent years. In order to address any

potential deficiencies in empirical databases currently available, this study unlike any other uses

two different databases in order to compare the results pertaining to the CSP and CFP relation-

ship. Moreover, this study examines industry specific mechanisms of the CSP and CFP link.

                                       3
1.2    Thesis structure and summary

  The first part of this study analyzes the link between CSP and CFP for 400 listed companies

in the US. As endogeneity is a central issue when examining this link, this issue is a main focus

in this paper. We find that it is not uncommon for studies in this field to be on the weak end of

accounting for endogeneity, which could be a contributing factor to the heterogeneous results.

                                                                             3                4
  In order to measure CSP, two empirical databases are used: KLD  and ASSET4 . The main

focus in the study lies on KLD, but ASSET4 as a proxy for CSP is used in order to see if results

vary depending on what empirical database is used. As proxies for CFP, a market-based perfor-

mance measure, Tobin’s Q, and an accounting-based performance measure, ROE, are used.

When KLD is used as a proxy for CSP, no relationship is found between CSP and CFP. This

can be explained using neutrality theory, which stipulates that due to the high degree of inter-

mediary and moderating variables there is at best only a random link between CSP and CFP.

When ASSET4 is used as a proxy for CSP, the results are somewhat different. When Tobin’s Q

is used to measure CFP, a weak negative link between the governance dimension and CFP is

found. When using ROE a positive relationship between the environmental dimension and CFP

is found, as well as a negative relationship between the social dimension and CFP. The differ-

ences in results obtained when using KLD or ASSET4 is likely to be due to low degrees of

theorization (i.e. what the empirical databases actually measure) and commensurability (i.e. how

CSP is measured) (Chatterji, et al., 2015).

  In order to further examine the differences regarding the CSP-CFP relationship that is found

when KLD or ASSET4 is used, we look at the relationship between KLD and ASSET4 across

years by means of their convergent validity. A moderate degree of convergence between the two

empirical databases is observed, thus strengthening the argument that any differences are due

to theorization and commensurability. An important implication of the analysis between KLD

and ASSET4 is that future research studying the CSP-CFP link should preferably use several

empirical databases for CSP in order to validate that the nature of the CSP-CFP relationship

   3
    KLD is now part of the MSCI KLD ESG STATS database. We refer to it as KLD throughout. See data
   disclaimer in  section 12.
   4
    ASSET4 is an ESG product by Thomson Reuters.
                                       4
that is found is not limited to a certain database. Furthermore, the results from comparing KLD

and ASSET4 should be kept in mind when comparing findings from previous studies.

  To assess any industry specific mechanisms behind the CSP and CFP relationship, the sample

used in this study is divided into two groups: Group (1) are firms that belong to industries that

can be classified as high-polluting, and group (2) are firms that belong to industries that are

low-polluting. This study examines if firms in high-polluting industries have more to gain from

being environmentally responsible (i.e. strong performance in the environmental dimension of

ESG) in CFP than do firms in non-polluting industries. We find that the environmental dimen-

sion for firms in group (2) is negatively correlated with CFP. Using legitimacy theory, this could

be explained by the fact that firms in group (2) do not have a “bridge to gap” between their

actions and social values and norms, as they do not pollute.

  When as a robustness check the measure of CSP is lagged with more than one year which is

the case in the main model, the results suggest that firms in group (1) have more to gain in CFP

from strong performance in the environmental dimension than group (2). This too can be ex-

plained by legitimacy theory in that firms in group (1) are likely to be perceived as more “sinful”

due to the pollution and thus CSR activities will demonstrate that these firms are not actually

“that bad”. This, e.g. improved firm reputation, is then translated into CFP according to the

results. These industry specific findings are useful as they provide with a better understanding

of the mechanics underlying the CSP-CFP relationship. They also increase the understanding of

why firms in different industries voluntarily choose to adopt CSR related practices, as can be

explained using legitimacy theory.

  To summarize, this study provides an extensive analysis of the CSP-CFP relationship with an

emphasis on accounting for endogeneity. Contrary to prior studies in this field, this study ad-

dresses a main issue relating to the fact that empirical databases measuring CSP might differ

from each other. Furthermore, the industry specific findings provide us with a better under-

standing of how the mechanics behind the CSP-CFP might differ depending on industry type.

It is safe to say that we give CSR a good run for its money.

                                       5
2   Previous Literature

  Among studies attempting to establish a relationship between CSP and CFP, the findings are

certainly mixed. Some empirical studies indicate either a positive, negative, bi-directional or non-

existent linkage, while other academic research conclude that the standard methodologies applied

by a vast majority of studies are econometrically flawed (Garcia-Castro, et al., 2010). In this

section, previous literature examining the link between CSP and CFP will be presented. In

section 2.1, research concluding a positive and/or bidirectional relationship between CSP and

CFP will be discussed. In  section 2.2, literature relating to a negative relationship between

CSP and CFP will be presented. In  section 2.3, empirical studies concluding none or an am-

biguous relationship between CSP and CFP will be provided. In  section 2.4, literature relating

to the validity of different CSR ratings will be discussed. Literature relating to differences in

CSR practices depending on industry type will be presented in  section 2.5. Finally, contribution

to existing literature will be discussed in  section 2.6.

2.1    Positive and bidirectional relationships between CSP-

    CFP

  In line with the findings of Cochran and Wood (1984), most studies focus on either accounting-

based returns or market-based returns as proxies for CFP when examining the CSP-CFP rela-

tionship. An early study by Moskowitz (1972) examines the short-term share performance of 14

listed firms in the US that were perceived as socially responsible. In this study, Moskowitz finds

that share returns of these selected socially responsible firms outperform several major indices.

Although the study has received criticism due to the seemingly subjective way of measuring

social responsibility as well as the lack of adjustment for systematic risk, the study at the time

was an important contribution and stepping stone in the research field of CSR as it showed the

value of screening portfolios (Cochran and Wood, 1984; Ullman, 1985).

  In a comprehensive study by Waddock and Graves (1997), the empirical linkages between

CSP and CFP are examined using a constructed CSR index based on the KLD index structure

for a sample of 469 companies in the S&P 500. The study finds a positive relationship between

                                       6
CSP and accounting-based CFP as measured by ROA, ROE and return on sales – i.e. indicating

that a company can “do well by doing a good”. Plausible explanations for the positive relation-

ship includes improved investor relations, company reputation and employee moral by being, or

at least appearing to be, socially responsible. Interestingly, the study also finds that CSR depends

on financial performance indicating that companies can also “do good by doing well”.

  Orlitzky et al. (2003) examine the relationship between CSP and CFP by conducting a meta-

analysis of 52 previous studies. The study concludes a positive relationship between CSP and

CFP, and shows that the strength of the positivity varies depending on if market-based or

accounting-based performance measures are used. The correlation between CSR and financial

performance is found to be higher with accounting-based measures. Similar to the abovemen-

tioned findings by Waddock and Graves (1997), a bidirectional relationship between CSR and

financial performance is found in the study.

  In a study by Schreck (2011), where CSR-scores obtained from oekom research AG are tested

against the market-based financial performance indicator Tobin’s Q, no bidirectional relationship

as found by Waddock and Graves (1997) and Orlitzky et al. (2003) can be established. The

study, however, concludes a positive relationship between the corporate governance and envi-

ronmental management components of CSP and Tobin’s Q.

  On the subject of bi-directionality, Granger (1969) proposes a test which can be used to assess

whether one future time series has any predictive effect on a lagged time series. If a lagged time

series CSP is significantly correlated with current time series CFP, but lagged values of CFP

show no correlation current values of CSP, then CSP ‘Granger causes’ CFP.   The Granger

causality test has been used in CSP-CFP literature with mixed results. Shreck (2011) applies

this methodology and finds no evidence that CSP would Granger cause CFP. The test has been

                                                                5
criticized by econometricians as a case of  post hoc fallacy (Diebold, 2000). Moreover, it is not

directly applicable to longitudal/panel data, which is the prevalent construction in a majority

of studies in this field.

   5
    States that the order of events (i.e. X occurred before Y, therefore X must cause Y) is not a sole determinant of
   causality
                                       7
  Cochran and Wood (1984) find a weak positive link between CSP and CFP using a total

sample of 61 firms spread over the time periods 1970-1974 and 1975-1979. The study uses ac-

counting returns as performance measures and at the time of the study expanded CSR research

by controlling for asset age, a control variable that the authors of the study find to be highly

correlated with CSP. The weak positive link between CSP and CFP remains after testing for

asset age. In their study, Cochran and Wood argue that the results and conclusions regarding

the relationship between CSP and CFP in previous similar research that ignores controlling for

asset age should be second-guessed. Furthermore, the study also includes an industry-specific

control group.

  In 1988, McGuire et al. find an overall positive relationship between CSP and CFP. The study,

often quoted by CSR researchers due to its extensive nature, measures CSR using data from a

survey created by Fortune and measures both how CSP predicts CFP and how CFP predicts

CSP. An overall positive relationship between CSP and CFP is found using both market-based

and accounting-based measures, such as Alpha and ROA. McGuire et al. also conclude that

accounting-based to a higher degree seems to correlate with CSP than do market-based measures

and that prior CFP appears to be a superior predictor of CSP rather than subsequent CFP.

2.2    Negative relationship between CSP and CFP

  Central to literature supporting a negative relationship between CSP and CFP is the theory

regarding managers’ fiduciary duty as laid forth by Milton Friedman in his well-known article

“The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits” (Friedman 1970). Friedman

describes that the main responsibility of managers should be to increase shareholder value, and

excess investments in social projects and activities is likely to be value destructive for the firm.

Henderson (2001) argues that firms investing in CSR run high risks of excess costs thus affecting

profits, for example due to new required accounting systems. In an early study, Vance (1975)

re-examines the abovementioned study by Moskowitz (1972) over a longer time period and finds

that the overwhelming majority of the selected socially responsible firms actually performed

worse than the market indices.

  Lopez et al. (2007) analyze the relationship between CSP and CFP using accounting-based

measures. The sample analyzed consists of two groups with 55 firms in each subsample during

                                       8
the years 1998-2004; one group with firms included in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index (DJSI)

and the other group with firms not included in the DJSI but included in the Dow Jones Global

Index (DJGI). In order to improve the degree of homogeneity of the sample, the regression model

includes control variables for size, activity sector and risk. Mainly looking at the growth of profit

before tax (PBT) measured by the growth in revenue, a negative relationship between CSR and

accounting-based financial performance is found in the study. Lopez et al. argue that CSR related

expenses can put socially responsible firms in an economic disadvantage in the short-term, and

that governments through legislation and subsidies could potentially play an important role in

encouraging CSR related practices among firms seeking to avoid the economic disadvantage.

  Baron et al. (2011) analyze the relationship between CSR and financial performance using a

sample of 1,600 firms in the US over the period 1996-2004. The KLD database is used to measure

CSR score and Tobin’s Q as the measure for financial performance. The study includes firm

fixed effects in the estimation model in order to capture any unobserved heterogeneity in the

sample and also a lagged variable approach to check the robustness of the model. The study

concludes no correlation between CSR and financial performance, but a negative correlation

between the social component and financial performance. The authors argue that the negative

correlation may be a result of the effects on firm reputation, brand equities and productivities

that social pressure may cause.

2.3    Neutral or ambiguous relationship between CSP and

    CFP

  Some empirical research find no evidence at all of a relationship between CSR and financial

performance. McWilliams and Siegel (2000) in an extensive study link data from Compustat to

KLD and analyze how CSR affects financial performance over the period 1991-1996 for a total

of 524 firms. The study uses a similar statistical model to Waddock and Graves (1997) but also

includes a component that captures firm-investments in R&D, which has been suggested in

previous literature (e.g. Griliches, 1979). The study concludes that CSR has no impact on finan-

cial performance and also emphasizes the importance of controlling for R&D in the econometric

model.

                                       9
  Aupperle et al. (1985) examine the relationship between CSR and financial performance. In

an attempt to improve the methodology of previous similar studies in the field, the authors

survey CEOs using a constructed survey instrument in order to establish the corporates’ social-

responsibility orientation. The components in the measure of CSP in the study are economic,

legal, ethical and discretionary, and a risk-adjusted ROA is used as a proxy for CFP. The authors

conclude no relationship between CSP and CFP but also find that firms with a CSR committee

in the corporate board do not financially outperform firms without this board-feature.

  Garcia-Castro et al. (2010) address the issue of endogeneity in their study and argue that

endogeneity, when not properly accounted for, provides false results and thus incorrect conclu-

sions regarding the CSP-CFP relationship. The authors examine the CSP-CFP relationship using

panel data for 658 listed firms in the US included in the KLD database since 1991. In terms of

estimation methods, a combination of OLS, fixed effects and instrumental variables are used in

order to enable comparison with other studies and at the same time addressing endogeneity. As

a proxy for CSP, KLD data is used and as dependent variables, Tobin’s Q, MVA, ROA and

ROE are used. The regression model includes controlling for risk, sales, R&D and leverage. The

authors conclude that when using a fixed effects model ROE, ROA and Tobin’s Q support a

neutral relationship between CSP and CFP. A neutral relationship is also found when the in-

strumental variables model is used for all of the different CFP measures. When MVA is used, a

slightly negative relationship can be concluded. Lastly, the authors stress the importance of

accounting for endogeneity in future studies as it might play a deciding role in terms of the

nature of the CSP-CFP relationship.

2.4    Validity of different CSR ratings

  Amongst previous empirical research described in  sections 2.1-2.3, various types of CSR

ratings have been used to measure CSP (e.g. KLD, ASSET4 and DJSI). As described by Ullmann

(1985), the conflicting results among studies regarding how CSR affects financial performance is

partly due to difficulties in measuring CSR as well as due to shortcomings amongst different

CSR-measuring databases. Yet, however, there is surprisingly little research examining how well

different CSR ratings converge and thus how comparable different previous empirical studies are

                                      10
with one another. Schwab (1980) mentions that the lack of validity in research of measures used

in studies is a reason why organization studies have not made faster progress.

  Chatterji et al. (2015) attempt to establish the extent to which several major CSR raters

converge. Specifically, the authors analyze the convergence of KLD, FTSE4Good, DJSI, Innovest,

Calvert and ASSET4 using data from 2002 to 2010. After first examining company overlaps

among the six CSR raters, tetrachoric correlations between the CSR raters are performed to

further assess the convergent validity. The authors use the term “convergent validity” to express

the similarities between different databases. Chatterji et al. (2015) reason that two central mech-

anisms drive the degree of convergence between CSR raters; namely the extents of theorization

and commensurability. Theorization refers to what the different CSR raters actually measure,

i.e. if their theorizations of CSR are similar. As CSR is in its essence rather intangible and

vaguely defined, the theorization aspect is a central issue when trying to understand and examine

any potential differences between CSR raters. Commensurability refers to how different CSR

raters measure the same thing. As an example the authors explain that a high degree of com-

mensurability can occur if CSR raters measure the degree of employee safety within a firm in a

similar fashion. Adjustments are made to account for differences in theorization of CSR across

the six raters. Findings in the paper include little correlation between the six raters as well as

little overlap in membership across the raters. Furthermore, the results suggest that the raters

measure CSR components in different ways and thus that the commensurability among CSR

scores is low. The authors argue that the results should signal caution when interpreting results

from other studies using only one or a limited amount of raters when measuring CSR and call

for further research of the validity of CSR raters.

  Sharfman (1996) in his study attempts to validate the KLD measurement ratings by using a

methodology known as construct validity, meaning that the KLD ratings are correlated against

other types of CSR ratings. In the study, KLD is correlated against ratings generated by Fortune

magazine from a corporate reputation survey as well as against a constructed list of mutual

funds perceived to be socially responsible. The correlations indicate that KLD to some extent

measure similar aspects of CSP as the Fortune ratings and the constructed mutual funds list

and thus the authors argue that this encourages use of the KLD score.

                                      11
2.5    Differences in CSR across industries and legitimacy

     theory

  Roberts (1992) in his study examines how firm strategy impacts CSR disclosure. Moreover, in

the study, measures of economic performance, strategic posture toward social responsibility as

well as the power of stakeholders are used in order to assess any variations in CSR disclosure

across industries. The dependent variable in the study intended to be a proxy for CSR disclosure

is based on an analysis by the Council on Economic Priorities in 1986 covering over 130 firms.

Roberts divides seven industries covered in the sample into two groups: high profile industries

and low profile industries. The high profile group includes the automobile, airline and oil indus-

tries and are chosen due to their high levels of political risk, consumer visibility as well as intense

industry competition. Roberts hypothesizes and finds that firms in the industries that belong to

the high profile group are more prone to disclose CSR activities.

  Campbell et al. (2003) analyze to what extent attempts of firms to construct legitimacy and

thus close the legitimacy gap determines the amount of voluntary CSR disclosures. The authors

of the study argue that attempts to construct legitimacy may vary depending on industry as

different industries will be associated with different connotations in society at large. Firms in

industries with negative associations should according to the legitimacy theory be expected to

disclose more CSR related information and as an example, the authors bring up the tobacco

industry which in society is by many seen as a “sinful” industry due to the harmful nature of

the products. Moreover, Campbell et al. reason that for an industry as “sinful” as the tobacco

industry, the goal of legitimacy strategies might not be the same for firms in industries with

more positive connotations. They argue that for tobacco companies, the goal of legitimacy strat-

egies might be to lessen negative connotations associations in society as among some stakeholders

it would be impossible to completely achieve legitimacy. Using data from corporate reports and

five companies that were listed in the FTSE 100 during the period January 1974 to June 1988,

findings interestingly enough show that more sinful firms in the sample do not always disclose

more CSR information and that in some cases the less sinful firms actually disclosed more.

Possible explanations according to the authors include that some firms might not view CSR

                                      12
disclosure as a means of closing the legitimacy gap, and that some firms might regard CSR

disclosure as an ineffective way of attaining higher legitimacy among stakeholders.

2.6    Contribution to existing literature

  This paper contributes to the field of CSR in several ways. Firstly, by examining a possible

link between CSP and CFP, we contribute with additional findings regarding the nature of this

relationship. During the course of writing this paper and reviewing previous literature, it has

become clear to us that findings relating to the CSP-CFP relationship will perhaps always be

mixed as the issues suggested by Ullmann (1985) are difficult to erase entirely. Thus, any findings

and conclusions from previous studies should not be looked upon in isolation – but rather to-

gether with other previous studies as results clearly vary depending on factors such as what

empirical database and model is used in a study. Secondly, this paper contributes to existing

literature by comparing and analyzing the KLD and ASSET4 databases in a way that, to the

best of our knowledge, has not been done before. By looking at bivariate correlations as well as

comparing the results from our main model using both of these two empirical databases, we are

able to present evidence that support arguments that there are substantial differences between

KLD and ASSET4 with regards to their theorization and commensurability. Thirdly, this study

delves deep into differences relating to the benefits of CSR in terms of CFP for different industry

types, based on their degree of pollution, using the framework of legitimacy theory. This analysis

is important as it helps to understand the mechanics of the CSP-CFP relationship and how it

differs across different industries.

3   Addressing Endogeneity

3.1    The basic problem of endogeneity

  In its most basic form, the problem of endogeneity arises when an explanatory variable is

correlated with the error term of a model (Wooldridge, 2013). In financial economics, the issue

is well researched and is usually taken into account by using sophisticated econometric tech-

niques to (partially) correct for endogeneity (see for example Greene, 2002). Garcia-Castro et al.

(2010) note that strategic management research, particularly literature that deals with the CSP-
                                      13
CFP link, has insofar been heavily skewed towards pure statistical modelling, and generally does

not allude to econometrics to account for endogeneity. Endogeneity causes a serious concern for

researchers, and several studies imply that it is most probably a contributing factor to the

heterogeneous results in CSP-CFP literature (Jo & Harjoto, 2011).

  To illustrate the issue of endogeneity, we define a simple (time-constant) OLS model which

we assume will yield a true estimation of the dependent variable  𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖:

     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖  = 𝛽𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖  + 𝛾𝑍𝑖  + 𝑢𝑖                                                               EQ.1

     𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖     is an observable proxy for CSP
     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖     is an observable proxy for CFP
             is a time-invariant unobservable explanatory variable (... or strategic characteris-
       𝑍𝑖
               tics)
     𝑢𝑖         is the error term
  An assumption of  EQ.1  is that values of the explanatory variables are uncorrelated with the

error term. It follows that a correlation is not directly measurable, as running the model only

produces estimates of the error terms. Thus, the model can produce biased estimates. More

specifically, endogeneity can commonly occur as a result of omitted-variable bias (OVB) or when

there is a causal loop between the dependent and explanatory variables within a specified model

(reverse causality). We now move on to discuss these two issues in the context of CSP-CFP

literature.

3.2    Omitted-variable bias

   Continuing the analysis above, we assume that  𝑍𝑖  is a confounding variable, i.e. is correlated

separately with  𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖  and  𝜀𝑖. Since we are actually running the regression in absence of  𝑍𝑖, we

will estimate:

     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖  = 𝛽𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖  + ε𝑖                                                                      EQ.2
      𝜀𝑖         is the composite error term, i.e.  𝜀𝑖  = 𝛾𝑍𝑖  + 𝑢𝑖
   In this sense, the error term with absorb  𝑍𝑖. If the results show that there is in fact a corre-

lation between  𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖  and  𝑍𝑖 , and  𝑍𝑖  simultaneously affects  𝐶𝐹 𝑃 𝑖  (i.e.  𝛾 ≠ 0 ), then conse-

quently  𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖  is correlated with  𝜀𝑖, in direct violation with the aforementioned OLS assumption.

It follows that the model suffers from an endogeneity problem.

                                      14
  In the context of strategic management, Hamilton and Nickerson (2003) argue that OVB, and

as such endogeneity, arises from the fact that managers make strategic decisions based on ex-

pectations of how their decisions will affect performance of the firm in the future. This contra-

dicts the assumption that decisions are taken randomly, which is common in most cross-sectional

regression models in this field (Garcia-Castro et al., 2010). Nevertheless, if we assume that the

managers build up their expectations based on internal factors (e.g. personal values and corpo-

rate culture) that are less tangible to other stakeholders, there is a basis for information asym-

metry. These internal factors are either unknown or incredibly difficult to quantify to researchers.

More importantly in the context of research, if any of these internal factors are separately cor-

related with both CFP and other strategic dimensions of a firm, then they are by definition

omitted variables.

  How does one account for OVB? We will now present the two prevailing methods. Firstly,

several studies have tried to reproduce previous results by adding more control variables to the

existing model. McWilliams and Siegel (2000) argue that when R&D intensity is added to a vast

array of CSP-CFP models, the sign and significance on the CSP coefficient changes radically.

The rationale behind adding R&D intensity to the model is because it has previously been shown

to correlate with financial performance and CSP, and therefore controlling for it reduces the

effect arising from its confounding properties. Another study found that the cultural background

of a CEO could affect both financial and non-financial decisions, although found it difficult to

quantify as a variable (Agle et al., 1999). The issue with this first method is self-explanatory: it

is virtually impossible to identify all omitted variables, and even if we could theoretically identify

a majority of them, the problem of measurability remains intact.

  The second set of solutions found in literature relates to the choice of model. Some studies

have tried to account for endogeneity by specifying a firm fixed effects (FE) model, with mixed

results. The FE estimation proves to be a useful specification given that the inference is solely

bound to the strategic behavior of the same firms in the panel data (Baltagi, 2013). One sub-

stantially more complex, and potentially flawed, method is the usage of instrumental variables

(IV). We will revisit the estimator and model specification in greater detail below and in our

methodology part, but first we need to address the issue of causality in CSP-CFP literature.

                                      15
3.3    Reverse causality and causal claims

  Suppose our research question is “Does a higher CSP lead to a higher CFP?” In order to make

true causal claims about the CSP-CFP link, the explanatory variable (CSP) would need to be

fully exogenous, i.e. unrelated to any observed or unobserved variables in the model. As previ-

ously discussed there is probably a vast array of unobserved (omitted) variables, leading to

unobserved heterogeneity (Arellano, 2003). In context of CSP-CFP, researchers generally con-

textualize the relationship as some dimensions of CSP (non-randomly) existing in a firm. Internal

and external mediator effects then translate this into either improved or decreased CFP. The

issue of reverse causality arises from the fact that we don’t necessarily know in what direction

the relationship holds. This is summarized in  Figure 1.

                         Figure 1: The Reverse Causality Issue

                                            Reverse causality

       CSP Dimensions                 Mediator Effects                 CFP Measures
  Environmental management         Internal effects                  Market-based
  •CO2  emissions                  •Innovation                    •Tobin's Q
   •Sustainable production             •Improved efficiency               •Market value added
  Social issues                      •Employee satisfaction             •MTB ratio
   •Community involvement
   •Employee relations               External effects                  Accounting-based
  Corporate governance              •Brand gains                   •Return on Assets (ROA)
   •Executive compensation            •Access to finance                •Return on Equity (ROE)
  •Ownership structure              •Reputation                    •ln(EBITDA)

 This  figure  illustrates  reverse  causality  in  context  of  corporate  social  performance  and  corporate  financial
 performance. Partly adopted from Shreck (2011).

  In literature, two contradicting theories on the CSP-CFP link are important to mention, the

good management approach and slack resources hypothesis (Waddock & Graves, 1997). We

discuss these in greater detail in  section 4.1, but more importantly the two theories are by no

means collectively exhaustive or mutually exclusive. It’s not unreasonable to assume a simulta-

neous existence of the two, leading to a bi-directional link between CSP and CFP. We can

conclude that the CSP-CFP relationship is more complex than one can intuitively imagine, and

moreover, can lead to inconsistent estimates if the model(s) is designed without care.

                                      16
3.4    FE estimator with CSP-CFP panel data

  Building on the works of Garcia-Castro et al. (2010) and Hamilton and Nickerson (2003), we

will now discuss the fixed effects estimator and how it can be conceptualized in the context of

our study. Assume we gather some balanced panel data over time (t) on CSP and CFP for a

number of firms (i). We can re-specify the static OLS model (EQ.1) as follows:

     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖𝑡  = 𝛽𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖𝑡  + 𝛾𝑍𝑖  + 𝜀𝑖𝑡                                                             EQ.3

     𝜀          is the error term
       𝑖𝑡
   As we can see, the panel construction now allows all variables except for  𝑍𝑖  to vary over time.

𝑍𝑖  represents the non-random strategic characteristics of firms and managers that are difficult

to observe or measure for researchers. In order to account for endogeneity we now relax the OLS

assumption and allow  𝑍 𝑖  to be correlated with  𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖𝑡. Under the assumption of strict exogeneity

which is conditional on  𝑍𝑖, it follows that:

     𝐸(𝜀𝑖𝑡 |𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖𝑡 , 𝑍𝑖 ) = 0, 𝑡 = 1, … , 𝑇                                                          EQ.4

  We incorporate fixed effects by introducing firm dummy variables into the regression denoted

by  𝛼𝑖. Another computationally different way to do this is by using a within transformation in

order to demean the variables in  EQ.3, thus eliminating  𝑍𝑖

     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖𝑡  − 𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝚤̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅  = 𝛽(CSPit  − 𝐶𝑆𝑃𝚤̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ ) + 𝛾(𝑍𝑖  − 𝑍𝚤̅̅̅̅̅̅ ) + (𝜀𝑖𝑡  − 𝜀𝚤̅̅̅̅̅ )                           EQ.5

  As  𝑍𝑖  = 𝑍𝚤̅̅̅̅̅̅  we have now by construction eliminated the unobserved bias. If we run  EQ.5

using an OLS estimation, the estimates of  𝛽  ought to be correct. Of course, the fixed effects

model is not spotless in terms of accounting for endogeneity. Scholars in strategic management

argue that the FE model is preferable to OLS, but note that the model produces biased estimates

when changes in firm strategy are endogenous during a panel period (Hamilton & Nickerson,

2003). In such cases, it might make sense to look into instrumental variables as a complement

to the fixed effects specification.

3.5    FE-IV approach

  If the aforementioned assumption holds, namely that managers do not make strategic decisions

randomly, then we have reason to suspect that CSP is not truly exogenous. One way in which

                                      17
researchers attempt to account for endogeneity is by using an instrumental variables (IV) ap-

proach. The fixed-effects estimator can sometimes be combined with an IV approach (see for

example  Varadharajan-Krishnakumar  &  Balestra,  1987;  Wooldridge  &  Semykina,  2010).

Wooldridge & Semykina (2010) discusses the FE-IV approach in the presence of unobserved

heterogeneity as well as endogenous explanatory variables. The combination has, to the best of

our knowledge, been used very scarcely in CSP-CFP literature. Battista Derchi (2015) found no

evidence suggesting that the FE-IV approach would provide better estimates than a standard

FE estimator when studying the link between CSR-linked executive compensation and CSP.

  Theoretically, we can estimate CSP using a set of variables that (1) are related to CSP, and

are (2) not correlated with the error terms in the main CFP model (orthogonality). If we assume

that  CSP  can be measured for firm  𝑖  at a given time  𝑡, then we can specify an equation system

which takes the following form:

     𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖𝑡  = 𝛽1 𝑆𝑖𝑡  + 𝛼1𝑖  + 𝜀1𝑖𝑡                                                           EQ.6

     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖𝑡  = 𝛽2 𝐶𝑆𝑃𝚤𝑡̂  + 𝛼2𝑖  + 𝜀2𝑖𝑡                                                        EQ.7

  𝑆𝑖𝑡  in  EQ.6  is called a set of instruments. If these instruments are identified to be valid,  EQ.7

should yield unbiased estimates of  𝛽2. Of course, a primary concern when using an IV approach

is finding the appropriate instruments. In their article on diversification discount and endogene-

ity, Campa and Kedia (2002) argue that the equation system in an IV estimation easily becomes

unidentified as most observable strategic characteristics of a firm are included in the main model.

  A few studies have attempted to find appropriate instruments, with mixed results. Shreck

(2011) used lagged CSP variables, although this can prove to be flawed by construction. If an

unlagged CSP metric is correlated with CFP, then a lagged CSP metric (usually 1 or 2 years) is

likely to also exhibit the same correlation, in direct violation with orthogonality condition (2).

This is partly due to the fact that CSP ratings rarely change significantly year on year. Moreover,

most studies do not provide appropriate tests regarding the validity of their choice of instruments

and robustness of the overall model.

  When using the IV approach, one has to be cautious of the problems that the methodology

entails. Bound et al. (1995) found that instruments which explain a small portion of the variation

in the endogenous regressor (CSP) can lead to biased estimates, even when they are weakly

correlated to the error terms in the main model. Several studies have found that in the presence

                                      18
of weak instruments, IV estimations can lead to incorrect estimates (Hausman, 2001). While

there are numerous suggestions on how to account for weak instruments or mismeasured varia-

bles, it is undoubtedly clear that the IV approach should be used in a complementary fashion.

4   Theories and Hypothesis

4.1    Theories

  Whether or not a firm should be socially responsible and adopt CSR is a widely debated topic.

Opponents argue that it does not lead to any short- or long-term financial benefits for a firm,

and proponents argue the opposite. Central to these differences of opinions are two theories that

need to be understood in order to fully place the CSR debate in the right context: the shareholder

theory and the stakeholder theory. The shareholder theory, common in economics, evolves

around that the main purpose of a firm should be to maximize shareholder value. Managers and

executives in their corporate roles should not adhere to any perceived “social responsibilities” if

this is outside of the scope of what lies in the interests of shareholders. Instead, any investments

in social activities should be undertaken on an individual basis not using the firm’s resources

(Friedman, 1970). The stakeholder view is different from the original shareholder view in that it

besides stockholders also recognizes the importance of other stakeholders in order for a firm to

be successful and grow. Freeman (1984) describes different stakeholders such as customers, sup-

pliers and employees and outlines ideal ways a firm can respond to their demands and interests.

The importance of not isolating stakeholders and their impacts on a firm but instead focusing

on interconnections is a central part of stakeholder theory, and this type of “helicopter perspec-

tive” has generated criticism among academics. Many organizational scholars argue that simul-

taneously focusing on different stakeholders and their different demands will lead to confusion

among managers and executives which may lead to inefficiencies and conflicts within the organ-

ization (Donaldson and Preston, 1995; Jensen, 2001).

  Further building on the importance of recognizing the needs of stakeholders other than stock-

holders as emphasized by the stakeholder theory, the legitimacy theory to some degree can be

used to explain why firms adopt CSR practices. Mathews (1993) defines organizational legiti-

macy as the state a firm is in when the norm of social values of what is expected from a firm is

                                      19
in line with the social values that are a result of the firm’s business activities. When the two

value systems are not congruent, organizations risk facing reputational damage but it is however

possible to construct legitimacy by in different ways improving the firm’s image in society

(Dowling & Pfeffer, 1975). Thus, building on Dowling and Pfeffer (1975), CSR practices among

firms can be used as a means to reach legitimacy.

  As seen in previous research, the findings regarding the relationship between CSP and CFP

have been mixed. In order to understand the results of the causal links and the direction of the

relationship, a theoretical framework that explains the direction of causality needs to be intro-

duced.  Table 1  illustrates the different theories that are applicable depending on what type of

direction of the causality that is found and if the links are positive, negative or neutral.

                            Table 1: Overview of Theories
        Relationship              Positive               Negative               Neutral

                             Good management
        CSP → CFP                theory;             Trade-off hypothesis

                                Social impact hypothesis
                                                                                             Neutrality theory

       CSP ← CFP       Slack resources hypothesis    Opportunism hypothesis

                     ?
      CSP ↔ CFP               Virtuous circle hypothesis

 This table provides with an overview of central theories explaining the different directions of the relationship
 between corporate social performance and corporate financial performance.

  Starting with the direction of causality that implies that a high CSR causes improved CFP,

the social impact hypothesis and the good management theory can be applied when there is a

positive link. Although the theories are in many ways related to each other, they are somewhat

different in terms of their definitions. According to the social impact hypothesis, which can be

seen as an extension of the stakeholder theory, the recognition and meeting of demands of stake-

holders that have stakes or claims in a firm will lead to higher CFP (Freeman, 1984; Preston

and O’Bannon, 1997). Moreover, the positive relationships with stakeholders that often are a

result of CSR practices may lead to better corporate reputation, which in turn may lead to

higher CFP (Cornell & Shapiro, 1987). The good management theory, as argued by Schreck

(2011), stipulates that high CSP and CFP are in fact the results of good management of a firm.

  When the link is negative, implying that higher CSP is shown to be negatively correlated with

CFP, the trade-off hypothesis can be used as the base explanatory framework. Building on
                                      20
theories by Friedman (1970), Preston and O’Bannon (1997) discuss this neoclassical-type theory

saying that the costs associated with investing in CSR will cause a competitive disadvantage

and negative impact on CFP compared to firms that are not as socially responsible. As Aupperle

et al. (1985) mention, the competitive disadvantage is caused by a decrease in available firm

resources due to the investments in social activities. Furthermore, the theory supports the find-

ings of the study by Vance (1975) described in  section 2.2.

  When the direction is such that CFP causes a higher CSP, the slack resources hypothesis can

be used as an explanatory tool. According to the slack resources theory, firms with higher finan-

cial performance are more likely to be able to afford adopting CSR practices (Waddock and

Graves, 1997; Schreck, 2011). Thus, this resource based theory may also explain the findings of

previous studies concluding that firm size which is assumed to be correlated with firm assets can

significantly impact the amount of CSR investments a firm undertakes. When the link however

is negative, the opportunism hypothesis can be applied. This theory, as discussed by Preston

and O’Bannon (1997), is based on the assumption that managers often act in their own self-

interests. According to the theory, managers may attempt to limit CSR related investments

when financial performance is strong in order for themselves to make short-term private financial

gains. Conversely, managers may undertake CSR investments when financial performance is

weak in order to “counter” poor results (Preston and O’Bannon, 1997).

   If a bidirectional relationship is found, this can be explained by the virtuous cycle hypothesis.

As discussed by Lindgreen et al. (2016), synergetic forces cause the relationship between CSP

and CFP to run in both directions. If the synergetic relationship is positive, it implies that

stronger CFP leads to higher CSP, but at the same time the higher CSP causes higher CFP. A

negative synergetic relationship would mean that high CSP leads to weak CFP, which in turn

limits the firm’s ability to make further CSR related investments – i.e. creating a virtuous cycle.

  Finally, if a neutral link between CSP and CFP is found, an applicable theory is the neutrality

theory. Due to a high number of intermediary and moderating variables when looking at the

CSP and CFP relationship, a random link is assumed to exist (Ullmann, 1985; Waddock and

Graves, 1997). Thus, according to this theory, there are no reasons to expect a relationship

between CSP and CFP other than due to random effects.

                                      21
4.2    Research hypothesis

   Previous literature indicate that in the field of CSR, the results pertaining to any relationship

between CSP and CFP are truly heterogeneous. Among these mixed findings are those who

claim the relationship between CSP and CFP is neutral, i.e. non-significant. As discussed in

section 4.1, the high number of intermediary and moderating variables suggest, at its best,

only a random link between CSP and CFP (Ullmann, 1985; Waddock and Graves, 1997). Thus,

the first hypothesis regarding the CSP and CFP relationship in line with neutrality theory is

formulated as follows:

Hypothesis H1a: There exists a neutral relationship between a firm’s corporate social perfor-

mance and its market-based and accounting-based corporate financial performance

  As described in  section 2.1, some previous empirical research point to a positive relationship

between company CSR scores and financial performance. Firm investments in CSR is seen as

lowering investment risk for investors, whilst ignoring CSR in a firm’s operations is considered

a riskier investment (Feldman et al. 1997; Robinson et al. 2008; El Ghoul et al. 2011). Firms

ignoring integrating CSR may face indirect costs in the form of, for example, reputational dam-

age and litigation costs if products or services turn out to be unsafe or harmful (Waddock and

Graves 1997; El Ghoul et al. 2011). Investing in socially responsible firms means that investors

due to the lower perceived risk will demand a lower risk premium. This is in turn leads to a

lower discount rate used in firm valuation by investors and thus results in higher company value

(Hamilton et al. 1993; El Ghoul et al. 2011). Furthermore, investments in CSR could lead to

competitive advantages that might potentially lead to financial improvements in that invest-

ments in CSR may enhance firm reputation as well as the ability to attract and retain high-

quality employees (Albinger & Freeman 2000; Backhaus et al. 2002; Bauman & Skitka, 2012).

Therefore, in order to establish a possible positive relationship the following hypothesis will be

tested:

                                      22
Hypothesis H1b: There exists a positive relationship between a firm’s corporate social perfor-

mance and its market-based and accounting-based corporate financial performance

  On the contrary, there are those who argue that investing in CSR and being socially respon-

sible does not lead to any net financial benefits for a firm due to the costs outweighing the

benefits. According to shareholder theory, the fiduciary duty of managers and executives should

be focused on maximizing shareholder value and any excess spending on social causes is likely

value destructive and causes distraction from value enhancing projects and activities that the

firm could otherwise undertake (Friedman, 1970; Friedman & Miles 2002). Investments and

activities relating social responsibility should not be carried out by the corporation, but rather

by the individuals (Friedman 1970). Also, according to the famous inept-custodian argument,

managers and executives simply lack the necessary expertise and morals to make investment

decisions regarding CSR activities. The hypothesis in order to examine a possible negative rela-

tionship is thus as follows:

Hypothesis H1c: There exists a negative relationship between a firm’s corporate social perfor-

mance and its market-based and accounting-based corporate financial performance

  In previous research where the relationship between CSR scores and financial performance has

been examined, different databases generating the CSR performance have been used. The ma-

jority of studies use CSP from either the KLD database, Thomson Reuters ASSET4 database or

data compiled by Sustainalytics. The databases used to obtain CSP do not only vary among

academic researchers, but also among companies screening and evaluating different investment

alternatives based on CSP. CSR is not easily defined and the many different components con-

stituting CSR make it difficult to quantify. Due to the intangibility and difficulty in measuring

CSR, there are risks of variations in CSP across the databases. The problem with this variation

is that the difference in scores may lead to incorrect and diverging conclusions regarding the

relationship between CSR and financial performance as well as what investment decision should

be made. Thus, this central issue should be of major interest to both academic researchers and

                                      23
corporations. With access to CSR data from KLD and ASSET4 the consistency and robustness

of the CSR scores will be tested. The research hypothesis is as follows:

Hypothesis H2: There is little convergence between corporate social performance as measured

by the KLD and ASSET4 databases

  Using legitimacy theory voluntary engagement in CSR can be explained by firms seeking to

bridge gaps between their actions, and social values and norms in the surrounding society. When

employing CSR practices a firm can be said to construct legitimacy by showing that firm activ-

ities are in line with social values, e.g. by releasing CSR reports together with other company

filings. As discussed in  section 2.5,  several studies have concluded that the degree and nature

of CSR activities and disclosure depend on what industry a firm belongs to (e.g. Roberts, 1992;

Campbell et al., 2003). Building on legitimacy theory, a plausible explanation to the variation

is that some industries are more negatively looked upon by society due to factors such as harm-

fulness of products produced or negative environmental impact caused by manufacturing pro-

cesses common in the industry. Thus, firms in industries with negative connotations may be

more inclined to adopt CSR practices as it is likely that the gaps to be bridged are wider than

in industries that are associated with more positive connotations. An example illustrating this is

comparing firms in the tobacco industry with firms in the restaurants and bars industry. Due to

factors such as harmfulness of products and unethical aspects, tobacco firms are likely to have

higher incentives to construct legitimacy than firms in the restaurants and bars industry. Ques-

tions therefore arise regarding whether or not firms in industries with negative connotations have

more to gain in CFP if CSR practices are adopted by firms as construction of legitimacy could

be argued to have a greater affect for firms in these industries, or also cause greater financial

damage if CSP is poor (Schreck, 2011). In order to examine this, industries with a high degree

of pollution has been chosen as proxies for industries with bad connotations in society. As many

of the gaps for firms in high-polluting industries pertain to the environmental dimension of CSR,

any influence on CFP will be analyzed through this aspect. The research hypothesis can be

formulated as follows:

                                      24
Hypothesis H3: The environmental dimension of corporate social responsibility will have a

higher impact on corporate financial performance for firms in industries with a higher degree of

pollution than in other industries.

5   Data and Methodology

  In the following section, the methodological approach and econometric model will be described

in great detail. In  section 5.1  we thoroughly present the data and sample collection process. In

sections 5.2  the variables in the regression model will be laid forth and motivated. The regres-

sion specification with an exact description of the methodology will follow in  sections 5.3  and

5.4  in order to facilitate and encourage replications of this study. Lastly, we discuss our robust-

ness checks in  sections 5.5  and  5.6.

5.1    Data and sample collection

  As this study includes a comparison of the CSP-CFP relationship between when using KLD

and ASSET4 for listed companies in the US, this subsection is divided into two parts: the first

part explaining the data and sample collection using KLD, and the second part explaining the

process using the ASSET4 database.

  When using KLD, we started by collecting CSR score data for listed firms in the US. The

KLD database contains performance indicators pertaining to environmental, social and govern-

ance aspects of firms. Each year, the database is updated and several “subaspects” pertaining to

the ESG dimensions may be added or removed. For reasons relating to compatibility with AS-

SET4, which will be explained below, and due to low variation in added or removed subaspects

in the KLD database which enables comparison between years, data is collected for the period

2007-2014. Furthermore, this time period in line with previous research is deemed sufficiently

long for any effects of CSR investments to “materialize” and potentially affect financial perfor-

mance. Once the data was gathered, adjustments in the sample were made to remove any outliers

with exceptionally high or low market capitalization and thus minimize the sample selection bias.

                                      25
This is in line with previous studies stating that firm size can affect the amount of CSR related

investments that is undertaken (e.g. Waddock and Graves, 1997).

  When using ASSET4, ESG data for listed firms in the US was gathered. The ASSET4 data-

base is part of Thomson Reuters and today contains data for over 5000 global companies across

over 400 different ESG metrics. Similar to KLD, data is collected through publicly available

information and is available starting 2002. Once again, outliers with exceptional market capital-

izations were removed from the sample.

  When data had been gathered for both KLD and ASSET4, adjustments were made to arrive

at a final single sample. Firstly, we collect financial data from Thomson Reuters Datastream,

and additional firm data from proxy statements. Secondly, we merge this with the ESG data

from ASSET4 and drop all observations that do not have all firm and year observations. In line

with Chatterji et al. (2015), to optimize and enable the comparability between KLD and ASSET4

we chose to drop the firms that did not overlap in the two databases. As such, we arrive at a

sample of 3200 (400 U.S. listed firms) observations with all firm and year data. This takes the

form of balanced panel data.  Table 2  illustrates the adjustments made in order to arrive at the

final sample. Lastly, Tobin’s Q, total assets, ROE, EBITDA, and debt to assets were winsorized

at the 5% level in each tail in order to remove outliers. An example of an outlier was Sears

Holding Corporation with an extremely negative ROE of -420% at a single point in time.

  Summary statistics of the final sample is illustrated in  Table 3. As seen by looking at the

statistics in the table, the sample is skewed toward larger firms. As an example, the mean of

                                                                                     th
total assets is 28,200 ($ million), the median is 12,200 ($ million) and the 75  percentile is 30,800

($ million). With regards to net sales, the median is 4,700 ($ million) and the mean is 13,000 ($

million). The standard deviations are high for both total assets and total sales, measuring 39,600

($ million) and 38,500 ($ million). As will be discussed later on in this paper, this is linked to

the high amount of financial firms in the sample with large balance sheets.

  In order to assess the industry distribution among the firms in the final sample, a supersector

ticker by ICB was used. When looking at industries with greater concentration in the final

sample, 14% of the firms belong in Industrial Goods and Services, 9% in Technology, 9% in Oil

& Gas, 8% in Retail and 8% in Health Care. Firms included in the Financial Industry (i.e. Banks,

                                      26
Financial Services and Insurance) make up 19% of the sample. The industry distribution is

illustrated in  Table 4.

5.2    Variable description and summary statistics

Tobin’s Q

  The main focus when measuring financial performance in this study lies on the market-based

measure Tobin’s Q. Focusing on market-based performance indicators when assessing how CSR

affects financial performance is appropriate as it means looking at the value that is assigned by

the market where all forms of expectations are included (Schreck, 2009). Furthermore, the mar-

ket value includes intangible values, which partly stem from a firm’s investments in CSR (Manos

& Drori, 2016). Fundamentally, Tobin’s Q revolves around the hypothesized idea that the mar-

ket value of a firm should be equal to the total value of the replacement costs, and thus a low

value of Tobin’s Q indicates that a firm is undervalued and a high value indicates that stocks

are overvalued. Tobin’s Q, a forward looking measure, captures the intangible value of a firm

assigned by the market and previous literature have suggested several ways to compute the

performance measure (Guenster et al., 2011). In this study, the following formula has been used

to obtain Tobin’s Q’s for the firms in the sample:

                                                𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠
                  𝑄 =                                                     EQ.8
                                   𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠

  In the regression model, the performance indicator is logarithmically transformed in order to

normalize the distribution of residuals. Tobin’s Q as a market-based performance measure has

been used frequently in previous CSR related studies (e.g. Garcia-Castro et al., 2010; Schreck,

2011; Baron et al., 2011). The extensive use of Tobin’s Q enables comparison between the results

of this study with previous research using the same performance indicator and similar method-

ology.

                                      27
ROE

  In this study, the accounting-based performance indicator used is ROE due to the high number

of previous studies using ROE as a proxy for financial performance (e.g. Waddock and Graves,

1997; Garcia-Castro et al., 2010) and due to a high number of financial companies in the sample.

As the main focus lies on the market-based performance indicator Tobin’s Q, ROE in this study

is used to provide a more nuanced picture of the CSP to CFP relationship in order to examine

whether or not the results of this study depend on what performance indicator is used in the

econometric model. Thus, ROE as a performance measure also serves as a robustness check of

the findings in this paper.

CSP

  As previously mentioned, CSR ratings from the KLD database and Thomson Reuters ASSET4

are used in this study to measure CSP. Below, KLD and ASSET4 are described together with a

summary of constructional and methodological differences between the databases. Please see

Figures 2-3  for additional information on the data construction and methodologies behind KLD

and ASSET4.

KLD

  KLD, or as of recently MSCI ESG KLD STATS, is a database updated annually containing

positive and negative environmental, social and governance performance indicators divided into

subaspects (e.g. operational waste and regulatory compliance). Each subaspect is then labelled

as either a strength (if positive aspect) or concern (if negative aspect). If a firm fulfils the criteria

for a strength or concern this will be marked with a “1”, and if the criteria are not met this will

be indicated by a “0”. In order to arrive at an aggregated score for each dimension, the net of

all strengths and concerns is calculated. As an example, a firm with two fulfilled strengths and

one fulfilled concern in the environmental dimension will result in an aggregated environmental

score of 1 (2-1). The total aggregated score across all dimensions is given by simply adding the

net scores of each dimension, which in this study is how the variable CSP [KLD] is created. The

final variable has a value range of -10 to 19.

                                      28
  The data is collected by a team of over 140 analysts and is yearly updated and assessed by

looking at for example company filings and public documents, company websites and macro data

from governments, NGOs and academics. Data in the KLD database is available from 1991 and

today covers five different data set universes where companies are sorted depending on what

index they belong to.

ASSET4

  ASSET4 is a product from Thomson Reuters and contains scores ranging from 0-100 in four

subdomains (Environmental, Economic, Social and Corporate Governance). Data is available

from 2002 and is collected by a team of analysts looking at publicly available information relating

to over 400 different ESG metrics. In order to allow for comparability with KLD, we create an

equally weighted score from the ESG domains, which is the basis for our CSP [ASSET4] variable.

Control variables

  In order to mitigate the potential bias due to omitted variables, several control variables are

included in the regression model used in this study. Data is gathered using Thomson Reuters

Datastream and complemented with proxy statement verification. Firstly, in line with previous

studies (e.g. Lopez et al., 2007; Baron et al., 2011), size is controlled for using a firm’s total

assets which in this study is transformed logarithmically. Size has been argued to affect the

financial performance of a firm (e.g. Garcia-Castro et al., 2010) and is therefore a suitable control

variable.

  Additionally, although not related to the main rationale behind the selection of the independ-

ent variable, it has been argued that firm size due to factors such as resource constraints and

scale of operations can influence a firm’s CSR activities, and previous research has shown that

the motivational level to invest in CSR related projects varies depending on firm size (Waddock

and Graves, 1997; Udayasankar, 2008). Even though adjustments related to size have been per-

formed on the sample used in this study, there are still sufficient variations in total assets that

motivates controlling for size. As an additional note, in contrast to studies such as Schreck

(2011), sales has not been used as a proxy for size as 19% of the total sample are financial

                                      29
companies. The main source of revenue for banks is interest income and thus controlling for size

with sales would be a misrepresentation of the sample.

  Secondly, leverage as a proxy for financial risk is included as a control variable as financial

leverage has been shown to affect CFP. Although debt creates tax benefits due to interest tax

shields, financial distress costs may offset any tax savings depending on the level of leverage

(Berk & DeMarzo, 2013). The relationship between leverage and CFP is ambiguous as previous

empirical studies provide with heterogeneous results. Following previous research (e.g. McGuire

et al., 1988; Waddock and Graves, 1997; Schreck, 2011), the level of debt to assets is used in

this study. Furthermore, as a side note and not related to the choice of leverage as an independ-

ent variable, Dowell et al. (2000) argue that higher leverage could negatively impact a firm’s

ability to afford investments in CSR related projects. This is linked to the effects of debt on the

cash flows of a firm.

  Thirdly, cash return on assets (cash flow from operations to total assets) as a proxy for firm

liquidity is controlled for in the regression model. The rationale behind including this measure

lies in the fact that a high ratio indicates that cash is available for reinvestment in the firm

which in turn could translate into improved financial performance. Additionally, market-to-book

(lagged), Tobin’s Q (lagged) and ROE (lagged) ratios are added as control variables due to their

clear link to current CFP.

                                      30
5.3    Regression specification

  The baseline model is a two-way fixed effects model which takes the form of:

     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖𝑡  = 𝛼𝑖  + 𝛽1 𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖(𝑡−1)
     +𝛽2 𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖(𝑡−1)
     +𝛽3 𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖(𝑡−1)
    +𝛽4 𝐿𝐼𝑄 𝑖(𝑡−1)
    +𝛽5 𝑀𝑇 𝐵 𝑖(𝑡−1)
     +𝛽6 𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖(𝑡−1)
     +𝜆𝑇𝐼𝑀𝐸
    +ε𝑖𝑡
     𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖𝑡         is measured by either log(Q) or ROE for a firm  i  at time t
     𝛼𝑖               is a firm specific constant, i.e. the fixed effects
     𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑖(𝑡−1)      is the aggregate score for a firms CSR measured by either KLD or ASSET4
    𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖(𝑡−1)    is measured by log(Assets) for a firm  i  at time  t-1
    𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐾𝑖(𝑡−1)    is measured by Debt / Assets for a firm  i  at time  t-1
    𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑖(𝑡−1)     is measured by Cash Return on Assets for a firm  i  at time  t-1
    𝑀𝑇 𝐵𝑖(𝑡−1)    is measured by Market Value / Book Value for a firm  i  at time  t-1
    𝐶𝐹 𝑃𝑖(𝑡−1)     is measured by either log(Q) or ROE for a firm  i  at time  t-1
    𝜆              is a set of constants to the time (2007-2014) dummies
     𝜀𝑖𝑡               is a time-variant error term
  EQ.9  specified above is a model used to examine the CSP-CFP relationship. In the model,

both accounting-based and market-based indicators are used as proxies for CFP. In our analysis,

we will use variations of this specification in order to test different hypotheses, as well as perform

various robustness checks specified below.

  We run this model first with an aggregated CSP score. After this, we perform an identical

regression, but disaggregate the CSP score into the three ESG (ENV, SOC and GOV) dimensions,

in order to examine if any separate domain individually has an effect on CFP. As such, we test

hypotheses H1a-H1c in a collectively exhaustive manner. In line with the methodology used in

previous literature, we lag our variables one year to capture the long-term nature of CSR. Prac-

tically, this means that engagement in CSR activities has been argued to take time before trans-

lating into financial impact. This is also a method to reduce distortion caused by possible reverse

causality. More specifically, in the model we assume that CSP is a set of strategic decisions

which then impacts CFP.

                                      31
  To test hypothesis H2 regarding the convergent validity of different CSP ratings, we repeat

identical regression procedures for KLD and ASSET4 separately. Moreover, we compute Spear-

man rank correlations between the different dimensions of CSP between the two rating systems

on a year-by-year basis to see if there is any directly observable convergence or divergence. The

reason for using Spearman’s rank correlations in place of Pearson’s correlations for this study is

further discussed in the results section.

  Aligned with the reasoning mentioned in the  section 3  about endogeneity, we use a firm fixed

effects model to account for the fact that strategic (CSR) decisions by managers are not likely

to be random. Specifically, under the assumptions that unobserved variables of the model are

time-invariant, we use fixed effects to describe intra-firm variation over time. We also transform

the model into a two-way FE estimation by adding time dummies, in order to capture variation

in CSP ratings across years. Whilst a random effects estimator might be useful for cases where

there is little variation of CFP over time, the FE model minimizes the distortion caused by OVB.

There is as such a case-specific explanation as to why we prefer the FE model over the RE

equivalent. In order to statistically determine whether an FE or RE model should be used, we

                                                                   6
run a heteroscedasticity-robust version of the Hausman test  . In all our tests we can reject the

null that an RE estimator is preferable to a FE estimator at a 1% significance level. Lastly, a

Breusch-Pagan test is performed to assess homoscedasticity of the variables. We can reject the

null of homoscedasticity in favor of heteroscedasticity at a 1% significance level (White, 1980).

For the sake of coherence in this study, we use heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors across

all estimations and tests.

5.4    Connecting legitimacy theory and pollution

  In order to empirically test hypothesis H3 claiming that firms in high-polluting industries have

more to gain in CFP from the environmental dimension of CSR, we construct dummy variable

(POLLUTE) which assumes the value “1” if a firm belongs to an industry that is deemed as

high-polluting or “0” if a firm belongs to an industry that is less polluting. These two groups,

i.e. high-polluting industries and less pollutant industries, were constructed using the Blacksmith

   6
    The alternatives to the Hausman test under non-homoskedasticity is further discussed in Chmelarova (2007)
                                      32
Institute ranking as a guideline, where degree of pollution is outlined per industry. The industries

in our sample that belong to the high-polluting group are auto and parts, telecom, oil and gas,

chemicals, industrial goods and services, personal and household goods, health care and lastly

food and beverages. In  Table 5  we see the means of the different CSP domains. A simple two-

sample t-test reveals the difference is significant for the aggregated CSP score and for the SOC

domain, but not for ENV and GOV.

  We divide the sample according to the POLLUTE classification. In order to test the difference

between the coefficients, we first follow the methodology proposed by Zellner (1962) and estimate

a seemingly unrelated regression model. After storing the estimates for the four models, we run

a Wald test to investigate whether the CSP coefficients are, on an individual basis, statistically

equal to each other.  The standard Wald statistic takes the form of:

                                                                                 2
                          [𝑏̂(𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑃𝑂𝐿𝐿𝑈𝑇𝐸=1(𝑡−1) ) − 𝑏̂(𝐶𝑆𝑃𝑃𝑂𝐿𝐿𝑈𝑇𝐸=0(𝑡−1) )]
           𝑊 =                                                          EQ.10
                    𝜎 2  {𝑏̂(𝐶𝑆𝑃                )} + 𝜎 2 {𝑏̂(𝐶𝑆𝑃                )}
                                 𝑃𝑂𝐿𝐿𝑈𝑇𝐸=1(𝑡−1)                   𝑃𝑂𝐿𝐿𝑈𝑇𝐸=0(𝑡−1)

  This test statistic follows a chi-squared distribution under the null that the stored estimates

of the coefficients are equal to each other, and under the assumption that the coefficients of the

different groups have sampling distributions which are independent (Clogg, et al., 1995). We

note that the test is sensitive to the assumption that the respective regressions of the two groups

have correlated error terms. One alternative way to the test the same hypothesis would be to

introduce interaction terms (e.g. ENVxPOLLUTE, SOCxPOLLUTE etc) for each of the inde-

pendent variables and run the baseline regression with these. We make the judgement that the

Wald test is however preferable as the ‘interaction term’ method may cause issues of multicol-

linearity.

5.5    Robustness checks

  Several robustness checks have been performed in order to assess the strength and validity of

the results in this study. A total of five different robustness checks are performed including an

instrumental variables approach. While some robustness checks are in line with methodology

used in previous studies, one of the robustness checks involves a removal of the financial firms

in the sample which has, to the best of our knowledge, not been done before. The first robustness

check is using ROE as an additional proxy for CFP. The second robustness check is to lag CSP
                                      33
in the regression model with different time periods than one year. Specifically, CSP will be lagged

both two and three years.  The rationale behind choosing this type of robustness check relates

to the fact that it is unclear how long it takes for a firm’s CSR activities to potentially translate

into any impact on CFP, due to the often argued long-term and “slow” nature of CSR (Battista

Derchi, 2015). Thus, it is interesting to see if any variations in the degree of lag of CSP will

generate different results in terms of the CSP-CFP relationship.

  The third robustness check involves using a three-year average CSR score instead of only

looking at how the previous year’s CSR score affects CFP. This choice of test is based on the

argument that an average score may contribute to evening out any potential abnormal variation

in CSR scores across consecutive years.

  The fourth robustness check relates to removing the financial firms in the sample. The differ-

ent nature of the financial industry compared to other industries, e.g. how revenue is earned and

different CSR practices, might cause the results of the CSP-CFP relationship to be skewed

toward financial firms due to their high representation in the sample.

5.6    Combined FE-IV estimation model

  Building on the basic problem of endogeneity, an FE-IV estimation approach in line with that

of Wooldridge & Semykina (2010) will be used as a type of robustness check, keeping in mind

the limitations it poses (discussed in  section 3).

  We include all exogenous variables in the first stage in line with previous research and follow

the practice to have (n+1) instruments per each (n) endogenous regressor (Larcker & Rusticus,

2010). The first instrument relates to the external pressure of a firm to adopt the practice of

having a CSR report or disclose a certain degree of CSR information separate to the annual

report (REPORT_PRESSURE). We measure external pressure by the proportion of peers, i.e.

firms within the same industry, that have adopted this CSR practice each year. The second

instrument is also related to industry-specific pressure and measures the proportion of firms that

have adopted the practice of linking executive compensation to CSR metrics (COMP_PRES-

SURE). We can theoretically assume that industry-specific pressure correlates with a firm’s CSP.

Raw data on whether an individual firm has adopted the CSR reporting or CSR executive

                                      34
compensation practice for each given year is collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream and

the variables are then constructed separately.

6   Empirical Results and Analysis

  This section analyzes and evaluates the results using our models and robustness checks. It is

divided on the basis of our hypotheses, and structured as follows: In  section 6.1  we present a

brief overview of correlations, which is then used to draw conclusions regarding multicollinearity.

In  section 6.2  we outline the CSP-CFP relationship from our main model and discuss hypoth-

eses H1a-H1c. In  section 6.3, we assess hypothesis H2 by comparing KLD and ASSET4 as

proxies for CSP. In section 6.4  we expand the scope of our analysis to industry-specific evidence.

Specifically we cover hypothesis H3, which compares the effects of the environmental domain on

CFP in high-polluting industries vis-à-vis low-polluting industries. Lastly,  section  6.5  contains

the results of our robustness checks and instrumental variable analysis.

6.1    Correlation analysis

  Table 6  shows correlations between unlagged (at time t) versions of the variables used in our

model. We use Spearman’s rank correlations  in lieu  of Pearson’s due to two main reasons: Spear-

man’s rank correlation (1) is more appropriate for  ordinal  scales, which is in line with the way

KLD is measured, and (2) relaxes the assumption that the tested variables follow a bivariate

normal distribution (Wayne, 1990; Chatterji et al., 2015). A variance inflation factor (VIF)

analysis of our main model shows that the tolerance levels (1/VIF) are above 0.1, indicating

there is probably no multicollinearity (Kutner, et al., 2004)

  Firstly, while log(Q) and ROE are inherently different, it is unsurprising to find that they are

significantly correlated with each other (positive,  ρs=0.5668, p<0.001), as they both capture

financial performance. Secondly, we find that all KLD measures (CSP, ENV, GOV and SOC)

are weakly correlated (positive,  ρs<0.22, p<0.001) with log(Q) and ROE, respectively. The same

pattern is observed when using ASSET4 as a proxy for CSP. Further evaluation shows that the

CSP domain which has the highest correlation with log(Q) is ENV for KLD and SOC for AS-

SET4, respectively. We observe an identical pattern for ROE. Additionally, as expected, the

                                      35
different CSP domains (i.e. SOC with GOV, GOV with ENV, etc) are positively correlated with

each other, for both KLD and ASSET4. These results are expected as there are most likely CSP

spillover effects for most companies. This practically means that if a company is adopting sus-

tainable environmental practices, then the same company is likely to adopt governance and

social related practices as well.

  The control variables which are used in the regression show interesting patterns: SIZE is

negatively correlated with both log(Q) and ROE (-0.3256 and -0.0867, p<0.001). This is not

necessarily intuitive, as the size of a company is often argued to affect CFP positively (Lee,

2009). LIQ is positively correlated with both measures, and we find that MTB and log(Q) are

highly correlated (ρs=0.8925, p<0.001), which is likely due to the fact that MTB can be seen as

a proxy for the expected growth by the market. The same is observed for ROE. Furthermore,

RISK is negatively correlated with ROE. This finding is interesting as one could argue that

higher leverage would imply higher returns, but at the same time, leverage can have negative

effects on the bottom line.

6.2    The relationship between CSP and CFP

  Table 7  shows results from our main two-way fixed effects model (using KLD as a proxy for

CSP) and is divided in the following way. Model (1) and (3) use the lagged aggregate CSP score

as main explanatory variable for log(Q) and ROE respectively. Model (2) and (4) show the same

regression, but disaggregates CSP into its three components (ENV, GOV and SOC). All control

variables have been lagged one period.

  While looking at models (1)-(4), we observe no significant relationship between CSP and CFP,

in support of hypothesis H1a. This is true both when using an aggregated CSP score and the

disaggregated components. In other words, we cannot determine whether CSP has a significant

positive or negative impact on CFP. This is in line with the findings of Aupperle et al. (1985),

Waddock and Graves (1997), and Garcia-Castro (2010). Possible explanations have been dis-

cussed in previous literature and theories, and will be further analyzed in the discussion. In the

same models SIZE is negatively (p<0.01) correlated with CFP, in line with the correlation anal-

ysis. Moreover, we find that RISK is positively correlated with ROE, in line with the argument

that a higher degree of leverage means that investors will require a higher return on investment

                                      36
to compensate for the additional risk. We fail to reach the same conclusion when using the

market-based measure. No significant relationship is found in either model between LIQ and

CFP.  A positive relationship (p<0.01) is found for MTB with both CFP measures, supporting

the explanation that MTB is a decent proxy for growth as implied by the market. It comes as

no surprise that lagged CFP measures are positively related with unlagged CFP measures

(p<0.01), as seen from both a market-based and account-based perspective.

   From the F-tests across all models, we find a rejection of the joint null that the coefficients of

our independent variables are equal to zero at 1% significance. Moreover, we find that all models

                                                  2
using log(Q) as a proxy for CFP have a higher  𝑅   (explain a higher portion of variance) than

the models using ROE. Similar to the arguments brought forward in Drori and Manos (2016),

the reason for this could be due to the fact that market-based measures to a greater extent factor

in the intangible value of CSR.

6.3    Comparing KLD and ASSET4

  In order to shed light on the validity of our study and previous studies in this field, we move

on to examine if we get different results when using a different proxy for CSP on the exact same

sample. As mentioned before, we use ASSET4 as an alternative proxy for CSP as it is commonly

used in previous research. The analysis is made up out of two parts. Firstly, we run an identical

regression model using ASSET4 and present this in  Table 8. This analysis will show if we get

different results to those in  section 6.2. Next, we look further into the differences between the

CSR ratings in line with Chatterji et al. (2015), by using correlation analysis as our main tool.

  In Models (1) and (3), we find no evidence of an existing relationship between CSP and CFP,

when using an aggregated CSP score from ASSET4. These results are in line with what is found

when performing the same analysis with KLD. However, results are different when disaggregating

the CSP scores into the respective ESG domains. On the market-based side, we find a weak

negative relationship (p<0.01) between the GOV dimension and CFP. When looking at the

results using the accounting-based performance measure, we find that ENV is positively corre-

lated with CFP. This is different to the results obtained when using KLD in that it is significant

(p<0.05) but also positive. Moreover, the analysis using ASSET4 yields a negative relationship

between SOC and CFP. In terms of the control variables, the nature of the relationships with

                                      37
CFP (i.e. if positive, negative or non-existent) are the same. The implications of these findings

will be discussed on the basis of theorization and commensurability in  section 7.

  By performing Spearman rank correlations between KLD and ASSET4, a clearer overview

regarding the convergent validity of these two different proxies for a CSR is given. The correla-

tions are done on a year-by-year basis in order to assess if the convergence between KLD and

ASSET4 vary across years. The results from the correlation analysis is shown in  Table 9. As

seen in  Table 9, the correlations are shown from 2007-2014 using both aggregated and disaggre-

gated CSR scores. When looking at the aggregated version of CSP, we see that the correlations

are all positive and vary across years. Between 2009 and 2010, the degree of convergence seems

to have increased (i.e. from 0.2007 to 0.5798, p<0.01). Although it may be impossible to exactly

pinpoint the underlying cause of the increase, it is possible that it is due to a higher degree of

theorization and commensurability. In terms of the CSP domains, we see a rather high degree

of variation across years with different significance levels. For GOV, the correlation was negative

(-0.1221, p<0.1) in 2013.

6.4    Industry-specific evidence

  We will now shift focus to industry-specific groups, in order to investigate any potential dif-

ferences depending on what industry firms belong to in context of the CSP-CFP link. More

specifically, building on legitimacy theory, we investigate whether firms in high polluting indus-

tries (POLLUTE=1) have more to win in terms of financial performance from being environ-

mentally responsible, than do non-polluting firms (POLLUTE=0).

  In  Table 10, specifically in model (4), where log(Q) is the CFP measure and is regressed on

the ESG components, we see that there is a negative relationship (p<0.01) between ENV and

CFP for firms in non-polluting industries. These findings can be interpreted as companies in

non-polluting industries in fact are financially worse off when investing in environmental man-

agement. The coefficients difference test results are presented in  Table 11. We reject the null

hypothesis (p<0.05) that the ENV coefficient in the POLLUTE=1 group is equal to the coeffi-

cient to the POLLUTE=0 group. This implies that firms in non-polluting industries have in fact

more to lose when investing in environmental management than do firms in polluting industries.

                                      38
6.5    Robustness checks - treatment of sample

  As previously mentioned, several robustness checks have been performed in this study to

reinforce the validity of the results. Firstly, we use ROE as a robustness check as another proxy

for CFP. The second robustness tests involves lagging the measure of CSP with different time

periods than one year. CSP was lagged both two and three years in order to examine if any

differences relating to the CSP and CFP link is found. In  Table 12  the results of this robustness

check are presented. We find that overall there is no major difference in the CSP to CFP rela-

                                                    7
tionship when lagging with two or three years . We do, however, find that the sign and signifi-

cance of the GOV domain shifts from non-existent to a weak and negative one (p<0.1). This

result is in line with the results generated when using the ASSET4 scores as a proxy for CSP.

This supports the argument by Battista Derchi (2015) that it is unclear how long it takes for

CSP to have any financial impact. Furthermore, when lagging with two and three years, we

observe that the effects of the environmental dimension on CFP becomes even greater in terms

on financial benefits. In  Table 13, we find that for the POLLUTE=1 group, ENV is now posi-

tively correlated with the market-based measure (0.0088, p<0.05) in contrast to the non-signif-

icant relationship seen in  Table 10. For the POLLUTE=0 group, ENV is still negative (-0.0138,

p<0.05). The ENV dimension remains unchanged with regards to the nature of the relationship

with the accounting-based measure (ROE). A SUR-based Wald test confirms the difference in

the ENV coefficient between the POLLUTE=1 and POLLUTE=0 groups.

  The third robustness test involves using a three year average CSP score in order to minimize

the impact on the CSP and CFP relationship caused by any abnormal variations in CSP scores

across years. The results of this robustness check yields no different results than when the one-

year lagged version of CSP is used. This strengthens the validity of our main results.

  The fourth robustness check entails a removal of firms in the financial industry. The results

are presented in  Table 14. For the market-based measure log(Q), no differences with regards

to the relationship between the CSR dimensions with CFP are found. However, with ROE we

observe two differences. Firstly, the ENV dimension becomes positively correlated with CFP

(0.7442, p<0.01). Secondly, the GOV dimension also becomes positively correlated with CFP

   7
    Three years is not presented.
                                      39
(0.6423, p<0.05). One of the reasons why removing financial firms causes differences when look-

ing at ROE and its relationship with the CSP dimensions might be due to the fact that banks

have volatile earnings which directly feeds through to ROE (de Haan & Poghosyan, 2012). When

removing these firms, ROE is thus according to this argument normalized and the volatility in

returns is dampened.

6.6    Robustness checks - FE-IV approach

  We finish our robustness checks by contrasting our main model with an IV-model using ag-

gregated CSP scores from KLD, the results of which are presented in  Table 15. The estimation

includes the same control variables, as well as firm- and year fixed effects as our main model,

but assumes that that CSP is an endogenous regressor. As we can see in the second stage when

using log(Q) the results on the CSP-CFP link remain insignificant and the sign of CSP is un-

changed, in line with our previous results.

  It makes sense however to briefly assess the validity of the instruments and overall used

method. As previously mentioned, a theoretically valid instrument needs to be (1) highly corre-

lated with the endogenous regressor (CSP), and (2) uncorrelated with the error terms in the

main model (orthogonality condition). Whilst we cannot directly test these assumptions in a

perfect manner, we can evaluate the outcome with common IV validity tests.

  Firstly, we add REPORT_PRESSURE and COMP_PRESSURE to our main model specifi-

cation and run the regression (not presented), whereas we find no significant correlation between

their coefficients and CFP. Secondly, we see in the table that both instruments are significantly

correlated to CSP in the first stage estimation, supporting our argument that industry-specific

pressure is related to strategic decisions by means of a firms’ CSP.  Thirdly, a common “back-

of-the-envelope” practice is to compare the first-stage F-statistic to the rule of thumb value of

10 (Staiger & Stock, 1997). After doing this, we find that the F-statistic exceeds 10 at a signifi-

cance level of 1%, strengthening the choice of our instruments. Fourthly, whilst we cannot test

the orthogonality conditions directly, we can perform a test of over-identifying restrictions using

either Sargan or Hansen’s test. We choose Hansen’s test as this test statistic is consistent under

conditions of heteroscedasticity (Hayashi, 2000). In an overidentified context we fail to reject

the joint null hypothesis that the excluded instruments are left out correctly from our model and

                                      40
that the included instruments are valid (p=0.9704 for the log(Q) model). Fifthly, we compute a

weak identification test using the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic. This statistic is, again,

preferable to Cragg-Donald’s version under conditions of heteroscedasticity-robust standard er-

rors (Kleibergen & Paap, 2006). Comparing the outcome to the study by Stock & Yogo (2005),

our results exceed the critical values at approximately 20% maximal IV size. These results nei-

ther accept nor reject the null that the excluded instruments are (weakly) correlated with the

endogenous regressor (CSP). Sixthly, we compute an endogeneity test which signals a non-rejec-

tion of the null that CSP can be treated as exogenous. Collectively, whilst the IV validity test

results are mixed, we reach the conclusion that there is no indication that FE-IV would provide

better estimates in modelling the CSP-CFP link.

7   Conclusions and Discussion

  In this study, the relationship between CSP and CFP is examined. The relationship is exam-

ined using two empirical databases; KLD and ASSET4. When using the main model with KLD,

no relationship is found regardless if the market-based performance measure Tobin’s Q or the

accounting-based performance measure ROE is used. This supports hypothesis H1a claiming

there is a non-existent relationship between CSP and CFP. This finding supports the neutrality

hypothesis which stipulates that there is, at best, only a random relationship between CSP and

CFP due to the many intervening and moderating variables. The finding of no relationship is in

line with previous research such as Waddock and Graves (1997) and Garcia-Castro et al. (2010).

  When performing the same regression using the main model but with ASSET4 as a proxy for

CSP, no relationship between the aggregated CSR score and CFP is found. When disaggregating,

a weak negative relationship is found between the governmental dimension and CFP measured

by log(Q). When using ROE as a proxy for CFP, the environmental dimension is positively

correlated with CFP and the social dimension is negatively correlated with CFP. These findings

are too mixed in order to draw any conclusions, but what can be seen is that the results vary

depending on if a market-based or accounting-based performance is used.

  With regards to the correlations between KLD and ASSET4, variation across years is observed

for the aggregated measure of CSP as well as for the disaggregated dimensions. The correlations

                                      41
seem to variate in a random manner, and this is likely to be due to variations in terms of the

overlap of firms covered in both empirical databases as well as adding and removing score indi-

cators in each domain. The lowest correlation between KLD and ASSET4 is observed for the

governmental domain. The majority of correlations across years range from 0.4-0.6, indicating

that the degree of convergent validity is moderate. The moderate degree of convergent validity

between these two empirical databases can be interpreted in such a way that KLD and ASSET4

to some extent converge in terms of theorization. The implication of this finding is that previous

and future research should preferably use several empirical databases when constructing proxies

for CSP. Our results suggest that findings regarding the CSP and CFP relationship may vary

depending on what empirical database is used. Moreover, the moderate convergent validity be-

tween KLD and ASSET4 should be taken into consideration when reviewing and comparing

results of previous research.

  Next, we investigated whether or not firms in high-polluting industries have more to gain in

CFP from being environmentally responsible. When lagging one year and splitting our sample

into the pollute and non-pollute groups, we found a negative relationship between the environ-

mental dimension and CFP (log(Q)) for the non-polluting industries. This implies that it does

not pay off to be environmentally responsible in terms of CFP if a firm is in a non-polluting

industry. Using legitimacy theory, a possible explanation could be that there is simply no bridge

to gap in terms of the firm activities and social values and norms and thus there are no financial

benefits of being environmentally responsible. When we, however, lag the explanatory variables

two years, the results are different and are in line with legitimacy theory. The two year lag yields

a positive correlation between the environmental dimension and CFP measured by log(Q), and

a slightly negative relationship between the environmental dimension and CFP for the non-

polluting group. According to the legitimacy theory, this can be explained by the fact that firms

in high-polluting industries have more to win by justifying their actions through CSR activities

and thus showing that they are not in fact “that sinful”. Following the same reasoning as when

lagging two years, this is in line with the legitimacy theory. Using these results, some light into

the mechanics behind voluntary CSR disclosure can be shed.

                                      42
8   Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research

  Although this study has put great emphasis on employing a sound methodological approach

where multiple robustness checks and an analysis regarding how the use of different CSR empir-

ical databases affect the end results have been performed, several limitations need to be addressed.

These limitations are important to keep in mind before drawing any general conclusions regard-

ing the nature of the CSP-CFP relationship and any industry specific findings. Firstly, an im-

portant limitation is that CSR is vaguely defined and difficult to measure. Thus, theorization

and commensurability should always be discussed in further research when a certain empirical

database is used in order to critically evaluate if findings are specific to the database used.

Moreover, linked to the fact that CSR is difficult to measure, it might be that empirical databases

such as KLD and ASSET4 are not sophisticated enough to capture all CSR performance of firms.

Some aspects of CSR might not be included in the databases and thereby the CSR scores do not

entirely capture CSP.

  Continuing on the theme of limitations relating to measuring CSR, weaknesses with KLD and

ASSET4 need to be discussed as they affect the nature of the CSP-CFP relationship. Starting

with KLD, an obvious weakness lies in the way the scores are constructed. The binary scoring

system in which the strengths and concerns are given means that it is difficult to capture any

gradual variation across years (Battista Derchi, 2015). In other words it is not possible to deter-

mine the extent to which a strength or concern is fulfiled and thus any variation between firms

becomes more difficult to assess. As the KLD database is updated yearly, subcomponents may

vary over time for companies (Servaes & Tamayo, 2013; Battista Derchi, 2015).

  This issue of binary scores is not present when using ASSET4, which is an important argument

to use ASSET4. Furthermore, both KLD and ASSET4 run the risk of covering firms differently

depending on how long the firms have been included in the databases. This might cause biased

results when comparing firms based on CSP.

  An additional weakness with KLD and ASSET4, which also goes for the majority of other

empirical databases measuring CSR, is that not enough focus is placed on weighing different

aspects of CSR depending on what industry the firm belongs to when constructing CSR scores.

It is reasonable to believe that a firm in a high-polluting industry should be more intensely

                                      43
scrutinized based on CSR aspects involving environmental management than a firm in a non-

polluting industry. In other words, there is room for improvement in empirical databases to

make sure that firms in different industries gets scored based on relevant CSR performance

indicators.

  In terms of the data and sample collection in this study, there are several limitations that

need to be addressed. Firstly, our sample is limited to listed firms in the US and ideally a sample

when investigating a matter such as CSP-CFP should contain a higher number of firms. However,

it is important to remember that comparing firms with too high of a geographical distance could

pose problems in terms of making comparability less meaningful. Different aspects such as the

way CSR is integrated into businesses as well as different regulations could mean that comparing

firms, for example, in the US with companies in Japan, where regulations to a higher degree call

for CSR, becomes difficult (Krukowska, 2014). Secondly, this study only looks at data from 2007-

2014. This limited time period might not be long enough to fully capture the nature of the CSP-

CFP relationship. Thirdly, the summary statistics of our data shown in  Table 3  show that our

sample is skewed towards larger firms. The high amount of financial firms in our sample is a

reason why the mean of total assets is so large and the standard deviation is so high. This,

however, is not necessarily an issue as larger firms often are those who invest the most in CSR

related practices and are exposed to the most social pressure from society in terms of CSR

(Ioannou et al., 2014).

  The issue with endogeneity is a further limitation of this study. Although the FE estimation

model as well as the IV model do to some extent account for endogeneity, it is impossible to

entirely account for it. This, as is discussed throughout this paper, can cause biased results. It

is clear that further research with improved ways of accounting for endogeneity is needed.

  Finally, there are limitations relating to the main model used in this study. The first issue

relates to the control variables used. For example R&D, which can be argued to play an im-

portant part in explaining the CSP-CFP relationship, has been left out. Further research is

needed that includes controlling for R&D intensity and other related control variables. The

second issue is that this study focuses solely on short-term measures of CFP (Tobin’s Q, ROE).

In order to capture the long-term effect of CSR, we encourage future studies to replicate a similar

model design using forward-looking CFP measures (e.g. forecast P/E, ROE etc).

                                      44
                                                    p99                3.73   78.758.4413.0094.23
                                                       157,000159,000366,00043.95% 13,200



              445 -45  400
          Firms                                   p75                2.113,14254.663.714.0083.42
                                                       30,80016,60044,87922.27%



      N
              3560 -360 3200
                                                              7,185      1.501,26737.892.341.0065.08
                                                Median12,200 17,39414.04%
                                                   Percentiles


                                                    p25  5,2113,2616,000  1.14573 23.541.44-1.0041.32
                                                            7.53%



                                                  p1      549 263    0.9621 1.260.80
                                                           2,187                        -7.0021.71
                                                          -14.44%

                                                                                 45


     : Sample selection                     SD
                                            : Summary statistics      0.763,33121.312.004.0222.02
                                                  39,60038,500124,87313.54%

     Table 2
                                   Table 3
                                                   Mean              1.742,62639.032.931.3162.58
                                                       28,20018,50047,94914.72%

                                              Summary statistics


                               N
                                                     3200320032003200320032003200320032003200







          Sample selectionFirms covered by ASSET4 with all firm and year observationsFirms not covered by KLD + size and proxy statement adjustmentsFinal sampleThis table shows how we arrived at the final sample. First ASSET4 ESG data and financials are collected from ThomsonReuters. We drop all firms with exceptional market capitalization and all observations with incomplete firm_year data.Secondly, we match the remaining 3560 observations with MSCI ESG KLD STATS, leaving us with a final overlappingsample of 3200 observations and 400 firms.




                                             DescriptionVariableTotal assets ($mn)Total sales ($mn)Total employeesROETobin's QOperational incomeDebt-to-Assets ratioMarket-to-Book ratioCSP [KLD]CSP [ASSET4]This table shows summary statistics pertaining to the sample used in this study. The number of firms (N), means, standard deviations (SD) aswell as percentiles are listed for variables such as total assets and total sales.

Tables

9
          SD   2.292.763.101.632.192.522.711.892.563.323.121.682.572.413.633.012.683.672.94 2.97


    SOC [KLD]
           Mean -0.331.061.261.102.350.83-0.070.400.213.271.80-0.310.721.041.010.701.382.560.54 1.14


          SD   0.560.830.740.770.920.790.940.660.660.860.880.670.820.860.810.900.750.950.84 0.84


    GOV [KLD]
           Mean -0.20-0.01-0.07-0.44-0.53-0.50-0.32-0.34-0.05-0.42-0.53-0.25-0.37-0.19-0.36-0.59-0.53-0.13-0.37-0.36



          SD   1.301.651.580.900.970.881.350.671.851.380.891.241.330.841.510.951.331.970.99 1.40


    ENV [KLD]
           Mean 0.75-0.15-0.250.440.570.45-0.550.380.491.360.450.520.660.570.990.520.881.220.80 0.53



          SD   2.983.723.972.312.533.263.612.603.674.483.852.383.583.095.093.873.905.393.97 4.02              46


    CSP [KLD]
: Industry summary statisticsMean 0.230.900.951.102.390.78-0.940.440.654.211.72-0.041.011.411.630.631.733.650.97 1.31


Table 4

           1% 3% 6% 2% 5% 3% 9% 6% 5% 9% 6% 2% 14%3% 5% 8% 8% 4% 3%
                                                                 100%
         Frequency



               5  10 25 6  18 11 37 23 18 37 22 6  55 13 21 33 32 15 13
                                                                           400
         Firms
     Observations


         N    40 80 20048 14488 29618414429617648 440104168264256120104
                                                                          3200












          IndustryAutomobiles & PartsBasic ResourcesUtilitiesTelecomBanksMediaOil & GasReal EstateChemicalsTechnologyFinancial ServicesConstructions & MaterialsIndustrial Goods & ServicesInsurancePersonal & Household GoodsRetailHealth CareFood & BeverageTravel & LeisureTotalThis table shows industry summary statistics for the sample used in this study. For all of the 19 industries, means and standard deviations for corporate social performance (CSP)scores are listed. All CSP scores are measured by the empirical database KLD. The means and standard deviations are also given in each of the three dimensions that make upthe aggregated CSP. On a stand-alone basis, the Industrial Goods and Services industry has the highest frequency in the sample. Financials collectively make up 19% of thesample.
               0.791.45     1.14
                    -0.66***
       SOC [KLD]



               -0.33-0.38 0.05-0.36
       CG [KLD]
    Disaggregated



               0.520.54  -0.020.53
       ENV [KLD]
                                                             47

               0.981.61     1.31
    AggregatedCSP [KLD]   -0.63***



                          -
             189211     400
        Firms


        N           -
    Observations15121688    3200
: Differences in means according to the POLLUTE classification


Table 5

    CSP measureGroupPOLLUTE=1POLLUTE=0DifferenceSampleThis table shows the means for the industries in high-polluting industries (POLLUTE=1) and industries inlow-polluting industries (POLLUTE=0) with corresponding t-tests for significance. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,* p<0.1.
                                                 1             is an
          (16)
                                                    denotes           (t)
                                                             (t)


                                                         1
          (15)
                                                                0.0451*


                                                      1
          (14)
                                                             0.5056***-0.2769***

                                                       . COMP_PRESSUREt

                                                   1
          (13)
                                                          -0.2615***-0.2437***0.1938***


                                                1
          (12)
                                                      -0.0509***0.1052***0.1305**0.094***
                                                           is a control variable measured by the logarithm

                                                                              (t)

                                             1
          (11)
                                                  0.6771***0.0317***0.0864***-0.0295***0.058***


                                          1
          (10)
                                       0.0123***0.0943***0.7264***0.5787***          is the return on equity at time           is a control variable measured by a firm’s market-to-book ratio.
                                                       -0.0867***-0.1118***
                                                             (t)        (t)


         (9)                             1
                                       0.1292                   . ROE
                                         0.5668***-0.0172**-0.3256***0.6097***0.8925***-0.2375***       t


         (8)                          1

                                        0.1141***0.1925***0.1975***0.2444***0.3723***0.1332***0.1121***0.0766***



       (7)                 1                            , respectively, denote the environmental, governance and social dimensions that together                                         48
                                                                             0.0273     (t)
                                     0.8069***0.1442***0.2503***0.174***0.2142***0.3259***0.1974***0.1486***



         (6)                   1
                                            0.0431*  and ENV
                                  0.6193***0.6011***0.0803***0.1606***0.1895***0.1872***0.2286***0.1303***0.0802***
: Spearman correlation analysis                                     (t)


         (5)                1
                                              , SOC
                                0.7585***0.9345***0.9312***0.1267***0.2264***0.2111***0.2507***0.3599***0.1715***0.1282***0.0609**  (t)
Table 6                                                   is the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time

                                                              (t)
        (4)          1                                        . GOV
                                                         t
                            0.396***                             -0.0002
                               0.2379***0.3576***0.4211***0.2105***0.1766***0.0133***0.2353***0.1058***0.1253***0.1908***



         (3)         1
                                                           0.0261 -0.0022
                        0.3305***0.3882***0.2422***0.4056***0.352***0.098***0.1084***0.0421***0.135***0.2648***0.0857***



         (2)      1
                            0.22***   0.215***        0.0549**0.085***0.085***-0.0205
                     0.2461***0.1736***0.1341***0.2064***0.0863***0.1021***0.2488***0.2954***


                                                                   and REPORT_PRESSURE(t) are significantly correlated with corporate social performance in its aggregated and disaggregated form. ***
           1
         (1)                                                                                    (t)
                                                           -0.002                      is a control variable measured by cash flow from operations to total assets. MTB
                 0.4589***0.8973***0.6192***0.4671***0.2841***0.4621***0.4516***0.1563***0.1556***0.0989***0.2569***0.2483***0.0691***0.1423***
                                                                        (t)
                                               (t)

                                            (t)




                              (%)
           [KLD][KLD]   [KLD][KLD]   [ASSET4][ASSET4]   [ASSET4][ASSET4]    (t)

                      (t)      (t)      (t)      (t)       (t)           (t)      (t)   (t)
                (t)     (t)      (t)     (t)                       (t)

          CSPGOVSOCENVCSPGOVSOCENVlog(Q)ROECOMP_PRESSUREREPORT_PRESSURESIZELIQMTBRISK                    is a control variable measured by total debt to assets as a proxy for a firm’s financial risk. The correlation matrix suggests no multicollinearity. Moreover, the instrumental

                                                                            (t)
                (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)(11)(12)(13)(14)(15)(16)
    Spearman correlation coefficients and significance levels between main variablesMain variables                                    This correlation matrix illustrates the Spearman pair-wise correlation coefficients between the dependent, independent and instrumental variables used in this study. CSPthe aggregated corporate social performance score at timemake up the corporate social performance score. The [KLD]-mark and [ASSET4]-mark indicates which empirical database is used to measure the aggregated corporate socialperformance score and the disaggregated dimensions. Log(Q)instrumental variable measuring the proportions of firms that have adopted the practice of linking executive compensation to CSR metrics. REPORT_PRESSURE is aninstrumental variable relating to the external pressure to report firm-specific CSR activities in addition to the annual report. SIZEof a firm’s total assets. LIQRISKvariables COMP_PRESSUREp<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05.
                          Table 7: Baseline regression (KLD)

 Results of the two-way fixed effects estimation - using MSCI KLD as a proxy for CSP
 Dependent variable                           log(Q) (t)                     ROE (t)  (%)
 Model                                  (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)

 Explanatory variables
  CSP (t-1)                          -0.0009                     -0.0353
                                          (0.0013)                       (0.0873)
  ENV (t-1)                                   -0.0042                     0.0253
                                                       (0.0038)                       (0.2688)
  GOV (t-1)                                   0.0010                     0.2784
                                                       (0.0043)                       (0.2467)
  SOC(t-1)                                    -0.0004                     -0.1151
                                                       (0.0015)                       (0.1030)
 Controls
  SIZE (t-1)                        -0.0698***   -0.0701***       -9.6336***   -9.6005***
                                         (0.0184)      (0.0184)           (1.6073)      (1.6090)
  RISK (t-1)                         0.0002      0.0002         0.1052***   0.1040***
                                         (0.0005)      (0.0005)           (0.0275)      (0.0273)
  LIQ (t-1)                           -0.0273      -0.0268          -8.2377      -8.4533
                                         (0.1036)      (0.1038)           (7.1380)      (7.1804)
  MTB(t-1)                       0.0143***   0.0143***        2.8883***   2.8902***
                                         (0.0053)      (0.0053)           (0.3288)      (0.3275)
  log(Q) (t-1)                        0.3319***   0.3315***
                                          (0.0395)      (0.0396)
  ROE (t-1)                                               0.1758***   0.1751***
                                                                          (0.0378)      (0.0378)
 Regression details
  Year FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  Firm FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  N                                 2,800        2,800            2,800        2,800
  Unique firms                          400         400              400         400
    2
  R                                    0.3865       0.3868            0.2365       0.2372
  F-statistic                           82.85***      71.20***           28.43***      24.61***
  p-value FE vs RE                     0.0000       0.0000            0.0000       0.0000

In this figure, the results of the two-way fixed effects estimation model using the KLD database to measure corporate
social performance scores of firms are presented. Two measures for corporate financial performance are used: the
logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time  t  (model 1 and 2) and return on equity at time  t  (model 3 and 4). In model 1, the
aggregated corporate social performance at time  t-1  is the dependent variable. In model 2, the aggregated form of
corporate social performance is divided into its three dimensions which are then used as dependent variables: envi-
ronmental (ENV(t-1) ), governance (GOV(t-1) ) and social (SOC(t-1) ). In model 3, the aggregated form in corporate social
performance is used as the dependent variable. In model 4, the environmental, governance and social dimensions
are used as dependent variables. Control variables are SIZE (t-1) as measured by the logarithm of total assets, RISK (t-
1)  as measured by total debt to assets, LIQ(t-1)  as measured by cash flow from operations to total assets, MTB (t-1)  as
measured by the market-to-book ratio, the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time  t-1  in models 1-2, and lastly return on
equity at time  t-1  in models 3-4. Standard errors are robust for heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                      49
                       Table 8: Baseline regression (ASSET4)
 Results of the two-way fixed effects estimation - using Thomson Reuters ASSET4 as a proxy for CSP
 Dependent variable                           log(Q) (t)                     ROE (t)  (%)
 Model                                  (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)

 Explanatory variables
  CSP (t-1)                          -0.0004                     -0.0145
                                          (0.0005)                       (0.0272)
  ENV (t-1)                                   0.0005                    0.0380**
                                                       (0.0004)                       (0.0191)
  GOV (t-1)                                 -0.0013***                   -0.0073
                                                       (0.0004)                       (0.0238)
  SOC(t-1)                                    -0.0002                    -0.0570**
                                                       (0.0004)                       (0.0224)
 Controls
  SIZE (t-1)                        -0.0682***   -0.0723***       -9.5774***   -9.5769***
                                         (0.0184)      (0.0185)           (1.5987)      (1.5829)
  RISK (t-1)                         0.0002      0.0002         0.1052***   0.1073***
                                         (0.0005)      (0.0005)           (0.0274)      (0.0274)
  LIQ (t-1)                           -0.0232      -0.0191          -7.9552      -7.5775
                                         (0.1040)      (0.1026)           (7.0820)      (7.0197)
  MTB(t-1)                       0.0141***   0.0141***        2.8872***   2.8810***
                                         (0.0053)      (0.0052)           (0.3284)      (0.3300)
  log(Q) (t-1)                        0.3329***   0.3288***
                                          (0.0393)      (0.0393)
  ROE (t-1)                                               0.1751***   0.1738***
                                                                          (0.0377)      (0.0377)
 Regression details
  Year FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  Firm FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  N                                 2,800        2,800            2,800        2,800
  Unique firms                          400         400              400         400
    2
  R                                    0.3866       0.3904            0.2366       0.2401
  F-statistic                           84.62***      74.15***           28.59***      24.85***
  p-value FE vs RE                     0.0000       0.0000            0.0000       0.0000
In this table, the results of the two-way fixed effects estimation using Thomson Reuters ASSET4 to measure the
corporate social performance of firms are presented. Two measures for corporate financial performance are used:
the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time  t  (model 1 and 2) and return on equity at time  t  (model 3 and 4). In model 2,
the aggregated form of corporate social performance is divided into its three dimensions which are then used as
dependent variables: environmental (ENV(t-1) ), governance (GOV(t-1) ) and social (SOC(t-1) ). In model 3, the aggre-
gated form in corporate social performance is used as the dependent variable. In model 4, the environmental,
governance and social dimensions are used as dependent variables. Control variables are SIZE (t-1) as measured by
the logarithm of total assets, RISK (t-1)  as measured by total debt to assets, LIQ (t-1)  as measured by cash flow from
operations to total assets, MTB (t-1)  as measured by the market-to-book ratio, the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time
t-1  in models 1-2, and lastly return on equity at time  t-1  in models 3-4. Standard errors are robust for
heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                     50
         Table 9: KLD and ASSET4 correlations

 Results from year-by-year Spearman matrix between CSR domains
Domain       CSP       ENV       GOV       SOC
 Period           ρs            ρs            ρs            ρs
 2007        0.2176***      0.0020      0.1352**     0.3313***

 2008        0.2111***      0.0553       0.0520      0.3353***

 2009        0.2007***      0.0913       0.0137      0.2870***

 2010        0.5798***    0.5384***    0.3597***    0.4528***

 2011        0.6200***    0.5453***    0.4009***    0.4880***

 2012        0.5221***    0.4919***     -0.0050      0.4817***

 2013        0.6188***    0.5444***     -0.1221*     0.5507***

 2014        0.4687***    0.5916***     -0.0535      0.2705***

 All years     0.4671***    0.4211***    0.1341***    0.4056***

This table illustrates the Spearman correlations between CSR domains from
the two empirical databases KLD and ASSET4. Correlations are presented
from 2007-2014. CSP denotes corporate social performance. ENV is the envi-
ronmental dimension included in CSP. GOV is the governance dimension
included in CSP. SOC is the social dimension included in CSP. At the bottom
of the table, an average Spearman correlation during the years 2007-2014 is
also listed. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05.

                         51
                                                                                                   as


            (8)                                                             YESYES  211                        (t-1)
                                                                                                      1,477  0.1902
                             0.1526(0.4683)0.0691(0.3657)-0.0582(0.1408)  (2.4089)0.0623(0.0386)5.1985(10.5458)(0.4764)     (0.0455)               14.39***
                                                           2.2714*** 0.1156**



        Pollute = 0
            (7)                                                               YESYES  211
                                                                                                      1,477  0.1900
                      -0.0086(0.1193)                      (2.4259)0.0633(0.0387)5.2982(10.4254)(0.4756)     (0.0457)               15.95***
       (%)                                                  2.2595*** 0.1161**                                . Control variablest
                                  -10.0727*** -10.0881***
        (t)



     ROE

          (6)                                                         YESYES  189
                                                                                                      1,323  0.3094
                             -0.0337(0.3111)0.4057(0.3167)-0.2017(0.1535)  (2.1919)(0.0387)(10.2107)(0.3986)     (0.0572)                17.28***
                                                  0.1592***-16.60903.4297*** 0.2203***
                                             -9.1607***



        Pollute = 1
            (5)                                                               YESYES  189
                                                                                                     1,323  0.3081
                       -0.0784(0.1249)                       (2.2018)(0.0390)(10.0862)(0.3949)     (0.0570)                19.35***
                                            -9.2206***0.1601***-16.7195*3.4427*** 0.2211***                                        in models 5-8. Standard errors are robust

                                                                                              t-1

                                                                    as measured by total debt to assets, LIQ



          (4)                                                             YESYES  211                       (t-1)
                                                                                                      1,477  0.3492
                               (0.0061)0.0034(0.0060)0.0014(0.0022)  (0.0256)0.0001(0.0007)0.1141(0.1494)(0.0079)(0.0517)                     33.47***       . Two measures of corporate financial performance are
                                                         0.0166**0.2415***                                        as measured by the market-to-book ratio, the logarithm
                     -0.0164***        -0.0705***
                                                                            t-1
                                                                                (t-1)       52

        Pollute = 0
            (3)                                                               YESYES  211
                                                                                                      1,477  0.3446
                      -0.0012(0.0019)                      (0.0257)0.0000(0.0006)0.1188(0.1515)(0.0078)(0.0518)                     39.29***
        (t)                                                   0.0173**0.2426***
                                             -0.0733***


     log(Q)


          (2)                                                         YESYES  189
                                                                                          1,323  0.4435               (models 1-4) and return on equity (models 5-8) at time
                           0.0031(0.0047)-0.0043(0.0063)-0.0010(0.0021)  (0.0246)0.0001(0.0007)-0.1738(0.1460)0.0118(0.0072)(0.0567)                    43.48***
                                         -0.0607**           0.4259***                                t



        Pollute = 1
            (1)                                                               YESYES  189
                                                                                                      1,323  0.4430
                      -0.0005(0.0017)                      (0.0248)0.0001(0.0007)-0.1697(0.1454)0.0121*(0.0072)(0.0562)                     49.11***
                                             -0.0622**            0.4240***

                                                                                           in models 1-4, and lastly return on equity at time
: Baseline regression divided according to the POLLUTE classification
                                                                                              t-1

                                                                                  as measured by the logarithm of total assets, RISK
Table 10
                                                                                          (t-1)



                                                                  (t-1)
                            (t-1)    (t-1)             (t-1)    (t-1)         (t-1)          (t-1)
                (t-1)               (t-1)                 (t-1)
                                                                   2
                 CSP  ENV  GOV SOC    SIZE RISK LIQ  MTB log(Q)ROE    Year FEFirm FEN Unique firmsR F-statistic
    Results from the two-way fixed effects model decomposed to high and low polluting industries - using MSCI KLD as a proxy for CSRDependent variableGroupModelExplanatory variables        Controls                          Regression details        In this table, the results from the two-way fixed effects model is presented when the sample has been divided into agroup with high-polluting industries, and another group with low-polluting industries. The KLD empirical database isused to measure corporate social performance (CSP) at timeused: the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at timeare SIZEmeasured by cash flow from operations to total assets, MTBof Tobin’s Q at timefor heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
             χ)*

                     0.752600.010000.272800.310600.630600.755100.455000.60130

           p-value (Prob>


     W
                     0.1000010.730001.200002.340000.230001.190000.560001.02000



       Wald Test Results
          Sum ofsquared0.000000.004080.000070.000010.001120.041300.063450.02100



           between
          2            0.0000000.000380.000060.000010.004870.034710.113300.02059   . The three dimensions are the environmental (ENV), the governance
         Δ coefficients                                   t-1

: Wald tests                                                                 53


Table 11
                     -0.00120-0.016400.003400.00140-0.008600.152600.06910-0.05820
                                                                                     . For both performance measures, results are shown for the aggregated version of a firm’s corporatet


         Coefficients

                     -0.000500.00310-0.00430-0.00100-0.07840-0.033700.40570-0.20170
            Pollute = 1 Pollute = 0

                               t
                                               (%) t
                       t
                                      (%)  t

                                                             and return on equity (ROE) at time
                                                                      t



                       (t-1)  (t-1)                 (t-1)  (t-1)
                              (t-1)              (t-1)       (t-1)              (t-1)

              CSP  ENVGOVSOC CSP  ENVGOVSOC
     Results from the suest/Wald Test of difference between regression coefficientsModels Aggregated CSP, log(Q)Disaggregated CSP, log(Q)Aggregated CSP, ROEDisaggregated CSP, ROEThis table shows the coefficients from a seemingly unrelated regression. Two measures of corporate financial performance (CFP) are used: the logarithm ofTobin’s Q at timesocial performance (CSP) and for the three dimensions making up CSP, at time(GOV) and the social (SOC). All models include the control variables size, risk, liquidity, market-to-book and lagged versions of CFP. A Wald test is performedto test the null that each individual coefficient of the CSP dimensions are statistically equal to each other. The critical value for rejecting the null is p<0.05.
         Table 12: 2 year lagged robustness check - Baseline regression (KLD)

 Results of the two-way fixed effects estimation - using MSCI KLD as a proxy for CSP
Dependent variable                           log(Q) (t)                     ROE (t)  (%)
 Model                                  (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)

 Explanatory variables
  CSP (t-2)                          -0.0001                     0.0345
                                          (0.0012)                       (0.0737)
  ENV (t-2)                                   -0.0002                     0.1001
                                                       (0.0036)                       (0.2617)
  GOV (t-2)                                  -0.0082*                    0.1888
                                                       (0.0043)                       (0.2814)
  SOC(t-2)                                    0.0018                     -0.0229
                                                       (0.0017)                       (0.1010)
 Controls
  SIZE (t-1)                        -0.0997***   -0.0991***       -8.4460***   -8.4518***
                                         (0.0226)      (0.0226)           (1.8358)      (1.8426)
  RISK (t-1)                         0.0003      0.0003         0.0847***   0.0840***
                                         (0.0005)      (0.0005)           (0.0294)      (0.0293)
  LIQ (t-1)                          0.0771      0.0817         -18.3008**   -18.3098**
                                         (0.1066)      (0.1063)           (8.6490)      (8.6851)
  MTB(t-1)                        0.0127**    0.0124**        2.9716***   2.9768***
                                         (0.0053)      (0.0053)           (0.3495)      (0.3478)
  log(Q) (t-1)                        0.3806***   0.3824***
                                          (0.0406)      (0.0407)
  ROE (t-1)                                               0.2068***   0.2063***
                                                                          (0.0451)      (0.0450)
 Regression details
  Year FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  Firm FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  N                                 2,400        2,400            2,400        2,400
  Unique firms                          400         400              400         400
    2
  R                                    0.3579       0.3596            0.2220       0.2222
  F-statistic                           73.71***     63.41***          21.14***     18.04***
  p-value FE vs RE                     0.0000       0.0000            0.0000       0.0000

In this figure, the results of a robustness check using a two-way fixed effects estimation model with the KLD
database to measure corporate social performance (CSP) scores of firms are presented. Two measures for corporate
financial performance are used: the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time  t  (model 1-2) and return on equity at time  t
(model 3-4). The explanatory variables are the aggregated corporate social performance at time  t-2  and the three
dimensions that make up the aggregated CSP score: environmental (ENV(t-2) ), governance (GOV(t-2) ) and social
(SOC(t-1) . Control variables are SIZE (t-1) as measured by the logarithm of total assets, RISK (t-1)  as measured by
total debt to assets, LIQ(t-1)  as measured by cash flow from operations to total assets, MTB (t-1)  as measured by the
market-to-book ratio, the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time  t-1  in models 1-2, and lastly return on equity at time  t-
1  in models 3-4.  Standard errors are robust for heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                     54
                                                                          and
           (8)                                                       YESYES  211                        ) and
                                                                                                      1,265  0.1760
                            0.0884(0.4813)0.1145(0.4149)0.0258(0.1467)  (2.8252)0.0430(0.0395)-3.1256(12.5953)(0.4796)     (0.0564)               14.39***                t-2
                                          -8.5054***     2.5354*** 0.1135**                                      (t-2)


                                                                                as measured

        Pollute = 0
            (7)                                                          YESYES  211                              (t-1) as measured by
                                                                             1,265 0.1759
                      0.0493(0.1118)                      (2.8685)0.0436(0.0399)-3.0523(12.5063)(0.4816)     (0.0565)               15.95***
                                                            2.5300*** 0.1133**
      (%)                                -8.4941***                                           . Two measures of (t-1)
        (t)

                                                                       t-2

     ROE

          (6)                                                        YESYES  189
                                                                                                      1,134  0.2879
                           0.0707(0.2847)0.2713(0.3759)-0.1337(0.1343)  (2.4073)(0.0452)(10.8774)(0.5179)    (0.0618)              17.28***                   ), governance (GOV
                                            -8.4231***0.1292*** 3.3326*** 0.2857***
                                                                                    (t-2)


       Pollute = 1                                                                         (models 1-4) and return on equity
                                                                                        t
           (5)                                                        YESYES  189
                                                                                                      1,134  0.2872
                       -0.0207(0.0913)                       (2.4026)(0.0453)(10.8693)(0.5167)     (0.0614)                19.35***
                                            -8.4490***0.1289*** 3.3288*** 0.2882***
                                                        -29.3273*** -28.9953***





                                                                                       in models 1-4, and lastly return on equity at time
            (4)                                                               YESYES  211
                                                                                                      1,266  0.3202
                                (0.0058)0.0030(0.0058)0.0046*(0.0024)  (0.0295)0.0001(0.0006)0.1741(0.1390)(0.0079)(0.0568)                     27.35***
                      -0.0138**          -0.1226***     0.0235***0.2522***                                                 t-1

                                                                                        55

       Pollute = 0
             (3)                                                               YESYES  211
                                                                                                      1,266  0.3148
             0.0014(0.0019)                    (0.0297)-0.0000(0.0006)0.1808(0.1411)(0.0080)(0.0563)                    32.70***
        (t)                                   -0.1266***      0.0245***0.2568***


     log(Q)
                                                                               as measured by the logarithm of total assets, RISK


          (2)                                                        YESYES  189                             (t-2)
                                                                                                      1,134  0.4297
                                (0.0044)(0.0057)-0.0004(0.0023)  (0.0336)0.0005(0.0007)0.0004(0.1600)0.0029(0.0065)(0.0501)                     43.19***
                         0.0088**            -0.0623*             0.5094***
                               -0.0202***



       Pollute = 1
             (1)                                                               YESYES  189
                                                                                                      1,134  0.4213
                     -0.0014(0.0016)                     (0.0337)0.0005(0.0007)-0.0038(0.1622)0.0036(0.0066)(0.0506)                     49.77***                             as measured by cash flow from operations to total assets, MTB
                                     -0.0676**          0.5038***

                                                                                                                                                                                             (t-1)

                                                                                                             . The explanatory variables are the aggregated corporate social performance at timet


                                                                                     Control variables are SIZE
                                                                                                                                                                  .

                                                                                                           (t-2)

: 2 year robustness check - baseline regression according to the POLLUTE classification


                                                               (t-1)
                          (t-2)    (t-2)            (t-1)   (t-1)        (t-1)         (t-1)
              (t-2)              (t-2)                (t-1)
                                                               2                                in models 5-8. Standard errors are robust for heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                 CSP  ENV  GOV SOC    SIZE RISK LIQ  MTB log(Q)ROE    Year FEFirm FEN Unique firmsR F-statistic
     Results from the two-way fixed effects model decomposed to high and low polluting industries - using MSCI KLD as a proxy for CSRDependent variableGroupModelExplanatory variables         Controls                               Regression details
                                                                                 In this table, the results of a robustness check using a two-way fixed effects model is presented when the samplehas been divided into a group with high-polluting industries, and another group with low-polluting industries. TheKLD empirical database is used to measure corporate social performance (CSP) at timecorporate financial performance are used: the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time(models 5-8) at timethe three dimensions that make up the aggregated CSP score: environmental (ENVsocial (SOCby total debt to assets, LIQthe market-to-book ratio, the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at timet-1
Table 13
          Table 14: No financials robustness check - Baseline regression (KLD)

 Results of the two-way fixed effects estimation - using MSCI KLD as a proxy for CSP
 Dependent variable                           log(Q) (t)                     ROE (t)  (%)
 Model                                  (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)

 Explanatory variables
  CSP (t-1)                           -0.0008                     -0.0243
                                          (0.0015)                       (0.1001)
  ENV (t-1)                                   -0.0046                    0.7442***
                                                       (0.0042)                       (0.2282)
  GOV (t-1)                                   0.0011                    0.6423**
                                                       (0.0051)                       (0.2860)
  SOC(t-1)                                     0.0000                      -0.0247
                                                       (0.0017)                       (0.1073)
 Controls
  SIZE (t-1)                        -0.0731***   -0.0734***       -9.6508***   -7.0893***
                                         (0.0211)      (0.0212)           (1.8625)      (1.3133)
  RISK (t-1)                         -0.0003      -0.0003         0.1526***   0.1466***
                                         (0.0005)      (0.0005)           (0.0304)      (0.0323)
  LIQ (t-1)                           -0.0735      -0.0721          -6.9038     -11.4566
                                         (0.1101)      (0.1104)           (8.0768)      (8.3661)
  MTB(t-1)                       0.0154***    0.0153**        2.9298***   2.9781***
                                         (0.0059)      (0.0059)           (0.3511)      (0.3159)
  log(Q) (t-1)                        0.3576***   0.3569***
                                          (0.0427)      (0.0429)
  ROE (t-1)                                               0.1909***   0.1892***
                                                                          (0.0443)      (0.0435)
 Regression details
  Year FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  Firm FE                         YES       YES            YES       YES
  N                                 2,267        2,267            2,267        2,267
  Unique firms                          324         324              324         324
    2
  R                                    0.4092       0.4096            0.2557       0.2199
  F-statistic                           86.26***      74.45***           26.81***      27.93***
  p-value FE vs RE                     0.0000       0.0000            0.0000       0.0000

This table shows the results of a robustness check using a two-way fixed effects model where the KLD empirical
database has been used to measure the corporate social performance (CSP) of firms. This robustness check entails
removing all firms belonging to the financial industry (banks, insurance and financial services), Two measures of
corporate financial performance (CFP) are used: the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time  t  and return on equity at
time  t. Explanatory variables are the aggregated CSP score at time  t-1  as well as the three dimensions of CSP at
time  t-1: environmental (ENV), governance (GOV) and social (SOC). The explanatory variables are the aggre-
gated corporate social performance at time  t-1  and the three dimensions that make up the aggregated CSP score:
environmental (ENV(t-1) ), governance (GOV(t-1) ) and social (SOC(t-1) . Control variables are SIZE (t-1) as measured by
the logarithm of total assets, RISK(t-1)  as measured by total debt to assets, LIQ(t-1)  as measured by cash flow from
operations to total assets, MTB (t-1)  as measured by the market-to-book ratio, the logarithm of Tobin’s Q at time
t-1  in models 1-2, and lastly return on equity at time  t-1  in models 3-4.   Standard errors are robust for
heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                     56
       Table 15: Robustness check - FE-IV approach (KLD)
 Results from Instrumental Variable regression
 Dependent variable                                      log(Q) t
                                                   FE & IV
 Estimator                         FE
                                                   First stage   Second stage
 Model                               (1)          (2)          (3)

 Explanatory variable
  CSP (t-1)                        -0.0009                -0.0015
                                       (0.0013)                 (0.0138)
 Instruments
  COMP_PRESSURE (t-1)                     2.9396***
                                                         (0.9126)
  REPORT_PRESSURE (t-1)                   2.8602**
                                                         (1.2611)
 Controls
  SIZE (t-1)                      -0.0698***   -0.6075**   -0.0701***
                                      (0.0184)      (0.2616)      (0.0198)
  RISK (t-1)                       0.0002      -0.0058      0.0002
                                      (0.0005)      (0.0062)      (0.0005)
  LIQ (t-1)                        -0.0273     -0.5228     -0.0277
                                      (0.1036)      (1.2524)      (0.0995)
  MTB(t-1)                     0.0143***    0.0537    0.0143***
                                      (0.0053)      (0.0791)      (0.0052)
  log(Q) (t-1)                      0.3319***    -0.5138    0.3317***
                                      (0.0395)      (0.4491)      (0.0367)
 Regression details
  Firm FE                       YES       YES       YES
  Time FE                      YES       YES       YES
  N                              2,800       2,800       2,800
  Unique firms                       400         400         400
    2
  R                                 0.3865       0.3630       0.3865
  F-statistic                        82.85***     40.53***     106.3***
 IV Validity
  Hansen Statistic                                            0.108
  Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic                              9.404
  Endogeneity Test Statistic                                   0.0112
In this table, the explanatory variable CSP(t-1)  denotes the corporate social performance
of a firm at time  t-1. COMP_PRESSURE (t)  is an instrumental variable measuring the
proportions of firms that have adopted the practice of linking executive compensation to
CSR metrics. REPORT_PRESSURE, an instrumental variable, relates to the external
pressure to report firm-specific CSR activities in addition to the annual report. Control
variables are SIZE (t-1) , RISK(t-1), LIQ(t-1), MTB (t-1)  (the market-to-book ratio) and the
logarithm of Tobin’s Q. Model 1 is a fixed-effects estimation and models 2 and 3 represent
the first and second stage of a 2SLS estimation including fixed effects. The Hansen sta-
tistic is a heteroscedasticity robust test for over identifying restrictions. The Kleibergen-
Paap Wald F-statistic is compared to Stock and Yogo (2002) and tests for weak instru-
ments. The endogeneity test is a heteroscedasticity version of the Durbin-Wu-Hausman
for the null that the main regressor, i.e. CSP, can be treated as exogenous.  Standard
errors are robust for heteroskedascticiy. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                             57
10  Appendix

                   Figure 2: Thomson Reuters ASSET4 methodology

   Company overview                                              Equally weighted excl. Economic (0-100)

       Pillars           Economic (0-100)           Environmental (0-100)            Social (0-100)           Corp. Governance (0-100)

                • Client loyalty            • Resource Reduction         • Employment Quality        • Board structure
                • Performance             • Emission Reduction         • Health & Safety           • Compensation policy
                • Shareholders loyalty         • Production Innovation       • Training & Develop.        • Board functions
      Categories                                                             • Diversity                 • Shareholders Rights
                                                                    • Human rights             • Vision and Strategy
                                                                          • Community
                                                                                             • Product responsibility

      Indicators                                > 250 indicators (calculated from data point values)

       Data points                             > 750 data points                                          Link to public data sources (Raw data)

 This figure describes the Thomson Reuters ASSET4 methodology to arrive at a CSP score for a firm. More than
 750 data points linked to (amongst others) public data sources creates more than 250 indicators, which are then
 used to translate into a score (ranging from 0-100) for the each CSR domains (Economic, Environmental, Social
 and Corporate Governance). Thomson Reuters also provides an overview score, but does not disclose how they
 weigh the different domains. We construct an equally-weighted CSR score by weighing Environmental, Social and
 Governance equally. For this study, the Economic dimension has not been included. The figure is partly adopted
 from Thomson Reuters.

                   Figure 3: MSCI ESG KLD STATS methodology

             Environmental indicators                      Social indicators                       Governance indicators

  Strengths                         Strengths                         Stengths
   •Environmental opportunities - Clean teach        •Human Rights Policies & Initiatives            •Corruption & Instability
   •Waste Management - Toxic Emissions and Waste    •Union Relations                       •Financial System Risk
   •Natural Resource Use - Raw Material Sourcing      •Board of Directors - Gender
   •Climate Change - Energy Efficiency             •Product Safety and Quality
  Concerns                         Concerns                         Concerns
   •Supply Chain Management                 •Support for Controversial Regimes             •Governance Structures Controversies
   •Water Stress                         •Labor-Management Relations               •Controversial Investments
   •Impact of Products and Services              •Workforce Diversity                     •Bribery & Fraud
   •Operational waste                      •Anticompetitive Practices                  •Governance - Other Concerns
 This figures describe the MSCI ESG KLD STATS methodology to arrive at a CSP score for a firm. In this figure,
 examples of strengths and concerns in each domain comprising corporate social responsibility are given. If a firm
 fulfils the criteria for a strength or concern this will be marked with a “1”, and if the criteria are not met this will
 be indicated by a “0”. In order to arrive at an aggregated score for each dimension, the net of all strengths and
 concerns is calculated. As an example, a firm with two fulfilled strengths and one fulfilled concern in the environ-
 mental dimension will result in an aggregated environmental score of 1 (2-1). The total aggregated score across all
 dimensions is given by simply adding the net scores of each dimension.

                                      58
11  References

    [1]  Agle, B. R., Mitchell, R. K. & Sonnenfeld, J. A., 1999. Who Matters to CEOs? An
       Investigation of Stakeholder Attributes and Salience, Corporate Performance and CEO
       values.  Academy of Management Journal,  42(5), pp. 507-525.

    [2]  Albinger, H. & Freeman, S., 2000. Corporate Social Performance and Attractiveness as
       an Employer to Different Job Seeking Populations.  Journal of Business Ethics,  28(3),
        pp. 243-253.

    [3]  Arellano, M., 2003. Panel Data Econometrics. I: Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 7-
        31.

    [4]  Aupperle, K. E., Carroll, A. B. & Hatfield, J. D., 1985. An Empirical Examination of the
       Relationship between Corporate Social Responsibility and Profitability.  Academy of
       Management Journal,  28(2), pp. 446-463.

    [5]  [Backhaus, K. B., Stone, B. A. & Heiner, K., 2002. Exploring the relationship between
       corporate social performance and employer attractiveness.  Business & Society,  41(3), pp.
       292-318.

    [6]  [Baltagi, B. H., 2013. Econometric Analysis of Panel Data (Fifth edition). I: New York:
        Wiley, pp. 13-63.

    [7]  Baron, D. P., Agus Harjoto, M. & Jo, H., 2011. The Economics and Politics of Corporate
       Social Performance.  Business and Politics,  13(2), pp. 1-48.

    [8]  Battista Derchi, G., 2015.  Does CSR-linked Executive Compensation Promote CSR
       Performance?,  Lausanne: University of Lausanne.

    [9]  Bauman, C. W. & Skitka, L. J., 2012. Corporate Social Responsibility as a Source of
       Employee Satisfaction.  Research in Organizational Behavior,  Årgang 32, pp. 63-86.

    [10] Berk, J. & DeMarzo, P., 2013.  Corporate Finance.  3 red. Boston: Pearson Education
       Limited.

    [11] Bound, J., Jaeger, D. A. & Baker, R. M., 1995. Problems With Instrumental Variables
       Estimation  When  the  Correlation  Between  the  Instruments  and  the  Endogenous
       Explanatory Variable is Weak.  Journal of the American Statistical Association,  90(430),
        pp. 443-450.

    [12] Bowen, H., 1953.  Social Responsibilties of the Businessman.  New York: Harper.

                                      59
[13] Campa, J. M. & Kedia, S., 2002. Explaining the Diversification Discount.  Journal of
    Finance,  57(4), pp. 1731-1762.

[14] Campbell, D., Craven, B. & Shrives, P., 2003. Voluntary social reporting in three FTSE
    sectors a comment on perception and legitimacy.  Accounting, Auditing & Accountability
    Journal,  16(4), pp. 558-581.

[15] Chatterji, A. K., Durand, R., Levine, D. I. & Touboul, S., 2015. Do Ratings of Firms
    Converge? Implications for Managers, Investors and Strategy Researchers.  Strategic
   Management Journal,  Early View(DOI: 10.1002/smj.2407).

[16] Chmelarova, V., 2007.  The Hausman Test, And Some Alternatives, With Heteroskedastic
    Data,  s.l.: Graduate School of the Lousiana State University.

[17] Clogg, C. C., Petkova, E. & Haritou, A., 1995. Statistical Methods for Comparing
    Regression Coefficients Between Models.  The American Journal of Sociology,  100(5), pp.
    1261-1293.

[18] Cochran, P. L. & Wood, R. A., 1984. Corporate Social Responsibility and Financial
   Performance.  Academy of Management Journal,  27(1), pp. 42-56.

[19] Cornell, B. & Shapiro, A. C., 1987. Corporate Stakeholders and Corporate Finance.
    Financial Management,  16(1), pp. 5-14.

[20] de Haan, J. & Poghosyan, T., 2012. Size and earnings volatility of US bank holding
    companies.  Journal of Banking and Finance,  36(11), pp. 3008-3016.

[21] Diebold, F. X., 2000.  Elements of Forecasting.  2 red. s.l.:Cengage Learning.

[22] Donaldson, T. & Preston, L. E., 1995. The Stakeholder Theory of the Corporation:
    Concepts, Evidence, and Implications.  The Academy of Management Review,  20(1), pp.
    65-91.

[23] Dowell, G., Hart, S. & Yeung, B., 2000. Do Corporate Global Environmental Standards
    Create or Destroy Market Value?.  Management Science,  46(8), pp. 1059-1074.

[24] Dowling,   J.   &   Pfeffer,   J.,   1975.   Organizational   Legitimacy:   Social   Values  and
    Organizational Behavior.  The Pacific Sociological Review,  18(1), pp. 122-136.

[25] El Ghoul, S., Guedhami, O., Kwok, C. C. & Mishra, D. R., 2011. Does corporate social
    responsibility affect the cost of capital?.  Journal of Banking & Finance,  35(9), pp. 2388-
    2406.

                                   60
[26] Feldman,  S.  J.,  Soyka,  P.  A.  &  Ameer,  P.  G.,  1997.  Does  Improving  a  Firm's
   Environmental Management System and Environmental Performance Result in a Higher
    Stock Price?.  The Journal of Investing,  6(4), pp. 87-97.

[27] Freeman, E. R., 1984.  Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach.  s.l.:Pitman.

[28] Friedman,  A.  L.  &  Miles,  S.,  2002.  Developing  Stakeholder  Theory.  Journal  of
    Management Studies,  39(1), pp. 1-21.

[29] Friedman, M., 1970. The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits.  The
   New York Times Magazine, 13 September.

[30] Garcia-Castro, R., Ariño, M. A. & Canela, M. A., 2010. Does Social Performance Really
    Lead to Financial Performance? Accounting for Endogeneity.  Journal of Business Ethics,
    92(1), pp. 107-126.

[31] Granger, C. W. J., 1969. Investigating Causal Relations By Econometric Models and
    Cross-spectral Methods.  Econometrica,  37(3), pp. 424-438.

[32] Greene, W. H., 2002. Econometric Analysis (Fifth edition). I: New Jersey: Pearson
    Education, pp. 339-425.

[33] Griliches, Z., 1979. Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development
    to Productivity Growth.  The Bell Journal of Economics,  10(1), pp. 92-116.

[34] Guenster, N., Bauer, R., Derwall, J. & Koedijk, K., 2011. The Economic Value of
    Corporate Eco-Efficiency.  European Financial Management,  17(4), pp. 679-704.

[35] Hamilton, B. H. & Nickerson, J. A., 2003. Correcting for Endogeneity in Strategic
    Management.  Strategic Organization,  1(1), pp. 51-78.

[36] Hamilton, S., Jo, H. & Statman, M., 1993. Doing well while doing good? The Investment
    Performance of Socially Responsible Mutual Funds.  Financial Analysis Journal,  49(1),
    pp. 62-97.

[37] Hausman, J., 2001. Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the
    Right and Problems from the Left.  Journal of Economic Perspectives,  15(4), pp. 57-67.

[38] Hayashi, F., 2000. Econometrics. I: Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 206-213,
    226-228, 407-417.

[39] Henderson, D., 2001.  Misguided Virtue False Notions of Corporate Social Responsibility.
    London: The Institute of Economic Affairs.

                                   61
[40] Ioannou, I., Cheng, B. & Serafeim, G., 2014. Corporate social responsibility and access
    to finance.  Strategic Management Journal,  35(1), pp. 1-23.

[41] Jensen, M. C., 2001. Value Maximisation, Stakeholder Theory, and the Corporate
    Objective Function.  European Financial Management,  7(3), pp. 297-317.

[42] Jo, H. & Harjoto, M. A., 2011. Corporate Governance and Firm Value: The Impact of
    Corporate Social Responsibility.  Journal of Business Ethics,  103(3), pp. 351-383.

[43] Kleibergen, F. & Paap, R., 2006. Generalized Reduced Rank Tests using the Singular.
    Journal of Econometrics,  Årgang 127, pp. 97-126.

[44] Krukowska, M., 2014. Determinants Of Corporate Social Responsibility In Japanese
   Companies.  Management and Business Administration, Central Europe,  22(4), pp. 39-
    57.

[45] Kutner, M. H., Nachtsheim, C. J. & Neter, J., 2004.  Applied Linear Regression Models
    (Fourth edition).  Irwin: McGraw-Hill.

[46] Larcker, D. F. & Rusticus, T. O., 2010. On the use of Instrumental Variables in
    Accounting Research.  Journal of Accounting and Economics,  49(3), pp. 186-205.

[47] Lee, J., 2009. Does Size Matter in Firm Performance? Evidence from US Public Firms.
    International Journal of the Economics of Business,  16(2), pp. 189-203.

[48] Lindgreen, A., Kotler, P., Vanhamme, J. & Maon, F., 2016.  A Stakeholder Approach to
   Corporate Social Responsibility: Pressures, Conflicts, and Reconciliation.  New York:
    Routledge.

[49] Lopez, M., Garcia, A. & Rodriguez, L., 2007. Sustainable Development and Corporate
    Performance: A Study Based on the Dow Jones Sustainability Index.  Journal of Business
    Ethics,  75(3), pp. 285-300.

[50] Manos, R. & Drori, I., 2016.  Corporate Responsibility.  1 red. s.l.:Palgrave Macmillan .

[51] McGuire, J. B., Sundgren, A. & Schneeweis, T., 1988. Corporate Social Responsbility
    and Firm Financial Performance.  Academy of Management Journal,  31(4), pp. 854-872.

[52] McWilliams,  A.  &  Siegel,  D.,  2000.  Corporate  social  responsibility  and  financial
    performance: correlation or misspecification?.  Strategic Management Journal,  21(5), pp.
    603-609.

                                   62
[53] Moskowitz, M., 1972. Choosing Socially Responsible Stocks.  Business and Society Review,
    Issue 1, pp. 71-75.

[54] Orlitzky, M., Schmidt, F. L. & Rynes, S. L., 2003. Corporate Social and Financial
    Performance: A Meta-analysis.  Organization Studies,  24(3), pp. 403-441.

[55] Preston, L. E. & O'Bannon, D. P., 1997. The Corporate Social-Financial Performance
    Relationship.  Business and Society,  36(4), pp. 419-429.

[56] Roberts, R. W., 1992. Determinants of Corporate Social Responsibility Disclosure: An
    Application of Stakeholder Theory.  Accounting, Organizations and Society,  17(6), pp.
    595-612.

[57] Robinson, M. J., Kleffner, A. & Bertels, S., 2008.  The Value of a Reputation For
    Corporate Social Responsibility: Empirical Evidence,  s.l.: Working paper, University of
    Michigan.

[58] Schreck,  P.,  2009.  The  Business  Case  for  Corporate  Social  Responsibility.  1  red.
    Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag.

[59] Schreck, P., 2011. Reviewing the Business Case for Corporate Social Responsibility: New
    Evidence and Analysis.  Journal of Business Ethics,  2(103), pp. 167-188.

[60] Schwab,  D.  P.,  1980.  Construct  validity  in  organization  behaviour.  Research  in
    Organizational Behaviour,  Issue 2, pp. 3-43.

[61] Servaes, H. & Tamayo, A., 2013. The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility on Firm
   Value: The Role of Customer Awareness.  Management Science,  59(5), pp. 1045-1061.

[62] Sharfman, M., 1996. The construct validity of the Kinder, Lydenberg & Domini social
    performance ratings data.  Journal of Business Ethics,  15(3), pp. 287-296.

[63] Staiger,  D.  &  Stock,  J.  H.,  1997.  Instrumental  Variables  Regression  with  Weak
    Instruments.  Econometrica,  65(3), pp. 557-586.

[64] Stock, J. & Yogo, M., 2005. Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression. I:
   Andrews  DWK  Identification  and  Inference  for  Econometric  Models.  New  York:
    Cambridge University Press, pp. 80-108.

[65] TIME,  2012.  Why  Companies  Can  No  Longer  Afford  to  Ignore  Their  Social
    Responsibilities,  Pennsylvania: Knowledge@Wharton.

                                   63
[66] Udayasankar, K., 2008. Corporate social responsibility and firm size.  Journal of Business
    Ethics,  83(2), pp. 167-175.

[67] Ullmann, A. A., 1985. Data in Search of a Theory: A Critical Examination of the
    Relationships Among Social Performance, Social Disclosure, and Economic Performance
    of U.S. Firms.  Academy of Management Review,  10(3), pp. 540-557.

[68] Waddock, S. A. & Graves, S. B., 1997. The Corporate Social Performance-Financial
    Performance Link.  Strategic Management Journal,  18(4), pp. 303-319.

[69] Vance, S. C., 1975. Are Socially Responsible Corporations Good Investment Risks?.
    Management Review,  64(8), pp. 18-24.

[70] Varadharajan-Krishnakumar, J. & Balestra, P., 1987. Full Information Estimations of a
   System  of  Simultaneous  Equations  with  Error  Component  Structure.  Econometric
    Theory,  3(2), pp. 223-246.

[71] Wayne, D. W., 1990. Spearman rank correlation coefficient (Second edition). I:  Applied
    Nonparametric Statistics.  Boston: PWS-Kent, pp. 358-365.

[72] White, H., 1980. A Heteroscedasticity Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
    Direct Test of Heteroscedasticity.  Econometrica,  48(4), pp. 817-818.

[73] Wooldridge,  J.  M.,  2013.  Introductory  Econometrics:  A  Modern  Approach  (Fifth
    Edition). I: Australia: South-Western College Publications, pp. 82-83, 490-528.

[74] Wooldridge, J. M. & Semykina, A., 2010. Estimating Panel Data Models in the Presence
    of Endogeneity and Selection.  Journal of Econometrics,  157(2), pp. 375-380.

[75] Zellner, A., 1962. An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated Regressions
    and Tests for Aggegation Bias.  Journal of the American Statistical Association,  57(298),
    pp. 348-368.

                                   64
12  MSCI data disclaimer

  The following disclaimer pertains only to ESG data derived from the MSCI ESG KLD STATS

database. In the thesis we refer to this data interchangeably as KLD or MSCI KLD:

  The ESG data contained herein is the property of MSCI ESG Research Inc. (ESG).  ESG,

its affiliates and information providers make no warranties with respect to any such data.  The

ESG data contained herein is used under license and may not be further used, distributed or

disseminated without the express written consent of ESG.

  Reproduced by permission of MSCI ESG Research Inc.

   ©2016 MSCI ESG Research Inc. All rights reserved.

                                      65