Stockholm School of Economics Bachelor’s Thesis
Department of Finance May 2016

               Altruism or Nepotism?

   A Study of Financial Firms’ Connections to Presidential Candidates and the
                      Resulting Impact on Stock Returns

                    Marcus Ackland* Victor Svahn**

     Abstract: It has proven difficult in previous research to quantify the accrued value derived
      from connections between companies and the political sector in developed countries. This
      thesis aims to quantify the value of connections to a presidential candidate in the early stage of
      a political election. By doing so, we aim to fill the gap in existing research that is mostly
      conducted on already elected politicians. On the 12th of April 2015, Hillary Clinton announced
      that she was running for President of the United States. Surrounding the announcement,
      financial companies who are connected to Clinton experienced significant abnormal returns.
      The cumulative effect amounts to 2.9 % after five days of trading. When isolating the
      connection to Clinton by controlling for firm characteristics, we show that the “Clinton effect”
      can explain the increase in value. These results show the significance of the relationship
      between the private and political sector, even in an early stage of a political election; where the
      candidates themselves have not been elected to office and hold no legal power.

     Keywords: political connections, financial firms, event study
     Tutor: Ramin Baghai

     Acknowledgements: First and foremost, we are thankful for the support we have received from
      our tutor, Ramin Baghai; assistant professor at the department of finance at the Stockholm
      School of Economics. Further we want to extend our gratitude to Karin Fernler for her valuable
      input.

*22994@student.hhs.se **22993@student.hhs.se
Table of contents

1 Introduction 03
1.1 Research question 05
2 Previous Research 05
    2.1 Emerging Countries 06
    2.2 Developed Countries 06
    2.3 Related Research 07
       2.3.1 Regulatory Capture 07
    2.4 How our paper adds to the previous literature 08
3 Background 08
    3.1 Hillary Clinton’s career 08
    3.2 Why we study Clinton 9
    3.3 Wall Street Speeches 09
    3.4 The Clinton Foundation 10
    3.5 How the media influences the public’s perception of Clinton 11
4 Data 12
5 Methodology and Hypothesis formulation 13
    5.1 Hypothesis formulation 13
    5.2 Event Study 14
    5.3 Ordinary Least Squares Regression 16
       5.3.1 Robust Standard Error Correction 16
6 Results 17
    6.1 Event Study 17
       6.1.1 Speech group 17
       6.1.2 Analysis of Speeches 18
       6.1.3 Foundation group 19
       6.1.4 Analysis of Foundation 19
    6.2 OLS Regression model 19
       6.2.1 Speech group 20
       6.2.2 Analysis of speeches 20
       6.2.3 Foundation group 20
       6.2.4 Analysis of Foundation 21
    6.3 Summary of results and implications 21
       6.3.1 What implications do these results have for the research field? 22

7 Discussion 22
    7.1 The announcement could have industry-wide effects 22
    7.2 Why does not foundation show the same results? 23

8 Conclusion 24

List of References 25
Appendices 27
    Appendix A: Tables and Graphs 27
    Appendix B: Code to run in R 34

                                                                                   2
1 Introduction

During the 2016 U.S. primary elections, the topic of special interest has dominated the agenda. In
this paper, we set out to try and quantify this effect to determine whether or not there is a value of
a connection to a candidate in a presidential primary. This study show that companies who have a
connection to Hillary Clinton experience an increase in abnormal returns of roughly 3% over the
days following her announcement to run for President of the United States on the 12th of April
2015.
       Research in the area of political connections have emerged in the last decade and there is
limited research that focus on an early stage as a primary election. In addition to this, there are few
papers centering on the high office of the Presidency, they rather focus on the U.S. Congress. For
instance Akey (2015) showed that firms donating to the winning instead of to the losing congress
candidate experienced a 3% abnormal return. Further, Duchin & Sosyura (2012) showed that firms
connected to a congress representative are more likely to receive capital under the Troubled Asset
Relief Program (TARP). These connections are established, however, our topic with regards to a
presidential candidate is not exhaustively researched.
        Existing research suggest that connections are more valuable to firms in emerging markets,
because they do not have strong enough institutions to guard against possible corruption (Khwaja
and Mian, 2005). Valuable connections exist in developed countries as well, and can be explained
by, among other things, the connection in a crisis hypothesis (Baker, Bloom, and David 2015).
This hypothesis claims that even though a country’s institution is solid there can be a value of
connections when a crises occurs. Recent studies have documented this effect (Acemoglu et al

                                                                                                   1
2015), however, studies analyzing normal times have not yielded as strong results .These recent
developments will serve as the backbone for our thesis as we want to further develop the field of
political connections in developed countries.
       What has driven our hypothesis is the assumption that there could exists a quid pro quo
between the political and the private sector. Therefore, companies that provide money to a well-
known presidential candidate could expect a return, in one way or another. The connections we
consider in this paper are established before Clinton announced her candidacy. Namely, the Wall

1
 Some researchers have found valuable connections in developed countries as Amore and Bennedsen (2013).But
these connections tend to be less significant and yield smaller results.

                                                                                   3
Street firms at which she held speeches and the financial firms who donated to the Clinton
Foundation. Because there is no crisis at the time of her announcement, we argue that the abnormal
returns could be motivated by regulatory capture rather than the connection in a crisis hypothesis.
Regulatory capture comes from the theory of capture which means that a company take control
(captures) another part (Dal Bó, 2006). Our findings should be seen in the light of this, implying
that for instance a Wall Street firm can expect something from Clinton when they have contributed
to her, aside from the speech itself. What they could be expecting is a that Clinton does not pass
regulation that are unfavorable to them.
        The speeches Clinton held at financial firms gives us further reason to study the financial
industry, because it is susceptible to regulation from the federal level of government it is justified
to limit our analysis to that sector. Our paper consists of two steps in order to quantify the
connections. First, we conduct an event study to find potential cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs). Secondly, we try to isolate the effect from the announcement by treating each firm as if
it had the same characteristics. This is done with an Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression. The
data we collected is heteroscedastic. To address this, we utilize robust standard errors to treat the

                                     2
data as if it was homoscedastic .
       Two event studies are carried out during the period surrounding Clinton’s announcement
to measure the abnormal returns for connected firms with regards to speeches and contributions to
the Clinton Foundation. We then compare those to the abnormal returns for the rest of the financial
firms on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) that constitute our control group.
       The event study shows that there is a significant, positive CAR for both the companies at
which Clinton held speeches and also for the companies which donated to the Clinton foundation.
Further, there is a significant difference in the CAR between the two groups. We study different
event windows to determine the exact effect on Clinton’s announcement. Our results indicate that
the speech group’s results are slightly more significant and its CAR is also higher.
        The uncertainty regarding an event study is that there could be some bias to the separation
of the connected groups—that the increase in value for these firms are not because of their
connection to Clinton but that they share another characteristic. To control for this uncertainty, we
perform an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression, where CAR[0,t] is the dependent variable and
regress on firm specific variables in this case size, leverage and their profitability which has been

2
 A homoscedastic sample is one criteria to pursue a regression.

                                                                                   4
done in previous research (Acemoglu et al, 2015). By including a dummy variable for the Clinton
connection, we can isolate this effect. From the regression we deduce that Clinton’s announcement
was the reason why the connected firms experienced positive, significant CARs. We can therefore
conclude that Clinton’s announcement had a direct quantifiable effect on these connected
companies’ stock returns.

1.1 Research question
Given the amount of attention to special interest during the U.S. primary election 2016 and the
debates, on both the republican and democratic side, it would be of interest to quantify if this effect
results in an increase in value for companies with a connection to a presidential candidate.
The question that we want to answer in this paper is:

               Do connections to presidential candidates increase stock returns?

We believe that the connected firms we study will have a positive return on their stock as the
market is aware and perceive that there is a connection between Clinton and a particular group of
companies. If we assume that the market perceives an existing connection, news relating Clinton
could have spill-over effects on the companies she has a connection to. Our hypothesis is then that
these effects would be reflected in their stock price.
       Another important aspect to address is why we look at the speech and foundation group. It
could be argued that the market already knows of these connections as Clinton’s ties to Wall Street
has been circulated in the media before. We are certain that some of the connections we study were
already established before this campaign cycle. What our criteria for a connection provides is a
tangible relation between Clinton and the connected firm. We therefore argue that the connection
actually exists and is not just a haphazard coincidence.

2 Previous Research

The research regarding connections between firms to politicians is a growing area as research
continually find new patterns and behaviors. This field can be separated into two parts, one
regarding emerging countries and the other concerns developed countries. Literature with regards
to developed countries have increased lately because of a public interest in the matter and

                                                                                   5
                                                                              3
requirements to disclose campaign finance, especially in the U.S . This information opens up the
field of research and enables us to, in more detail, study the effect between politics and their
connections to private companies.

2.1 Emerging Countries
Studies indicate that political connections to a larger degree affects corporations in emerging
markets. This phenomenon is arguably a product of misgovernance due to weak institutions which
in turn enables a corrupt relation between firms and politicians. This is illustrated by Khwaja and
Mian (2005) who observed stock brokers who manipulate stock prices in Pakistan.
       The idea of misgovernance is developed from the early work of Fisman (2001) who showed
that a connection to the president in Indonesia during the 1990s made companies soar 23 % in firm
value when the Indonesian economy was in a downward spiral. Another similar example is made
by Johnson and Mitton (2003) who found that in 1998 when the Prime Minister of Malaysia
introduced regulations of capital flows, companies gained 5 billion, 32 % of which was because
of their connection to him. That event could further be considered a result of regulatory capture
as the Prime Minster passes a regulation that affects connected firms in an advantageous matter.
        The papers concerning the emerging market all share the characteristic of weak institutions.
Therefore this argument serve as the strongest reason explaining why connections between stock
returns and politicians are more evident in emerging markets than in developed countries.

2.2 Developed Countries
Previous studies suggest that political connections do alter businesses’ value in developed
countries, although, in general, not to the same extent. For instance Amore and Bennedsen (2013)
found value in family connections to politicians in Denmark, a seemingly non-corrupt country.
One example in the United States is the Jeffords Effect (Jayachandaran, 2006), an eponym from a
senator who would change parties which in turn switched the control in the US senate. The study
showed that it affected firms’ values with 1%. Similar to this example, most studies in the United
States focus on elections to congress. For example, Tahoun (2014) showed that members of

3
 The Disclose Act of 2010 put more pressure on political candidates to disclose their campaign contributions

                                                                                   6
Congress that own stock in a company that donate to their campaign are more willing to give these
firms governmental contracts.
       On a higher level of government there are few examples. Fisman et al (2012) shows that
by analyzing connections to Vice President Dick Cheney, they show that the reason for a lack of
increased value is the fact that the connections to Cheney are not strong enough. The conclusion
they draw is that the legal system in the US is sophisticated to not be affected by connections.
       One influential paper for our study is The Value of Connections in Turbulent Times by
Acemoglu et al (2015). They shed light on the abnormal returns surrounding the announcement of
Timothy Geithner – a former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York – to Treasury
Secretary had on connected financial firms. They are able to isolate this effect to Geithner for three
different groups who were all connected to Geithner when he was President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York. The results they find are noteworthy for a developed market such as the United
States. An emerging argument that explains this phenomenon is the connections in a crisis. The
hypothesis states that during turbulent times, and when economic markets are as turbulent as they
were during Geithner’s appointment in 2008, the midst of the financial crisis, companies will
benefit from having a connection to an influential politician.

2.3 Related Research
As our paper is closely related to politics we will briefly touch upon other research fields to better
contextualize our research question.

2.3.1 Regulatory Capture
Nobel Laureate George Stigler developed the concept of regulatory capture in his 1971 paper The
Theory of Economic Regulation. The theory centers on the fact that a regulatory or legislative body
can be captured from special interest groups and generate favorable conditions for the capturer.
This risk is something that an agency is exposed to by its very nature, since it exists to regulate an
industry and is therefore heavily connected to it. Capture does not implicate that a company can
gain favorable regulation in exchange for payment per se. While political donations are a type of
materialist capture, another example is that the industry can indoctrinate the regulatory agency in
their way of thinking by lobbying them.

                                                                                   7
       Capture is of importance when considering Clinton’s potential connections as they have
contributed to her financially. Even if they do not lobby her directly, it is in their best interest to
avoid further regulation. By being on friendly terms they have a closer relationship than they would
have had otherwise. Therefore it could be in Clinton’s subconscious that she would not pursue
tough regulation on the financial industry if she takes office.

2.4 How our paper adds to the previous literature
From the aforementioned literature, we notice that there are several papers that cover different
aspects of this complicated issue between the private and political sector. What our paper adds to
this, is that we try to analyze one step earlier. When Clinton announced her candidacy for president,
she was already an influential figure but she wielded no legislative or regulatory power. She is
simply seeking to be the nomination of the Democratic Party. Geithner, in comparison, was all but
confirmed as the next Treasury Secretary and the examples from Congress are the results of actual
election victories or change in party control. We aim to quantify the primary election’s importance
and the potential value in an influential political figure such as Hillary Clinton.

3 Background

To understand why Clinton’s announcement can affect connected firms we need to emphasize her
background, the chosen firms’ connection to Clinton and how the media can alter our view on
these connections. First, we analyze Clinton’s background and argue that her past form a perfect
and complex example to study. Thereafter we review the two connected groups and explain how
the media which is the channel between the politician and the market can affect how these
connections are perceived.

3.1 Hillary Clinton’s career
Clinton is one of the most qualified candidates to ever run for president. She has held positions
within several levels of government, most recently Secretary of State in Obama’s first cabinet. She
began her political career almost four decades ago, as First Lady of Arkansas when her husband,
Bill Clinton, was Governor of Arkansas. Since then she has been First Lady of the United States,
one of the most influential to hold that position. She was the first to hold a postgraduate degree,

                                                                                   8
had a professional career of her own, took charge of healthcare policy and moved her office to the
west wing of the white house. After her period as First Lady, she was elected Senator from New
York and served two terms. In 2008 she ran for President but lost to Barack Obama and was offered
the role of Secretary of State during his first term. In 2012 she chose to resign and has since been
involved with the Clinton Foundation and served as a corporate speaker.

3.2 Why we study Clinton
The majority of the candidates for the 2016 U.S. presidential elections have spent their entire life
in the political sector and the chance of finding strong connections to the private sector is weak.
Example of candidates with a successful career in the private sector, e.g. Mitt Romney in 2012,
are not as easy to analyze because he served as governor of Massachusetts before announcing his
campaign and therefore did not have any recent, strong connections. Also, Bain Capital and BCG
where he spent the majority of his career are not public, which could complicate the study of any
direct impact on the market. Hillary Clinton is a unique candidate because of her vast experience
in politics but also her strong connections to the private sector.
       Another reason that Clinton is a good candidate to study is because of other events where
the market has reacted to her. On the 21st September 2015, Clinton tweeted in response to the
recent price increase in the biotechnology sector that she would lay out a plan to stop the “price
gouging” going on in the industry. Biotech stocks fell 20 % to 35 % in a few trading days and

                                                 4
investor lost over $130 billion as a result . This tells us that even though she is not the democratic
nominee yet, the market values her influence and potentially perceive her as the presumptive
nominee already.

3.3 Wall Street speeches
When Clinton left the White House she was on the speaker circuit, according to CNN she held 92

                                       5
speeches between 2013 and 2015 . Not all of these speeches were held to firms within the financial
industry but the ones that were, have gained a lot of publicity. Her base speaking fee is $225,000
and she has famously refused to allow media to attend and has not released the transcripts from
her speeches. It is important to point out that there is nothing illegal with Clinton’s speeches and

4
 http://money.cnn.com/2015/09/21/investing/hillary-clinton-biotech-price-gouging/
5
 http://money.cnn.com/2016/04/20/news/economy/hillary-clinton-goldman-sachs/

                                                                                   9
her speaking fee is not unusual for someone with her experience. It does, however, raise questions
if she can be controlled by special interest and if they expect anything back from her, would she
become President. To extend the group of companies, we also include financial firms to whom
either of the Clintons have held speeches at.
        Sunstein (1994) argues that a speech by a politician can be procured to draw attention to a
certain topic. This could seem counterintuitive for financial firms since they are usually under
scrutiny and negative publicity from the media and the public, it would be in their best interest to
draw attention away from themselves. However, this could be explained by Sunstein’s conclusion
that a political candidate who can successfully attract and accumulate money should be more opt
to do well in the “political marketplace”. The political marketplace is a metaphor that embodies
the political decisions as taken on a marketplace in exchange for payment or other services.
        We conclude that this connection could be in the interest of the connected financial firms,
if Clinton was elected president. As she is reluctant to release the transcripts from her speeches,
there could be something dubious that she does not want the public to know of, that could benefit
this group.

3.4 The Clinton Foundation
The Clinton Foundation was founded as the William J. Clinton Foundation in 2001 when Bill
Clinton left the White House. Hillary Clinton served on the board during 2013-2015. The mission
is to “strengthen the capacity of people throughout the world to meet the challenges of global

                   6
interdependence.”  During her time as Secretary of State it was required to disclose donations to
the foundation, per an ethics agreement with President Obama.
       The foundation has been criticized for taking money from foreign corporations and
especially companies that have lobbied Clinton when she was Secretary of State, notably the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Blackwater. Another reason that the Clinton foundation has been
accused of conflicts of interest is that questions have been raised as to whether the donations are
motivated only by an altruistic reason or if companies donating hope to gain access to the Clintons’

                                               7
power and influence in Washington DC .

6
 The Clinton Foundation’s website
7
 http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-clinton-charity-case-1438731092

                                                                                 10
       Given the questions raised on the true motive of donations to the Clinton Foundation, we
want to include the financial firms who have donated more than $50,000 as a separate connection.
This would answer if there are any increases in value to a financial firm who have donated to the
Clinton Foundation.

3.5 How the media influences the public’s perception of Clinton
The purpose with this part is to understand how the media portrays Clinton. By doing so, we can
better understand why these connections do occur. According to Tetlock (2007) Media’s
description of an event impacts stock returns. The media depicts Clinton as connected to some
firms and if Clinton announces her presidential campaign that should have spill-over effects on the
connected firms.
        The media tends to focus their reporting on a few controversies that she has been involved
in. Two controversies that frequently have been discussed are her email scandal and her ties to the
financial sector. One obvious reason may be that the media is biased and chooses continually to
repeat these controversies. But by using the concept of mediatization, meaning that “a political
system to a high degree is influenced by and adjusted to the demands of the mass media in their
coverage of politics” Asp, (1986), we are allowed to see her public figure in a new perspective.
        The media builds up a persona and after enough time, that persona becomes a reality in the
eye of the public. This process could be illustrated via the mediatization as the media often
describes Clinton as correlated to Wall Street. The medialization then suggest that this portrayal
after enough time becomes the reality and the common way people recognize and describe
her.
       The media has focused their reporting on her controversies to a large extent. One reason
for this coverage can also be found in Braden (1996) who argues that women running for office
receive different, irrelevant, questions from the media because of their gender. There are several
studies supporting this view (Khan 1992 and Witt, Pages and Matthews 1994). However, these
studies are over two decays old and the question of equality has shifted the way the media report
their articles, however, the views of Clinton may be deeply rooted.
       A study of Clinton as the First Lady in the 1996 election indicated that only one out of
eight news articles about Clinton was about her political standpoints, the rest were in regard to her
personality and her appearances (Bystrom, Mckinnon and Channey, 1999). The research further

                                                                                 11
concluded that Clinton was significantly more prone to receive negative media coverage than her
counterpart, Elizabeth Dole. Consequently, one reason explaining Clinton’s seemingly negative
public image may be the result of over 20 years of negative publicity.
       It would be interesting to study why this is the case, however that is beyond the scope of
our paper. The conclusion is that media’s depiction of Clinton is a double edged sword: it gives
Clinton space to advocate her concerns, at the same time, the media have portrayed her in the lens
of her controversies. These have, among other things, given the public the perception that she is
connected to Wall Street which could yield spill-over effects as the public, and market, could be
influenced by the media.

4 Data

The sample of financial firms that is used in our analysis consist of the firms on the New York
Stock Exchange that are classified as financial companies. They amount to 378 companies. These
consist of all financial companies, which includes subsidiaries. First, we clean up the data and
remove any duplicates we might find. After removing duplicates we end up with 293 unique
financial firms. In order to be able to analyze all the data, we have to exclude companies that do
not provide enough stock returns during the entire period. These could be companies who had their
IPO in late 2014 or 2015. We also removed companies who merged during that time. After this
we end up with 244 financial firms that make up our base sample. For descriptive statistics for this
sample, see table 1 in Appendix A.
       From the 244 financial firms we create a connected group and a control group for both of
the two groups based on their connection to Clinton. The first, which is the speech-group, is the
group of financial firms at which she held speeches 2013-2015. This consist of 8 companies, for
detail see table 2, panel A. The second group of connected companies are the ones that have
donated to the Clinton Foundation. We limit our analysis to companies that have donated more
than $50,000. The connected firms in this group amounts to 12 companies and are listed in table
2, panel B. The control group is listed in table 3 in Appendix A.
       We have decided to not include a separate group for campaign donations which could at
first be thought of as the most obvious group to have an interest in Clinton’s campaign. There are
two reasons that we omit this group. The first is that the majority of campaign donations are made
to super-PACs instead of the candidate's political campaign. These donations are usually not made

                                                                                 12
by the company or their management per se but by employees at a specific company. This does
not necessarily mean that the donors have their company’s best interest in mind when donating but
could prioritize other issues such as social issues such as abortion or income tax. The speeches
Clinton held and the donations to her campaign usually involves top-level executives and could
therefore be argued to be a stronger channel of influence. Second, the companies included in both
of these groups consists of companies that frequently top lists of donors to Clinton’s campaign.
Because of this strong correlation, it would be obsolete to include donors as a separate group.

5 Methodology and hypothesis formulation

In this section we derive our six hypotheses to answer the research questions. There are three
hypotheses connected to the speech-connected group (H1, H3, H5) and three are in relation to the
foundation group (H2, H4, H6). After that we emphasize the methodology where we lay out the
event study and the Ordinary Least Square regression performed to answer our hypotheses.

5.1 Hypothesis formulation
In order to determine if there is an increase in value for a connected company, abnormal returns
on the days surrounding Clinton’s campaign will be analyzed. If we can accept the two hypotheses
stated below, we are reassured that there is a CAR because it is significantly different from zero.

   Hypothesis 1: The cumulative abnormal returns for a connected company at which Clinton has
   held a speech are different from zero.
   Hypothesis 2: The cumulative abnormal returns for a connected company who have donated to
   the Clinton Foundation are different from zero.

The first two hypotheses only state that the CAR is different from zero. With regard to our research
question, it is of essence to also determine if there is a difference between the connected groups
and the control group. After all, if non-connected firms also experience a significant CAR, there
is no value in being connected to Clinton.

                                                                                 13
   Hypothesis 3: The difference in cumulative abnormal returns between a connected company at
   which Clinton has held a speech and the control group is different from zero.
  Hypothesis 4: The difference in cumulative abnormal returns between a connected company
   who have donated to the Clinton Foundation and the control group is different from zero.

Finally, we want to test if the CAR is solely a result of a connection to Clinton. This does not have
to be the case, they could be a consequence of other firm characteristics such as size, leverage and
profitability.
   Hypothesis 5: The cumulative abnormal returns for a connected company at which Clinton held
   a speech is because of the connection to Clinton and not some other firm characteristic.
   Hypothesis 6: The cumulative abnormal returns for a connected company who have donated to
  the Clinton Foundation is because of the connection to Clinton and not some other firm
   characteristic.

These hypotheses can be divided by the group they are meant to test. Hypotheses one, three and
five are designed to test the speech-connected group and hypotheses two, four and six are meant
to test the foundation-connected group. To establish an increase in stock returns as a consequence
of a connection to Clinton, all three hypotheses in one group have to be accepted.

5.2 Event Study
An event study will be performed to test hypotheses 1-4. First we calculate a beta for each firm
throughout a one year estimation window. The length of the estimation window commonly varies
depending on what is studied, because our event is not directly tied to any specific company but
instead a political event we chose one year. This gives us a more reliable beta as we sample more
data. It is common to use 250 trading days as a proxy for one year but since we access the data
directly, we can use exactly one year.
       The event window also varies, it can be divided into short- and long term horizons (Chen,
2014). The first is more reliable because there can be other factors that affect stock returns
throughout the event window, therefore the closer you are to the studied event, the more likely it
is to be the source of the abnormal returns. In our study, we will use several event windows to
study Clinton’s announcement.

                                                                                 14
       The announcement is on a Sunday, the first trading day after the announcement is referred
to as day [0]. The first trading day before the announcement is denoted [-1] and the day after the
first trading day is written as [1]. To determine the immediate impact of the event, we will study
event windows [0] and [0,1]. To capture any potential leaks that might have affected the
announcement, windows [-3,3] and [-1,1] will be looked at. Lastly, to determine any sustained
effects we will study a window of [0,5] to determine the impact the announcement has had after
five days of trading.
       The measure of return we study is the cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) for each
company during the event window. The reason we study CAR is that this represents the increase
in value. Abnormal returns could also be of interest but if there is a significant AR say five days
after the announcement, it does not have to be relevant to the event itself. A company’s CAR can
be calculated as:

                                                                                            𝑛
                                                   𝐶𝐴𝑅[0, 𝑛]𝑖 = ∑ 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡
                                                                  𝑡=0

where 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 is the abnormal return for each company. This is a measure of how much it exceeds
the expected return compared to the market return:

                                             𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖𝑡 − [𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖 ⋅ 𝑅𝑚𝑡]

Where 𝑅𝑚𝑡 corresponds to the market return. We have used the S&P 500 index as a proxy for the
market return. 𝛼𝑖, 𝛽𝑖 have been calculated using a regression model (CAPM) throughout the
previous mentioned estimation window as follows:

                                                𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖 ⋅ 𝑅𝑚𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡

After having calculated the abnormal returns for the connected and the non-connected groups, we
measure the statistical significance of the CARs using a two-sided t-test. This is done to test if we
can accept or reject hypotheses 1-4. That is, to determine if the CARs are statistically different
from zero and if the difference between the connected and non-connected groups are statistically
different from zero.

                                                                                 15
5.3 Ordinary Least Squares Regression
Question marks surrounding an event study is the causality of the abnormal returns. Even though
we have done our best to establish connected groups based on existing, strong connections and can
see that these companies do experience a significantly larger return than our control group, this
does not have to be a consequence of the firms’ connection to Clinton. To test this, and in doing
so testing hypotheses 5-6, we will perform an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression that control
for firm characteristics. If the beta for the connected dummy variable is positive at a significant
level, we can accept our hypotheses. A positive beta would imply that a company who is connected
to Clinton experience a positive abnormal return as a result of that connection.
       There is no consensus regarding what firm characteristics to use when performing a
regression to control for the causality of an event study. In previous instances leverage and firm
size has been included (Johnson and Mitton, 2003). In a recent study Acemoglu et al (2015) added
return on equity to their analysis. Similar to what they did we will study the effect of firm size,
leverage and profitability. These three ratios can explain several aspects of the firms such as their
exposure to the market and the risk they have taken on by leveraging their business. By including
them in the regression we can ignore the impact they have as the results from the connection effect
is studied, ceteris paribus. Including these variables, and a dummy variable to control for the
connection to Clinton, we end up with the following equation:

          𝑦𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 ⋅ 𝑥𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 + 𝛽𝑙𝑒𝑣. ⋅ 𝑥𝑙𝑒𝑣. + 𝛽𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡 ⋅ 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⋅ 𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

The firm size is the log of total market cap just before the announcement, leverage is represented
by total debt to total capital and profitability is measured by return on equity, as is the norm for
financial firms.

5.3.1 Robust Standard Errors correction
One assumption to perform a regression is that the data analyzed is homoscedastic, as the error is
not correlated to the covariates. To address this we use robust standard errors which gives a more
representative result of the regression. As our analysis is done in R, we download a package and
function that utilize robust standard errors, for more details see Appendix B.

                                                                                 16
6 Results

The results are organized into two sections, in each we will conclude by answering if we can accept
or reject the hypotheses stated in 5.1 Hypotheses development. All tables and graphs will be
presented in the appendix at the end of the paper.
       First, the results from the event study is presented. Here it is evident that there are
significant CAR for the connected firms and that the difference between the connected and non-
connected firms is significantly different from zero.
        Lastly, we will present what we find after performing a regression upon firm characteristics
with CAR as a dependent variable.

6.1 Event Study
The result from the event study will be divided into firms that are connected by speeches and the
foundation in order to test hypothesis 1-4. Both groups show similar abnormal returns on the event
day and afterward that differ from zero, which indicate that there is a CAR for both groups. See
figure 1 for a graph showing the surrounding days of the event.

6.1.1 Speech group
The speech group shows that the CAR is positive and significantly different from zero on and after
the announcement (See table 5, panel A). At the same time this is not the case before the
announcement, which should be expected as there should not be an increase in value before the
event takes place.
        The difference in abnormal return on the event day is not as large as one would expect. Nor
does it reflect a significant CAR. CAR[0,1] indicate that there is a significant difference between
the connected and non-connected firms. If we study the following trading days we see that this
difference increases and is significant for the remainder of the event window. These numbers
suggest that there are positive, significant differences in CARs on all days where the highest
difference is on event day four with 2.6% between the connected and the non-connected group.
CAR[0,5] also indicates that there is a sustained effect after five days of trading.
       A second event study was carried out and extended to 11 event days where we measured
CAR[0,10] this was however less significant. The reason for that is because it is harder to isolate

                                                                                 17
one event’s effect the longer period one examines. Many factors could affect the abnormal returns;
hence, a shorter event study such as five days is more reliable.
       To investigate why CAR[0] is not significant we studied the event window CAR[-1,1] and
CAR[-3,3] in this way we capture any potential leakages prior Clinton’s announcement. Both event
windows indicate a positive difference in CARs with a significance under 1%. (See Table 4, panel
A).

6.1.2 Analysis of Speeches
In general, there is a positive trend throughout the post-announcement event window. The majority
of the CARs are statistically different from zero and the difference as well. The notable exception
is CAR[0]. This could be somewhat confusing since this is the first trading day after Clinton’s
announcement and we ought to see an immediate reaction from the market. Because only the
abnormal return for the connected companies on the day of the event, and not the difference, is
statistically different from zero, we propose that Clinton’s announcement have a positive impact
on the financial industry as a whole. This will be elaborated on further in the Discussion. (See 7.2.)
       Another potential explanation we find is that there is a leak in the days before the
announcement. Indeed, CNN and other news sources, reported on the Friday that Clinton would
announce her candidacy on Sunday the 12th of April. This strengthens our hypothesis that a leak
would soften the abnormal return on the first trading day after Clinton’s announcement, as some
of it could be priced in from the Friday. This hypothesis is supported by CAR[-1,1] which is
significant but it does not explain, however, why there is an increase in CAR for the remainder of
the event window.
       Another possible cause to the CAR’s insignificant p-value on the event day could be the
fact that, even though the announcement was the inception of her campaign, she held her first

                                    th
speech that Tuesday on the 14  of April. That was her campaign debut in the first state to vote in

                     8
the primary, Iowa . It could be argued that it was first when she held her speech in Iowa that the
market reacted to the fact that she was running for the Presidency. This could imply that the
market’s realization of Clinton’s intentions was outspread during several days, which also provides
an explanation to why we observe a sustained effect on CAR[0,5].

8
 https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/nation/2015/04/14/clintoniowa/ujEYUxeYwJc275PdFQ5pWI/story.html

                                                                                 18
       In conclusion we can accept both hypotheses 1 and 3 as the speech group has CARs that
are different from zero and the difference is positive in comparison to the non-connected group.
We notice that the numbers indicate a sustained effect for the speech group after five trading days.
We also observe that the leak reported on the Friday before the announcement (which was on a
Sunday) may have affected the CARs.

6.1.3 Foundation group
The Clinton Foundation group show similar numbers to the speech group yet they are not as
convincing as the first group, as they show higher p-values. (See table 4, panel B) The foundation
group also experiences CARs that are all different from zero from the announcement day and
throughout five days of trading which once again indicate that the group did experience abnormal
returns. The difference after five days of trading amounts to 1.9 % indicated by CAR[0,5] and it
could therefore be argued that the foundation group also had a sustained CAR after the event
window. (See table 5, panel B)
        CAR[0], similar to the speech group, does not display a significant difference between the
two groups. To examine this behavior we once again have to study the estimation windows
CAR[0,1], CAR[-1,1] and CAR[-3,3]. The results are similar to the speech group.

6.1.4 Analysis of Foundation
In the entire analysis we observe a similar pattern to that of the speech group. That is CAR[-1,1]
and CAR[-3,3] show that a leak could be the reason behind the softened effect on event day 0.
This would be expected, if the leak affects the first group it should also affect the group who have
donated to the Clinton Foundation.
        In conclusion, it is evident that there is a positive CAR surrounding the event day that is
significant throughout the remainder of the event window. Although, something could have
softened the impact of her announcement. This could partly be explained by a leak the Friday
before the announcement. These results suggest that we can accept hypotheses 2 and 4 as the CARs
are positive and there is a significant difference between the connected and non-connected groups.

6.2 OLS Regression model
The regression on firm-characteristics is performed to test hypotheses 5 and 6. These state that the
source of the abnormal return is a consequence of the firms’ connection to Clinton and not some

                                                                                 19
other variable that would have the firms behave similarly. To address this problem, we regress
both groups’ CAR on firm size, leverage and profitability and a dummy variable is included for
each connection respectively. We separate the speeches and the foundation connected companies
and present the results for each group individually.

6.2.1 Speech group
When taking into account the firm characteristics, the results indicate that we can accept our
hypothesis. The day of the event, CAR[0] is positive and significant at a 6% level (See table 6,
Panel A). 0.6% of the abnormal return on this day can be attributed to the Clinton connection. For
the post announcement event window, the connection coefficient continues to be positive and is
significant below 1%. After five trading days, a CAR of 3% can be attributed to the Clinton
connection. (See table 5, panel A). The event windows surrounding the event, CAR[-3,3] and
CAR[-1,1], the connection contributes with a positive 𝛽 of around 2%, which is significant.

6.2.2 Analysis of speeches
The regression implies that the results from the event study still holds after treating each firm as if
they had the same size, leverage and profitability. This should remove the main concerns to the
causality of the abnormal returns. It is clear that these are a result from the connection to Clinton.
       In conclusion, the group of companies at which Clinton held speeches experience a
cumulative abnormal return that is derived from their connection to Clinton. The fifth hypothesis
can be accepted as the connection still holds when we control for firm characteristics.

6.2.3 Foundation group
The regression is performed on the same covariates as was done on Speech-connections but with
a dummy variable for Foundation donations instead of speeches. On the event day we see a positive
coefficient for the connection; however, the coefficient is not statistically significant. (See table 6,
panel B) Throughout the event window we continue to see positive coefficients attached to the
Clinton connection. After five trading days, the contribution to a firm’s CAR is 2.3% as a result
of their connection to Clinton. With the exception of CAR[0,1], they are statistically significant;
CAR[0,2] has a p-value of below 5% and CAR[0,3], CAR[0,4] and CAR[0,5] are significant below
1%. What does differ for the Foundation connection is that the pre-announcement window, CAR[-
1,1], is not significant. CAR[-3,3] does prove to be significant to below 1%. See table 6.

                                                                                 20
6.2.4 Analysis of Foundation
The results above are similar to that of the speech-connections but we cannot draw as strong of a
conclusion as some days are not significant. What the results suggests is that there is a sustained
effect of a connection to Clinton as the CAR[0,5] is significant and positive. Also, a leak could
have impacted the result and lessened the impact on the event day. There is no significance on the
day following the event which could suggest that there is no excessive returns for companies
connected to Clinton, as this should have been reflected in the immediate abnormal return. This is
strengthened further by the fact that CAR[-1,1] is not significant either.
       The only conclusion we can draw is that there is an impact surrounding the event which is
evident by CAR[-3,3] and there is a sustained effect after five trading days. However, we cannot
draw any conclusion if the CAR is a direct consequence of Clinton’s announcement. Therefore it
is plausible that the announcement does have an effect on connected firms, but we cannot accept
Hypothesis 6 on a statistically significant level.

6.3 Summary of results and implications
Below is a table that presents our results in form of the hypotheses stated above. We can accept all
of the hypotheses with the exception of Hypothesis 6, which states that the CARs for foundation
companies are a consequence of connection to Clinton.

     Hypothesis Course of Action

     H1, CARs for speeches are significantly different from zero. Accepted

     H2, CARs for the Clinton Foundation is significantly different from zero. Accepted

     H3, The difference between CAR for speeches and the control group are        Accepted
      significantly different from zero.

     H4, The difference between CAR for foundation and the control group are       Accepted
     significantly different from zero.

     H5, CARs are affected by the speech connection and not because of some other       Accepted
      firm characteristic.

     H6, CARs are affected by the foundation connection and not because of some        Rejected
      other firm characteristic.

Hypothesis one, three and five are accepted, this implies that, for the speech group, the connection
to Clinton does increase stock returns. The same does not apply for the foundation group as

                                                                                 21
hypothesis six is rejected. We recognize that there are significant CARs but if this hypothesis does
not hold, we cannot deduce that the CARs are from the connection to Clinton. As our goal was not
to answer if all connected companies exhibit this behavior, we have successfully answered our
research question. Companies who are connected to a political candidate can experience increased
stock returns. In section 7 we will discuss eventual limitations and try to elaborate on why this is
not the case for the companies who donated to the Clinton Foundation.

6.3.1 What implications do these results have for the research field?
This paper aimed to fill the gap in existing research and has done so within the limitations of our
research question. What is most interesting in this study is that even though Clinton is influential
and a well-recognized name, she has no legal power as of her announcement. Despite this we show
that connections to a candidate is enough to experience abnormal returns and it would be
interesting to study this candidate further if she would be elected to office in the future.

7. Discussion

This study aimed to fill the gap in existing research and has done so within the limitations of this
paper. It is not exhaustive and there are two fundamental thoughts that have arisen that will be
addressed in this section. First, we will discuss if Clinton’s announcement impacts only the
connected group or the industry as a whole. Second, we will bring up the importance of a
connection and whether or not it is significant enough. Perhaps donations to the Clinton
Foundation are driven by an altruistic motive and firms do not expect a favor in return.

7.1 The announcement could have industry-wide effects
A potential explanation for the difference in CARs is not as significant as the individual reported
CARs is that the effect of Clinton’s announcement is industry wide.
       It would make sense to any observer if the reason behind an increase in value could be
because of potential regulatory favors, or simply lack of regulation, this would impact the entire
industry and not only the firms who have a connection to Clinton. Some companies could be the
driving force behind these “benefits” but everyone can reap the results. This would be supported

                                                                                 22
by our results and also tie into the theory of regulatory capture, mentioned earlier, as the motive
behind these connections.
       Earlier in this paper we concluded that, regardless of the actual connection between Clinton
and another party, the image that the media conveys does impact the public and could thence
influence the market. What this could imply, which is outside the scope of this paper, is that
perhaps it is not actually the connections per se that increases stock returns but a connection
perceived by the public. Further research into this area could try to establish a connection based
on online mentions -- in newspapers and twitter -- of a financial firm together with Clinton.

7.2 Why does not foundation show the same results?
The connections we have established in this paper, namely speeches and foundation, do show a
difference in CAR during the event windows. Speeches show a higher CAR than Foundation on
most instances. We believe that this is a consequence of speeches being a stronger connection to
Clinton. These companies have had direct contact with Clinton while a donation to her foundation
does not have to imply even meeting her. The true motive behind a donation could be seen as more
altruistic, relative to that of a speaking fee.
       Moreover, if these companies truly have an ulterior motive and see a benefit in Clinton
being elected, there are more effective ways of contributing to her campaign. What these
alternatives could offer, however, is a way to contribute to Clinton without directly being involved
in her political career.

                                                                                 23
8. Conclusion

Throughout the analysis in this paper, we see a pattern of positive cumulative abnormal returns for
connected firms on the first trading day after Hillary Clinton’s campaign announcement. We look
at two different groups, speeches and foundation donors and both display an excessive return
during our pre-determined event windows. This is significant on a standalone basis but also when
compared to a sample of financial firms who have, seemingly, no connection to Clinton. This
suggests that there is a value in being connected to a presidential candidate as some connected
firms do experience excessive stock returns.
        Controlling for firm-characteristics, one group still exhibits a significant increase in value
because of the connection to Clinton. The other is not as convincing even though there is a
significant connection on some days. From this analysis we can confirm that the increased value
for speech connected firms are derived from their connection to Clinton. For the foundation
connected companies, the results are not as significant. We can be sure that there is an impact but
we cannot be entirely certain that this is because of their connection to Clinton.
       We have shown that companies in developed countries can experience an increase in stock
returns because of their connection to a politician. This is done without the backdrop of a crisis
which has been the emerging argument to explain these phenomenon. However, this does not
contradict the connection in a crisis hypothesis. It is possible that if the U.S. would experience
another crisis, similar to that in 2008, these connections would become even more valuable and
this would be reflected in the CARs.
       What remains to be answered is if this value from connections are a one-time occurrence
or if there can be an established pattern for other presidential candidates as well. This appears to
be a fruitful area for further research.

                                                                                 24
References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Kermani, A., Kwak, J., Mitton, T., (2015). The Value of Connections
in a Turbulent Time: Evidence from the United States. Working paper not published.

Akey, P., (2015). Valuing Changes in Political Networks: Evidence from Campaign
Contributions to Close Congressional Elections. Oxford Review of Financial Studies 28(11),
3188-3223.

Amore, M.D., Bennedsen, M., The value of local political connection in a low-corruption
environment. Journal of Financial Economics 110(2), 387-402.

Asp, K., (1986). Powerful Mass Media. Studies in Political Opinion Formation. Stockholm:
Akademilitteratur

Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., (2015). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Working
paper not published.

Bó, E.D., (2006). Regulatory Capture: A Review. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 22(2),
203-225.

Braden, M., (1996). Women politicians and the media. Lexington: The University of Kentucky
Press.

Bystrom, D.G., McKinnon, L. M., and Channey, C.K. (1999). The first lady and the first estate:
Media coverage of Hillary Clinton and Elisabeth Dole in the 1996 presidential campaign. In
L.L. Kaid and D., and D.G. Bystrom (Eds), The electronic election: Perspectives on the 1996
campaign communication. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Duchin, R., Sosyura, D., (2012). The Politics of Government Investments. Journal of Financial
Economics 106(1), 24-48.

Fisman, R., (2001). Estimating the Value of Political Connections. The American Economic
Review 91(4), 1095-1102.
Jayachandaran, S., (2006). The Jeffords Effect. The journal of Law & Economics 49(2), 397-425.

Johnson, S., Mitton, T., (2003). Cronyism and capital controls: evidence from Malaysia.Journal
of Financial Ecnomics 67(2), 351-382.

Khan, K.F., (1992). Does being male help? An investigation of gender and media effects in the
U.S. Senate races. Journal of Politics 54, 497-517

Khwaja, A.I., Mian, A., (2005). Unchecked intermediaries: Price manipulation in an emerging
stock market. Journal of Financial Economics 78(1), 203-241.

Tahoun, A., (2014). The role of stock ownership by US members of Congress on the market for
political favors. Journal of Financial Economics 111(1), 86-110.

                                                                                 25
Fisman, D., Fisman, R., Galef, J., Khurana, R., and Wang, Y., (2012). Estimating the value of
connections to Vice-President Cheney. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 12(3), 1-
18.

Sunstein, C.R., (1994). Political Equality and Unintended Consequences. Culumbia Law Review
94(4), 1390-1414.

Tetlock, P.C., (2007). Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the Stock
Market. The Journal of THE AMERICAN FINANCE ASSOCIATION 62(3), 1139-1168

Witt, L., Paget, K., and Matthews, G., (1994). Running as a woman: Gender and power in
American Politics. New York: Three Free Press.

News articles and other references
DISCLOSED act of 2010. United States. H.R. 5175 (S.3628-Senate)

Egan, M., (2015). Hillary Clinton Tweet Crushes Biotech Stock.
http://money.cnn.com/2015/09/21/investing/hillary-clinton-biotech-price-gouging/. Accessed:
2016-05-14.

Griffin, D., (2016). The Truth About Hillary Clinton’s Wall Street Speeches.
http://money.cnn.com/2016/04/20/news/economy/hillary-clinton-goldman-sachs/. Accessed: 2016-05-
14.

Not published author, (2015). The Clinton Charity Case. http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-clinton-
charity-case-1438731092. Accessed: 2016-05-14.

Thomas, K., and Lerer, L., (2015). At Iowa College, Clinton began to lay out campaign message.
https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/nation/2015/04/14/clintoniowa/ujEYUxeYwJc275PdFQ5p
WI/story.html. Accessed: 2016-0-14.

The Clinton Foundation, https://www.clintonfoundation.org/ Accessed: 2016-05-14

                                                                                 26
Appendix A: Tables and Graphs

Figure 1: The graphs below presents the difference in cumulative abnormal return (CAR) ten
trading days before and after Clinton announcing her intention to run for President. The red line
                                                                                                                 th
indicates the start of the first trading day after her announcement, April 13 . The dotted lines
show the 90 % and 95 % significance interval.
Panel A: Difference in CAR surrounding the announcement of Clinton
running for President for Speech Connections vs non-connected firms.

  6,0%
  5,0%
  4,0%
  3,0%
  2,0%
  1,0%
  0,0%
  -1,0%
  -2,0%
  -3,0%
  -4,0%

Panel B: Difference CAR surrounding the announcement of Clinton running
for President for Foundation Connections vs non-connected firms.

  7,0%

  6,0%

  5,0%

  4,0%

  3,0%

  2,0%

  1,0%

  0,0%

  -1,0%

  -2,0%

                                                                                 27
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for our data which comprises of 244 financial firm listed on
the NYSE. “Speeches” consist of the companies at which Clinton held speeches between 2013
and 2015. “Foundation” are companies who have donated more than $50,000 to the Clinton
Foundation. 𝐶𝐴𝑅[𝑡1, 𝑡2] is the cumulative abnormal return from day 𝑡1 to day 𝑡2. The firm
characteristics that are analyzed are size (ln of assets), leverage (total debt to total capital) and
profitability (return on equity).

             Mean Min 25th Pctile Median 75th Pctile Max St. Dev. N
 Speeches 0.4% -1.8% -0.1% 0.5% 1.3% 2.8% 1.0% 244
 Foundation 0.3% -1.9% -0.3% 0.4% 1.1% 2.9% 1.1% 244

 CAR(-3,3) 0.2% -15.2% -1.3% 0.1% 1.8% 16.4% 3.6% 244
 CAR(-1,1) 0.1% -9.1% -0.8% 0.2% 1.1% 9.8% 2.2% 244
 CAR(0) 0.7% -3.3% 0.1% 0.7% 1.3% 8.7% 1.3% 244
 CAR(0,1) 0.6% -8.1% -0.1% 0.6% 1.3% 7.4% 1.7% 244
 CAR(0,2) 0.7% -11.4% -0.3% 0.7% 1.6% 9.1% 2.2% 244
 CAR(0,3) 1.0% -18.2% -0.3% 0.8% 2.2% 9.0% 2.6% 244
 CAR(0,4) 0.6% -17.4% -0.9% 0.5% 2.1% 9.9% 2.9% 244
 CAR(0,5) 0.3% -19.0% -1.2% 0.4% 1.8% 10.8% 3.2% 244

 Size 8.4 4.3 7.1 8.2 9.8 12.5 1.8 244
 Leverage 45.0 0.0 20.4 41.2 67.9 339.2 32.9 244
 Profitability 11.7 -66.4 6.3 9.6 15.8 83.9 14.5 244

                                                                                 28
Table 2: List of connected companies

The tables below show a list of the connected companies. These companies have been chosen
because of their relation to Clinton, either by Speeches or that they have donated to the Clinton
Foundation.

Panel A: Group of Companies at which Clinton has held a speech

                      Company Name Speaking Fees ($)
                       Bank of America 485,000
                       Citigroup 700,000
                      Goldman Sachs 675,000
                       J P Morgan Chase 225,000*
                       Morgan Stanley 225,000
                       Apollo Global Management 225,000
                       Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce 150,000
                        Ameriprise Financial Services 225,000

*Assumed to be standard fee, not listed in original source.

Panel B: Group of Companies who have donated to the Clinton Foundation

                        Company Name Donation ($)
                           Banc of California 1,000,000 - 5,000,000
                           Bank of America 1,000,000 - 5,000,000
                           Barclays 1,000,000 - 5,000,000
                           Citigroup 1,000,000 - 5,000,000
                           Goldman Sachs 1,000,000 - 5,000,000
                          HSBC Holdings 1,000,000 - 5,000,000
                           J P Morgan Chase 500,000 - 1,000,000
                           Morgan Stanley 500,000 - 1,000,000
                           The Blackstone Group 500,000 - 1,000,000
                           Wells Fargo 500,000 - 1,000,000
                          Lazard 50,000 - 100,000
                          Toronto Dominion Bank 50,000 - 100,000

Sources:

Clinton Foundation, https://www.clintonfoundation.org/ accessed 2016-05-14

Clinton Campaign Website, www.hillaryclinton.com accessed 2016-05-12

                                                                                 29
Table 3: List of companies in control group

This list consist of all financial companies in the control group. The list is sorted in alphabetical order.
                                                                            Control Group
ABM Industries BlackRock First Marblehead Corporation Marcus & Millichap Regional Management
Aegon Blue Capital Reinsurance Flagstar Bancorp Markel Corporation Regions Financial Corporation
Affiliated Managers Brookfield Property Partners Forestar Group Marriot Vacations Worldwide Reinsurance Group of America
Aflac Brown & Brown Fortress Investment Group Marsh & McLennan Companies RenaissanceRe
Alexander & Baldwin Capital One Financial Corporation Franklin Resources Maui Land & Pineapple Company RLI Corp
Alleghany Corporation CBRE Group FXCM MBIA Rollins
AllianceBernstein Holding Charles Schwab Gamco Investors Mercury General Corporation Rouse Properties
AllianzGI NFJ China Cord Blood Corporation Gazit-Globe MetLife Royal Bank Of Canada
Allied World Assurance China Life Insurance Company Genworth Financial MGIC Investment Corporation Royal Bank Scotland
Allstate Citizens Getty Realty Corporation MidSouth Bancorp Safeguard Scientifics
Altisource Residential CNA Financial Corporation Government Properties Income Trust Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Shinhan Financial Group
American Equity Investment Life CNO Financial Group Green Dot Corporation Mizuho Financial Group State Street Corporation
American Express Company Cohn & Steers Greenhill & Co Nam Tai Property Sterling Bancorp
American Financial Group Comerica Incorporated Grupo Financiero Santander Mexico National Bank Holdings Corporation Stewart Information Services
American International Group Community Bank System Hartford Financial Services Nationstar Mortgage Holdings Stifel Financial Corporation
American Realty Investors CPB HCI Group Nelnet Stifel Financial Corporation
Aon Credicorp HDFC Bank Limited New York Community Bancorp Stonegate Mortgage Corporation
Arlington Asset Investment Credit Suisse Group Hilltop Holdings Noah Holdings Suffolk Bancorp
Armada Hoffler Properties Cullen/Frost Bankers Horace Mann Educators Nomura Holdings Sumitomo Mitsui Financial
Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. Customers Bancorp Hudson Pacific Properties Oaktree Capital Group Sun Life Financial
Artisan Partners Asset Management D/B/A Chubb Limited New ICICI Bank Limited Och-Ziff Capital Management SunTrust Banks
Aspen Insurance Deutsche Bank Independence Holding Company Ocwen Financial Corporation Synovus Financial
Associated Banc-Corp Dun & Bradstreet Corporation ING Group OFG Bancorp TCF Financial Corporation
Assurant Dupont Fabros Technology Intercontinental Exchange Old Republic International Corporation Tejon Ranch Co
Assured Guaranty Eaton Vance Corporation Invesco OneBeacon Insurance Group Terreno Realty Corporation
Astoria Financial Corporation E-House Investment Technology Group OneMain Holdings The Hanover Insurance
Aviva Ellington Financial Itau Unibanco Banco Holding Oppenheimer Holdings The Travelers Companies
Axis Capital Holdings Emergent Capital J.G. Wentworth Company Orix Corp Ads Third Point Reinsurance
Banco Bilbao Viscaya Argentaria Employers Holdings Janus Capital Group PennyMac Financial Services Torchmark Corporation
Banco Bradesco Endurance Specialty JMP Group LLC PHH Corp Triple-S Management
Banco Bradesco Equifax Jones Lang LaSalle Incorporated Phoenix Companies U.S. Bancorp
Banco De Chile Essent Group KB Financial Group Piper Jaffray Companies Universal Insurance Holdings
Banco Latinoamericano EverBank Financial KCG Holdings PNC Financial Services Unum Group
Banco Santander Evercore Partners Kemper Corporation Primerica Validus Holdings
Banco Santander Brasil Everest Re Kennedy-Wilson Holdings Principal Financial Group Valley National Bancorp
BanColombia Everi Holdings KeyCorp ProAssurance Corporation Voya Financial
BancorpSouth F.N.B. Corporation Kingsway Financial Services Progressive Corporation W.R. Berkley Corporation
Bank of Hawaii FBL Financial Group KKR & Co. Prosperity Bancshares Waddell & Reed Financial
Bank Of Montreal Federal Agricultural Mortgage Legg Mason Provident Financial Services Walker & Dunlop
Bank Of New York Mellon Federated Investors Lincoln National Corporation Prudential Financial Walter Investment Management
Bank of Nova Scotia Fidelity and Guaranty Life Lloyds Banking Group Prudential Public Limited Company Western Alliance Bancorporation
BankUnited First Acceptance Corporation Loews Corporation Pzena Investment Management Westpac Banking Corporation
BB&T First American Corporation M&T Bank Corporation Radian Group Westwood Holdings Group
BBVA Banco Frances First BanCorp. Macro Bank Raymond James Financial White Mountains Insurance Group
BBX Capital Corporation First Commonwealth Financial Manning & Napier RE/MAX Holdings XL Group
Berkshire Hills Bancorp First Horizon National Corporation Manulife Financial Realogy Holdings

                                                                                                                  30
Table 4: Overview of CAR
The panels below show an overview of the five event windows we have studied in this paper.
“Significance” is a measure of the statistical significance for the differences between “Connected” and
“Non-Connected”. (* < 10%, ** < 5%, *** < 1%)

Panel A: Overview of CAR for Speech connections

                 Measure Connected Non-Connected Difference Significance
                 CAR[-3,3] 2.4% 0.2% 2.2% ***
                 CAR[-1,1] 1.5% 0.0% 1.5% ***
                 CAR[0] 1.0% 0.7% 0.3% -
                 CAR[0,1] 1.9% 0.5% 1.4% ***
                 CAR[0,5] 2.9% 0.2% 2.6% **

Panel B: Overview of CAR for Foundation connections

                 Measure Connected Non-Connected Difference Significance
                 CAR[-3,3] 2.5% 0.1% 2.4% ***
                 CAR[-1,1] 0.9% 0.0% 0.9% **
                 CAR[0] 0.9% 0.7% 0.2% -
                 CAR[0,1] 1.4% 0.5% 0.9% **
                 CAR[0,5] 2.2% 0.2% 1.9% ***

                                                                                         31
Table 5: Detailed view of CAR in post announcement window

The tables below presents a detailed view of the post-announcement event window. “Significance” shows
the significance for the difference between the connected and non-connected companies’ CAR.
“Significance (Level Effect)” represents the significance of the “CAR (Connected)” against zero.
(* < 10%, ** < 5%, *** < 1%)

Panel A: Post announcement event window for Speech connections

                                                                                                         Significance
 Event Day Date CAR (Connected) CAR (Non-Connected) Difference Significance
                                                                                                                 (Level effect)
     0 13-Apr-15 1.0% 0.7% 0.3% - ***
     1 14-Apr-15 1.9% 0.5% 1.4% *** ***
     2 15-Apr-15 2.5% 0.6% 1.9% *** ***
     3 16-Apr-15 3.2% 0.9% 2.3% *** ***
     4 17-Apr-15 3.4% 0.5% 2.9% *** ***
     5 20-Apr-15 2.9% 0.2% 2.6% ** ***

Panel B: Post announcement event window for Foundation connections

                                                                                                         Significance
 Event Day Date CAR (Connected) CAR (Non-Connected) Difference Significance
                                                                                                                 (Level effect)
     0 13-Apr-15 0.9% 0.7% 0.2% - ***
     1 14-Apr-15 1.4% 0.5% 0.9% ** ***
     2 15-Apr-15 2.0% 0.6% 1.4% *** ***
     3 16-Apr-15 2.4% 0.9% 1.6% *** ***
     4 17-Apr-15 2.6% 0.5% 2.0% *** ***
     5 20-Apr-15 2.2% 0.2% 1.9% *** ***

                                                                                         32
Table 6: Regression Coefficients

Table 6 display the results from our (robust) OLS regressions. Each covariate’s beta is shown including standard error in parenthesis.
The significance level for each coefficient is also shown. (* < 10%, ** < 5%, *** < 1%)

Panel A: Regression Coefficients for the Speech connected companies

                      CAR[-3,3] CAR[-1,1] CAR[0] CAR[0,1] CAR[0,2] CAR[0,3] CAR[0,4] CAR[0,5]
 Clinton Connection 2.2% ** 1.3% *** 1.4% * 1.3% *** 1.7% *** 2.2% *** 2.7% *** 3.0% ***
                     (0.9%) (0.5%) (0.3%) (0.4%) (0.6%) (0.7%) (0.9%) (0.9%)
 Firm Size 0.0% 0.0% 0.6% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% -0.2%
                     (0.2%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%)
 Leverage 0.0% 0.0% -0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
                     (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%)
 Profitability 0.1% * 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
                     (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%)
 R^2 0.06 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.04 0.03
 N 244 244 244 244 244 244 244 244

Panel B: Regression Coefficients for the Clinton Foundation

                      CAR[-3,3] CAR[-1,1] CAR[0] CAR[0,1] CAR[0,2] CAR[0,3] CAR[0,4] CAR[0,5]
 Clinton Connection 2.1% *** 0.7% 0.4% 0.7% 1.3% ** 1.3% *** 1.8% *** 2.3% ***
                     (0.6%) (0.4%) (0.3%) (0.4%) (0.5%) (0.5%) (0.6%) (0.6%)
 Firm Size 0.0% 0.0% -0.1% 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% -0.2%
                     (0.2%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%)
 Leverage 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
                     (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%)
 Profitability 0.1% * 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
                     (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%)
 R^2 0.06 0.02 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03
 N 244 244 244 244 244 244 244 244
                                                                                                                 33
Appendix B: Code in R to run analysis

rm(list=ls())

C=matrix(c(1),nrow=6,ncol=1)

#Hillary Tickets to loop through
nyseFin=c("AIG","ABM","AEG","AMG","AFL","ALEX","Y","AB","NFJ","AWH","ALL","RESI","AEL","AXP","AFG","ARL","AON","AI","AHH","AJG","AP
AM","AHL","ASB","AIZ","AGO","AF","AV","AXS","BBVA","BBD","BBDO","BCH","BLX","BSBR","SAN","CIB","BXS","BOH","BMO","BK","BNS","BKU"
,"BBT","BFR","BBX","BHLB","BLK","BCRH","BPY","BRO","COF","CBG","CO","LFC","BLW","CIA","CNA","CNO","CNS","CMA","CBU","CPF","BAP","C
S","CFR","CUBI","CB","DNB","DFT","EV","EJ","EFC","EMG","EIG","ENH","EFX","ESNT","EVER","EVR","RE","EVRI","FNB","FFG","AGM","FII","FGL",
"FAC","FAF","FBP","FCF","FHN","FMD","FBC","FOR","FIG","BEN","FXCM","GBL","GZT","GNW","GTY","GOV","GDOT","GHL","BSMX","HIG","HCI"
,"HDB","HTH","HMN","HPP","IBN","IHC","ING","ICE","IVZ","ITG","ITUB","JGW","JNS","JMP","JLL","KB","KCG","KMPR","KW","KEY","KFS","KKR",
"LM","LNC","LYG","L","MTB","BMA","MN","MFC","MMI","MKL","VAC","MMC","MLP","MBI","MCY","MET","MTG","MSL","MTU","MFG","NTP",
"NBHC","NSM","NNI","NYCB","NOAH","NMR","OAK","OCN","OFG","ORI","OB","OMF","OPY","IX","PFSI","PHH","PNX","PJC","PNC","PRI","PFG",
"PRA","PGR","PB","PFS","PRU","PUK","PZN","RDN","RJF","RMAX","RLGY","RM","RF","RGA","RNR","RLI","ROL","RSE","RY","RBS","SFE","SHG","S
TT","STL","STC","SF","SFN","SGM","SCNB","SMFG","SLF","STI","SNV","TCB","TRC","TRNO","THG","TRV","TPRE","TMK","GTS","USB","UVE","UN
M","VR","VLY","VOYA","WRB","WDR","WD","WAC","WAL","WBK","WHG","WTM","XL","OZM","SCHW","DB","BANC","BCS","HSBC","LAZ","BX",
"TD","WFC")
nyseSpeech=c("BAC","C","GS","JPM","MS","APO","CM","AMP")

ejFoundation=c("SCHW","OZM","DB","ABM","AEG","AMG","AFL","ALEX","Y","AB","NFJ","AWH","ALL","RESI","AEL","AXP","AFG","AIG","ARL","A
MP","AON","APO","AI","AHH","AJG","APAM","AHL","ASB","AIZ","AGO","AF","AV","AXS","BBVA","BBD","BBDO","BCH","BLX","BSBR","SAN","CI
B","BXS","BOH","BMO","BK","BNS","BKU","BBT","BFR","BBX","BHLB","BLK","BCRH","BPY","BRO","CM","COF","CBG","CO","LFC","BLW","CIA","C
NA","CNO","CNS","CMA","CBU","CPF","BAP","CS","CFR","CUBI","CB","DNB","DFT","EV","EJ","EFC","EMG","EIG","ENH","EFX","ESNT","EVER","E
VR","RE","EVRI","FNB","FFG","AGM","FII","FGL","FAC","FAF","FBP","FCF","FHN","FMD","FBC","FOR","FIG","BEN","FXCM","GBL","GZT","GNW","
GTY","GOV","GDOT","GHL","BSMX","HIG","HCI","HDB","HTH","HMN","HPP","IBN","IHC","ING","ICE","IVZ","ITG","ITUB","JGW","JNS","JMP","JL
L","KB","KCG","KMPR","KW","KEY","KFS","KKR","LM","LNC","LYG","L","MTB","BMA","MN","MFC","MMI","MKL","VAC","MMC","MLP","MBI","
MCY","MET","MTG","MSL","MTU","MFG","NTP","NBHC","NSM","NNI","NYCB","NOAH","NMR","OAK","OCN","OFG","ORI","OB","OMF","OPY","
IX","PFSI","PHH","PNX","PJC","PNC","PRI","PFG","PRA","PGR","PB","PFS","PRU","PUK","PZN","RDN","RJF","RMAX","RLGY","RM","RF","RGA","R
NR","RLI","ROL","RSE","RY","RBS","SFE","SHG","STT","STL","STC","SF","SFN","SGM","SCNB","SMFG","SLF","STI","SNV","TCB","TRC","TRNO","TH
G","TRV","TPRE","TMK","GTS","USB","UVE","UNM","VR","VLY","VOYA","WRB","WDR","WD","WAC","WAL","WBK","WHG","WTM","XL")
Foundation=c("WFC","TD","BX","MS","LAZ","JPM","HSBC","GS","C","BCS","BAC","BANC")

#Old dates
Url="http://real-chart.finance.yahoo.com/table.csv?s="
estimationWindow="&a=02&b=12&c=2014&d=02&e=12&f=2015&g=d&ignore=.csv"
eventWindow="&a=03&b=10&c=2015&d=03&e=20&f=2015&g=d&ignore=.csv"

for(i in nyseSpeech)
{
urlCompany<-paste(url,i, estimationWindow,sep="")

dataCompany<-read.csv(urlCompany, header=TRUE)
dataCompany<-rev(dataCompany)

pricesCompany<-dataCompany[,'Adj.Close']
datesCompany<-dataCompany[,'Date']
returnsCompany<-(head(pricesCompany,-1)-tail(pricesCompany,-1))/tail(pricesCompany,-1)

urlSP500<-paste(urlen,"%5EGSPC",first,sep="")

dataSP500<-read.csv(urlSP500, header=TRUE)
dataSP500<-rev(dataSP500)

pricesSP500<-dataSP500[,'Adj.Close']
datesSP500<-dataSP500[,'Date']

returnsSP500<-(head(pricesSP500,-1)-tail(pricesSP500,-1))/tail(pricesSP500,-1)

fit <- lm(returnsCompany ~ returnsSP500)
summary(fit)

#---------------------------------------- eventWindow analysis -------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                 34
urlCompany<-paste(url,i, eventWindow,sep="")

dataCompany<-read.csv(urlCompany, header=TRUE)
dataCompany<-rev(dataCompany)

pricesCompany<-dataCompany [,'Adj.Close']
datesCompany<-dataCompany [,'Date']
returnsCompany<-(head(pricesCompany,-1)-tail(pricesCompany,-1))/tail(pricesCompany,-1)

urlSP500<-paste(urlen,"%5EGSPC",second,sep="")

dataSP500<-read.csv(urlSP500, header=TRUE)
dataSP500<-rev(dataSP500)

pricesSP500<-dataSP500[,'Adj.Close']
datesSP500<-dataSP500[,'Date']

returnsSP500<-(head(pricesSP500,-1)-tail(pricesSP500,-1))/tail(pricesSP500,-1)

#Calculate Abnormal returns and CAR
AR<-returnsCompany-(coef(fit)[1]+returnsSP500*coef(fit)[2])
AR<-rev(AR)
CAR<-cumsum(AR)

dates<-rev(datesSP500)
dates<-dates[-1]

print(i)

C<-cbind(C,CAR)
colnames(C)[ncol(C)]=i
}

#--------------------------------------------------------- STATISTICS -------------------------------------------------------------------

#Manually save data from previous run to compare
ConnectionResults<-C[,-1]
CompaniesResults<-C[,-1]

P=matrix(c(1),nrow=5,ncol=1)

#t-test for the difference in CAR
for(j in 1:6)
{
 b<-t.test(ConnectionResults[j,],CompaniesResults[j,],var.equal=FALSE,paired=FALSE, conf.level = 0.95)
 temp<-c(b$estimate[1],b$estimate[2],b$p.value,b$conf.int[1],b$conf.int[2])
 P<-cbind(P,temp)
}

#Export results to Excel
write.xlsx(data.frame(P), "Results_CAR.xlsx", col.names = TRUE, row.names = FALSE)

write.xlsx(data.frame(ConnectionResults), "Ind_Firm_NYSE_Speexch.xlsx", col.names = TRUE, row.names = FALSE)

#--------------------------------------------------------- OLS REGRESSION ------------------------------------------

regressionData <- read_excel("Regression.xlsx",9)

#CAR[-3,3]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [2])
#CAR[-1,1]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [3])
#CAR[0]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [4])
#CAR[0,1]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [5])

                                                                                 35
#CAR[0,2]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [6])
#CAR[0,3]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [7])
#CAR[0,4]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [8])
#CAR[0,5]
car<-as.matrix(regressionData [9])

speech_dummy<-as.matrix(regressionData [10])
mktcap<-as.matrix(regressionData [11])
lev<-as.matrix(regressionData [12])
roe<-as.matrix(regressionData [13])

#summarR.lm produces robust standard errors for the regression
reg<-lm(car ~ speech_dummy+mktcap+lev+roe)
summaryR.lm(reg)

                                                                                 36