Stockholm School of Economics
Bachelor’s Thesis in Finance, Spring 2017

                    Does Firm Size Matter?
     Measuring the Operational Performance Development in
                  Management Buyouts

                        Jesper Björkman* Helge Kalman**

                                    Abstract
This thesis seeks to identify the determinants of operational performance in management buyouts
(MBOs) and examine whether there are any differences in operational performance for MBOs of
different sizes. This is done by analyzing a novel data sample comprising 116 consecutive
Swedish MBOs using a linear regression model. We find that private equity (PE) backed MBOs
grow at a higher rate than non-PE backed MBOs, but have a negative impact on the operational
efficiency within the firm. Additionally, we find that a high management equity stake correlates
with a high operational efficiency development. However, the results reveal no differences in
operational performance depending on the size of the MBO, suggesting there is no optimal size
category in which an MBO can be particularly effective.

Keywords: Management Buyout, Operational Performance, Size, Private Equity
Tutor: Associate Professor Daniel Metzger, Department of Finance,
Stockholm School of Economics

Acknowledgements: We would like thank our tutor Daniel Metzger, Associate Professor at the
Department of Finance at the Stockholm School of Economics, for valuable guidance and input
in the writing of this thesis.

*23331@student.hhs.se
**23232@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents

1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 1
   1.1. Introduction to buyouts ............................................................................................................ 1
   1.2. Definitions and delimitations .................................................................................................... 3
2. Operational value generation in buyouts .................................................................................. 4
   2.1. Financial engineering ................................................................................................................ 5
   2.2. Governance .............................................................................................................................. 5
   2.3. Operational improvements ....................................................................................................... 6
   2.4. Size as a factor in value generation ............................................................................................ 7
   2.5. The value-add of management ownership ................................................................................. 8
3. Hypothesis development ........................................................................................................... 9
   3.1. Operating performance in MBOs of different sizes .................................................................. 9
  3.2. Difference in operating performance of PE backed and non-PE backed MBOs ..................... 10
  3.3. Size of management stake and its implications on the operating performance in MBOs.......... 10
   3.4. Difference in operating performance if the MBO is a secondary buyout ................................. 11
4. Methodology ............................................................................................................................ 13
   4.1. Choice of operating metrics and event window....................................................................... 13
   4.2. Peer group design ................................................................................................................... 13
   4.3. Data collection ....................................................................................................................... 16
     4.3.1. MBO dataset .................................................................................................................. 16
     4.3.2. Operating metrics ........................................................................................................... 18
      4.3.3. Control variables............................................................................................................. 18
   4.4. Regression model and statistical tests ...................................................................................... 19
   4.5. Robustness tests and limitations to the thesis .......................................................................... 20
5. Results and analysis................................................................................................................. 21
6. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................... 28
References ....................................................................................................................................... 31
Appendices ...................................................................................................................................... 34

                                        2
1. Introduction

1.1. Introduction to buyouts
Management buyouts “MBOs” and leveraged buyouts “LBOs” first emerged in the 1980s
(Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009) and have since played a crucial part in the shaping of today’s
economic landscape. An MBO refers to when the management of a company acquires the shares
in the company in which they are employed, thus buying out the existing shareholders. An MBO
is in theory very appealing for the management group participating in the transaction, considering
they as shareholders will be able to directly reap the rewards of the company’s potential success -
as opposed to when the management group is merely employed in the company. Thus, the upside
for the management is far greater post-buyout. A leveraged buyout is a financial transaction in
which the buying party, most often a private equity firm, uses the target’s assets as collateral to
support a large portion of debt financing. Since the acquiring party finances the transaction with a
significant amount of debt, the equity needed to be committed is lower, resulting in a leverage
effect on shareholder returns.
    Due to the large size of most buyouts, the management group is often not able to commit

                                                 1
the equity needed for a pure MBO . Instead, most MBOs are backed by a private equity firm that
wants to align the management’s interest with their own by investing alongside the incumbent
management team. Between 2007 and 2015, private equity buyout investments as a percentage of

      2
GDP in Sweden was the second highest out of all the European countries, surpassed only by

                                          3
Luxembourg (Invest Europe , 2016). Furthermore, the revenues generated by Swedish private
equity backed portfolio companies in 2013 corresponded to 8.4% of the GDP in Sweden

         4
(SVCA, 2015).
    Considering private equity plays such a major role in the Swedish economy, the area has
drawn wide media attention and its impact on different stakeholders has been extensively
researched. While most previous studies on the Swedish private equity market have focused on
the value creation of leveraged buyouts (see for example; Bergström et al., 2007), this study
examines the operational performance development within management buyouts. Although
previous research suggests that management buyouts are especially effective in improving the
operational performance by reducing agency costs (see for example; Jensen, 1986; Wright et al.,

1 A pure MBO is what the authors refer to when a company is bought solely by the management team.
2 Buyout investments as a percentage of GDP by location of the portfolio company, rather than the location of the
PE firm.
3 ”Invest Europe, formerly known as EVCA, is the association representing Europe’s private equity, venture capital
and infrastructure sectors, as well as their investors.”; https://www.investeurope.eu/
4 ”SVCA - The Swedish Private Equity and Venture Capital Association is the industry body and public policy
advocate for the private equity and venture capital industry in Sweden.”; https://www.svca.se/
                                        1
1994; Cuny and Talmor, 2007), there is limited research on how MBOs perform depending on
firm size and the equity stake acquired by the management - which is the focal point of this study.
A dataset of 116 Swedish MBOs between 2005 and 2012 is constructed and benchmarked against
peer groups, matched by industry and sales, in order to answer the following research questions:

    1. Do management buyouts of different sizes experience different operational performance development post-
        buyout?
    2. Does the presence of a private equity firm affect the operational performance development in management
        buyouts?
    3. Do management buyouts where the incumbent management acquires a higher equity ownership result in
         better operational performance development?

Since the MBOs are benchmarked against industry peers, the descriptive statistics will also give
an indication as to whether management buyouts perform better than their respective industry
peers.
    Whereas previous studies on the operational performance development of management
buyouts have mainly been conducted in the U.S. and the U.K. (see for example; Kaplan, 1989;
Wright et al., 1994; Singh 1990), this study sheds light on how management buyouts in Sweden
perform. Evidence on the operational performance of MBOs on the Swedish market is insightful
considering the corporate ownership structure in Sweden differs from that of the U.S. and the
U.K. Swedish companies are to a larger extent family-controlled and with much less dispersed
corporate ownership (Faccio and Lang, 2002), why the ex-ante agency costs in theory are lower
(Vinten, 2007). Since a reduction of agency costs through the alignment of shareholder and
management interests is considered to be a pivotal source of value creation in management
buyouts (Jensen, 1986; Wright et al., 1994; Cuny and Talmor, 2007), the performance of Swedish
MBOs could therefore be different from that of MBOs in other geographies. This theory is in
line with the reasoning of Meuleman et al. (2009) and Schulze et al. (2001), who argue that
improvement gains attributed to a reduction of agency costs may be limited to companies with
low ownership concentration prior to buyout. An additional benefit of studying the Swedish
market is the availability and coherence of accounting data, since it minimizes the risk of selection
biases in the data which could skew the results.
    The study contributes to existing literature on management buyouts and industry
practitioners by providing recent evidence on the post operational performance development of
MBOs in Sweden in relation to industry peers, finding that management buyouts grow faster than

                                        2
their respective peers, but perform worse in operational efficiency development. A high portion
of management equity ownership is found to have a positive impact on operational efficiency,
while MBOs that are backed by a private equity firm perform worse than industry peers in terms
of operational efficiency but better in terms of sales growth. Because of these results, we presume
that different buyers in management buyouts likely employ different value creation strategies.
MBOs where the incumbent management acquires a large equity stake focus on improving the
company’s operational efficiency, while PE backed buyouts focus on growth to a larger extent.
This could provide support to the notion that PE firms today in general have different strategies
for value creation, in comparison to during the inception of leveraged buyouts, considering Phan
and Hill (1995) find that there is a larger focus on efficiency than growth in LBOs between 1986
and 1989. No clear conclusion regarding how MBOs of different sizes perform in relation to
each other can be drawn - although the results indicate that large MBOs perform better in
operational efficiency, while small MBOs perform better in sales growth.

1.2. Definitions and delimitations
To provide readers with a necessary understanding of the main concepts referred to throughout
the study, following is a list with brief explanations of how each concept is defined and delimited.

   i. A Management buyout has been defined in this study as a transaction where the incumbent
       management team acquires an outspoken stake in the company they manage, similar to
        the definition used by Singh (1990). This definition is also in line with the one used by the

                                                                   5
       global transaction database provider MergerMarket. Other alternative MBO transactions
       (e.g. Management Buy-In, Buy-In Management Buyout) have been excluded from the
        sample data and not taken into specific consideration within the study.
  ii. Management stake is defined as the percentage of total equity within the company that the
       incumbent management possesses immediately after the acquisition has occurred. The
       calculation of management stake is mainly based on management’s (e.g. CEO, CFO and
        COO) stake, but broadened in certain cases to include leading executives active within the
       company if the management stake is not explicitly mentioned in the transaction press
        releases or annual report. Management stake do not include options or similar derivatives
        and benefits. Only full equity ownership post transaction has been considered a part of
       the management’s stake in the company.

5 ”MergerMarket is a global provider of corporate financial news, intelligence and analysis.”;
http://mergermarketgroup.com/
                                        3
 iii. A private equity backed MBO is defined as a transaction where a financial sponsor has
       acquired a significant stake in the target company in conjunction with the company’s
       management. The definition of financial sponsors is delimited to private equity (PE)
        firms and venture capital (VC) firms.
 iv. A secondary buyout (SBO) refers to when the target company was previously owned by a
       financial sponsor, and a new financial sponsor together with the management team
        acquires a stake in the target company.
  v. Size is defined in regards to sales. Delimitations on size, further described in the
         methodology section of the thesis, are based on sales at the year of the buyout.
  vi. Operational growth is defined as the firm’s compounded annual growth rate of sales (sales
        CAGR). Calculation of this metric is presented in appendix table A2.
 vii. Operational efficiency is defined using the following common accounting metrics: EBITDA
       margin, EBIT margin and return on total assets (ROA). How these metrics are calculated
        is presented in table A2 in the appendix.
viii. Adjusted operational performance is the difference between the operational performance
       development of the MBOs in comparison to their respective industry peers. Excess
       operational performance or abnormal return is used synonymously to adjusted
       operational performance throughout the study.

2. Operational value generation in buyouts

                                                                                                                     6
Considering a vast majority of all MBO transactions are backed by a PE sponsor , in a so called
leveraged buyout, it is crucial to understand the value generation process in LBOs in order to
hypothesize effectively about the operational performance development in MBOs.
    The general consensus on value creation in buyouts is that they exhibit excess operational
performance development in relation to industry peers, which is especially in management
buyouts (Cumming et al., 2007; Kaplan, 1989; Wright et al., 1996; Acharya and Kehoe, 2008;
Singh, 1990). Cuny and Talmor (2007) provide empirical insight into why it could be optimal to
consider a private equity buyout of the firm prior to commencing an operational turnaround in
an underperforming business, even though the current management would likely be able to bring
about the same operational changes. Firstly, a private equity buyout allows for the exploration of
all feasible turnaround plans, including replacement of top management, without tension between
the board and management. Secondly, private equity can generate stronger managerial incentives

6 In our sample of 116 Swedish MBOs, 89 are PE backed.

                                        4
which result in a greater inclination for the current management team to provide information
regarding the turnaround opportunities within the firm, which leads to more effective turnaround
strategies (Cuny and Talmor, 2007).
    The value generation processes in buyout transactions can be divided into three key areas;
financial, governance, and operational engineering (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). During the
emergence of leveraged- and management buyouts in the 1980s, financial and governance
engineering were particularly prevalent as sources of operational value generation, but in recent
times there has been a shift towards operational engineering as a main source of value creation
(Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009; A.T. Kearney, 2014; Brigl et al., 2012).

2.1. Financial engineering
Jensen (1986) as well as Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) identify leverage as a major source of value
creation in buyouts, which can be categorized under financial engineering. An ideal LBO target is
typically a company with low fixed costs and with a stable free cash flow generation. Hence, in
most LBO targets pre-buyout there are significant risks of the agency costs related to free cash
flow that Jensen (1986) present. However, by levering up the company and forcing it to support
principal and interest payments on debt, managers within the company will be pressured to limit
excessive spending, thus mitigating the free cash flow agency costs (Jensen, 1986). However,
considering that the risk for financial distress costs and bankruptcy significantly increases with
high leverage, there is a tradeoff regarding the optimal level of debt in the buyout company,
which participants in buyout transactions need to take into careful consideration. Additionally,
due to the tax deductibility of interest payments in most jurisdictions, there are tax benefits of
using higher leverage, which PE firms exploit.

2.2. Governance
In addition to financial engineering, Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) identify governance as a key
area of value generation within portfolio companies, referring to the active ownership role PE
firms take in their portfolio companies. For example, PE firms are to a larger extent than other
owners unsentimental about replacing management within portfolio companies that perform
poorly. Considering the typically short investment horizon of 3-5 years, there is simply no room
for poor decision making capabilities (Rogers et. al, 2002; Gadiesh and MacArthur, 2008; Kaplan
and Strömberg, 2009). Cornelli and Karakas (2008) find that LBO targets experience a higher
turnover of CEOs and directors, and that the board size of public companies is immensely
reduced once a public company is taken private in an LBO transaction. These results are in line

                                        5
with a study made by Acharya and Kehoe (2008), who find that the CEO (CFO) are 39% (33%)
likely to be replaced within the first 100 days after deal completion. Corporate governance as a
key category of value creation in buyouts is reinforced in a study by Guo et al. (2011), who find
that the improvement in operating cash flows post-buyout is higher in firms where the CEO has
been replaced at, or soon after, the completion of the deal.
    Moreover, much like in management buyouts, PE firms performing leveraged buyouts
recognize the importance of aligning the interests between management and the shareholders,
which is why key managers are often either required or encouraged to co-invest alongside the PE
firm by making a significant equity contribution (Acharya and Kehoe 2008; Kaplan and
Strömberg, 2009). For example, Phan and Hill (1995) find that the average management equity
ownership increased from 14.2% to 35.7% after a leveraged buyout. The increased management
equity stake results in both potential upside, should the company perform well, as well as
potential downside if the company performs poorly. Since private equity investments are highly
illiquid, managers that invest in the company will also hold a more long-term view, which
mitigates the risk of earnings management in order to reach short-term performance goals
(Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). Other possible ways of aligning the interests of the management
with those of the PE firm’s include participation in incentive schemes directly linked to the
portfolio company’s long-term performance, such as option programs and discretionary bonuses.
    Furthermore, Acharya and Kehoe (2008) find that PE firms spend substantial amounts of
time working with the management of their portfolio companies - a majority having board
meetings at least once per month in addition to frequent informal contact with the CEO.
    The notion that private equity firms generate value through the use of proper managerial
discipline is supported by the findings of Rogers et al. (2002), who studied over 2,000 PE
transactions over a ten-year period. In contrast to public companies, the management in privately
owned companies never have to divide their attention between short-term quarterly results and
loosely defined long-term targets. For example, PE firms make sure the management within their
portfolio companies focuses all their efforts on a few key strategic objectives (Rogers et al., 2002).
Jones (1992) and Wright et al. (1992) find that managers performing an MBO implement
organizational restructurings in addition to engage in efforts to change accounting control
systems post-buyout.

2.3. Operational improvements
Today, much of the operational value creation in LBO transactions stem from the industry
expertise and input provided by the PE firms. Following this, there have been more PE hires

                                        6
with backgrounds in management consulting and other professions with operational industry
expertise, instead of the historically typical hires with experience in financial engineering from e.g.
investment banking and corporate development. (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009; A.T. Kearney,
2014; Brigl et al., 2012). Acharya and Kehoe (2008) divide the value creating initiatives into two
main categories; productivity and organic growth. Examples of productivity improvements
include supply chain efficiency, overhead cost reduction as well as working capital reduction.
Organic growth initiatives include e.g. review of pricing, identifying new channels, products and
geographies in addition to identification of new customers where the company is already present
(Gadiesh and MacArthur, 2008; Acharya and Kehoe, 2008).
    Other ways PE firms can add value to their portfolio companies is by identifying and
evaluating attractive investment opportunities (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). PE firms are
known to consolidate industries by making bolt-on acquisitions to their portfolio companies, thus
growing inorganically.

2.4. Size as a factor in value generation
There is limited research on the potential differences in operational performance development of
leveraged and management buyouts of different sizes. However, Wright et al. (1996) write that
smaller and larger buyouts are more prone to failure than medium-sized buyouts. Moreover, size
has empirically been proven to affect the governance and financial structure of both U.K. and
U.S. buyouts (Singh, 1990; Wright et al., 1994). For example, financial institutions are less likely
to be present on the board of small MBOs and small MBOs are more likely to use lower leverage
than large ones (Wright et al., 1994). Turner (1983) write that small firms may in theory be more
receptive to structural changes than large firms, considering the fact that they exhibit less
organizational inertia. Additionally, smaller firms could possibly respond faster to disruptive
innovation considering they have less formalization and fewer organizational levels (Turner,
1983). Considering corporate governance is such an important area for the value creation within

           7
buyouts , the findings of Turner (1983) imply that management, at least in theory, has higher
chances of successfully implementing key strategic changes in smaller firms. In conclusion, the
findings on the impact of size within buyouts are limited, in particular within MBOs, which is
why this thesis aims to shed light on the area.

7 See section 2.2. “Governance” for an in-depth discussion regarding corporate governance.

                                        7
2.5. The value-add of management ownership
Cuny and Talmor (2007) write that changes in ownership structure, especially in MBOs, are used
to exploit what is referred to as governance arbitrage. By increasing management ownership,
agency costs common in public corporations, such as managerial entrenchment and ineffective
internal controls, could be mitigated to some extent (Cuny and Talmor, 2007). Wright et al.
(1994) provide arguments as to why management buyouts may result in more effective corporate
governance and incentive alignment. One aspect of higher equity stakes held by the management
team is that horizontal control becomes more prominent within the firm, particularly amongst
the managers participating in the MBO, rather than only vertical monitoring which is common in
many organizations (Wright et al., 1994). Moreover, Jensen (1986) argues that public-to-private
buyouts can reduce agency costs related to free cash flow. Further empirical evidence on buyouts
as a way of improving corporate governance and managerial incentives is presented by Wright et
al. (1992) and Palepu (1990) for the U.K. and U.S. markets respectively.
    One of the reasons why buyouts historically exhibited higher operational performance gains
is that many of the buyouts from earlier periods had poor pre-buyout performance (Guo et al.,
2011). When evaluating possible operational outperformance of management buyouts in relation
to peers it is important to consider the risk of earnings management prior to acquisition. There is
a serious risk that the incumbent management performing the MBO act in their own best interest
rather than that of the shareholders’, by understating the company earnings prior to making a
buyout bid - thus being able to acquire the company at a lower price. Even though company
managers generally approach investment bankers to perform a fairness opinion and value the
company, considering the valuation of the company is based on accounting metrics, management
may attempt to depress the pre-buyout earnings (DeAngelo, 1986). This would in turn result in
an overstatement of operational performance development post-buyout in relation to industry
peers. However, DeAngelo (1986) surprisingly find no evidence of earnings management in
MBOs, though the reliability of the results has been criticized (see for example; Perry and
Williams, 1994). In contrast to DeAngelo (1986), Perry and Williams (1994) provide statistically
significant evidence of negative earnings manipulation in the year preceding the management
buyout announcement.

                                        8
3. Hypothesis development

3.1. Operating performance in MBOs of different sizes
Considering the impact of size on the operational performance in MBOs is ambiguous, below is a
discourse on the arguments for operational outperformance of large and small MBOs.

Arguments for operational outperformance within large MBOs
It is plausible to assume that there are more possibilities for implementation of structural changes
and divestments of unprofitable business units within mature and large firms. Considering large
firms have been shown to have higher managerial hubris in regards to corporate takeovers than
small firms (Roll, 1986; Moeller et al., 2004), it is likely that the room for margin improvement is
higher in large firms. An additional argument as to why large companies could experience higher
operational efficiency development is that they could reap the benefits of economies of scale as
they become larger. This is especially true within industries characterized by high fixed cost, such
as manufacturing. The agency costs of free cash flow presented by Jensen (1986) are also
expected to be more prominent in large firms since they have a higher free cash flow generation
than small firms. Considering that agency problems related to free cash flow in theory are
reduced post-buyout, it is reasonable to hypothesize that large MBOs exhibit better operational
performance development than small MBOs, with the exception of sales CAGR.

Arguments for operational outperformance within small MBOs
Considering the corporate structure within small firms tends to be less complex and bureaucratic,
the likelihood of effective restructurings is higher in small firms (Turner, 1983). Another crucial
aspect to be taken into account is the equity stake held by management in small and large firms,
considering a high management ownership stake has been shown by some research to correlate
with high operational performance development (Cuny and Talmor, 2007; Wright et al., 1996;
Lichtenberg and Siegel 1990; Thompson et al., 1992; Phan and Hill, 1995). Demsetz and Lehn
(1985) find that management ownership is higher within small firms than large, which suggests
that smaller firms possess a high probability of outperforming large firms. However, we
hypothesize that managers in small firms focus to a greater extent on a buy-and-build strategy
than managers in large firms, which draws attention away from cost-control and efficiency within
the organizations. Consequently, as discussed above, larger firms are expected to focus on
operational efficiency and margin expansion to a larger extent than small firms. Also, we
recognize that smaller firms are naturally expected to grow at a higher rate than large firms

                                        9
considering a small increase in absolute values will have a higher percentage impact on small
firms.
    The discussion above yields the following hypotheses:

        H1 a): Small MBOs will exhibit a higher excess sales CAGR than large MBOs
         H1 b) Small MBOs will exhibit a lower excess operational efficiency performance development than large
     MBOs

3.2. Difference in operating performance of PE backed and non-PE backed MBOs
The operational value creation of LBOs has been previously researched, and the general
consensus is that the post-buyout operating performance of LBO targets increases (Smith 1990;
Jensen 1989; Kaplan 1989), although some studies suggest that private equity buyouts merely
transfer wealth from one stakeholder to another (Perry and Williams 1994; Phalippou, 2009).
Vinten (2007) presents evidence that contradicts previous studies regarding positive operational
value creation from PE ownership. Within the Danish market, Vinten (2007) finds that during
the time period 1991-2004, PE backed buyouts significantly underperform industry peers.
However, to the best of our knowledge, no study on management buyouts has included both PE
backed and non-PE backed MBOs in their dataset.
    Following the discussion on operational value generation in buyouts in section 2, it can be
concluded that operational performance development clearly plays a big role in PE firms’ strategy
to generate adequate returns. Although there is no clear consensus regarding PE firms’ ability to
generate excess operational performance within their portfolio companies, we hypothesize that
PE backed MBOs will generate both a higher sales CAGR as well as better operational efficiency
development than non-PE backed MBOs.

       H2 a) PE backed MBOs will experience a higher excess sales CAGR than non-PE backed MBOs
       H2 b): PE backed MBOs will experience higher development in excess operational efficiency performance
       than non-PE backed MBOs

3.3. Size of management stake and its implications on the operating performance
   in MBOs
Some previous research supports the notion that MBOs successfully enhance the operating
performance of companies (Kaplan, 1989; Cuny and Talmor, 2007; Wright et al., 1996;
Lichtenberg and Siegel 1990; Thompson et al., 1992; Phan and Hill, 1995). For example,

                                       10
Thompson et al. (1992) find that the size of management’s equity stake is highly significant in
explaining the operational post-buyout performance in U.K. MBOs, and Phan and Hill (1995)
find that an increase in management ownership has an even higher impact on the operational
performance than increased debt in a study on large U.S. public-to-private buyouts. However,
Bergström et al. (2007) and Guo et al. (2011) surprisingly find no significant correlation between
a high management equity stake and excess operational performance in a Swedish and U.S.
context respectively. Although there is no clear evidence regarding the impact of management
ownership on the operational performance, most research suggests that a higher management
stake results in excess operational performance.
    In addition to the arguments presented in section 2.5, a higher management stake should in
theory incentivize managers to increase the operational performance and sales. Thus, we
hypothesize that the sales CAGR as well as operational efficiency performance will be higher in
MBOs where the incumbent management possesses a large equity stake post-buyout.

        H3 a) MBOs with a higher management stake will experience a higher excess sales CAGR
       H3 b): MBOs with a higher management stake will experience a higher development in excess
         operational efficiency performance

3.4. Difference in operating performance if the MBO is a secondary buyout
There has been a sharp increase in secondary buyouts in the past few years, (Bonini, 2015; Wang,
2012). Out of all the Swedish private equity buyouts in 2015, 30.7% of the firms were exited
through a secondary buyout, surpassed only by public offerings which accounted for 36.5% of
the divestments (Invest Europe, 2016). Although the prominence of SBOs is significant, the
economic rationale behind these transactions is still ambiguous (Bonini, 2015; Wang, 2012).
    Considering PE firms spend significant amounts of time working to improve the operations
of their portfolio companies, as presented in section 2.2, all operational improvement
opportunities should in theory already have been captured in the first buyout round, thus making
SBOs unattractive. Resolving agency problems within the buyout target in the first round should
result in substantial operational improvements (Wright et. al, 2009; Bonini, 2015), but since these
are one-off changes, the only additional value a PE firm can add in the second round is through
strategic initiatives and new investments (Bonini, 2015).
    However, Wang (2012) argues that although efficiency gains and value creation are likely to
have been captured in the primary buyout (PBO) there is no reason to believe that efficiency
gains in the secondary buyout cannot exist. Two arguments are presented to support this claim

                                       11
(Wang, 2012): First of all, it is possible that the original buyer did not realize the full efficiency
gains in the primary buyout. For example, if the PE firm participating in the PBO had to perform

                                  8
a so called “forced sell” , some key strategic initiatives may not have been fully implemented yet,
why the operational performance development in the PBO did not reach its full potential.
Secondly, PE firms have different industry expertise and sector specializations, why different PE
firms could add value to the portfolio companies in different maturity stages (Wang, 2012). For
example, the PE firm backing the PBO could be especially good at expanding the operations of
the company, while the PE firm backing the SBO could be especially good at minimizing costs
and working capital management.
     Bonini (2015) finds that primary buyouts significantly outperform their industry peers, while
the operational performance of secondary buyouts do not differ from their peers, which is in
contrast to the findings of Wang (2012), who does not find any clear differences across the
buyout rounds or the peer group. As presented by Bonini (2015), a major reason as to why the
results differ may be because Wang (2012) compares heterogeneous buyouts in the first and

                                                                                                     9
second round, while Bonini (2015) uses panel data for 163 companies . In line with the findings
of Bonini (2015), Eriksson and Wittgren (2014) also use panel data and find that second round
buyouts in the Nordic region underperform first round buyouts.
    In conclusion, there is no clear consensus on whether there is scope for excess operational
performance development in secondary buyout targets. However, we take the view of Bonini
(2015) and argue that most of the possible firm improvements are likely captured in the first
round. The scenario of a PE firm not being able to extract the majority of the possible efficiency
gains in the primary buyout is unlikely and ought to be an exception rather than the general case.
Thus, we hypothesize that MBOs that are secondary buyouts exhibit a lower sales CAGR and
operational efficiency performance development than other MBOs.

        H4 a) MBOs that are SBOs will experience a lower excess sales CAGR
       H4 b): MBOs that are SBOs will experience a lower development in excess operational efficiency
        performance

8 A “forced sell” is when a PE firm is forced to divest their portfolio company prematurely because of fund
constraints (Bonini, 2015). This could e.g. be when the PE firm needs to close the fund within a certain time frame
and distribute the remaining funds to their investors.
9 Equivalent to 326 buyouts on a stand-alone basis, since each company is subject to both a PBO and an SBO.

                                       12
4. Methodology

4.1. Choice of operating metrics and event window
When choosing which metrics to be used for measuring the operational performance in the
buyout sample we strove for comparability with previous research on buyouts. After having
examined some of the most cited papers within the subject of buyouts (see for example; Kaplan,
1989; Wright et al., 1996; Barber and Lyon 1996; Bergström et al., 2007), the following
accounting performance metrics were chosen: sales CAGR, change in EBITDA margin, change
in EBIT margin and change in ROA, where sales CAGR measures the growth, and the other
metrics measure the operational efficiency within the firm. How the metrics are calculated is
presented in appendix table A2. The operational metrics measure the difference in the year prior
to the buyout (t-1) and three years post-buyout (t+3).
    The choice of event window (t-1 to t+3) is in line with the approach of Kaplan (1989) and
Scellato and Ughetto (2013). Another approach would have been to only look at the difference
between the year prior to buyout and the year the company is divested once again. We recognize
two main issues in using the latter approach. Firstly, considering the incumbent management
does not always intend to sell the company within a certain time frame, in contrast to for example
a private equity firm, this would limit the sample of MBOs since many have not yet been exited.
Secondly, the approach of comparing the operational performance in the year prior to the MBO
with the performance three years afterwards is more common. By using another approach, the
comparability of the results would diminish.

4.2. Peer group design
Peer groups have been gathered for each buyout based on industry and size. This has been done
in order to adjust for variations across industries and isolate the determinants of excess
operational performance. Moreover, it allows for an analysis of whether the MBOs experience
abnormal returns in relation to industry peers. When matching a peer group to each individual

                                                                      10
MBO in the sample data, we have chosen to use the NACE  code system and then match by
sales. The following framework was used for assigning peers to each buyout:
    1. Based in Sweden
    2. Minimum 50 MSEK in revenue
    3. Same 2-digit NACE code
    4. Accounting data available for the entire event window

10 The NACE code system is a statistical classification of economic activities within the European community;
http://ec.europa.eu/
                                       13
    5. Not included in the MBO sample
    6. Matched by sales

                                                                                             11                     12
The peer group companies were collected using the databases Amadeus   and Datastream ,
which provide extensive data for private and listed companies. Using the above framework, this
yielded a peer group of 2,560 firms.
    Each buyout company has been given a two-digit NACE code definition (see table A3 in the
appendix for an overview of the NACE code main group distribution). Barber and Lyon (1996)
state that the most common method of creating a peer group is by using either a two digit or
four-digit industry definition. It can be argued that using a two-digit definition rather than a
three- or four-digit definition (which is the maximum) creates a wide peer group, but according
to Barber and Lyon (1996), no additional explanatory power is provided by using more than a
two-digit definition when creating peer groups.

                              13                 14
    The databases Valu8  and Retriever  were used to collect the NACE codes for each
company and were cross checked against each other. In a few instances, no official NACE code
could be found, and in those cases an appropriate NACE code was assigned using the authors’
own discretion. Two other issues were identified when giving the sample companies a certain
industry code: Firstly, many of the companies within the buyout sample are holding companies,
therefore either having no industry code at all or the code of “Activities of head office” and
“Management consultancy activities”. Secondly, some companies have multiple different
subsidiaries and operations within their corporation, giving them suitability for a variety of
different industry codes. To tackle these problems, the NACE code for the main operating
subsidiary was used, thus giving companies the industry code that is most suitable for their
respective business model. This approach is in line with that used by Bergström et al. (2007), who
encountered similar issues.
    The peer group was held constant throughout the entire event window, which is in line with
the approach taken by Barber and Lyon (1996), i.e. the peer groups do not include companies
that have gone bankrupt. This introduces a risk of survivorship bias amongst the peers, which we
recognize as a limitation. However, the potential bias is likely to be small considering the peer

11 Amadeus is a Bureau Van Dijk database containing comprehensive information for European companies;
https://amadeus.bvdinfo.com/
12 Datastream is a Thomson Reuters database; https://www.thomsonreuters.com/
13 ”Valu8 provides intelligent tools for screening and analyzing Nordic company data” http://www.valu8group.com/
13 SDC Platinum provides data intelligence globally for the financial industry; https://www.thomsonreuters.com/
14 Retriever is a Swedish database containing financial statements for Swedish companies; https://www.retriever.se/

                                       14
group is large and since peers with poor operational performance development during the event
window are still included.
    As the study measures size as the main variable in the regression, we recognize the
importance of using size matching in our analysis. One peer group was created for each buyout
by matching at the 2-digit NACE code level and then identifying the closest 10 peers by sales at
the year of the buyout. If the 2-digit level contained fewer than 10 peers, the framework was
stretched to look at the NACE-code main industry level (1-digit), and then matched to each

          15
buyout . Out of the 10 firms comprising each peer group, the median value for each operating
metric has been used in order to mitigate the risk of extreme values within the peer group.
    Barber and Lyon (1996) argue that there are benefits of using peers that have similar pre-
event performance, since this makes the analysis more synchronized with the market and reduces

                                  16
the impact of mean reversion  in the data. Without these adjustments, there is a risk that the
results may be biased for certain firms within the control group. However, in line with Bergström
et al. (2007), we have decided to exclude this as criteria when creating the peer group. With a
large enough sample, the pre-event performance should have minimal impact on the median that
is used as a proxy. By using stricter criteria such as the one regarding synchronization of pre-
event performance, the risk of minimizing the peer group sample increases, whereas NACE

                                     17
codes, geography and similar size  have been prioritized higher than pre-event synchronization.
    After creating the industry peer group, adjusted operational performance have been created
for each MBO in order to measure the improvement in operational performance in relation to
industry peers and isolate the determinants of operational performance. This eliminates any
industry specific events during the time period, and reveals the potential abnormal returns that
are realized through a management buyout.
    Furthermore, by dividing the companies into different NACE codes and creating a dummy
variable that represents the main NACE code industry, it is possible to see if there is a correlation
between successful MBOs and certain industries.
     Considering the operational performance of financial and real estate companies are evaluated
using different accounting metrics than other industries, these companies have been excluded
from the buyout sample, reducing the buyout sample from 121 to 116 MBOs.

15 The framework was only stretched in a few cases, since only two industries contained fewer than 10 peers
(“Mining and quarrying” and “Public administration and defence; compulsory social security”).
16 Pre-event matching reduces the risk of mean reversion, which is when the operating metrics revert back to the
mean after having been at a temporarily high or low level. For example, if the company at the start of the event
window has a temporarily high performance, a researcher might find that the company performs poorly, when the
company is in fact only reverting back to its mean in a predictable manner (Barber and Lyon, 1996).
17 Peers have similar size in terms of sales.

                                       15
4.3. Data collection

4.3.1. MBO dataset
When selecting which buyouts to include in the MBO dataset, the first thing to decide upon is
which definition to use for an MBO. In broad consideration, there are two versions of an MBO
to choose between. These are pure MBOs and “regular” MBOs. A pure MBO is when the
management of a company is the only participant in the transaction. There are no additional
investors buying shares in the company and no financial sponsor actively engaged from the buyer
side of the deal. The other, more common version, is when the management team is participating
in the transaction from the buy-side, but does not have to be the only buyer. This is a much
broader definition, and includes, but is not limited to, PE backed acquisitions. Within this
definition, the management can take on many different management stakes. It could be a
majority or a minority stake, but is regardless defined as an MBO.
    This broader definition of MBOs is the definition we have chosen to use, and is based on
two primary aspects:

    1. Sample size and data accessibility – The definition of pure MBOs described above is quite
       rare, and there have been a limited number of pure MBOs in Sweden, why the MBO
       sample size would be reduced significantly should this definition of an MBO have been
       used. Furthermore, most relevant databases do not keep track of pure MBOs, which
       makes it much more time consuming and difficult to extract from a larger data sample.

                     18
       Bloomberg  is an example of a database that keeps track of pure MBOs, while SDC
       Platinum and MergerMarket do not.
   2. Coherency with previous research – While looking at previous research on MBOs, we
       have found that most studies use the broader version. In fact, many MBO studies use
       sample data that consists almost exclusively of PE backed MBOs.

As the study examines operational performance and improvements, the financial data have been
collected for a five-year period. That is, one year prior to the acquisition and three years after the
acquisition (t-1 to t+3). Based on this, MBOs have been collected between the years 2005 and
2012. The latest year is 2012 since it is impossible to collect data for three years post-buyout for
transactions later than 2012, due to the 2016 annual reports not yet having been made publicly
available for the buyout companies. Buyouts earlier than 2005 are difficult to locate relevant data

18
  Bloomberg is a firm providing news, information and analytics worldwide; www.bloomberg.com/professional/
                                       16
for. Upon examining other studies, it can be concluded that other studies performed have used
similar time frames for their respective buyout samples.
    The MBOs used in the study have been collected using a combination and cross checking of
three different databases; MergerMarket, SDC Platinum and Bloomberg - all having detailed
records of the Swedish buyout market.
    Certain adjustments were deemed necessary in order to improve the sample data and its
reliability. Firstly, adjustments were made to eliminate those companies that for a particular
reason had no (t-1) or (t+3) values available. Examples of when companies had to be excluded
due to lack of data include companies that reported their group figures in a foreign parent
company prior to the buyout. Other examples include: (1) when the company was bought by a
foreign company during the three-year period after the MBO had taken place, resulting in the
group data being made available only in the foreign parent company, and (2) when the company
was acquired and merged into another business during the three year period. We identify the
unavailability of data for certain companies as a potential source of selection bias. However, we
did not encounter that either large or small firms have data available to a larger extent than the
other, which reduces our concerns of potential bias regarding the availability of accounting data.
    Secondly, all companies that have gone into bankruptcy during the time period were
excluded from the data sample. We recognize that this introduces a bias in the results, as it only
affects companies that have performed poorly, as there is no exclusion of companies that have
grown remarkably.
    Thirdly, adjustments were made to eliminate companies that had sales below 50 MSEK
(approx. 5 MEUR), as they have been deemed to be too small to be a part of the analysis.
Healthcare companies, for example, can be very large although having little current revenue, but
for coherency reasons, all companies below 50 MSEK have been excluded from the sample data.
    In line with Kaplan (1990) and Smith (1990) we have restricted the final dataset to consist

                                                               19
of firm MBOs rather than divisional MBOs , considering complete divisional accounting data is
seldom reported, even amongst public companies (Lichtenberg and Siegel, 1990). We recognize
the lack of divisional MBOs in the dataset as a limitation and potential source of bias towards
poorly performing MBOs, considering empirical evidence suggest divisional MBOs experience
higher operational improvements than firm MBOs (Singh, 1990; Muscarella and Vetsuypens,
1990). Singh (1990) suggests that the main reasons divisional MBOs experience higher sales
growth and increases in operational improvement is because these MBOs exhibit the highest
change in governance and manager incentives post-transaction.

19 A divisional MBO is when a division of the company is divested to its responsible management team, whereas a
firm MBO is when the entire firm is sold.
                                       17
4.3.2. Operating metrics
The financial data for the MBOs have been hand-collected from the companies’ financial
statements. Tracking the companies post-buyout proved to be a difficult and time consuming
process, but was made possible by thoroughly scrutinizing the annual reports for the
organizational number of each new parent company post-transaction. In total, over 1,000+
annual reports were downloaded from the Retriever database. For some of the more recent
transactions, the database Valu8 was used to collect the necessary accounting data, in order to
reduce the time spent hand-collecting data. In cases where Valu8 were used, the data was checked
at random with the respective annual reports to make sure there were no errors.
     In a few cases, a few of the buyout companies changed fiscal reporting year either in the year
prior to transaction (t-1) or three years afterwards (t+3), resulting in a shorter or longer fiscal year
than the standard 12 months. In these cases, adjustments have been made to enhance the
comparability. This was done by dividing the number of months reported and multiplying by 12,
thus simulating what the results would have looked like on a 12 month-basis. Although this does
not give a completely accurate picture of how the company performed, it gives a fairer picture of
the operational performance than a shorter or longer reported period than 12 months.
Additionally, when the average assets were unavailable for the calculation of ROA, the outgoing
balance of total assets was used.

4.3.3. Control variables
In addition to collecting accounting data for the operational metrics, data for control variables
were collected in order to test all of the hypotheses. The collection of data on the management
equity stake was collected using MergerMarket, annual reports and press releases. In total, 71
observations were collected for the management stake out of the total sample of 116 MBOs.
Information regarding if the MBOs were backed by a private equity firm or not have been
collected mainly using MergerMarket, SDC Platinum and Bloomberg. If these databases have not
contained the relevant information, annual reports from Retriever or press releases have been
used. The same sources were used to collect information regarding if the MBOs were secondary
buyouts. In total, the dataset contains 89 PE backed buyouts, and 30 secondary buyouts.

                                       18
4.4. Regression model and statistical tests
Descriptive statistics
Two primary statistical tests have been performed, apart from the regressions. These are
descriptive statistics and Welch’s t-test (see tables B3-B6 in the appendix for Welch’s t-test).
These tests have been constructed in a way so that the results will give preliminary results and an
indication of what the regression models seek to test. A size dummy, containing 50% of the
largest MBOs by sales at the year of the buyout, defined as “large” and the 50% smallest MBOs
defined as “small”, was used as a base for the descriptive statistics to get a first indication as to
whether hypothesis 1, regarding size differences in MBOs, is true. Other variables were also
created in order to explain the other hypotheses.
    The different operating metrics used to define operational performance and value creation
was segmented into two categories, raw data and adjusted data. This creates a more descriptive
picture of the performance of the sample data based on the independent variables, both in raw
format as well as adjusted for industry effects, creating an adjusted variable that represents
abnormal returns.
     Through this, we receive key statistics of the different independent variables:

Table 1. Descriptive statistics for independent variables

Large MBOs N Mean Median S.D.
  Size 58 1 384.9 645.7 1 830.2
  PE backed 50 1 482.1 658.2 1 946.6
  SBO 21 2 029.7 782.7 2 531.5
  Management Stake 35 23.8% 18.3% 23.2%

Small MBOs N Mean Median S.D.
  Size 58 150.7 145.0 61.4
  PE backed 39 156.5 149.6 64.7
  SBO 9 172.9 161.1 65.9
  Management stake 36 42.3% 26.0% 34.0%
 The table presents descriptive statistics for independent variables, distributed over large and small MBO
 sub-groups. All variables refer to the sales (MSEK) at the year of the buyout, except management stake
 which refers to the percentege of total equity held by management post-buyout.

Specification of regression model
In order to test each hypothesis, linear regressions have been performed. Certain differences exist
between the different regressions, all of which will be described in greater detail below. The
specifications of the regressions that will be run to test the hypotheses are the following:

                                       19
Specification 1

Specification 2

Please refer to table A1 in the appendix for a description of each variable in the regression
models. Since we have four different metrics for measuring improved operational performance,
sales CAGR, change in EBITDA margin, change in EBIT margin and change in ROA, we need
to perform at least four different regression to test the dependent variables in regards to each
metric.
     The main variable that is of interest in the thesis and in the regression is the dummy variable
for size. As seen in the formula, simultaneously as we test the correlation between different
performance metrics together with the dummy variable for size, we also test the influence of
other independent variables. The first of these variables is whether the transaction was PE
backed, second being the percentage of the total equity that the management owns post-buyout,
thirdly whether the transaction was a secondary buyout, and lastly a control variable for the
industry in which the company operates.
     In total, 71 observations were collected for the management stake out of the total sample of
116 MBOs. This minimizes the sample substantially when performing the regression, why two
separate regressions have been performed as to not neglect the value of a larger buyout sample.

4.5. Robustness tests and limitations to the thesis
The data contains a number of outliers for the different operational metrics used that could skew
the results of the analysis. Previous studies have handled this in different ways. One way is to use
a trimming method of the data set by plotting the different observations and manually excluding
observations that are outliers based on certain specified criteria. Another potential way of dealing
with this is by using a logarithmic function to neutralize outliers and create a normalized
distribution of the sample data.
    We have chosen not to correct for any outliers in the main regressions and descriptive
statistics. This as it has been verified that no incorrect data exists in the buyout sample, and after
performing different robustness test, we could not find any large improvement in regards to
significance or explanatory power by performing adjustments to the data set. However, as a

                                                                              th         th
robustness check, a regression with winsorized variables at the 5  and 95  percentiles have been

                                       20
                                                                                 20
included in the appendix nevertheless (see tables B1-B2 ). This method of treating outliers is in
line with Barber and Lyon (1996).
     In order to test the data and its significance, different tests have been performed in order to
analyze its reliability. Firstly, a multicollinearity test was performed to evaluate the correlation and
the dependency of different variables within the regression model. Although a tendency to
correlation could be seen between certain variables at first sight, by performing a variance
inflation factor analysis (VIF), it could be concluded that no tendency to multicollinearity existed
in the data sample among the dependent variables. None of the variables, or the total mean,
exceeded the value 4, which is commonly the value when one might suspect that there could be a
multicollinearity problem within the dataset (O’brien, 2007). The results from the VIF analysis
are presented in tables C3-C4 in the appendix.
    Tests for heteroscedasticity have also been performed, both through scattering and Breusch-
Pagan testing. No noticeable problem was found with the data in regards to heteroscedasticity,
but robust regressions have nevertheless been made in order to adjust and correct for any
potential impact of this.
     We acknowledge that there might be certain issues and bias in regards to the accounting data
and sample selection. Firstly, we have only studied a certain time period as event window,
potentially creating misguiding results due to the typical investment horizon of 3-5 years of
private equity firms. To examine this further, one would need to do a robustness test and
evaluate the same operational metrics between inception and exit for all companies within the
sample data. Secondly, the study only measures a limited number of operational metrics that have
been deemed through research and literature to be the most prevalent. However, there are many
other metrics available, some of which previous studies have used as proxies for measuring the

                                     21
operational performance. ROIC  is an example of this. Thirdly, as the data has been hand-
collected manually, we have certified it ourselves that all accounting data is correct, although the
risk for human error cannot be fully disregarded.
     Through different tests and made analysis, we are confident that the potential biases in the
data ought to have a very minor impact on the results and not distort the regressions.

 5. Results and analysis

Tables 2-4 report the descriptive statistics and regression results.

20 The winsorized regressions have no major improvement in regards to the significance levels and results in
comparison to the untreated regressions.
21 ROIC stands for return on invested capital.

                                       21
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of operational performance metrics

                     Total sample Large sub-sample Small sub-sample PE backed Non-PE backed Large equity stake Small equity stake SBO Non-SBO
                     Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj. Raw Adj.
Sales CAGR
  N 116 116 58 58 58 58 89 89 27 27 36 36 35 35 30 30 86 86
  Mean 0.106 0.037 0.084 0.023 0.122 0.051 0.127 0.058 0.037 -0.033 0.106 0.041 0.108 0.041 0.055 -0.015 0.123 0.055
  S.D. 0.176 0.175 0.129 0.145 0.201 0.201 0.183 0.180 0.129 0.141 0.178 0.189 0.215 0.208 0.112 0.117 0.191 0.189
  Median 0.076 0.019 0.072 0.018 0.097 0.032 0.097 0.043 0.024 -0.039 0.069 0.032 0.073 -0.014 0.045 -0.032 0.097 0.048
  Max 1.150 1.025 0.385 0.629 1.150 1.025 1.150 1.025 0.381 0.205 0.686 0.629 1.150 1.025 0.403 0.321 1.150 1.025
  Min -0.201 -0.439 -0.115 -0.195 -0.201 -0.439 -0.164 -0.222 -0.201 -0.439 -0.201 -0.439 -0.164 -0.222 -0.150 -0.195 -0.201 -0.439
Δ EBITDA Margin
  N 116 116 58 58 58 58 89 89 27 27 36 36 35 35 30 30 86 86
  Mean -0.022 -0.010 -0.015 0.006 -0.031 -0.026 -0.028 -0.013 -0.003 0.001 0.006 0.009 -0.019 0.010 -0.028 -0.021 -0.020 -0.006
  S.D. 0.090 0.106 0.063 0.115 0.096 0.094 0.093 0.113 0.078 0.077 0.068 0.072 0.090 0.129 0.125 0.135 0.075 0.094
  Median -0.009 -0.004 -0.005 0.005 -0.013 -0.019 -0.013 -0.005 -0.005 -0.003 -0.005 0.013 -0.004 0.005 -0.014 -0.001 -0.006 -0.010
  Max 0.315 0.383 0.093 0.383 0.229 0.189 0.315 0.383 0.229 0.189 0.229 0.189 0.315 0.383 0.315 0.335 0.229 0.383
  Min -0.357 -0.361 -0.231 -0.361 -0.357 -0.346 -0.357 -0.361 -0.153 -0.155 -0.153 -0.155 -0.261 -0.252 -0.357 -0.361 -0.269 -0.250
Δ EBIT Margin
  N 116 116 58 58 58 58 89 89 27 27 36 36 35 35 30 30 86 86
  Mean -0.036 -0.028 -0.032 -0.019 -0.040 -0.037 -0.048 -0.038 0.003 0.007 0.005 0.008 -0.037 -0.016 -0.040 -0.040 -0.034 -0.024
  S.D. 0.106 0.117 0.078 0.120 0.116 0.115 0.106 0.121 0.100 0.099 0.086 0.088 0.102 0.129 0.137 0.144 0.094 0.107
  Median -0.021 -0.016 -0.011 -0.009 -0.029 -0.033 -0.026 -0.027 -0.014 -0.008 -0.012 -0.002 -0.020 -0.001 -0.002 -0.013 -0.026 -0.020
  Max 0.301 0.310 0.094 0.310 0.301 0.298 0.241 0.310 0.301 0.298 0.301 0.298 0.241 0.310 0.241 0.251 0.301 0.310
  Min -0.431 -0.476 -0.268 -0.476 -0.371 -0.354 -0.431 -0.476 -0.184 -0.188 -0.184 -0.188 -0.341 -0.336 -0.431 -0.476 -0.290 -0.286
Δ ROA Margin
  N 116 116 58 58 58 58 89 89 27 27 36 36 35 35 30 30 86 86
  Mean -0.088 -0.064 -0.079 -0.049 -0.097 -0.079 -0.107 -0.083 -0.026 -0.002 -0.050 -0.015 -0.099 -0.071 -0.068 -0.055 -0.095 -0.067
  S.D. 0.181 0.201 0.117 0.148 0.228 0.243 0.172 0.198 0.202 0.201 0.191 0.224 0.156 0.162 0.170 0.189 0.186 0.206
  Median -0.047 -0.052 -0.048 -0.026 -0.047 -0.069 -0.052 -0.061 -0.028 -0.008 -0.076 -0.021 -0.032 -0.040 -0.037 -0.028 -0.078 -0.071
  Max 0.356 0.498 0.212 0.304 0.356 0.498 0.237 0.498 0.356 0.387 0.356 0.498 0.023 0.271 0.237 0.498 0.356 0.387
  Min -0.835 -0.814 -0.432 -0.497 -0.835 -0.814 -0.835 -0.814 -0.432 -0.346 -0.432 -0.497 -0.681 -0.653 -0.681 -0.653 -0.835 -0.814
The table reports descriptive statistics for all independent variables related to the hypotheses. Descriptive statistics have also been created for the entire data sample of MBOs. Total sample represents the
entire dataset and are general descriptives of the data. Large & small sub-samples represent the size dummy and is the total data sample divided into one group for all large firms and one group for all small
firms. PE backed & non-PE backed contain descriptive statistics for all firms belonging to the respective category. Large and small equity stake is divided into two groups of the firms that contained relevant
shareholder data (71 firms in the sample). SBO & non-SBO is structured similarly to 'PE backed' and 'non-PE backed'.

                                                             22
Table 3. Regression 1 - all variables except management stake

                  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
 VARIABLES Sales     Sales CAGR      Delta     Delta EBITDA    Delta     Delta EBIT    Delta    Delta ROA
              CAGR       Adj.       EBITDA       Adj.        EBIT       Adj.       ROA       Adj.

 Size -0.0435 -0.0377 0.0259 0.0389* 0.0189 0.0298 0.0260 0.0403
               (0.0321) (0.0313) (0.0176) (0.0207) (0.0204) (0.0225) (0.0375) (0.0422)
 PE backed 0.110*** 0.117*** -0.0267 -0.0192 -0.0552** -0.0509** -0.106** -0.116**
               (0.0390) (0.0399) (0.0182) (0.0203) (0.0227) (0.0240) (0.0450) (0.0475)
 SBO -0.0896*** -0.0954*** -0.00751 -0.0186 0.00629 -0.00813 0.0530 0.0380
               (0.0312) (0.0318) (0.0252) (0.0288) (0.0287) (0.0314) (0.0404) (0.0451)
 Industry 0.00503*** 0.00394*** -0.000520 0.000317 -0.000498 0.000133 3.96e-05 0.00272
              (0.00143) (0.00147) (0.000800) (0.000873) (0.000955) (0.00101) (0.00179) (0.00210)
 Constant -0.0372 -0.0906*** -0.00173 -0.0165 0.00556 -0.00438 -0.0341 -0.0610
               (0.0310) (0.0323) (0.0233) (0.0238) (0.0278) (0.0280) (0.0507) (0.0535)

 Observations 116 116 116 116 116 116 116 116
 R-squared 0.206 0.178 0.035 0.038 0.051 0.042 0.059 0.066
The table presents the coefficients and robust standard errors (in parentheses) from a robust regression of the operational
performance change one year prior to buyout (t-1) and three years afterwards (t+3). Adj. refers to the adjusted changes in operating
performance of the MBOs in relation to their respective peer groups. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.

Table 4. Regression 2- all variables

                    (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
 VARIABLES Sales     Sales CAGR     Delta     Delta EBITDA    Delta     Delta EBIT    Delta    Delta ROA
                CAGR       Adj.      EBITDA       Adj.       EBIT       Adj.       ROA       Adj.

 Size -0.0218 -0.0182 0.0234 0.0453* 0.0142 0.0348 0.00198 0.0328
                 (0.0548) (0.0538) (0.0195) (0.0256) (0.0226) (0.0264) (0.0423) (0.0474)
 PE backed 0.154** 0.212** 0.0223 0.00629 0.0119 -8.39e-05 0.0623 0.0707
                 (0.0758) (0.0820) (0.0229) (0.0278) (0.0312) (0.0337) (0.0657) (0.0677)
 Management      0.0785 0.167 0.0972** 0.0546 0.130*** 0.101* 0.298*** 0.365***
 Stake
                 (0.0997) (0.113) (0.0402) (0.0493) (0.0463) (0.0513) (0.0931) (0.0906)
 SBO -0.0801 -0.0728 0.0279 0.0162 0.0399 0.0251 0.0810 0.0864
                 (0.0500) (0.0513) (0.0305) (0.0352) (0.0324) (0.0357) (0.0534) (0.0592)
 Industry 0.00654*** 0.00502** 0.000402 0.00137 0.00123 0.00204** 0.00213 0.00474**
                (0.00206) (0.00218) (0.000761) (0.000845) (0.000824) (0.000903) (0.00164) (0.00205)
 Constant -0.135 -0.247** -0.0807** -0.0659 -0.107** -0.0999** -0.280*** -0.345***
                 (0.0902) (0.103) (0.0360) (0.0424) (0.0455) (0.0485) (0.0848) (0.0877)

 Observations 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71
 R-squared 0.201 0.186 0.095 0.081 0.134 0.107 0.171 0.238
The table presents the coefficients and robust standard errors (in parentheses) from a robust regression of the operational
performance change one year prior to buyout (t-1) and three years afterwards (t+3). Adj. refers to the adjusted changes in operating
performance of the MBOs in relation to their respective peer groups. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively.

                                       23
Descriptive statistics of total MBO sample
The results indicate that MBOs grow at a substantially higher rate than industry peers, which is
quite interesting considering the MBOs have been matched to the 10 closest industry peers by
sales at the point of entry. It suggests that management buyouts are much better than industry
peers at expanding.
    Descriptive statistics reveal that the total MBO sample experiences an abnormal return for
sales CAGR of 3.7 percentage points on average and a median value of 1.9 percentage points
above the industry peer groups. There are several possible explanations as to why MBOs
experience considerably higher sales growth than peers. Firstly, the most likely explanation is
related to acquisitions. This as a majority of the sample data consist of MBOs that are PE backed,
and thus influenced by the principles and techniques employed by private equity firms to increase
the value of the firm prior to divestment. This includes bolt-on acquisitions and strategic growth
initiatives, resulting in higher sales growth than the general market.
    Upon examining the operational efficiency metrics, e.g. EBITDA margin, EBIT margin and
ROA, the results reveal that the Swedish management buyouts between 2005 and 2012
underperform their respective industry peers, which stands in contrast to some previous findings
(see for example; Cumming et al., 2007; Kaplan, 1989; Wright et al., 1996; Acharya and Kehoe,
2008), but is in line with the results of Vinten (2007) and Desbrières and Schatt (2002) who study
buyouts within the Danish and French market respectively. Following is a discourse as to why the
operational efficiency performance of the buyouts is worse than for comparable firms within the
same industries.
    One of the reasons why operational performance development in the dataset differs from
some older studies could be because the buyout landscape has changed in the time period
between those studies and today (see for example; Wang, 2012; Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009).
Guo et al. (2011), for example, find that the value creation in more recent deals is substantially
lower overall. Desbrières and Schatt (2002) identified a large portion of family-owned firms
within their dataset, i.e. where the pre-buyout ownership concentration is high, as one of the
main reasons for operational underperformance. This study has made no distinction as to
whether the MBOs were family-owned pre-buyout, but considering the family ownership within
the Swedish market is high and companies overall are more closely held than in e.g. the U.K and
U.S. (Faccio and Lang, 2002), this might explain the low operational efficiency performance
development in the dataset. Additionally, Vinten (2007) suggests that perhaps the private equity
governance model is not as suitable for countries in which the corporate ownership is
concentrated.

                                       24
Another possible explanation as to why the results differ from a few of the other studies (see for
example; Wright et al., 1996) is the choice of event window. In this study, we chose an approach
in line with Kaplan (1989) and Scellato and Ughetto (2013), who measure the operational
performance change in the year prior to acquisition (t-1) to three years afterwards (t+3). It is
possible that the benefits associated with a management buyout have not been fully realized
within this time span, which could be why the MBOs in our dataset do not show the same
operational outperformance in relation to industry peers as some other studies find in regards to
operational efficiency development. Wright et al. (1996), for example, find that MBOs
outperform their benchmark particularly three-year post-buyout and beyond, i.e. after the event
window that this study examines.
    Another aspect that might make the data biased is the revaluation of assets after an
acquisition, which might have a negative effect on a metric like ROA.

Operating performance in MBOs of different sizes
Upon examining the differences based on size, the descriptive statistics indicate that small firms
experience a considerably higher growth rate in sales than large firms that are subject to an MBO,
which is in line with hypothesis (1 A). This is hardly surprising, considering it is easier to grow at
a larger percentage rate each year if the absolute starting value is small. The relatively higher
standard deviation of small firms is also to be expected, considering their business model,
products and organizational structure are presumably not as developed as for larger firms.
    When examining the large vs small sub-groups, it is possible to distinguish that large MBOs
indeed deliver a better performance when it comes to EBITDA margin, whereas smaller firms do
not. This is also in line with expectation and the fact that smaller firms experience higher sales
growth. Larger firms focus more on efficiency and operational performance through margins
than smaller firms that have presumably higher ambitions to grow their businesses.
    However, the regression reveals no clear differences in performance development for
management buyouts of different sizes, as the overall results of the size variable are not
statistically significant. The only metric that shows significance is the peer adjusted
EBITDA margin change, which is on average higher for the large MBOs in comparison to the

                                                         22
small firms below the 6.3% (8.1%) level , providing support for hypothesis (1 B).

22 6.3% (8.1%) significance level depending on if management stake is included (excluded) in the regression.

                                       25
Difference in operating performance of PE backed and non-PE backed MBOs
The regression reveals that management buyouts backed by a Private Equity firm experience
higher sales growth than non-PE backed MBOs below the 1% significance level, supporting
hypothesis (2 A). This result was expected based on the different strategies used by PE-firms to
increase the value of their target firms, and is in line with the findings of previous research on the
subject. A major reason as to why the PE backed MBOs grow at a significantly higher rate than
their industry peers and non-PE backed MBOs is likely due to bolt-on acquisitions to portfolio
companies that PE firms conduct. Both in terms of merging businesses and making large
investments to grow portfolio companies.
    In contrast to hypothesis (2 B), our results show that PE backed MBOs have negative EBIT
and ROA development below the 5% significance level. This stands in contrast to the findings of
Smith (1990), Jensen (1989) and Kaplan (1989) but is in line with the findings of Vinten (2007),
who find that private equity ownership is associated with a negative operational performance in
relation to industry peers. The results also support the suggestions made by Perry and Williams
(1994) and Phalippou (2009), who argue that buyouts only transfer wealth between different
stakeholders – not increase the operational performance of the buyout company.
     Important to take into consideration, however, is that the data only covers the year prior to
the buyout until three-years afterwards. Many PE firms have longer investment horizons than 3
years, and the data could therefore be misleading compared to if one were to examine the
operational development at the exit date. Based on the results, it is likely that PE backed MBOs
focus more on growth in the first three years following the buyout, rather than operational
efficiency in order to increase the value of the firm.

Size of management stake and its implications on the operating performance in MBOs
When examining the impact of management stake on operational performance in MBOs, no
significant result was possible to retrieve from the made regression for sales CAGR. However, a
tendency can be seen that higher percentage rate owned by management at the time of the
transaction increases the firm’s sales CAGR, albeit not statistically significant. In the sample data,
companies defined as having a high management stake have a median abnormal return of 3.2
percentage points above that of its industry peers, whereas firms belonging to the group defined
as having a small management stake underperform. As it is not statistically significant, no clear
conclusion can be drawn from the regression, however the positive value of 0.167 still gives an
indication of the impact of management stake on the sales growth.

                                       26
Unlike for sales CAGR, the regression reveals significant result on multiple different metrics for
operational efficiency (both adjusted EBIT and adjusted ROA). We receive a value of 0.101 at
the 10% significance level for change in EBIT margin and 0.365 at the 1% significance level for
change in ROA margin. What this proves is that there exists a strong correlation between the size
of the management stake in an MBO and the operational efficiency within the firm. The results
support the suggestions made by Jensen (1986) and Cuny and Talmor (2007), who argue that
increased management ownership reduces free cash flow agency costs and managerial
entrenchment. The results are also in line with the findings of Thompson et al (1992) and Phan
and Hill (1995).
     What is interesting to take notice of, however, is that even though a larger management
stake is better when it comes to operational efficiency in MBOs, according to the descriptive
statistics, the median adjusted value for both EBIT margin and ROA is lower than for the
industry peer group, regardless of management stake size. This would indicate that MBOs in
general perform worse than their industry peers on operating efficiency metrics. The regression
was not able to find any statistical significant results for the adjusted value of EBITDA margin. It

                                                                                                                                          23
did however find that a higher management stake leads to a higher operational raw EBITDA
margin development at the 5% significance level.
    In conclusion, the results highlight the importance of incentivizing the incumbent
management through co-investments, as it results in a better use of resources and reduced agency
costs.

Difference in operating performance if the MBO is a secondary buyout
The regression and descriptive statistics provide support to our hypothesis that the likelihood of
a PE firm being unable to realize the majority of all the possible efficiency gains in the first round
is low, and that SBOs therefore are likely to underperform in comparison to primary buyouts.
Both the descriptive statistics and regression model reveal results that support hypothesis (4 A);
MBOs that are secondary buyouts experience a lower sales CAGR than other MBOs below the
1% significance level. These results are in line with the findings of Bonini (2015), who find that
primary buyouts perform significantly better than secondary buyouts. A possible explanation as
to why the performance of SBOs differ to that of PBOs is that the companies experience a
substantial one-off reduction in agency costs in the first round, thus resulting in operational
outperformance in comparison to the secondary buyout. This reasoning is in line with the
suggestions made by Meuleman et al. (2009). Although Wang (2012) argues that there is scope for

23 Raw data refers to the performance unadjusted for industry peers.

                                       27
efficiency gains in SBOs as well, the descriptive statistics indicate that SBOs experience worse
operational efficiency development overall in comparison to primary buyouts. These results
support hypothesis (4 B), that MBOs that are SBOs will experience a lower development in
operational efficiency.

6. Conclusion

This thesis has sought to answer the impact of size on the post-buyout operational performance
development of Swedish management buyouts. Previous research has been done on LBOs and
fund size, but to the best of our knowledge, no research on the impact of size has been made on
MBOs. Consideration has also been taken to other factors, such as the size of the management
equity stake post-buyout and whether the transaction was private equity backed or a secondary
buyout. In total, 116 MBOs were included in the analysis whereof information about
management stake was collected for 71 of these. In order to isolate the determinants of excess
operational performance, each buyout was matched to its ten closest peers from a sample of
2,560 Swedish firms.

Table 5 – Summary of hypotheses tests

Hypotheses Support Significance
H1 - Operating performance in MBOs of different sizes
 H1A: Small MBOs will exhibit a higher excess sales CAGR than large MBOs TRUE NO
 H1B: Small MBOs will exhibit a lower excess operational efficiency performance development than large TRUE NO
      Small MBOs will exhibit a lower change in EBITDA margins TRUE YES
      Small MBOs will exhibit a lower change in EBIT margins TRUE NO
      Small MBOs will exhibit a lower change in ROA TRUE NO

H2 - Difference in operating performance of PE backed and non-PE backed MBOs
 H2A: PE backed MBOs will experience a higher excess sales CAGR than non-PE backed MBOs TRUE YES
 H2B: PE backed MBOs will experience higher development in excess operational efficiency performance      FALSE YES/NO
  than non-PE backed MBOs
      PE-backed MBOs will exhibit a higher change in EBITDA margins FALSE NO
      PE-backed MBOs will exhibit a higher change in EBIT margins FALSE YES
      PE-backed MBOs will exhibit a higher change in ROA FALSE YES

H3 - Size of management stake and its implications on the operating performance in MBOs
 H3A: MBOs with a higher management stake will experience a higher excess sales CAGR TRUE NO
 H3B: MBOs with a higher management stake will experience a higher development in excess operational      TRUE YES/NO
  efficiency performance
      MBOs with higher management stake will exhibit a higher change in EBITDA margins TRUE NO
      MBOs with higher management stake will exhibit a higher change in EBIT margins TRUE YES
      MBOs with higher management stake will exhibit a higher change in ROA TRUE YES

H4 - Difference in operating performance if the MBO is a secondary buyout
 H4A: MBOs that are SBOs will experience a lower excess sales CAGR TRUE YES
 H4B: MBOs that are SBOs will experience a lower development in excess operational efficiency TRUE/FALSE NO
      MBOs that are SBOs will exhibit a lower change in EBITDA margins TRUE NO
      MBOs that are SBOs will exhibit a lower change in EBIT margins TRUE NO
      MBOs that are SBOs will exhibit a lower change in ROA FALSE NO

The table reports the hypothesis results reached through the made regressions and descriptive statistics. In the column support, "TRUE" indicates that the data favors the
made hypothesis, whereas "FALSE" indicates the opposite. All significance data is from regression 1 except for H3 which is from regression 2. Significance denotes
whether the results are significant at either the 1%, 5% or 10% level.

                                       28
The study finds limited significant support for the existence of differences in operational
performance development for MBOs of different sizes. This is interesting since it implies that
perhaps there is no optimal size category in which an MBO can be particularly effective, and that
previous suggestions that restructurings are more effective in small organizations (see for
example; Turner, 1983) may be incorrect. Considering that Wright et al. (1996) write that smaller
and larger buyouts are more prone to failure than medium-sized buyouts, our findings of no clear
differences depending on firm size calls for further research on the area.
    Additionally, the thesis reveals that a high management equity stake significantly correlates
with a high operational efficiency development, providing support to the notion that an
alignment of interests between managers and shareholders improves firm performance.
    Private equity backed management buyouts are found to grow at a significantly higher rate
than non-private equity backed MBOs, in line with what was hypothesized. This is likely due to
the strategic growth initiatives employed by PE firms, as well as the higher rate of bolt-on
acquisitions amongst PE backed MBOs. Surprisingly, the results also reveal that the backing of a
PE firm has a significantly negative impact on the operational efficiency of the buyout target,
which is in line with the findings of Vinten (2007). This is interesting, considering it suggests that
the PE governance model perhaps is not as suitable for countries where the overall company
ownership concentration is high – since the ex-ante agency costs in theory are lower.
    The study also sheds light on the long-term impact of private equity ownership by examining
the operational performance of MBOs that are secondary buyouts. The results reveal that
secondary buyouts experience significantly lower sales growth than primary buyouts, further
strengthening the notion that most of the value creation is captured in the first buyout round.
    By providing recent evidence on the Swedish buyout market, the study contributes to
existing literature as well as industry practitioners. The results support the notion that it is
important to incentivize top management through co-investments, since it results in a better use
of resources. It would be interesting to investigate this further in future research, for example by
measuring the executive pay as well as take into account potential option schemes used to
incentivize the management team.
    Additionally, the study suggests that there is no clear size category in which management
buyouts perform particularly well, and that management buyouts in Sweden seem to
underperform their respective industry peers in terms of operational efficiency. In order to isolate
the size factor and confirm the results found in this thesis, future research could look at a more
homogeneous buyout sample, by looking at e.g. only pure MBOs or only PE backed MBOs.

                                       29
We hypothesize that one of the main reasons management buyouts underperform is due to the
high ownership concentration in Sweden, which would be interesting to investigate further in
future research. Other studies could aim to confirm whether the pre-buyout concentration of
ownership, and whether the firm was family owned, indeed affects the operational performance
development post-buyout. Another suggestion for further research is to conduct a similar study
outside of Sweden. The operational performance development in contemporary management
buyouts in other geographies may differ from the results in this study, considering the Swedish
private equity market is very mature. Moreover, we encourage future studies to research the
operational performance development of MBOs on a longer time frame, considering the long-
term results and value creation may differ from the first three years post-buyout.

                                       30
References

A.T. Kearney 2014, How PE Operations Teams Create Value. Chicago: A.T. Kearney, Inc.

Acharya, V. & Kehoe, C. 2008, "Corporate governance and value creation evidence from private equity",
Working paper, London Business School.

Barber, B.M. & Lyon, J.D. 1996, "Detecting abnormal operating performance: The empirical
power and specification of test statistics", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 359-399.

Bergström, C., Grubb, M. & Jonsson, S. 2007, "The Operating Impact of Buyouts in Sweden: A
Study of Value Creation", The Journal of Private Equity, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 22-39.

Bonini, S. 2015, "Secondary Buyouts: Operating Performance and Investment Determinants",
Financial Management, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 431-470.

Brigl, M., Nowotnik, P., Pelisari, K., Rose, J. & Zwillenberg, P. 2012, Private Equity: Engaging for
Growth. Boston: Boston Consulting Group Ltd.

Cornelli, F. & Karakas, O. 2008, "Private Equity and Corporate Governance: Do LBOs Have
More Effective Boards?", Working Paper, Department of Finance, London Business School,
London.

Cumming, D., Siegel, D.S. & Wright, M. 2007, "Private equity, leveraged buyouts and
governance", Journal of Corporate Finance, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 439-460.

Cuny, C.J. & Talmor, E. 2007, "A theory of private equity turnarounds", Journal of Corporate
Finance, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 629-646.

DeAngelo, L.E. 1986, "Accounting Numbers as Market Valuation Substitutes: A Study of
Management Buyouts of Public Stockholders", The Accounting Review, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 400-420.

Demsetz, H. & Lehn, K. 1985, "The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
Consequences", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 93, no. 6, pp. 1155-1177.

Desbrières, P. & Schatt, A. 2002, "The impacts of LBOs on the performance of acquired firms:
The French case", Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, vol. 29, no. 5-6, pp. 695-729.

Eriksson, E. & Wittgren, J. 2014, Reaching for "High-Hanging Fruit"? - A Study of Operational
Performance in Secondary Buyouts. Bachelor’s Thesis, Department of Accounting and Department of
Finance, Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm.

Faccio, M. & Lang, L.H.P. 2002, "The ultimate ownership of Western European corporations",
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 365-395.

Gadiesh, O. & MacArthur, H. 2008, Lessons From Private Equity Any Company Can Use. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.

Guo, S., Hotchkiss, E.S. & Song, W. 2011, "Do Buyouts (Still) Create Value?", Journal of Finance,
vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 479-517.

                                       31
Invest Europe 2016, Invest Europe Yearbook - 2015 European Private Equity Activity. Brussels: Invest
Europe.

Jensen, M.C. 1986, "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers", The
American Economic Review, vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 323-329.

Jones, C.S. 1992, "The attitudes of owner-managers towards accounting control systems
following management buyout", Accounting, Organizations and Society, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 151-168.

Kaplan, S. 1989, "The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value",
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 217-254.

Kaplan, S.N. & Strömberg, P. 2009, "Leveraged buyouts and private equity", Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 121-146.

Lichtenberg, F.R. & Siegel, D. 1990, "The effects of leveraged buyouts on productivity and
related aspects of firm behavior", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 165-194.

Meuleman, M., Amess, K., Wright, M. & Scholes, L. 2009, "Agency, strategic entrepreneurship,
and the performance of private equity-backed buyouts", Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, vol.
33, no. 1, pp. 213-239.

Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P. & Stulz, R.M. 2004, "Firm size and the gains from
acquisitions", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 201-228.

Muscarella, C.J & Vetsuypens, M.R. 1990, "Efficiency and Organizational Structure: A Study of
Reverse LBOs", Journal of Finance, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1389-1413.

O'Brien, R.M. 2007, "A caution regarding rules of thumb for variance inflation factors", Quality
and Quantity, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 673-690.

Palepu, K.G. 1990, "Consequences of leveraged buyouts", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27,
no. 1, pp. 247-262.

Perry, S.E. & Williams, T.H. 1994, "Earnings management preceding management buyout
offers", Journal of Accounting and Economics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 157-179.

Phalippou, L. 2009, "Beware of venturing into private equity", Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
23, no. 1, pp. 147-166.

Phan, P.H. & Charles, W.L.H. 1995, "Organizational Restructuring and Economic Performance
in Leveraged Buyouts: An Ex Post Study", The Academy of Management Journal, vol. 38, no. 3, pp.
704-739.

Rogers, P., Holland, T. & Haas, D. 2002, "Value acceleration: Lessons from private-equity
masters", Harvard business review, vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 94-95.

Roll, R. 1986, "The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers", The Journal of Business, vol. 59,
no. 2, pp. 197-216.

                                       32
Scellato, G. & Ughetto, E. 2013, "Real effects of private equity investments: Evidence from
European buyouts", Journal of Business Research, vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 2642-2649.

Schulze, W.S., Lubatkin, M.H., Dino, R.N. & Buchholtz, A.K. 2001, "Agency Relationships in
Family Firms: Theory and Evidence", Organization Science, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 99-116.

Singh, H. 1990, "Management Buyouts: Distinguishing Characteristics and Operating Changes
Prior to Public Offering", Strategic Management Journal, vol. 11, pp. 111-129.

Smith, A.J. 1990, "Corporate ownership structure and performance. The case of management
buyouts", Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 143-164.

Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association 2015, Private Equity Performance Study 2015.
Stockholm: Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association.

Thompson, R.S., Wright, M. & Robbie, K. 1992, "Management Equity Ownership, Debt and
Performance: Some Evidence from UK Management Buyouts", Scottish Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 413-430.

Turner, J.A. 1983, "Organisational Performance, Size, and the Use of Data Processing Resources", Working
Paper, Center for Research on Information Systems, New York University, New York.

Vinten, Frederik. 2007, "The Performance of Private Equity Buyout Fund Owned Firms", Working Paper,
Centre for Economic and Business Research, Copenhagen Business School.

Wang, Y. 2012, "Secondary buyouts: Why buy and at what price?", Journal of Corporate Finance, vol.
18, no. 5, pp. 1306-1325.

Wright, M., Thompson, S. & Robbie, K. 1992, "Venture capital and management-led, leveraged
buy-outs: A European perspective", Journal of Business Venturing, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 47-71.

Wright, M., Robbie, K., Thompson, S. & Starkey, K. 1994, "Longevity and the Life-Cycle of
Management Buy-Outs", Strategic Management Journal, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 215-227.

Wright, M., Wilson, N. & Robbie, K. 1996, "The Longer-Term Effects of Management-Led Buy-
Outs", Journal of Entrepreneurial and Small Business Finance, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 213-234.

                                       33
Appendices

Appendix A
Table A1. Description of dependent and independent variables

Variable Description
Δ OP Change in operating performance for the chosen metric
Management Stake Variable capturing the fraction of the total equity held by
                        management post-buyout
Sizedummy Variable capturing whether the firm is large or small,
                           measured by sales (50% quartile)
PE BackedDummy Variable capturing whether the MBO is PE backed
SBODummy Variable capturing whether the MBO is a secondary
                       buyout
IndustryDummy Variable capturing which 2-digit NACE code the MBO is
                          categorized under
 The table presents definitions of dependent and independent variables in the regressions.

Table A2. Formulas for operational performance metrics

 The table reports calculations for operational performance metrics.

Table A3. NACE code grouping of sample data

NACE Code - Main Group Definition N Percentage of Total Sample
  Manufacturing 43 37%
  Whole sale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles 22 19%
  Information and communication 10 9%
  Human health and social work activities 10 9%
  Construction 9 8%
  Administrative and support service activities 6 5%
  Education 5 4%
  Proffesional, scientific and technical activities 4 3%
  Transportation and storage 4 3%
  Water supply; sewage, waste management and remediation activities 2 2%
  Accommodation and food service activities 1 1%
Total 116 100%
The table presents the distribution of MBOs across different industries based on their respective NACE main group code.

                                       34
Appendix B

Table B1. Regression of all variables included as operational metrics in the data, excluding the variable

                                                            th         th
management stake, winsorized robustness check at the 5  and 95  percentiles

                  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
 VARIABLES Sales     Sales CAGR      Delta     Delta EBITDA    Delta     Delta EBIT    Delta    Delta ROA
               CAGR       Adj.       EBITDA       Adj.        EBIT       Adj.       ROA       Adj.

 Size -0.0366 -0.0321 0.0209 0.0258 0.0175 0.0247 0.0138 0.0326
               (0.0245) (0.0231) (0.0146) (0.0160) (0.0172) (0.0189) (0.0305) (0.0342)
 PE backed 0.0871*** 0.0838*** -0.0206 -0.0227 -0.0429** -0.0477** -0.0821** -0.103**
               (0.0311) (0.0283) (0.0157) (0.0177) (0.0175) (0.0207) (0.0396) (0.0444)
 SBO -0.0736*** -0.0786*** -0.00586 -0.00487 0.0139 0.00710 0.0590* 0.0366
               (0.0265) (0.0271) (0.0191) (0.0206) (0.0222) (0.0239) (0.0323) (0.0344)
 Industry 0.00454*** 0.00362*** -0.000292 0.000527 -0.000287 0.000245 0.000434 0.00254
              (0.00121) (0.00112) (0.000663) (0.000717) (0.000778) (0.000836) (0.00144) (0.00169)
 Constant -0.0247 -0.0723*** -0.00989 -0.0184 -0.0112 -0.0104 -0.0525 -0.0596
               (0.0264) (0.0253) (0.0186) (0.0201) (0.0212) (0.0236) (0.0426) (0.0492)

 Observations 116 116 116 116 116 116 116 116
 R-squared 0.252 0.219 0.032 0.036 0.047 0.046 0.056 0.071
The table presents the coefficients and robust standard errors (in parentheses) from a robust regression of the operational
performance change one year prior to buyout (t-1) and three years afterwards (t+3). Adj. refers to the adjusted changes in operating
performance of the MBOs in relation to their respective peer groups. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively. The data for the operational performance metrics have been winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentile level.

Table B2. Regression of all variables included as operational metrics in the data, winsorized robustness check at

     th         th
the 5  and 95  percentiles

                    (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
 VARIABLES Sales     Sales CAGR     Delta     Delta EBITDA    Delta     Delta EBIT    Delta    Delta ROA
                CAGR       Adj.      EBITDA       Adj.       EBIT       Adj.       ROA      Adj.

 Size -0.000719 -6.11e-05 0.0186 0.0283 0.0119 0.0261 -0.00279 0.0345
                 (0.0345) (0.0331) (0.0161) (0.0191) (0.0189) (0.0215) (0.0353) (0.0372)
 PE backed 0.113* 0.139** 0.0277 0.0146 0.0284 0.0115 0.0736 0.0696
                 (0.0635) (0.0532) (0.0216) (0.0244) (0.0239) (0.0279) (0.0604) (0.0635)
 Management      0.0791 0.130* 0.0889*** 0.0744* 0.122*** 0.110** 0.278*** 0.341***
 Stake
                 (0.0757) (0.0727) (0.0321) (0.0382) (0.0376) (0.0446) (0.0837) (0.0840)
 SBO -0.0556 -0.0503 0.0137 0.0187 0.0339 0.0318 0.0938** 0.0829**
                 (0.0385) (0.0397) (0.0210) (0.0237) (0.0245) (0.0279) (0.0401) (0.0411)
 Industry 0.00548*** 0.00411*** 0.000704 0.00153** 0.00126* 0.00191** 0.00182 0.00391**
                (0.00160) (0.00154) (0.000614) (0.000685) (0.000684) (0.000783) (0.00147) (0.00174)
 Constant -0.112 -0.187*** -0.0868*** -0.0831** -0.121*** -0.111*** -0.276*** -0.319***
                 (0.0690) (0.0664) (0.0326) (0.0354) (0.0379) (0.0412) (0.0747) (0.0773)

 Observations 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71
 R-squared 0.267 0.225 0.116 0.127 0.164 0.147 0.194 0.255
The table presents the coefficients and robust standard errors (in parentheses) from a robust regression of the operational
performance change one year prior to buyout (t-1) and three years afterwards (t+3). Adj. refers to the adjusted changes in operating
performance of the MBOs in relation to their respective peer groups. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level,
respectively. The data for the operational performance metrics have been winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentile level.

                                       35
Table B3. Welch's t-test of differences between Small and Large sub-groups

Difference between Small and Large sub-groups N Mean Std. Error Significance
  Sales CAGR (small - large) 116 2.87% 3.25% 37.98%
  Δ EBITDA margin (small - large) 116 -3.20% 1.95% 10.40%
  Δ EBIT margin (small - large) 116 -1.87% 2.18% 39.39%
  Δ ROA (small - large) 116 -3.06% 3.73% 41.44%
 The table reports all observations in the sample, no observations have been dropped due to missing values. Sales
CAGR mean represents the difference in average compounded annual growth of sales rate during the event
window between companies defined large and small (a size dummy variable was created). EBITDA, EBIT and
 ROA represent the difference in average absolute percentage change during the entire event window. All data is
 industry adjusted.

Table B4. Welch's t-test of differences between Small and Large management stake

Difference between Large and Small sub-groups N Mean Std. Error Significance
  Sales CAGR (small - large) 71 -0.01% 4.73% 99.77%
  Δ EBITDA margin (small - large) 71 0.14% 2.48% 95.48%
  Δ EBIT margin (small - large) 71 -2.37% 2.62% 37.03%
  Δ ROA (small - large) 71 -5.65% 4.62% 22.61%
 The table reports all observations containing information regarding management stake. 45 observations have been
dropped due to missing values. Sales CAGR mean represents the difference in average compounded annual
growth rate of sales during the event window between companies defined as having large and small management
stake (a management stake dummy variable was created for the 50% largest management stake observations).
EBITDA, EBIT and ROA represent the difference in average absolute percentage change during the entire event
 window. All data is industry adjusted.
Table B5. Welch's t-test of differences between non-PE backed and PE backed MBOs

Difference between classification sub-groups N Mean Std. Error Significance
  Sales CAGR (non PE-backed - PE-backed) 116 -9.18% 3.31% 0.75%
  Δ EBITDA margin (non PE-backed - PE-backed) 116 1.38% 1.91% 47.39%
  Δ EBIT margin (non PE-backed - PE-backed) 116 4.51% 2.29% 5.43%
  Δ ROA (non PE-backed - PE-backed) 116 8.10% 4.40% 7.24%
 The table reports all observations in the sample, no observations have been dropped due to missing values. Sales
CAGR mean represents the difference in average compounded annual growth rate of sales during the event
window between companies defined as PE backed and non-PE backed (a PE backed dummy variable was
created). EBITDA, EBIT and ROA represent the difference in average absolute percentage change during the
 entire event window. All data is industry adjusted.

Table B6. Welch's t-test of differences between non-SBO and SBO MBOs

Difference between classification sub-groups N Mean Std. Error Significance
  Sales CAGR (non SBO - SBO) 116 6.99% 2.95% 2.00%
  Δ EBITDA margin (non SBO - SBO) 116 1.42% 2.66% 59.66%
  Δ EBIT margin (non SBO - SBO) 116 1.61% 2.88% 57.88%
  Δ ROA (non SBO - SBO) 116 -1.16% 4.11% 77.82%
 The table reports all observations in the sample, no observations have been dropped due to missing values. Sales
CAGR mean represents the difference in average compounded annual growth rate of sales during the event
window between companies defined as SBOs and non-SBOs (an SBO dummy variable was created). EBITDA,
 EBIT and ROA represent the difference in average absolute percentage change during the entire event window. All
 data is industry adjusted.

                                       36
Appendix C

Table C1. Correlation between all independent variables, excluding management stake

Regression 1 Size PE backed SBO Industry
Size 1.000
PE backed 0.224 1.000
SBO 0.236 0.325 1.000
Industry 0.045 0.189 -0.034 1.000
The table reports the correlation between the independent variables included in
 regression 1. Values close to 1 (-1) indicate highly positive (negative) correlation
 between the independent variables. Values around 0, indicate low to zero correlation.

Table C2. Correlation between all independent variables

Regression 2 Size PE backed Mgmt Stake SBO Industry
Size 1.000
PE backed 0.380 1.000
Mgmt Stake -0.307 -0.723 1.000
SBO 0.180 0.302 -0.315 1.000
Industry 0.135 0.165 -0.186 0.077 1.000
The table reports the correlation between the independent variables included in regression 2. Values
close to 1 (-1) indicate highly positive (negative) correlation between the independent variables. Values
around 0, indicate low to zero correlation.

Table C3. Multicollinearity testing on regression 1 – Variance Inflation Factor
Variance Inflation Factor - Regression 1
Variable VIF 1/VIF
PE backed 1.20 0.83
Size 1.17 0.86
SBO 1.09 0.92
Industry 1.05 0.95
Mean 1.13
 The table presents the variation inflation factor for
regression 1, performed in order to test for
multicollinearity. The lower the values in the VIF
 column, the lower the probability of multicollinearity.
 No indication of multicollinearity is found.

                                       37
Table C4. Multicollinearity testing on regression 2 – Variance Inflation Factor

Variance Inflation Factor - Regression 2
Variable VIF 1/VIF
PE backed 2.24 0.45
Management Stake 2.16 0.46
Size 1.18 0.84
SBO 1.13 0.89
Industry 1.04 0.96
Mean 1.55
The table presents the variation inflation factor for
regression 2, performed in order to test for
multicollinearity. The lower the values in the VIF
column, the lower the probability of multicollinearity. No
indication of multicollinearity is found.

Appendix D
Table D1. Management Buyout Sample

Target Buyer Entry year NACE rev. 2 code SBO PE backed
AB Annas Pepparkakor Accent Equity Partners AB 2005 10 NO YES
AB Vastanfors Industrier AB Vastanfors Industrier 2011 25 NO NO
Academic Work Sweden AB Academic Work 2006 78 NO NO
Addici Holding AB Danske Bank, Management Group 2008 80 NO NO
Aditro Logistics AB Valedo Partners 2012 52 NO YES
Akademikliniken AB Valedo Partners 2011 86 NO YES
Aleris Holding AB EQT III fund 2005 87 NO YES
Ambea AB Triton Partners 2010 87 YES YES
Anticimex AB Ratos AB 2006 81 YES YES
Apelns Express AB Investor Group 2011 38 NO YES
APSIS International AB Norvestor V, L.P. 2010 58 NO YES
Aptilo Networks AB Norvestor V, L.P. 2011 62 NO YES
Ariterm Group AB Management Group 2011 28 NO NO
Aspen AB Valedo Partners 2007 46 NO YES
Attendo AB Bridgepoint Advisers Limited 2005 87 NO YES
Aura Light Group AB FSN Capital II, L.P 2006 27 YES YES
Automation Press and Tooling AP&T Fairford Holdings Scandinavia AB 2009 28 YES YES
Benify Vitruvian Partners LLP 2011 69 NO YES
Bergteamet AB Polaris Private Equity 2011 42 YES YES
Boomerang International AB Priveq Investment 2006 46 NO YES
BS Elcontrol AB BS Elcontrol AB( MBO Vehicle) 2008 27 NO NO
BYGGmax AB Altor 2003 Fund 2006 47 NO YES
ByggPartner i Dalarna Holding AB Priveq Investment; Ytna AB 2006 41 NO YES
Cambio Healthcare Systems AB Valedo Partners Fund II AB 2012 58 YES YES
Componenta Albin AB Componenta Albin AB (MBO Vehicle) 2007 28 NO NO
Coromatic Group AB EQT Expansion Capital II 2011 71 YES YES
Crem Accent Equity Partners AB 2007 28 NO YES
Crem International AB SEB Venture Capital; Priveq Investment Fund IV L.P. 2012 28 YES YES
Cross Country Systems AB CrossCo Investment AB, Management Group 2005 26 YES YES
Eco-Borastapeter AB Litorina Kapital 2010 17 NO YES
El & Industrimontage Svenska AB Goodtech Intressenter AB 2007 43 NO NO
Elkapsling AB Management Group 2007 27 NO NO
Eltel AB 3i Group Plc 2007 61 NO YES
Emotron AB Polaris Private Equity II K/S, Management Group 2007 28 NO YES
Enfo Z Enfo Z 2011 62 NO NO
Envirotainer AB AAC Capital Partners 2010 29 YES YES
Espresso House Sweden AB Palamon Capital Partners LP 2006 56 NO YES
eTRAVELi AB Segulah IV, L.P. 2010 63 YES YES
Etteplan Tech AB Private Investor 2009 71 NO NO
Euroflorist Sverige AB Litorina Kapital 2007 46 YES YES
EuroMaint AB Ratos AB 2007 33 NO YES
Exotic Snacks AB Segulah III, L.P. 2008 46 NO YES
Exotic Snacks AB Credelity Capital AB 2011 46 YES YES
F.O.V. Fabrics AB FOV Fabrics 2008 13 NO NO
Fiskarhedenvillan AB Litorina IV L.P. 2012 46 YES YES
Five Seasons AB EQT Opportunity Fund 2006 46 NO YES

                                       38
Table D1. Management Buyout Sample (cont’d)

Target Buyer Entry year NACE rev. 2 code SBO PE backed
Flexlink AB AAC Capital Partners 2005 46 YES YES
Flextrus AB A&R Carton AB 2011 17 YES YES
Forvaltnings AB CJ Bjornberg Björnberg Group 2009 43 NO NO
GCE Gas Control Equipment AB Argan Capital Advisors LLP 2005 46 YES YES
Gycom AB Management Group, Credelity Capital AB 2007 47 NO YES
Hansen Conference & Event AB 2E Group AB 2007 79 NO NO
Hermods AB Strukturfonden II 2008 85 YES YES
Hilding Anders AB Candover Investments Plc; MV Credit; 2009 31 YES YES
Hooks Hastsport AB Accent Equity Partners AB 2011 47 NO YES
Human Care HC AB GGC Health Care 2008 86 NO YES
Humana AB Argan Capital Advisors LLP 2008 87 NO YES
Inflight Service Europe AB CapMan Oyj, Maneq, Management Group 2005 52 NO YES
Intrac Group AB Catella Investments; Baltic Investment Fund III 2007 46 NO YES
IV Produkt AB Götalandsexpressen 2005 28 NO NO
JB Education AB Axcel Industriinvestor A/S 2008 85 NO YES
Jetpak Group AB Polaris Private Equity 2006 52 NO YES
Joy Shop AB Management Group 2009 47 NO NO
Karosseriverken I Urbanusson Backarydsgruppen SPV 2011 29 NO NO
Kellve AB Reiten & Co Capital Partners VII L.P. 2008 28 YES YES
Kendrion Mefa AB Management Group 2007 29 NO NO
Kungsörs Plast AB KPS Petrol Pipe System (Management vehicle) 2009 22 NO NO
Lekolar AB 3i Group Plc 2007 46 YES YES
Lensway AB Investor Group 2010 46 NO NO
Metals & Powders Trading AB CapMan Mezzanine IV Fund; CapMan Buyout IX 2009 24 NO YES
Molnlycke Health Care AB Investor AB; Morgan Stanley Principal Investments 2007 46 YES YES
Mont Blanc Industri AB Accent Equity 2008, L.P. 2007 29 NO YES
mySafety Forsakringar AB Litorina Kapital 2007 80 NO YES
Nackademin AB Nackademin Holding AB 2008 85 NO YES
Nefab AB Nordic Capital Fund VI LP, Management Group, 2007 16 NO YES
Nimbus Boats Sweden AB Altor Equity Partners AB 2006 30 NO YES
Nordic Brass Gusum AB Nordic Brass Gusum AB 2011 24 NO NO
Nordic Water Products AB Privista Capital AB; Management Group 2008 46 NO YES
Oral Care AB Procuritas Capital Investors IV LP 2010 86 NO YES
Osby Glas AB Procuritas AB 2012 23 NO YES
Pallco AB Polstiernan Industri AB 2006 31 NO YES
Permascand AB Mittkapital i Jämtland och Västernorrland AB 2012 24 NO YES
Perstorp PAI Partners 2005 43 YES YES
Perten Instruments Group AB Valedo Partners 2010 46 NO YES
PIAB Invest AB Altor Fund II GP limited 2006 28 NO YES
Polarica AB Hartwall Capital Oy AB, Intera Fund I 2010 10 YES YES
PPS Power Planning System AB The Riverside Company 2011 85 NO YES
Projectplace International AB Investor; InnovationsKapital; Via Venture Partners 2009 58 NO YES
Proxima AB Nacka Narsjukhus CapMan Plc 2007 86 NO YES
Pysslingen Forskolor och Skolor AB Polaris Private Equity III 2009 85 NO YES
Samres AB PEQ AB 2010 52 NO YES
Samsa AB CapMan Life Science IV Fund LP 2009 43 NO YES
San Sac AB Priveq Investment Fund III 2008 38 NO YES
ScandBook AB Accent Equity Partners AB 2006 18 NO YES
Scandinavian Track Group AB Polaris Private Equity III 2011 42 NO YES
Scienta Scientific AB InnovationsKapital 2010 26 YES YES
Semantix AB Litorina Kapital III, L.P. 2009 74 YES YES
Skandinavisk Kommunalteknik AB Litorina IV L.P. 2011 46 YES YES
Skanska Byggvaror AB Polaris Private Equity 2012 25 NO YES
Solhagagruppen AB Valedo Partners 2007 87 NO YES
SoliferPolar AB Mikael Colebring, Mikael Engström, Kajsa Engström 2011 29 NO NO
SRG Online AB Norvestor IV LP, Management Group 2007 63 NO YES
Structo AB Lyckes Förvaltning AB 2005 24 NO NO
Sveab AB Management Group,ITP Invest 2009 42 NO YES
Svenskt Konstsilke AB Svenskt Konstsilke AB (MBO Vehicle) 2007 46 NO NO
Svenssons i Lammhult AB Investor Group 2007 47 NO NO
Sydtotal AB Priveq Investment Fund III 2007 43 NO YES
Team Olivia AB Procuritas AB 2008 86 NO YES
The Chimney Pot AB Boiling Water AB 2011 59 NO NO
Tolerans AB Litorina Kapital 2006 28 YES YES
Troax Group AB Accent Equity 2008, L.P. 2010 25 NO YES
Unfors RaySafe AB Unfors Holding 2006 26 NO YES
Verisure Holding AB Hellman & Friedman LLC; Bain Capital LLC 2011 80 YES YES
Water Jet Sweden AB Vega Ronneby AB 2009 28 NO NO
Xlent Consulting Group Neqst Partner AB 2009 62 YES YES
Zetterbergs Produkt AB Eriksson & Erfäldt Holding AB; Management Group 2005 29 NO NO
The table contains the entire sample data of target firms, acquiring firms, year of the transaction, NACE code definition of each target firm, and
whether the transaction was PE backed or an SBO.

                                       39