  On the pricing of non-convertible preferred stock offerings

               Josefsson, N. Charbel and Wall, L. Hannes

                             May 15, 2017

                                    Bachelor Thesis
                                 Department of Finance
                           Stockholm School of Economics

                           Abstract

Existing research encompassing pricing of preferred stock offerings is limited and it seems as
if researchers have ignored to investigate it. As such, and given the recent years’ momentum in
the Canadian preferred stock market, in this study we examine the pricing of non-convertible
preferred stock issues by assessing initial returns of 266 seasoned offerings on the Toronto
Stock Exchange over the period 2002-2016. We find significant evidence of new preferred
stock issues being overpriced, yielding negative first-day excess returns of 0.60%. This
overpricing is strongly tied to illiquidity discounts in the aftermarket. We also find that
increased interest rate uncertainty at the time of the issue renders in more overpricing,
demonstrating increased difficulty in assessing the preferred stock’s true value. No significant
support for overpricing being a result of underwriter competition is evident. Finally, we find
that new offerings made by firms that recently have issued preferred stock are priced more
accurately. This is suggested to be a result of investors having a recent firm-specific issue
available acting as reference upon evaluating the new issue.

Keywords: Preferred Stock, Seasoned Offerings, Overpricing, Liquidity, Interest Rate
Uncertainty

Acknowledgment: We would like to express our sincere gratitude to our tutor, Jungsuk Han,
for his valuable input and commitment during the process of writing this thesis. We would also
like to graciously thank Michael Halling for his input on statistical matters.
Table of content

1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 1

2. Literature review and our contribution ................................................................................... 3

   2.1 Pricing of equity offerings ................................................................................................ 3

   2.2 Pricing of bond offerings .................................................................................................. 4

   2.3 Pricing of preferred stock offerings .................................................................................. 5

   2.4 Liquidity in pricing of securities ...................................................................................... 6

   2.5 Contribution to existing research ...................................................................................... 6

3. Hypotheses ............................................................................................................................. 8

4. Data ...................................................................................................................................... 10

   4.1 Sample collection ........................................................................................................... 10

   4.2 Data discussion ............................................................................................................... 11

5. Methodology ........................................................................................................................ 12

   5.1 Dependent variable ......................................................................................................... 12

   5.2 Independent variables ..................................................................................................... 15

   5.3 Regression model ........................................................................................................... 17

   5.4 Test statistics................................................................................................................... 17

6. Results and Discussion ......................................................................................................... 19

   6.1 Descriptive statistics ....................................................................................................... 19

   6.2 Univariate analysis ......................................................................................................... 21

   6.3 Multivariate analysis....................................................................................................... 29

   6.4 Robustness test ............................................................................................................... 33

7. Limitations and future research ............................................................................................ 35

8. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................ 36

9. References ............................................................................................................................ 39

Appendix .................................................................................................................................. 43
1. Introduction

Preferred stock is a hybrid instrument featuring characteristics similar to those of both equity-
and debt instruments (Fabozzi and Mann, 2005). The amount of issues of preferred stock has
increased extensively in Canada for the past 15 years, constituting roughly USD 7.9bn in novel
issues in 2016 according to Bloomberg. As a result, the portion of preferred stock to total

                                                                    1
external financing has increased heavily in recent years . It appears as if Canadian firms are
finding it to be an increasingly beneficial way of raising capital instead of solely seeking to
traditional equity- or debt offerings. Preferred stock increasing in size relative to equity

                                                                                                 2
financing might partly be explained by the low interest rate environment . Moreover,
distributions from preferreds are regarded as dividends according to the Canada Revenue
Agency, which has favorable tax effects in Canada as compared to bond coupon payments,
subsequently rendering in higher after-tax yields compared to bonds. Arguably, this could be a
reason for why preferred stock in recent years gradually has substituted bonds as a means of

                                                  3
external financing. Lastly, the financial sector  accounts for approximately 62% of the issue
proceeds over the period 2002-2016 according to Bloomberg. The seemingly high ratio might
be explained by the fact that financials, in accordance with the Basel framework, could attribute
preferred shares as Tier-1 capital, subsequently incentivizing them to raise capital using
preferred stock.

    Previous literature suggests that new issues of common stock are underpriced (Ibbotson,
1975; Kooli and Suret, 2004) while studies on bonds are more ambiguous as it documents both
over- and underpricing (Datta et al., 1997; Cai et al., 2007). Literature on pricing of preferred
stock is limited. The only existing study in this field of research is Loderer et al. (1991),
studying whether underpricing in seasoned offerings of preferred stock exists on the U.S.
market. The authors make concluding remarks stating that the offerings are accurately priced,
regardless if they are convertible or non-convertible. Given the scarce literature on the pricing
of preferred stock in conjunction with the findings by Williams and Shutt (2000) stating that
the Canadian market is more efficient than that of the U.S, and also in light of the recent years’
momentum in the Canadian preferred stock market, we deem it important to document pricing
of new issues of preferred stock in Canada and compare it to the findings made by Loderer et
al. (1991).

1
 See appendix figure I.
2
 See appendix figure II.
3
 This denotation include insurance companies and is used throughout the thesis.
                                     1
    To our knowledge, we are the first to examine the pricing of preferred stock offerings in

                                                                                           4
the Canadian market. This study is restricted to solely encompass seasoned offerings  of non-
convertible preferred stock due to the vast amount of research made on Initial Public Offerings,
IPOs, as well as due to the different characteristics of convertibles and non-convertibles. We
assess initial returns of 266 seasoned offerings on the Toronto Stock Exchange over the period
2002-2016. Contrary to Loderer et al. (1991), we find that new preferred stock issues are
overpriced, yielding negative first-day excess returns of 0.60%. This finding is similar to that
documented on bonds by Datta et al. (1997) and Matsui (2006). Furthermore, measuring seven-
and thirty-day excess returns, we find indicative evidence of overpricing diminishing shortly
after issuance.

    Enhanced liquidity in the aftermarket is found to have a significant positive impact on
initial returns. Our findings demonstrate that aftermarket liquidity is not accurately estimated
by underwriters, subsequently rendering in mispricing as additional illiquidity discounts
(liquidity premiums) have to be offered in the aftermarket. This is in line with literature on
bonds (Amihud and Mendelson, 2006; Chen et al., 2007) and common stock (Amihud and
Mendelson, 1986; Brennan et al., 1998; Chordia et al., 2001), suggesting that illiquidity risk is
priced and consequently that the prices of illiquid securities must fall sufficiently to attract
investors. Moreover, we find evidence that overpricing has diminished over the years 2002-
2016, arguably a result of incremental aftermarket liquidity over time and subsequently
decreasing illiquidity discounts in the aftermarket following new issues.

    Additionally, we find that overpricing increases with interest rate uncertainty,
demonstrating increased difficulty in assessing the preferred stock’s true value. Furthermore,
we see that aftermarket liquidity tends to improve in times of high interest rate uncertainty.
Ultimately, this indicates that the total effect on initial returns from a change in interest rate
uncertainty, to some extent, is mitigated by the consequent change in liquidity (ceteris paribus)
due to their opposite impact on initial returns.

    No evidence of underwriter competition significantly affecting the level of overpricing is
made apparent in this study. This is contrary to findings put forward by Datta et al. (1997) and
Matsui (2006). However, this may be due to the limitations of our used proxy – number of

4
 A seasoned offering is, throughout this thesis, defined as an offering made by an already public firm that is not made with the
same ISIN code as an already outstanding security. This is sometimes referred to as “new classes of shares” in literature.
                                     2
underwriters – or that underwriters compete on alternate dimensions than offer price, e.g.
underwriter fees.

    Lastly, we make evident that stock offerings issued by firms that recently have issued
preferred stock are priced more accurately. This is arguably a result of investors having a recent
firm-specific issue available acting as reference when assessing the price of the new issue,
consequently mitigating underwriters’ ability to overprice preferred stock issues in close
conjunction with other issues.

    The highly interesting findings made in this study are argued to be useful for all market
participants, including issuing firms, underwriters and investors. It is our belief that enhanced
awareness and knowledge of pricing accuracy in preferred stock offerings is essential,
especially given the recent years’ growth in the Canadian preferred stock market. More
specifically, our results are valuable for an investor with a short investment horizon intending
to trade her holdings rather than holding them until maturity. Such investor should be aware of
new preferred issues being short-term overpriced, and she should consider liquidity, interest
rate uncertainty and subsequent issues to be important factors when evaluating whether to
participate in new issues.

2. Literature review and our contribution

2.1 Pricing of equity offerings

Underpricing in equity IPOs is a well-documented phenomenon first supported by the findings
of Ibbotson (1975). Several research papers have tried to explain the underpricing phenomena
in IPOs using asymmetric information (Baron, 1982; Rock, 1986), signaling theory (Allen and
Faulhaber, 1989; Grinblatt and Hwang, 1989: Welch, 1989) and book-building theory
(Benveniste and Spindt, 1989; Benveniste et al., 2002; Sherman and Titman, 2002). Contrary
to the findings of short-term underpricing in equity IPOs, long-term underperformance of equity
IPOs is documented by Aggarwal and Rivoli (1990), Ritter (1991), Loughran et al. (1994) and
Loughran and Ritter (1995). By investigating the Canadian market, Kooli and Suret (2004) find,
similar to studies encompassing the U.S. market, both short-term underpricing and long-term
underperformance of IPOs. Though, they conclude that underpricing is less severe in the
Canadian market as compared to findings on the U.S. market, pointing at the Canadian market
being more efficient. Examining seasoned equity offerings, SEOs, Loderer et al. (1991) find no
evidence of underwriters systematically setting offer prices below previous transaction prices,
except for possibly in the NASDAQ market. Furthermore, Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1995)
                                     3
document long-run underperformance following SEOs. Subsequently, more light was shed on
the area by the supplementary findings of Spiess and Affleck-Graves (1999), where they find
evidence of underperformance of the issuing firm’s stock following debt offerings, signaling
overvaluation of the issuer. Moreover, Ritter (1991) and Loughran and Ritter (1995) suggest
that firms are taking advantage of the transitory windows of opportunity by engaging in IPOs
as well as seasoned offerings when the firm’s stock is substantially overvalued.

2.2 Pricing of bond offerings

The research on the topic of pricing in bond offerings is not as extensive as the corresponding
research on equity offerings. Moreover, the existing research on pricing in bond offerings seems
to lack consensus in whether offerings are priced accurately or if mispricing exists, either in the
form of over- or underpricing. Several studies present evidence suggesting that yields on newly
issued bonds exceed yields on similar bonds outstanding in the market, implying underpricing
in new bond offerings (Brimmer, 1960; Conard and Frankena, 1969; Ederington, 1974;
Lindvall, 1977). Weinstein (1978) find similar results using holding-period returns rather than
yield to maturity. Similarly, Sorensen (1982) presents findings suggesting underpricing but
notes that there is a rather quick price adjustment to a new equilibrium post-issuance. Datta et
al. (1997) examine bond IPOs exclusively, as compared to previous studies which have
included seasoned issues. Although they find no statistically significant evidence of
underpricing on the full sample, the findings in the study point towards underpricing in IPOs of
high yield bonds while IPOs of investment grade bonds rather are overpriced. The authors argue
that the discrepancy in pricing stem from high yield bonds being equity-like instruments,
suffering more from information asymmetry than bonds rated investment grade, while
investment grade issues are more sought-after by underwriters which may lead to price
competition between them. Furthermore, using high quality bond prices in the form of actual
trader quotes; Fung and Rudd (1986) do not find any evidence of underpricing in new bond
offerings. In a study by Cai et al. (2007), underpricing in bond offerings is deemed to be related
to information problems, though not to illiquidity. With regards to research conducted on non-
U.S. markets, there are a few interesting documentations in the field of pricing of new bond
offerings. Wasserfallen and Wydler (1988) document a slight underpricing of new bonds at
issue date on the Swiss market. The underpricing, however, corresponds to the difference in
transaction costs between the markets for new and seasoned bonds. Moreover, they find that
the underpricing disappears as the new bonds have started to trade on the stock exchange, which
is approximately two days after issuance. In the first quantitative study conducted on Japan,

                                     4
Matsui (2000) provides evidence of overpricing in new offerings of straight bonds. In a
subsequent study, Matsui (2006) finds that overpricing is particularly apparent in issues with a
smaller number of underwriters, issues made in periods when fewer financial security
companies have experience as the lead managing underwriter and lastly issues with high ratings.
Similarly to the reasoning by Datta et al. (1997), Matsui (2006) concludes that overpricing
stems from competition between underwriters.

2.3 Pricing of preferred stock offerings

If the existing research on pricing of bond offerings is perceived as limited, the range of
previous research papers examining pricing of seasoned offerings of preferred stock is even
scarcer. Previous research has focused on the effect of preferred stock issuance on the common
stock (Mikkelson and Partch, 1986; Linn and Pinegear, 1988; Irvine and Rosenfeld, 2000),
motivation and characteristics of preferred stock issuers (Fooladi and Roberts, 1986; Houston
and Houston, 1990; Ely et al., 2002) and the long-run performance of preferred stock issuers
(Howe and Lee, 2006). The last mentioned study documents significant abnormal
underperformance over a 1-year time-horizon among preferred stock issuers, though they find
no abnormal underperformance for financial firms. This is hypothesized to be a result of
financial firms having a distinct motive to issue preferred stock due to regulatory requirements
for capital adequacy.

     Loderer et al. (1991) were the first, and currently still are the only ones, to have studied
whether underpricing in seasoned offerings of preferred stock exists. The sample used in their
study encompass 251 seasoned offerings of preferred stock in the U.S. between the years 1980-
1984, comprising both convertible and non-convertible preferred stock. The researchers fail to
document underpricing in these issues, regardless of exchange market, length of holding period,
or type of preferred issued. Although the general analysis is attributable to the full sample, the
researchers also investigate whether differences in the magnitude of returns for convertibles
and non-convertibles exist. They conclude that this is the case, though the results lack statistical
significance. The authors argue that a straight non-convertible preferred stock is more debt-like,
as compared to its convertible counterpart, and subsequently the pricing of such instrument
should be similar to that of coupon bonds. As they formulate their hypothesis, stating that they
expect to find small or no underpricing in non-convertible issues, the authors refer to the study
conducted on new debt issues by Weinstein (1978) whom documents an average excess return
of 0.38% in the first month. While the authors conduct separate tests differentiating between
convertible and non-convertible preferred stock, which ultimately indicates significant negative
                                     5
first-day excess returns for non-convertibles, they simultaneously emphasize the likelihood of
this result stemming from inappropriately over-adjusting the excess returns. Consequently, the
authors make a concluding remark stating that the new securities, indifferent of differentiating
between convertibles and non-convertibles, are accurately priced.

2.4 Liquidity in pricing of securities

Several studies have proved liquidity to be reflected in prices of traded securities. Amihud and
Mendelson (1986), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1993) and Vayanos (1998), to mention a few,
suggest that illiquid securities have higher expected return than liquid securities, i.e. there is a
price discount (premium) on illiquid (liquid) securities. Liquidity has been found to be priced
in both equity markets (Amihud and Mendelson, 1986; Brennan et al., 1998; Chordia et al.,
2001) and fixed income markets (Amihud and Mendelson, 2006; Chen et al., 2007).

     The relationship between liquidity and pricing of new issues has also been cataloged. Miller
and Reilly (1987) find that underpriced issues exhibit significantly greater trading volumes on
the first day of trading, compared to overpriced issues. Booth and Chua (1996) find that firms
seek ownership dispersion, where underpricing is a way of reaching it. In turn, ownership
dispersion implies greater aftermarket liquidity. Moreover, Ellul and Pagano (2006) suggest
that underpricing is higher in IPOs that feature lower expected liquidity, while Zheng and Li
(2008) find that underpricing renders in enhanced aftermarket liquidity.

2.5 Contribution to existing research

As aforementioned, existing research directly investigating the pricing of seasoned offerings of
preferred stock is limited to the study conducted by Loderer et al. (1991). The authors conclude
that the new securities, indifferent of differentiating between convertibles and non-convertibles,
are accurately priced. In light of the scanty research on seasoned offerings and preferred stock,
and also considering the shortcomings of the study by Loderer et al. (1991), we strive to shed
additional light on this field of research through this paper. This study is restricted to solely
encompass seasoned offerings of non-convertible preferred stock. This somewhat narrowed
research scope is legitimized considering the vast amount of research made on IPOs, as well as
due to the different characteristics of convertibles and non-convertibles. Data paucity is also a
contributing factor.

    Firstly, to our knowledge we are the first to examine the pricing of preferred stock offerings
on the Canadian market. The Canadian market is smaller than the U.S. market according to

                                     6
Bloomberg, making our results possible to extrapolate to other markets of similar size. Kooli
and Suret (2004) argue that Canadian institutional investors are smaller than U.S. institutional
investors and also that they tend to be less aggressive and more passive, which could imply that
Canadian institutional investors have less ability to have an influence on pricing of new
offerings. Moreover, Williams and Shutt (2000) document evidence of the Canadian market
being more efficient than the U.S. market with regards to equity issuance, though this is a notion
in need for additional supportive findings on issues of other financial instruments.
Abovementioned differences in market characteristics are valid reasons for why this study will
add new insights into the pricing of preferred stock offerings, hopefully fueling supplementary
future research on the area.

    Secondly, one of the shortcomings of the paper by Loderer et al. (1991) is that the
researchers lack an appropriate portfolio of comparable assets to apply as benchmark when
calculating excess returns. In the paper, a beta to the CRSP value-weighted index of 1 is used.
This methodology rests on the assumption that preferred stock has a similar beta to that of
common stock. However, the documentation made by Bildersee (1973) suggests that betas of
preferred stocks are less than that of common stock, supporting the fact that the excess returns
calculated in the paper of Loderer et al. (1991) are flawed. More specifically, they are probably

                                                                                                5
over-adjusted. This notion is further supported by more recent market data ; the beta of
preferred stock to common stock has historically been below 1 and holds true for both the U.S.
and Canadian market. For that reason, and as compared to Loderer et al. (1991) we use an
adjusted and more relevant market model which instead adjusts for returns of an index of more
comparable assets.

    Thirdly, and contrary to the study by Loderer et al. (1991) which solely investigates the
level of initial returns, we address the determinants on pricing of preferred stock offerings. We
investigate differences in pricing between company- and issue-specific characteristics. Also,
this study probes liquidity, interest rate volatility and underwriter competition as factors
potentially impacting initial returns. Lastly, we also investigate whether firm-specific issues
made within a short-time distance are more accurately priced in the subsequent issue.

5
 See appendix table I and II.
                                     7
3. Hypotheses

Since our sample is solely comprised of non-convertible preferred stock, we hypothesize our
sample to be priced more similar to that of bonds rather than common stock. Aforementioned
research suggests that new issues of common stock are underpriced (Ibbotson, 1975; Kooli and
Suret, 2004), while the research on bonds is ambiguous as it documents both over- and
underpricing (Datta et al., 1997; Cai et al., 2007). Loderer et al. (1991), however, find no
evidence of underpricing in their sample comprising both convertible and non-convertible
preferred stock. They conclude that first-day excess returns are not significantly different from
zero, implying that there is no evidence of any mispricing in these issues. While the authors
conduct separate tests differentiating between convertible and non-convertible preferred stock,
which ultimately indicates significant negative first-day excess returns for non-convertibles,
they simultaneously emphasize the likelihood of this result stemming from inappropriately
over-adjusting the excess returns. The authors make concluding remarks stating that the new
securities, indifferent of differentiating between convertibles and non-convertibles, are
accurately priced. In light of these findings, we expect to find similar results on non-convertible
preferred stock. Findings made by Williams and Shutt (2000) show that the Canadian stock
market is more efficient than that of the U.S., which adds further support for preferred stocks
being accurately priced.

  Hypothesis I: Seasoned offerings of non-convertible preferred stock are accurately priced.

    Studies point towards liquidity being a factor affecting the pricing of fixed income
securities (Amihud and Mendelson, 2006; Chen et al., 2007). Therefore, expected aftermarket
liquidity is a factor which underwriters have to consider upon pricing a new preferred stock
issue. Differences in the (by underwriters) expected- and actual aftermarket liquidity render in
mispricing. In the case of the new issue being more illiquid (liquid) than expected, negative
(positive) excess returns will be greater as illiquidity discounts (liquidity premiums) have to be
offered in the aftermarket.

 Hypothesis II: Illiquidity discounts (liquidity premiums) offered in the aftermarket render in
              mispricing in the form of initial negative (positive) excess returns.

    Non-convertible preferred stock is a debt-like instrument, yielding fixed dividend
payments which are decided upon issue. The price of such instrument is thus, as in the case of
bonds, inversely related to the level of interest rates as the value originates from future

                                     8
discounted cash flows. Hence, prices of fixed income securities, including non-convertible
preferred stock, are a function of not only issuer and issue characteristics but also market
conditions (Sorensen and Hawkins, 1981). Due to the influence interest rates have on the price
of preferred stock, market participants (including investors and underwriters) have to make
assumptions regarding future interest rates which might consequently render in increased
difficulty in assessing the preferred stock’s true value in times of high interest rate uncertainty.

  Hypothesis III: High interest rate uncertainty at the time of a preferred stock issue is cause
                                        for mispricing.
    Arguably, underwriters competing for the mandate by pitching favorable issuing terms,
including an excessive issue price, render in negative initial excess returns. Underwriter
competition has been documented as a cause for bond overpricing by Datta et al. (1997) and
Matsui (2006). The later study attributes the total number of underwriters involved in the issue
as a proxy for underwriter competition, suggesting that a small number of underwriters renders
competition to intensify as the opportunity to participate as a member in the underwriting
syndicate lessens. In light of previous documentations, we anticipate underwriter competition
to be a factor affecting initial excess returns.

Hypothesis IV: Offerings with higher underwriter competition are subject to mispricing in the
                            form of initial negative excess returns.

     If underwriters overprice a preferred stock issue, presumably investors will be reluctant to
overpay in a subsequent preferred stock issue conducted in the near future by the same firm,
thus putting force on underwriters to lower the price in the subsequent issue. If, however,
underwriters underprice a preferred stock issue, according to the information acquisition theory
this will render the underwriters able to acquire additional insights regarding the demand from
investors, subsequently they will not need to underprice a subsequent issue equally as much.
Consequently, it is reasonable to expect that offerings closely preceded by other preferred stock
offerings issued by the same firm are less mispriced than issues made with a great timely
distance.

 Hypothesis V: Preferred stock offerings issued by firms that recently have issued a preferred
                            stock will be priced more accurately.

                                     9
4. Data

4.1 Sample collection

Our sample of preferred stock offerings on the Toronto Stock Exchange is gathered from
Bloomberg and includes matured, redeemed, defaulted and currently active preferred stock. By
including non-active preferred stock, we strive to mitigate the risk for survivorship bias. The
collected data is constituted by issue-specific variables including issue date, offer price,
historical prices, issued- and historically traded volumes, underwriting syndicate, rating,
perpetual-, convertible- and IPO flag. Furthermore, the data is constituted by market-specific
variables such as interest rates and various indices, and by the firm-specific variables industry,
founding year and market capitalization.

    While the complete sample encompasses 422 issues, whereby the oldest observation dates
back to 1960, we have chosen a 15-year time horizon ranging between the years 2002-2016.
This is done for mainly two reasons, namely that the numbers of preferred issues pre-2002 are
few but also the fact that the suggested period includes both recessions and booms, thereby
capturing potential market differences. Furthermore, the interesting macro economical

                                                    6
dynamics such as the development of CORRA  over the specified time period add further
incentives for our choice of time horizon. We limit our sample to solely comprise seasoned

                                                                                              7
offerings of preferred stock, thereby rendering it free from IPOs and tap issues . Given the fact
that the sample data only include 14 IPO observations and six tap issues, this does not have a
great impact on the number of observations. For natural reasons, issues that lack offer prices

                                                                             8
and first-day midpoint closing prices are excluded from our sample.  As aforementioned,
convertible stocks are more equity-like than its non-convertible counterpart and for
comparability reasons we therefore exclude these observations from our sample as well. Lastly,
market capitalization is deemed necessary in controlling for firm size as well as measuring the
relative gross proceeds. Hence we exclude all observations lacking this variable data. In the
process of doing so, and which we would had done regardless had it not occurred in this process
(for comparability reasons), we simultaneously exclude all equity investment instruments.
Coincidentally, and favorably, the majority of all observations lacking market capitalization are
equity investment instruments and thus only few observations are excluded in essence.

6
 Abbreviation for Canadian Overnight Repo Rate Average, CORRA.
7
 A tap issue is defined as an issue with the same ISIN code as an already outstanding preferred stock.
8
 Observations lacking seven- and/or thirty-day midpoint closing prices are not excluded due to first-day returns being our
main dependent variable, as stated in section 5.1, and we strive not to decrease the number of observations.
                                     10
Ultimately, we observe that our sample only consists of perpetual preferreds. We also conclude
that all observations in our sample that were rated by S&P upon issue, and which are not
reported as “not available” by Bloomberg, were rated investment grade with only one
exception.

                                Table 1: Summary statistics
                                           Number Percent (%)
                 Full sample 266 100.0

                 By period
                 2002-2006 30 11.3
                 2007-2011 69 25.9
                 2012-2016 167 62.8

                  By sector
                 Financial 136 51.1
                 Non-financial 130 48.9

                  By rating
                 Investment grade 240 90.2
                 Not available 25 9.4
                 Non-rated 1 0.4

                 By key terms
                Perpetual 266 100.0
                 Non-convertible 266 100.0
                 Seasoned offerings 266 100.0
                   The table above illustrates, by number of observations and subgroup ratio, the
                  subgroups that form our sample. Sector is a dichotomous variable, whereby
                   “financial” signifies that the issuing company is active within the financial sector
                      and “non-financial” signifies that the company is active within any other industry
                 sector. Offerings are classified as investment grade if the issue rating provided by
                    S&P at issue was at least BBB-.

                       9
    Our final dataset  includes a total of 266 seasoned offerings of preferred stock, ranging
between the period 2002 and 2016. This represents approximately 63% of our initial dataset.

4.2 Data discussion

While we do consider our sample data to be sufficiently exhaustive in order for us to test our
hypotheses, we are aware of the potential limitations and gaps in the dataset.

    Firstly, it can be argued that only using one main source of data, Bloomberg, might be
limited or act as a source of risk. Furthermore, actual transaction data is not available through
Bloomberg but instead quoted broker prices are presented. That is, prices presented in
Bloomberg are computed using price quotes from brokers in combination with the Bloomberg
proprietary pricing service, BVAL. BVAL in itself combines other price quotes for the stock as

9
  See appendix table III for detailed data sample filter log.
                                     11
well as additional information found relevant by Bloomberg (such as historical correlations).
While it is optimal to use actual transaction data, to our knowledge no such data is available for
the Canadian preferred stock market. Thus, and given Bloomberg’s high reputation within the
fixed income segment, we argue that Bloomberg acts as a trustworthy source of data.
Furthermore, various research papers, both outside and within the U.S. bond market, have been
conducted using broker quotes. Fung and Rudd (1986) is an example of such a research paper.

    Moreover, excluding equity investment instruments from our sample may render in an
exclusion bias and subsequently distort our findings. This is noticeable when we filter for issues
lacking market capitalization, which in effect simultaneously renders in an exclusion of nearly
all non-perpetual issues, the majority of which coincidentally also are equity investment
instruments. For comparability reasons, however, we find it necessary to disregard equity
investment instruments in this thesis, considering the fact that they do not share similar
characteristics to that of the large bulk of our sample.

5. Methodology

5.1 Dependent variable

In studies investigating pricing of new issues of common stock, holding period return is
naturally used as proxy for expected return. However, there are two main approaches to assess
pricing of new issues of fixed income securities. While e.g. Conard and Frankena (1969),
Ederington (1974) and Lindvall (1977) investigate the difference in yield to maturity between
newly issued bonds and similar bonds outstanding in the market, more recent studies focus their
analysis on holding period returns (e.g. Weinstein, 1978; Fung and Rudd, 1986; Wasserfallen
and Wydler, 1988; Datta et al., 1997; Cai et al., 2007). The rationale for using yield to maturity
in studies on fixed income securities is that it approximates the expected return to the holder of
the instrument over the holding horizon. However, for an investor with a short holding horizon
the holding period return may act as a more appropriate proxy for the expected return compared
to yield to maturity (Weinstein, 1978). Moreover, the use of holding period returns enables
comparisons of findings on fixed income securities with findings in the equity market. Due to
the hybrid characteristics of preferred stock, comparability with previous findings on both fixed
income and equity is of great importance for the interpretation of our results. Additionally,
Loderer et al. (1991) use holding period returns when examining pricing of preferred stock
issues. Consequently, we have chosen to use holding period return as our proxy for the expected

                                     12
return on the preferred stock. Thus, we define the holding period raw return for an individual
preferred stock as:

                                                                                                                          𝑃𝑖,𝑡
                                      𝑅𝑖,𝑡 =    − 1 (1)
                                                                                          𝑃𝑖,0

    Pi,t is the midpoint closing price on day t of trading for preferred stock i and Pi,0 is the offer
price for stock i. We compute first-, seven- and thirty-day returns in order to compare our results
with that of Loderer et al. (1991). However, we attribute the first-day return as our main
dependent variable going forward, as we strive to eliminate the risk of additional information
reaching the market and potentially impacting the price. In order to assess the pricing of the full
sample, we use an equally-weighted average according to the formula below:

                                                    1   𝑛
                                        𝑅𝑎,𝑡 =   ∑ 𝑖=1 𝑅𝑖,𝑡                                               (2)
                                                   𝑛

     Ri,t is the holding period return of an individual preferred stock as defined in equation (1),
n the number of preferred stock offerings in the sample, t the holding period and a the full
sample. Conversely, we could have used value-weighted returns. Such method, however, would
cause larger firms to have the greatest impact on our results, making the results more difficult
to interpret on smaller firms. Our ambition is to explain the overall pricing in the Canadian
preferred stock market, which is comprised of both large and small firms, and therefore we
argue that an equally-weighted approach is preferable for this paper’s purpose. However, we
do find it interesting to control for firm size and do so in the thesis by adding firm size as a
control variable. Lastly, by using equally-weighted first-day returns we are able to compare our
results to the findings of Loderer et al. (1991).

    In order to isolate the excess return, i.e. the return an investor could earn in excess of an
index comprised of comparable assets, we adjust our observed raw returns for systematic risk.
Considering that our sample is solely comprised of seasoned offerings, measures of systematic
risk for individual preferred stock offerings are impossible to calculate as there is no trading
history. Consequently, an appropriate return, representing the return of the general market, has
to be applied and used. Previous studies on equity offerings have altered in their conducted
methodology regarding if and how to adjust for the market return. Ibbotson (1975) regresses a
one-stock portfolio excess return against both the same and previous calendar month market
excess return, while Ritter (1984) uses raw returns unadjusted for market movements. Loughran
et al. (1994) suggest that when investigating long-run returns, one should report both raw and
market-adjusted returns. In studies encompassing bonds, methodologies for adjusting for the

                                     13
market-return include matching the bond with a treasury bond with similar characteristics (Fung
and Rudd, 1986; Datta et al., 1997), matching the bond with a corporate bond with similar
characteristics (Weinstein, 1978; Wasserfallen and Wydler, 1988) and matching the bond with
an appropriate bond index (Sorensen, 1982; Cai et al., 2007). In the study by Loderer et al.
(1991) on preferred stock, the researchers adjust the raw returns with the value-weighted equity
CRSP index. However, in the process of doing so the authors suspect that they ultimately over-
adjust the returns, which is also supported by evidence provided by Bildersee (1973) whom
find that betas of preferred stock are less than that of common stock. This is further supported

                                10
by more recent market data  .

    In our study, we use an index when adjusting our raw returns. Our intention is to apply a
more appropriate index for the purpose of adjusting returns of preferred stock, compared to
Loderer et al. (1991). Not only will our decision to use an index as proxy for the market return
be in line with the study by Loderer et al. (1991), but also in accordance with methodologies
used in recent studies conducted on bonds, such as Cai et al. (2007).

    We apply the S&P/TSX Preferred Share Index, comprising investment grade preferred
stock listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange meeting certain criteria with respect to minimum
size, liquidity and exchange listing (Soe and Brzenk, 2014). Considering the fact that the index
is of investment grade quality, it is arguably a portfolio of assets suiting our sample well, as our
sample almost exclusively consists of investment grade issues (see section 4.1). The index
represented approximately 82% of the publicly traded Canadian preferred stock market as of

                       11
December 31, 2013  .According to Bloomberg, the first historical index data available for the
S&P/TSX Preferred Share Index is as of July 19, 2002. Our sample, however, includes
observations in the period prior to this date and therefore we need to complement the index for
the period January 1, 2002 – July 18, 2002. This is done using the S&P Composite Index,
adjusted for the beta of the S&P/TSX Preferred Share Index. The beta is derived through an
Ordinary Least Squares, OLS,-regression of daily returns for the two indices for the period July
19, 2002 – July 18, 2003, as this is the closest period and subsequently share similarities with
the period we are estimating. Henceforth, we refer to this extrapolated S&P/TSX Preferred
Share Index simply as the Preferred Stock Index. Naturally, as we lack historical trading data
for our seasoned offerings at the date of the issue, making beta estimations impossible, we need

10
  See appendix table I and II.
11
  According to S&P Dow Jones Indices.
                                     14
to make the assumption that each preferred stock’s beta to the Preferred Stock Index equals 1.
Thus, the holding period excess return for an individual preferred stock is defined as:

                                                                                                         𝑃𝑖,𝑡        𝑃𝑖,𝑚,𝑡
                              𝐸𝑅𝑖 = (   −     ) (3)
                                                                                   𝑃𝑖,0      𝑃𝑖,𝑚,0

     Pi,t is the midpoint closing price on day t of trading for stock i, Pi,0 is the offer price for
stock i, Pi,m,t is the closing level of the Preferred Stock Index on day t and Pi,m,0 is the closing
level of the Preferred Stock Index on the day before the first day of trading for stock i. Finally,
our main dependent variable is the equally-weighted excess return and is defined as:

                                                      1   𝑛
                                     𝐸𝑅𝑎,𝑡 =   ∑ 𝑖=1 𝐸𝑅𝑖                                          (4)
                                                     𝑛

    ERi is the holding period excess return for an individual preferred stock as defined in
equation (3), n the number of preferred stock offerings in the sample, t the holding period and
a the full sample.

5.2 Independent variables

                                                                                          12
Below, we discuss the nine variables included in our OLS regression model  .

   LN_GROSS_PROCEEDS: The natural logarithm of respective issue gross proceeds,
measured in CADm. Beatty and Ritter (1986) define gross proceeds as a proxy for ex-ante
uncertainty and find that smaller IPOs of common stock are subject to more speculation and as
such experience higher average initial excess returns. Moreover, a similar variable has been
used as a proxy for liquidity in bonds (Houweling et al., 2005; Cai et al., 2007), where larger
issues are deemed more liquid. We control for issue-specific characteristics using this variable.

   LN_MARKET_CAP: The natural logarithm of the issuing company’s equity market
capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. This variable acts to control for company-
specific characteristics.

    D_GROSS_PROCEEDS_TO_MARKET_CAP: A 0-1 dummy variable, whereby 1 signifies
that the gross proceeds relative to the issuing company’s equity market capitalization at the time
of the preferred stock issue is equal to or above the average across all issues. A similar variable
was used by Beatty and Ritter (1986) and Datta et al. (1997) for the purpose of controlling for
issue-specific risk. We control for issue-specific characteristics using this variable.

12
  See appendix table IV for mathematical derivations.
                                     15
    LN_AGE: The natural logarithm of 1 + the age of the issuing company, defined as the time
from preferred stock issue date to founding date. This variable has been used in many studies
investigating pricing of new equity issues, including Beatty and Ritter (1986) and Ljungqvist
and Wilhelm (2003). We use it to control for company-specific characteristics.

    D_FINANCIAL: A 0-1 dummy variable, whereby 1 signifies that the issuing company is
active within the financial sector and 0 signifies that the company is active within any other
industry sector. Taking into consideration that approximately half of our sample is constituted
by the financial sector, we find it reasonable to control for sectorial differences.

    LIQUIDITY: First-day stock turnover, computed as the first-day preferred stock trading
volume divided by total issued volume. We use it as a proxy for liquidity, as supported by
Houweling et al. (2005). There are many alternative proxies for liquidity, such as the bid-ask
spread and trade frequency. However, due to paucity in the number of observations for these
proxies, we find it reasonable to use the first-mentioned proxy. This variable is tied to
Hypothesis II.

    INTEREST_RATE_VOLATILITY: Previous research states that fixed income security
prices are not only functions of issuer and issue characteristics, but also market conditions
(Sorensen and Hawkins, 1981). We assess how interest rate uncertainty affects pricing of
preferred stock offerings by measuring the trailing three-week standard deviation of the natural
logarithm of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government

             13
bond index  . This variable serves to answer Hypothesis III.

    NUMBER_OF_UNDERWRITERS: The number of underwriters involved in the offering.
Matsui (2006) find that Japanese bonds with fewer underwriters comprising the underwriting
syndicate tend to experience more negative initial returns as the opportunity to participate as a
member in the underwriting syndicate lessens. We consider this to be a proxy for underwriter
competition, in line with Matsui (2006), and it serves to answer Hypothesis IV.

    D_SUBSEQUENT_ISSUE: A 0-1 dummy variable, whereby 1 signifies that the issue is
made within or exactly six months from the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering. If
underwriters overprice a preferred stock issue, presumably investors will be reluctant to
overpay in subsequent preferred stock issues conducted in the nearby future by the same firm.
If, however, underwriters underprice a preferred stock issue this will render them able to acquire

13
  Government of Canada Benchmark 10 Year Bond Yields (V39055). Henceforth referred to as the “ten-year Canadian
government bond index”.
                                     16
additional insights regarding the demand from investors for a particular type of issue and
subsequently enhance their ability to price the next issue more accurately. This variable is tied
to Hypothesis V.

5.3 Regression model

In order to successfully test our stated hypotheses, we apply OLS-regressions. Due to
heteroscedasticity, and in line with previous research such as Cai et al. (2007), we apply the

                                                                   14
Huber-White (1980) theory on robust standard errors  . Our final regression model is as
follows:

𝐸𝑅𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝐿𝑁_𝐺𝑅𝑂𝑆𝑆_𝑃𝑅𝑂𝐶𝐸𝐸𝐷𝑆 + 𝛽2 𝐿𝑁_𝑀𝐴𝑅𝐾𝐸𝑇_𝐶𝐴𝑃 +
𝛽3 𝐷_𝐺𝑅𝑂𝑆𝑆_𝑃𝑅𝑂𝐶𝐸𝐸𝐷𝑆_𝑇𝑂_𝑀𝐴𝑅𝐾𝐸𝑇_𝐶𝐴𝑃 + 𝛽4 𝐿𝑁_𝐴𝐺𝐸 + 𝛽5 𝐷_𝐹𝐼𝑁𝐴𝑁𝐶𝐼𝐴𝐿 +
𝛽6 𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑈𝐼𝐷𝐼𝑇𝑌 + 𝛽7 𝐼𝑁𝑇𝐸𝑅𝐸𝑆𝑇_𝑅𝐴𝑇𝐸_𝑉𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇𝐼𝐿𝐼𝑇𝑌 +
𝛽8 𝑁𝑈𝑀𝐵𝐸𝑅_𝑂𝐹_𝑈𝑁𝐷𝐸𝑅𝑊𝑅𝐼𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑆 + 𝛽9 𝐷_𝑆𝑈𝐵𝑆𝐸𝑄𝑈𝐸𝑁𝑇_𝐼𝑆𝑆𝑈𝐸 (5)

5.4 Test statistics

In our ambition to test the stated hypotheses and verify our findings, we utilize a broad scope
of test statistics as mentioned below.

    Descriptive statistics summaries are presented and aim to provide the reader with an
introduction to the dataset in terms of key issuer and issue characteristics, as well as other
variable data deemed relevant. By stating key variable values at certain percentile levels, we
facilitate the reader’s ability to review and analyze several statistical aspects of our sample.

     Univariate independent student’s t-tests are applied using raw- and excess returns in order
to determine whether the full sample of preferred stock issues is accurately priced or mispriced,
which serves to answer Hypothesis I. By conducting independent student’s t-tests and a two-
sample t-test on first-day excess returns using two subgroups (first- and third quartile) on the
basis of liquidity, we gather insights into answering Hypothesis II. Furthermore, and with the
exception for the liquidity variable, we investigate for subgroup differences among our
regression model variables as well as over the sample time period (by three equal time periods
of five years respectively) using independent student’s t-tests on first-day excess returns
(complemented with average liquidity levels). The findings made evident enable us to assess
each group’s respective first-day excess return and significance level, consequently providing

14
  This is discussed more elaborately in section 5.4.
                                     17
us with valuable evidence for answering Hypothesis II while providing insights into answering
Hypothesis III and IV. In order to answer Hypothesis V, we apply two-sample t-tests on first-
day excess returns on the basis of our dummy subsequent issue. This depicts the differences in
the pricing accuracy associated with having conducted two preferreds in a short time distance.

    We illustrate and analyze the correlations among our independent variables using both a
Pearson’s bivariate correlation matrix and the variation inflation factor, VIF. This is done for
the purpose of controlling for multicollinearity, and we then adjust our regression model for the
statistical phenomenon accordingly. Also, we include the dependent variable in the correlation
matrix and analyze its respective correlation to the independent variables so as to get an
indication of respective variable’s explanatory value on the dependent variable.

                                                             15
    By scatter plotting our first-day excess returns  , we observe only few outliers. None are,
however, considered extreme and consequently we find no need for winsorizing our data. Also,
plotting the regression model residuals and using the Breusch-Pagan (1979) test on each model
throughout the analysis we find evidence of heteroscedasticity. More specifically, we reject the
null hypothesis of homoscedasticity at the 1% significance level. Therefore, we find it necessary
to adjust for this phenomenon in our regression models using the Huber-White (1980) theory
on robust standard errors.

    Subsequently, having reviewed the descriptive statistics in conjunction with the
independent student’s t-tests and two-sample t-tests as well as the correlation matrix, we begin
to assess a multivariate analysis. We run six regressions (hierarchical), whereas the first two
only include the control variables and each following regression thereafter adds an explanatory
value. The sixth regression is therefore considered our complete and final model. The dependent
variable in each regression is the first-day excess return, as defined in section 5.1. Reviewing
the results from the various regressions enables us to answer Hypothesis II-V and demonstrates
the drivers of first-day excess returns.

     Lastly, we run several robustness tests in order to validate our findings. This is successfully
done by controlling for fixed effects and clustered standard errors. Moreover, we test for
robustness using various dependent variables as well as replacing the natural logarithm of gross
proceeds with that of market capitalization.

15
  See appendix figure III and IV.
                                     18
6. Results and Discussion

6.1 Descriptive statistics

                             Table 2: Variable descriptive statistics
                                              First                                Third         No. of
 Variable          Median Average
                                            quartile                          quartile     observations
 Age (years) 9.8 19.1 34.9 38.4 262
 Gross proceeds (CADm) 150 250 260 300 266
 Market cap (CADbn) 4.9 20.8 27.0 37.9 266
 Gross proceeds to market cap (%) 0.8 1.4 2.9 3.7 266
 Liquidity (%) 2.7 4.8 5.3 6.8 266
 Interest rate volatility (%) 1.2 1.6 1.9 2.3 266
 Number of underwriters 1.0 2.0 2.5 3.0 259
 The table above illustrates descriptive statistics for some key variables for the full sample. The returns are depicted at the
    th    th        th
 25 , 50  and 75  percentile levels, as well as at the average level while also revealing the number of observations. Age is
 the time between the preferred stock issue date and founding date. Gross proceeds is the offer price times the total number
 of shares issued. Market cap is the issuing firm’s equity market capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. Gross
 proceeds to market cap is defined as gross proceeds divided by market capitalization. Liquidity is the first-day preferred
 stock trading volume divided by total issued volume. Interest rate volatility is calculated as the trailing three-week standard
  deviation of the natural logarithm of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government bond
 index. Number of underwriters is simply the number of underwriters involved in the issue.

    There is some variation in age among our sample firms. However, as implied by the median
age of 19.1 years, the bulk of sample firms are to be considered mature. This is quite natural,
as our sample contains seasoned offerings exclusively. Firms engaging in seasoned offerings
are, per definition, already public firms, most probably with additional history as a private
company before going public. The fact that the majority of all issues were rated investment
grade upon issue further supports our theory on mature firms. The range in gross proceeds is

                                                                          th         th
deemed relatively narrow, where the difference between the 25  and 75  percentile is roughly
CAD 150m. Interestingly, there is a wider span in market capitalization of the issuing firms,
indicating that there are not large differences in gross proceeds between small- and large
companies. Though, one should also consider the fact that many large companies in our sample
for some years systematically issued preferreds on a half-year or quarterly basis, which could
infer that they compensate for relatively small gross proceeds by issuing more frequently.
Moreover, in our sample, relative preferred stock gross proceeds to outstanding equity at the
time of issue is deemed small, representing a median of only 1.4% of the market capitalization.
Using the same variable, Loderer et al. (1991) find the median for their sample to be
approximately 11%, suggesting their sample involve greater issue-specific risk. Our median of
1.4% signifies relatively low issue-specific risk, in accordance with the reasoning by Datta et
al. (1997), as capital raised through the preferred stock offering is modest in comparison to the
already established equity financing.

                                     19
                       Figure 2: Yearly average first-day sample liquidity

 9,0%
 8,0%
 7,0%
 6,0%
 5,0%
 4,0%
 3,0%
 2,0%
 1,0%
 0,0%
        2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016

               Yearly average first-day sample liquidity Linjär (Yearly average first-day sample liquidity)

    Liquidity, as measured by first-day stock turnover, averages 5.3% in our sample. The
number of shares traded on the first day averages 0.6 million for our sample, while the average
shares issued is 10.4 million. In general, fairly low first-day trading activity is what can be
expected of fixed income securities, as many investors arguably have the intention to hold them
for some time or even until maturity. As our sample exclusively comprises perpetual preferred
stock, which are securities configuring long maturities, it comes natural to assume that the
majority of investors buying such instrument have relatively long investment horizons. An
interesting notion, as depicted in figure 2 above, is that our sample yearly average liquidity
increases over time. This observation will be further discussed in section 6.2.

    With regards to interest rate volatility, no dramatic discrepancies are noticed when

                      th          th
comparing the 25  and 75  percentiles of 1.2% and 2.3% respectively. The interest rate
volatility is based on the ten-year Canadian government bond index, which is sensitive to
macroeconomic factors such as economic growth, inflation, political factors and monetary
policy. Given the characteristics of the bond index, the volatility in the yield is expected to be
low, as evident in our sample. The number of underwriters in each issue in our sample is on
average 2.5, which is somewhat lower than the average number of underwriters of 4.8 in the
sample used by Matsui (2006) on bond issues.

     Previous research, such as Datta et al. (1997), has successfully included issue rating as a
variable, documenting differences in pricing between investment grade- and high yield issues.
Unfortunately, and as noted in section 4.1, as our sample almost exclusively consists of
investment grade issues it is impossible for us to appropriately examine differences in pricing
between investment grade- and high yield issues.

                                     20
6.2 Univariate analysis

We begin our univariate analysis by reviewing initial returns for the full sample.

                   Table 3: Raw- and excess returns, as measured in percent
                                                                                                  t-statistic          No. of
              First quartile Median Average Third quartile
                                                                                 p-value      observations
                                             (A) Raw returns
 R1 -1.20 -0.20 -0.61*** 0.24 0.000 266
 R7 -1.00 0.00 -0.49*** 0.60 0.000 266
 R30 -1.04 0.40 -0.19 1.40 0.158 248
                                              (B) Excess returns
 ER1 -1.15 -0.24 -0.60*** 0.28 0.000 266
 ER7 -1.11 -0.03 -0.40*** 0.78 0.002 266
 ER30 -1.10 0.35 0.13 1.67 0.261 248
                                                                                                       th    th        th
 The table above illustrates holding period returns (in percent). The returns are depicted at the 25 , 50  and 75  percentile
  levels, as well as at the average level while also revealing p-values and number of observations. Rt is the equally-weighted
 raw return yielded from buying at the offer price and selling at the midpoint closing price on day t. ERt is the equally-
 weighted excess return yielded from buying at the offer price and selling at the midpoint closing price on day t. ***/**/*
  denotes statistical significance at 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

     As illustrated in table 3 above, our sample experiences negative first-day excess returns on
average by 0.60%. Similar findings are made when examining the first-day raw returns, yielding
negative returns of 0.61%. Both results are statistically significant at the 1% level. We observe
that 64% (36%) of the first-day excess returns are negative (positive), as compared to 55%
(45%) as found by Loderer et al. (1991). Furthermore, comparing the raw first-day returns we
note that 62% of our sample yields negative returns while Loderer et al. (1991) only observe
37%. The large discrepancy in the portion of issues yielding negative first-day excess- and raw
returns respectively in said study adds suspicion as to if the authors over-adjust when computing
the excess returns, which the authors argue to be prevailing in their study.

     While no severe overpricing is evident in our sample, statistically significant negative first-
day excess returns are still identified, as compared to Loderer et al. (1991) which makes
concluding remarks stating that their sample seems to be accurately priced. Consequently, we
conclude that our findings are not in line with those of said study. Considering the findings by
Williams and Shutt (2000), in which the authors state that the Canadian stock market is more
efficient than that of the U.S., our results are somewhat counterintuitive and not in line with
Hypothesis I – that preferred stock issues are accurately priced on the Canadian preferred stock
market. The fact that our sample yields negative first-day excess returns signify that
underwriters do not accurately account for the total risk upon determining the price.

    Our findings are similar to studies pointing towards overpricing in bonds (Datta et al., 1997;
Matsui, 2006). Datta et al. (1997) document an average first-day excess return of -2.88% on

                                     21
investment grade bond IPOs, which is a more severe level of negative excess return as compared
to our results. Based solely on this comparison, though not perfectly comparable due to
differences in the offerings being initial or seasoned, investment grade preferred stock seem to
experience negative first-day excess returns similarly to investment grade bonds, though not as
distinctly. Additionally, the comparison provides some insights on pricing of new issues of
hybrid instruments being in between that of equity and bonds, considering that equity issues are
documented to be underpriced on average (Ibbotson, 1975; Kooli and Suret, 2004). We are
unable to make direct comparisons to the findings of Matsui (2006), given the fact that he
employs relative yields as a proxy for overpricing while we apply holding period returns.
Nevertheless, similarities between the instruments can be identified with regards to overpricing
being present.

    We find excess returns to average -0.40% and 0.13% over a seven- and thirty-day holding
period respectively, implying that prices in the aftermarket of newly issued preferred stock tend
to revert to the offer price shortly after issuance. Hence, though the thirty-day holding period
lack statistical significance, on an indicative basis it seems as if the initial mispricing fades
rather quickly. Loderer et al. (1991) document an average excess return over the first five- and
thirty trading days of -0.09% and -1.28% respectively on the full sample (including both
convertible and non-convertible preferred stock). However, only the thirty-day excess return is
statistically significant. Our findings on the seven- and thirty-day returns are not perfectly
comparable to that of aforementioned research paper, due to differences in the definitions of
return and the inclusion of convertible/non-convertibles. Whereas we consider total number of
days when measuring returns, the authors of said paper instead consider trading days. Despite
the differences, we still find it interesting to compare our results with theirs as this further
strengthens ours and the authors’ suspicion that they over-adjust for the market returns.

     Table 4: Univariate analysis of first-day excess returns, as measured in percent, over
                                             liquidity
                                                                                       Average
                                         Liquidity ≥ 6.8% Liquidity ≤ 2.7%
                                                                                                                               diff
                                                                           t-                                      t-
                                                                                                                                  t-statistic
                                      Average   statistic   Obs. Average   statistic   Obs.
                                                                                                  p-value
                                                    p-value                      p-value
 Full sample 0.45*** 0.001 66 -1.56*** 0.000 67 0.000
 The table above illustrates first-day excess returns (in percent) by two subgroups on the full sample, based on the liquidity
 variable. The returns are depicted at the average level while also revealing subgroup p-values and number of observations.
 P-value of the difference between the subgroup averages is depicted in the rightmost column. The subgroup labeled
                                                                                                    th
  “Liquidity ≥ 6.8%” constitutes issues with first-day liquidity equal to or above 6.8%, which is the 75  percentile. The
                                                                                                                                                                                       th
 subgroup labeled “Liquidity ≤ 2.7%” comprises issues with first-day liquidity less than or equal to 2.7%, which is the 25
  percentile. ***/**/* denotes statistical significance at 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

                                     22
     Examining the relationship between liquidity and first-day excess returns of newly issued
preferred stock, our findings in table 4 show that there is a positive correlation between the two.
Issues having relatively poor aftermarket liquidity (as measured by the 25th percentile) yield
significantly larger negative first-day excess returns compared to relatively liquid issues (as
measured by the 75th percentile). This adds support for Hypothesis II – stating that illiquidity
discounts (liquidity premiums) in the aftermarket render in mispricing in the form of negative
(positive) first-day excess returns. That is, investors selling illiquid preferreds on the first day
of trading seem to offer a discount in order to compensate buyers for additional risk associated
with illiquidity. Likewise, as evident from the significant positive first-day excess return of
0.45%, the most liquid preferred stock seem to be selling at a premium in the aftermarket. Our
results are similar to studies providing evidence of greater aftermarket liquidity in underpriced
issues (Miller and Reilly, 1987; Booth and Chua, 1996; Zheng and Li, 2008). However, rather
than interpreting aftermarket liquidity as a consequence of the pricing of the new issue (as in
aforementioned studies), we interpret it as aftermarket liquidity affecting the level of pricing
directly and subsequently is an important factor for both underwriters and investors to consider
when assessing new issue pricing. This notion is in line with findings on bonds (Amihud and
Mendelson, 2006; Chen et al., 2007) and common stock (Amihud and Mendelson, 1986;
Brennan et al., 1998; Chordia et al., 2001), suggesting that illiquidity risk is priced and
consequently that the prices of illiquid securities must fall sufficiently to attract investors.
Arguably, first-day excess returns partly stem from a difference between the (by underwriters)
expected- and actual aftermarket liquidity. Had underwriters been able to accurately estimate
and incorporate aftermarket liquidity upon pricing the new issue, the level of mispricing would
presumably be lower. These observations stress the importance of aftermarket liquidity and its
impact on first-day excess returns.

   Table 5: Univariate analysis of first-day excess returns over time period, complemented
                            with first-day liquidity, measured in percent
                                          Average excess       t-statistic          Average            No. of
                                            return            p-value           liquidity        observations
 Full sample -0.60*** 0.000 5.27 266

 By period
 2002-2006 -1.02*** 0.001 2.19 30
 2007-2011 -0.58*** 0.000 3.84 69
 2012-2016 -0.53*** 0.001 6.41 167
 The table above illustrates average first-day excess returns (in percent), p-values, average liquidity (in percent)
 and number of observations, for the full sample as well as by three time period subgroups (three equal groups
 of five years respectively).

                                     23
    Upon conducting a univariate analysis of the determinants on first-day excess returns in
offerings of preferred stock, as illustrated in Table 5, we notice that negative first-day excess
returns are more severe in the period 2002-2006 compared to the following periods 2007-2011
and 2012-2016. These findings suggest that negative first-day excess returns diminish over
time, i.e. seasoned offerings of preferreds are gradually becoming more accurately priced. Since
the Canadian preferred stock market is relatively young, the observed pattern could be argued
to be a result of the market maturing and subsequently becoming more efficient over time. It
could also be a result of investors increasingly being able to monitor the pricing of previous
issues. That is, as underwriters slightly overprice issues in the earliest period their ability to
equally overprice issues in subsequent periods decreases, as rational investors arguably become
more reluctant to keep overpaying for newly issued preferreds. Thirdly, and most likely, the
observed pattern in pricing is linked to the aftermarket liquidity enhancement in new issues of
preferreds, as made evident in figure 2 in section 6.1 and table 5 above. We conclude that the
yearly average sample liquidity has increased over our sample time period, and given the recent
growth in the Canadian preferred market it makes sense that an increment in size and maturity
is followed by enhanced liquidity. In turn, increased liquidity render the aftermarket illiquidity
discounts to gradually decrease and in effect causes mispricing to diminish. In accordance with
this reasoning, the observed liquidity improvements are the primary reason for the observed
time period dynamics.

     The observed price reversion over the thirty-day holding period, as illustrated in table 3
and discussed in the beginning of this section, is an interesting finding. As a way of explaining
this phenomenon, and given the importance of liquidity in our findings, we look at how liquidity
develops over the holding period and conclude that the average liquidity decreases over the
seven- and thirty-days respectively following issue as compared to the first-day liquidity (not
illustrated in any table). This signifies that mispricing is not mitigated by liquidity
improvements shortly after issue. Given the scope of this thesis, which is to assess the initial
returns following an issue, we solely use this indicative result for the purpose of measuring the
persistence of initial mispricing.

                                     24
    Table 6: Univariate analysis of first-day excess returns, complemented with first-day
                               liquidity, measured in percent
                                        Average excess       t-statistic          Average            No. of
                                           return            p-value           liquidity        observations
Full sample -0.60*** 0.000 5.27 266

By gross proceeds
More than or equal to CAD 300m -0.27* 0.062 5.20 85
Between CAD 150-300m -0.51*** 0.001 5.29 112
Less than or equal to CAD 150m -1.17*** 0.000 5.32 69

By firm size
More than or equal to CAD 37.9bn -0.41** 0.032 5.50 66
Between CAD 4.9-37.9bn -0.62*** 0.000 4.90 134
Less than or equal to CAD 4.9bn -0.76*** 0.001 5.79 66

By relative issue size
More than or equal to 2.9% -0.54*** 0.002 5.90 78
Less than 2.9% -0.62*** 0.000 5.01 188

By age
Older than or equal to 38 years 0.01 0.478 5.68 66
Between 10 and 38 years -0.75*** 0.000 5.23 130
Younger than or equal to 10 years -0.96*** 0.000 5.05 66

By sector
Financial -0.47*** 0.000 4.81 136
Non-financial -0.74*** 0.000 5.74 130

By interest rate volatility
More than or equal to 2.3% -0.80*** 0.004 6.69 67
Between 1.2-2.3% -0.37*** 0.004 5.57 133
Less than or equal to 1.2% -0.86*** 0.000 3.21 66

By number of underwriters
Four or more -0.64*** 0.003 4.88 56
Two or three -0.67*** 0.000 6.03 121
One -0.41** 0.023 4.83 82

By subsequent issue
Less than or equal to 6 months -0.27** 0.017 5.58 104
More than 6 months -0.81*** 0.000 5.07 162

The table above illustrates average first-day excess returns (in percent), average p-values, liquidity (in percent) and number
of observations, by three subgroups (≤25th, 25th-75th and ≥75th percentile) on the full sample based on independent
variables. In order to achieve an even distribution among the number of underwriters, we subgroup by issues that have one,
two or three and four or more underwriters respectively. Gross proceeds is the offer price times the total number of shares
issued. Firm size denotes the issuing company’s equity market capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. Relative issue
size is based on the dichotomous variable defined as gross proceeds divided by market capitalization, whereby 1 signifies
that the ratio is equal to or above the average. Age is denoted as the time between the preferred stock issue date and founding
date. Sector is constituted by a 0-1 dummy variable, whereby 1 signifies that the issuing company is active within the
financial sector and 0 signifies that the company is active within any other industry sector. Liquidity is the first-day preferred
stock trading volume divided by total issued volume. Interest rate volatility is calculated as the trailing three-week standard
deviation of the natural logarithm of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government bond
index. Number of underwriters is simply the number of underwriters involved in the issue. Dummy subsequent issue is a
dichotomous variable, whereby 1 signifies that the issue is made within or exactly 6 months from the firm’s most recent
preferred stock offering while 0 signifies that the issue is made more than 6 months after the firm’s most recent preferred
stock offering. ***/**/* denotes statistical significance at the 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

                                    25
    The univariate analysis in table 6 suggests that negative first-day excess returns decrease
with increased gross proceeds, meaning that smaller issues suffer more from negative excess
returns compared to larger issues. This is not consistent with the findings by Beatty and Ritter
(1986), stating that smaller issues are subject to greater excess returns compared to larger issues.
These contradictive results may indicate that gross proceeds is not a proxy for information
asymmetry but liquidity instead, as suggested by Houweling et al. (2005) and Cai et al. (2007).
According to this notion, smaller issues are subject to illiquidity and consequently render in
illiquidity discounts in the aftermarket. This is, as shown in the average liquidity column in
table 6, however not directly evident in our sample. Moreover, standardizing issue size by
dividing it with market capitalization at the time of issue, we see that relatively large issues
yield less negative first-day returns, which is inconsistent with the reasoning by Datta et al.
(1997). In line with our economical intuition, though, it could simply be the case of smaller
issues being more difficult to price correctly as they are not monitored and scrutinized by market
participants as extensively as in the case of larger issues.

    Similarly, negative excess returns are more apparent in smaller firms, as measured by
market capitalization. These findings are rationalized through the same reasoning as that of
gross proceeds and implies that issues conducted by larger firms are monitored by more market
participants. This gives some suggestions for why issues made by larger firms are more
accurately priced. Also, and as evident in our sample, larger firms issue preferreds more
frequently. This enables market participants to review more close-by issues when assessing the
price on a new issue, thereby rendering in potential accuracy improvements.

    Our findings suggest further that younger firms generally suffer more from negative excess
returns than older firms. We also find that the eldest firms in our sample significantly yield zero
first-day excess returns at the 5% level (not illustrated in any table). This is inconsistent with
the findings of Beatty and Ritter (1986) and Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003).

    Ultimately, an increase in gross proceeds, age or firm size points towards decreasing
negative excess returns. In literature examining IPOs, ex ante uncertainty renders in
underwriters having to underprice issues in order to compensate for information asymmetries
between them and investors. However, we find no indications of underpricing in small issues,
nor do we find it in issues made by young- or small firms. Contrariwise, we establish that such
issues yield more negative initial excess returns. This strengthens our intuition about the effects
of market attention/involvement by market participants on how accurately priced the issue will
be. It is also possible that aftermarket liquidity is a contributing factor, as these issues arguably
                                     26
could suffer more from illiquidity. However, no such connection can easily be made in our
sample, as evident in the average liquidity column in table 5.

     In Hypothesis III, we put forward the notion that higher interest rate volatility could serve
as an explanatory variable for the negative excess returns. As it turns out, such notion cannot
be supported on the basis of our univariate analysis findings. Even though negative excess
returns are more apparent in times of high interest rate volatility, the same is true for periods
when the interest rate volatility is low. Hence, no linear relationship between interest rate
volatility and mispricing is apparent solely from reviewing the results of the univariate analysis.

    Furthermore, our univariate analysis indicates that an increased number of underwriters is
associated with increased negative excess returns, which is in sharp contrast to findings
presented by Matsui (2006) and our Hypothesis IV, both suggesting the opposite relationship.
This inconsistency to previous studies could stem from the fact that the number of underwriters
is not a perfect proxy for underwriter competition, but also that underwriter competition does
not in fact explain the negative excess returns. One should bear in mind that there are alternate
dimensions than offer price in which underwriters can compete on, such as on the basis of
underwriter fees, offering additional services (e.g. research coverage) or offering more
favorable issue terms (other than offer price). Naturally, these dimensions of competition would
not affect the pricing directly. Furthermore, the competition dynamics may differ
geographically with regards to if e.g. underwriter fees are fixed or not. Since Matsui (2006)
finds support for the number of underwriters having an impact on the level of pricing, the
findings might only be applicable as a proxy of underwriter competition on the Japanese market.
Contrary to the reasoning of Matsui (2006), the fact that increased number of underwriters yield
in more negative first-day excess return could signify that underwriters acting as sole
underwriters have a monopolistic position. This would imply that competition in issues where
few underwriters are involved are not as intense as in issues with syndicates consisting of
several underwriters, where there is more of a free market.

    In the process of controlling for sectorial pricing differences, we find that the financial
sector suffers less from negative excess returns than the non-financial sectors. This finding
might partly be interpreted in conjunction with an explanation of issue-incentives put forward
by Howe and Lee (2006), stating that financial firms have a clear purpose for issuing preferred
stock – namely to live up to capital adequacy requirements. This suggests that non-financial
firms time their issues to coincide with high valuations, while financial firms time their issues
with regards to capital adequacy as they care less about windows of opportunity related to
                                     27
valuation. In our sample, and as measured by dummy subsequent issue, we find that financial
firms tend to issue preferreds more frequently (not illustrated in any table). This might be related
to the aforementioned capital requirements and could potentially be a reason for why issues in
this sector are priced more accurately - in line with Hypothesis V.

     Table 7: Univariate analysis of first-day excess returns, as measured in percent, over
                                     subsequent issue
                                         Subsequent issue ≤ 6        Subsequent issue > 6     Average
                                                months                     months              diff
                                                                           t-                                      t-                      t-
                                        Average   statistic   Obs. Average   statistic   Obs.   statistic
                                                    p-value                      p-value           p-value
 Full sample -0.27** 0.017 104 -0.81*** 0.000 162 0.009
 The table above illustrates average first-day excess returns (in percent) by two subgroups on the full sample, based on the
  dummy subsequent issue. The returns are depicted at the average level while also revealing p-values and number of
  observations. P-value of the difference between the subgroup averages is depicted in the rightmost column. The subgroup
  labeled “Subsequent issue ≤ 6 months” constitutes issues made within or exactly 6 months from the firm’s most recent
 preferred stock offering. The subgroup labeled “Subsequent issue > 6 months” comprises issues that have been issued
  more than 6 months after the firm’s most recent preferred stock issue. ***/**/* denotes statistical significance at
 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

    By separating our full sample into two subgroups, based on subsequent issue activity, we
find discrepancies in the level of initial negative excess returns, as shown in table 7. While both
subgroups still yield negative first-day excess returns, we find their respective returns to be
significantly different from each other at the 1% significance level. That is, offerings preceded
by other preferred stock offerings issued by the same firm within a six-month period suffer
significantly less negative excess returns compared to issues made with a greater timely
distance. This is in accordance with Hypothesis V - and the underlying economical intuition
behind it – stating that subsequent issues are more accurately priced. It could, besides being tied
to liquidity differences, stem from recent firm-specific preferred issues acting as references for
investors when assessing pricing of new preferred stock offerings, thereby mitigating
underwriters’ ability to overprice preferred stock issues in close conjunction with other issues.

                                     28
6.3 Multivariate analysis

                      Table 8: Pearson’s bivariate correlation coefficients
                                      Dummy
                         First-      Ln                                                     Interest   Number   Dummy
                                           Ln       gross
                           day      gross                           Ln     Dummy    Liquid-     rate        of      subseq-
  Variable                                    market    proceeds
                             excess     proce-                             age     financial      ity       volati-    underw-      uent
                                               cap     to market
                              return       eds                                                                    lity        riters       issue
                                                       cap
 First-day excess
                           1.00
 return
 Ln gross proceeds 0.24 1.00
 Ln market cap 0.11 0.68 1.00
 Dummy gross
 proceeds to market      0.02 -0.47 -0.83 1.00
 cap
 Ln age 0.18 0.23 0.38 -0.28 1.00
 Dummy financial 0.07 0.09 0.31 -0.20 0.38 1.00
 Liquidity 0.39 0.03 -0.09 0.11 0.10 -0.13 1.00
  Interest rate
                       -0.01 0.07 0.06 0.00 0.08 -0.05 0.34 1.00
 volatility
 Number of
                         -0.05 -0.08 -0.24 0.13 -0.27 -0.31 -0.05 -0.05 1.00
 underwriters
 Dummy subsequent
                       0.15 0.24 0.42 -0.35 0.09 0.07 0.07 0.02 -0.03 1.00
 issue

Table 8 depicts the various correlation coefficients between our dependent and independent
variables.

    We find that the natural logarithm of market capitalization tends to correlate highly with
other predictor variables, in particular that of the dummy gross proceeds to market capitalization
and the natural logarithm of gross proceeds. The correlations are -0.83 and 0.68 respectively.
For natural reasons, considering that the aforementioned dummy variable is constituted by
market capitalization, we anticipate a high negative correlation between the two variables. For
the natural logarithm of gross proceeds, however, a correlation with the natural logarithm of
market capitalization close to 0.7 is cause for concern as it may indicate multicollinearity.
Subsequently, taking into consideration that the dependent variable correlates less with the
natural logarithm of market capitalization than that of the natural logarithm of gross proceeds,

                                                       16
and by reviewing the Variance Inflation Factor  , VIF, we find it appropriate to omit the natural
logarithm of market capitalization going forward in order to avoid multicollinearity.

    We find it interesting that two variables, liquidity and the natural logarithm of gross
proceeds – both of which have been cited in literature to be proxies for liquidity - correlate by
only 0.03. Simultaneously, they correlate with our dependent variable by 0.39 and 0.24
respectively, indicating large explanatory value.

16
  See appendix table V.
                                     29
     Interest rate volatility correlates with the dependent variable by -0.01, which is somewhat
understandable given the subgroup non-linearity as seen in table 6 in section 6.2. However, this
does not necessarily suggest that the variable is limited in explaining the level of excess return,
as it may have a more profound explanatory value when combined with our other variables.
Another interesting notion we make is that of the correlation between interest rate volatility and
liquidity of 0.34, signifying that increased interest rate uncertainty renders in improved
aftermarket liquidity.

          Table 9: OLS regression of first-day excess returns, as measured in percent
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

                       0.0093** 0.0101*** 0.0088*** 0.0092*** 0.0110*** 0.0107***
 Ln gross proceeds
                        (0.0038) (0.0031) (0.0031) (0.0032) (0.0036) (0.0036)
                        0.0008
 Ln market cap             Omitted Omitted Omitted Omitted Omitted
                          (0.0021)
 Dummy gross         0.0098** 0.0083*** 0.0058** 0.0058** 0.0059** 0.0074**
 proceeds to market
                        (0.0043) (0.0030) (0.0028) (0.0028) (0.0029) (0.0029)
 cap
                      0.0026*** 0.0027*** 0.0015** 0.0017** 0.0011 0.0011
 Ln age
                        (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0007) (0.0007)
                        0.0007 0.0010 0.0034 0.0032 0.0023 0.0022
 Dummy financial
                        (0.0025) (0.0024) (0.0022) (0.0021) (0.0021) (0.0021)
                                               0.1823*** 0.2101*** 0.2213*** 0.2160***
 Liquidity
                                                  (0.0272) (0.0321) (0.0336) (0.0335)
 Interest rate                                                     -0.3346*** -0.3576*** -0.3517***
 volatility                                                       (0.1247) (0.1246) (0.1241)
 Number of                                                              0.0001 0.0001
 underwriters                                                               (0.0008) (0.0008)
 Dummy subsequent                                                                0.0042*
 issue                                                                                           (0.0022)
                         -0.2045*** -0.2107*** -0.1930*** -0.1959*** -0.2288*** -0.2253***
 Constant
                        (0.0644) (0.0606) (0.0601) (0.0610) (0.0709) (0.0700)

 Observations 262 262 262 262 255 255
 F-statistic 6.69 8.32 14.39 11.90 12.66 11.48
 R-squared 0.1099 0.1092 0.2382 0.2648 0.2890 0.3007

 The table above illustrates our main dependent variable, the first-day excess returns, computed as the percentage change in
  price from offer price to the first-day midpoint closing price and adjusted for the market return. We run six regressions,
  whereas the first two only includes the control variables and each following regression thereafter add an explanatory value.
  The sixth regression is therefore considered our complete and final model. Ln gross proceeds is the natural logarithm of the
 offer price times the total number of shares issued. Ln market cap is the natural logarithm of the issuing company’s equity
 market capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. Dummy gross proceeds to market cap is a dichotomous variable
  defined as gross proceeds divided by market capitalization, whereby 1 signifies that the ratio is equal to or above the average.
 Ln age is the natural logarithm of the time between the preferred stock issue date and founding date. Dummy financial is a
  dichotomous variable whereby 1 signifies that the issuing company is active within the financial sector and 0 signifies that
 the company is active within any other industry sector. Liquidity is the first-day preferred stock trading volume divided by
  total issued volume. Interest rate volatility is calculated as the trailing three-week standard deviation of the natural logarithm
  of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government bond index. Number of underwriters is
 simply the number of underwriters involved in the issue. Dummy subsequent issue is a dichotomous variable, whereby 1
 signifies that the issue is made within or exactly 6 months from the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering while 0
 signifies that the issue is made more than 6 months after the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering. ***/**/* denotes
  statistical significance at the 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

                                     30
    Table 9 above depicts six regression models using a hierarchical linear regression structure,
based on the regression model defined in section 5.3. Robust standard errors are applied in
accordance with Huber-White (1980) due to heteroscedastic data, which we observe using the
Breusch-Pagan (1979) test. This is explained more thoroughly in section 5.4. The first (1) and
second (2) models are duplicates of each other and solely constituted by control variables, with
the single exception for model (2) being adjusted for the multicollinearity phenomenon of
including the natural logarithm of market capitalization (i.e. the variable is omitted).
Subsequent regression models (3-6) are based on model (2) and add an explanatory variable
hierarchically, yielding in the final adjusted regression model (6) being presented in the
rightmost column.

    Model (1), in its simplicity, does not explain all too much of the negative excess returns,
considering its low R-squared. We still find evidence suggesting that the natural logarithm of
gross proceeds and age respectively, as well as dummy gross proceeds to market capitalization,
with statistical significance positively impact the first-day excess returns. This is not consistent
with the findings of Beatty and Ritter (1986), Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2003) or Cai et al.
(2007), suggesting the reverse relationship. Instead, they may instead be interpreted by our
stated intuition – that they are an effect of market attention/involvement by market participants.
Aforementioned variables remain significantly positive in each subsequent model, with the
exception for age which loses its statistical significance in model (5) and (6). Furthermore,
controlling for sectorial differences in pricing, we find that issues conducted by financial firms
positively impact first-day excess returns, though without statistical significance.

    Excluding the natural logarithm of market capitalization in model (2) yields a marginal
impact on the model’s R-squared and simultaneously render the other variables more
statistically significant. This implies that the variable adds modest explanatory value when
combined with gross proceeds and support our theory on multicollinearity further.

    Adding liquidity results in a large impact on the overall regression model, as illustrated in
model (3). Not only does the R-squared double, indicating that the variable adds large
explanatory value and thereby further supporting our reasoning on the importance of illiquidity
discounts in explaining the observed negative first-day excess return, but it also has an impact
on the other variables’ significance levels and coefficients. More specifically, the natural
logarithm of age and dummy gross proceeds to market capitalization are rendered less
significant. This implies that the liquidity variable shares, and subsequently absorbs, some of
the explanatory value with aforementioned variables. The positive and statistically significant
                                     31
coefficient (at the 1% level) of liquidity confirms Hypothesis II – stating that potential
mispricing derives from illiquidity discounts or liquidity premiums – seeing as our findings
signify that increased liquidity prompts negative first-day excess returns. These results are
similar to studies providing evidence of greater aftermarket liquidity in underpriced issues
(Miller and Reilly, 1987; Booth and Chua, 1996; Zheng and Li, 2008), though we interpret our
findings in terms of aftermarket liquidity directly affecting the level of pricing rather than
aftermarket liquidity being a consequence of the pricing of the new issue, as interpreted by
Amihud and Mendelson (2006) and Chen et al. (2007). One important factor to highlight is
omitted variable bias (OVB) and its potential implication on how we interpret liquidity, as it
might be that an OVB in actuality is the true underlying force behind overpricing rather than
liquidity. If this was the case, then liquidity could be interpreted to be a result of the pricing
instead.

     From model (4), we are able to identify that the interest rate volatility coefficient is negative
at the 1% significance level. That is, and contrary to our findings in the univariate analysis and
correlation coefficient matrix, we conclude that increased interest rate volatility indeed render
in more mispricing in the form of negative excess returns, subsequently confirming Hypothesis
III. This suggests that market participants have greater difficulty in assessing the price of the
preferred stock in times of high interest rate uncertainty. An interesting notion, considering the
correlation of 0.34 between liquidity and interest rate volatility, is that the effect on the excess
returns from an increment in the interest rate volatility (ceteris paribus) to some extent is
mitigated by liquidity due to their opposite coefficient signs in the regression model.

    Model (5) confirms our previous findings on the insignificance of number of underwriters
when explaining the negative excess returns. With an insignificant coefficient of close to zero,
it seems as if including the number of underwriters in our model has a negative effect on the
natural logarithm of age, considering the fact that it ultimately loses significance. This might
stem from the seemingly high negative correlation of 0.27 between the two variables, in essence
rendering it difficult to derive any explanatory value from any of the two variables when
combined. Ultimately, and as put forward by Datta et al. (1997) and Matsui (2006), we do not
find any evidence of the initial negative returns originating from competition between
underwriters – thereby rejecting Hypothesis IV.

    Lastly, model (6) confirms the findings we made in section 6.2 regarding Hypothesis V,
namely that offerings preceded by other preferred stock offerings issued by the same firm within
a six-month period suffer less mispricing compared to issues made with a greater timely
                                     32
distance. The dummy subsequent issue’s positive coefficient, significant at the 10% level,
indicates that negative excess returns are mitigated in subsequent issues if made within a short
time period from other firm-specific preferred issues. While it might seem as if the variable is
rather uncertain, considering it is significant only at the 10% level, it should be stated that it has
a p-value of 5.1% and in essence is very close to being significant at the 5% level.

6.4 Robustness test

                                                                                                             17
In order to validate our findings, we run several robustness tests on our model and sample data  .

    We find it appropriate to investigate whether our final regression model remains robust
after substituting the main dependent variable. Cai et al. (2007) argue in their study on bonds
that seven-day returns act as a better way to measure initial returns compared to first-day
returns, given the instrument’s illiquid characteristic. Taking this into consideration, and given
the similarities between preferred stock and bonds, we find it intriguing to assess whether our
findings remain robust given this revised initial return measure. We find that the first-day raw
return averages -0.61%, excess seven-day return is -0.40% and seven-day raw return is -0.49%.
All returns are significant at the 1% level. Firstly, by instead including the first-day raw returns,
we note that the majority of the variables retain their significance levels and coefficient signs.
Comparing our standard model to that of the excess seven-day returns, we find that the natural
logarithm of age becomes significant at the 10% level. Other than that, no change in coefficient
signs or statistical significances is observed for the variables. Lastly, we also test our model
using seven-day raw returns and find that the dummy subsequent issue becomes insignificant.
This indicates that the variable is somewhat sensitive to how one defines holding period returns.
While we do find that dummy subsequent issue becomes insignificant using seven-day raw
returns, we still find that the average difference between the subgroups is statically significant
at the 5% level, thereby supporting Hypothesis II.

    In contrast to our standard model, in which we excluded the natural logarithm of market
capitalization and kept the natural logarithm of gross proceeds due to multicollinearity, we now
do the inverse to assess how robust the model is. Subsequently, we find that liquidity and
interest rate volatility remain statistically significant at the 1% level while the natural logarithm
of market capitalization becomes significant at the 5% level. We observe that the dummy
subsequent issue is insignificant, as compared to our standard model whereas it served to
support Hypothesis II. The change in the dummy significance level might partly stem from the

17
  See appendix table VI, VII and VIII.
                                     33
fact that the dummy variable correlates more with the natural logarithm of market capitalization
than the natural logarithm of gross proceeds.

    Next, reviewing our data sample we identify several instances where firms account for
multiple observations over the time period. That is, error terms might be correlated within
issuers and therefore we find it necessary to control for this using clustered standard errors (by
issuer, 57 clusters). Compared to our standard model, we find that the dummy gross proceeds
to market capitalization becomes further significant as it goes from the 5%- to the 1% level.
Similarly, the dummy subsequent issue has increased in statistical significance from the 10%-
to the 5% level. We note that the clustered standard errors for many variables in essence
decrease as compared to the standard model, thereby demonstrating negative intra-cluster
correlations.

     In order to control for unobservable fixed effects, we find it reasonable to conduct a fixed-
effect regression. Over our chosen time period, 2002-2016, several major shocks have occurred
(e.g. financial crisis 2008). Consequently, as we cannot identify all shocks over our sample
period, it is arguably appropriate to control for time-fixed effects. Doing so, we notice that the
coefficient of interest rate volatility increases quite substantially while remaining significant at
the 1% level. As identified above by controlling for issuer clusters, we find our sample to
comprise 57 clusters. Hence, issuer-fixed effects are considered appropriate in order to assess
the characteristics of a specific firm that are constant over all observations for that firm. Taking
issuer-fixed effects into consideration render the coefficient of interest rate volatility to decrease
and become statistically insignificant, implying that the explanatory value of interest rate
volatility might to some extent be captured by the issuer-fixed effects. Generally, controlling
for both issuer- and time-fixed effects have considerable impact on the standard model. The
coefficient sign of the natural logarithm of age changes and becomes significant at the 10%
level. Also, the coefficients of the natural logarithm of gross proceeds and the dummy gross
proceeds to market capitalization become insignificant. This suggests that these variables
actually capture issuer- and time-fixed effects in the standard model. Therefore, our findings in
section 6.3, stating that aforementioned variables might be tied to market attention/involvement
by market participants, are questionable and could instead be a result of issuer- and time-fixed
effects. In conclusion, our fixed effects regressions imply that a considerable part of our
variables might be better captured by issuer- and time-fixed effects. Noteworthy is, however,
that both the coefficient of liquidity and the dummy subsequent issue stand robust even when
fixed effects are accounted for.

                                     34
7. Limitations and future research

While we argue that this study supplies valuable insights into the pricing of Canadian preferred
stock offerings, we are well aware of its potential limitations.

    Firstly, the Canadian preferred stock market is to a large extent constituted by firms
operating in the financial sector. This bias towards the financial sector might negatively affect
the applicability of this study’s results on other markets where the financial sector is not as
dominant. It might also affect the applicability on the future Canadian market, given the recent

                                       18
changes in the Basel framework  , which could decrease the incentives for financial firms to
issue preferreds.

    Secondly, all variables in this study acting as proxies rest on assumptions made by us and
their construction is also highly dependent on data availability. First and foremost, while there
are many proxies for liquidity, due to data paucity we have limited ourselves to solely use the
first-day stock turnover. This is an important subject to shed light on, as liquidity is regarded a
key explanatory factor throughout this thesis. Naturally, it would be beneficiary to control for
various liquidity proxies, such as the bid-ask spread or trade frequency, but this has not been
possible in this thesis. Next, considering our interest rate volatility proxy is trailing, its ability
to capture forward-looking expectations might be insufficient. Though no such metric is
available for the Canadian market, a forward-looking measure such as the implied volatility on
bond index options would be a valuable addition to our model. Similarly, we acknowledge the
limitations of simply using the number of underwriters as proxy for underwriter competition.
Supplementary proxies would be variables capturing market shares of underwriters, underwriter
fees, offered services and other beneficial terms of the issue. Lastly, the dummy subsequent
issue could be complemented in terms of also capturing equity- and/or debt issues, compared
to solely measuring preferred stock issues. This is reasonable considering that other issues
might, likewise a previous preferred stock issue, act as a pricing reference for market
participants.

     Existing research on the topic of pricing of preferred stock offerings is scarce. In excess of
the limitations of our study, which is in need for further investigation, this field of research
needs additional documentation. A first step would be to survey additional markets, identifying
similarities and differences with findings on the U.S. and Canadian market. It would be

18
   Revisions made in the new Basel III framework, launched in 2013, no longer attribute preferred stock as Tier-1 capital.
                                     35
interesting to examine the impact institutional ownership has on pricing in new preferred issues,
especially in light of the notion made by Kooli and Suret (2004) whereby they stated that
Canadian institutional investors are small, passive and have limited ability to impact the pricing
of new issues. Furthermore, studying negative excess returns from a behavioral finance
perspective would yield interesting insights, where one approach could be to probe whether
investor sentiment could explain potential overpricing in new issues. Future research could also
investigate convertible preferred stock, comparing the results with our findings on non-
convertible preferred stock. Likewise, a review of pricing in issues with different terms would
render in valuable insights. Lastly, we identify that research is close to non-existent on the long-
term performance of preferred stock. This could be an interesting field of study from the
perspective of comparing it to the short-term performance of newly issued preferreds, as found
in this thesis, as well as to that of long-term performance of new issues of equity and bonds.

8. Conclusion

Existing research on the topic of pricing of preferred stock offerings is limited and it seems as
if researchers have ignored to investigate it. As such, this study aims to contribute to existing
literature by investigating the pricing of seasoned offerings of non-convertible preferred stock.
To our knowledge, we are the first to examine seasoned preferred stock offerings in the
Canadian market, and we do so by assessing initial returns of 266 issues on the Toronto Stock
Exchange over the period 2002-2016. Contrary to the only previous study on pricing of
preferred stock offerings, which is done on the U.S. market by Loderer et al. (1991), our
findings make evident that new preferred stock issues are overpriced, yielding negative first-
day excess returns of 0.60%. These findings are similar to those documented on bonds by Datta
et al. (1997) and Matsui (2006). Measuring seven- and thirty-day excess returns, we find
indicative evidence of overpricing diminishing shortly after issuance.

    Enhanced liquidity in the aftermarket is found to have a significant positive impact on
initial returns, considering relatively liquid issues are underpriced by 0.45% while relatively
illiquid issues are overpriced by 1.56%. This is also confirmed through our multivariate analysis
and robustness tests. Our findings suggest that aftermarket liquidity is not accurately estimated
by underwriters, thus rendering in mispricing as additional illiquidity discounts (liquidity
premiums) have to be offered in the aftermarket. These results are in line with current literature
on bonds (Amihud and Mendelson, 2006; Chen et al., 2007) and common stock (Amihud and
Mendelson, 1986; Brennan et al., 1998; Chordia et al., 2001), suggesting that illiquidity risk is

                                     36
priced and consequently that the prices of illiquid securities must fall sufficiently to attract
investors. Moreover, we find evidence of aftermarket liquidity improving over our sample
period 2002-2016, while overpricing simultaneously diminishes. Given the considerable
explanatory value of liquidity, as evident in all our tests, we investigate the over-time
diminishing overpricing phenomenon using liquidity and ultimately find it to be a result of
enhanced liquidity.

    Additionally, we demonstrate that overpricing increases with interest rate uncertainty. This
is argued to be a consequence of greater difficulty in assessing the preferred stock’s true value.
Furthermore, we see that investors become more (less) willing to trade their holdings in times
of high (low) interest rate uncertainty. Ultimately, this indicates that the total effect on initial
returns from a change in interest rate uncertainty, to some extent, is mitigated by the consequent
change in liquidity (ceteris paribus) due to their opposite impact on initial returns. Controlling
for fixed effects, we find that the interest rate volatility variable becomes insignificant (which
serves as proxy for interest rate uncertainty), indicating that the variable might to some degree
capture issuer-fixed effects.

    As proxied by number of underwriters participating in the syndicate, we are not able to find
any significant evidence of overpricing being a result of underwriter competition. This is
contrary to findings put forward by Datta et al. (1997) and Matsui (2006). We emphasize,
however, that the stated proxy might be ineffective in measuring underwriter competition. That
is, the relationship between number of underwriters and competition could be argued to be
reverse to that stated by Matsui (2006), namely that underwriters in issues with fewer syndicate
members instead have a monopolistic position, implying that competition is more intense in
issues with more underwriters where there is more of a free market. It could also be argued that
number of underwriters in fact is a good proxy for competition, but that underwriters compete
on alternate dimensions than offer price, e.g. underwriter fees.

    We also make evident that stock offerings issued by firms that recently have issued
preferred stock are priced more accurately, an observation which stands robust throughout
several tests. This is arguably a result of investors having a recent firm-specific issue available
acting as reference when assessing the price of the new issue, thereby mitigating underwriters’
ability to overprice preferred stock issues in close conjunction with other issues.

    Our results show that overpricing is most apparent in smaller issues or issues conducted by
younger firms. This is inconsistent with previous research suggesting that smaller issues or

                                     37
issues made by younger firms are subject to more ex ante uncertainty, consequently driving
underwriters to underprice these issues (Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Ljungqvist and Wilhelm,
2003). We do not find any clear evidence of this being a matter of illiquidity. Instead, a plausible
explanation could be that the issues are not monitored and scrutinized by market participants as
extensively as in the case of larger issues or issues conducted by elder firms. Controlling for
issuer- and time-fixed effects renders us questioning the validity of these variables, however,
as they either become insignificant or significant at the 10% level though with changed
coefficient signs. Similar reasoning is applicable on issues that are large relative to the equity
market capitalization at the time of the preferred stock issue. Sectorial differences are not found
to have a significant impact on pricing of seasoned preferred stock offerings.

    The highly interesting findings made in this study are argued to be useful for all market
participants, including issuing firms, underwriters and investors. It is our belief that enhanced
awareness and knowledge of pricing accuracy in preferred stock offerings is essential,
especially in light of the recent years’ momentum in the Canadian preferred stock market. More
specifically, our results are valuable for an investor with short investment horizon intending to
trade her holdings rather than holding them until maturity. Such investor should be aware of
new preferred issues being short-term overpriced, and she should consider liquidity, interest
rate uncertainty and subsequent issues to be important factors when evaluating whether to
participate in new issues.

                                     38
9. References

1. Aggarwal, R., and Rivoli, P., 1990, Fads in the Initial Public Offering Market?, Financial
   Management, Vol. 19, No. 4, pp. 45-57

2. Allen, F., and Faulhaber, G.R., 1989, Signaling by Underpricing in the IPO Market, Journal
    of Financial Economics, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 303-323

3. Amihud, Y., and Mendelson, H., 1986, Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread, Journal of
    Financial Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 223-249

4. Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., and Pedersen, L.H., 2006, Liquidity and Asset Prices,
    Foundations and Trends in Finance, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 269-364

5. Baron, D.P., 1982, A Model of the Demand for Investment Banking Advising and
    Distribution Services for New Issues, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 955-976

6. Beatty R.P., and Ritter J.R., 1986, Investment Banking, Reputation, and the Underpricing
    of Initial Public Offerings, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1-2, pp. 213-232

7. Benveniste, L.M., and Spindt, P.A., 1989, How Investment Bankers Determine the Offer
    Price and Allocation of New Issues, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp.
   343-361

8. Benveniste, L.M., Busaba, W.Y., and Willhelm Jr., W.J., 2002, Information Externalities
    and the Role of Underwriters in Primary Equity Markets, Journal of Financial
    Intermediation, Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 61-86

9. Bildersee, J.S., 1973, Some Aspects of the Performance of Non-Convertible Preferred
    Stocks, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 28, No. 5, pp. 1187-1201

10. Booth, J.R., and Chua, L., 1996, Ownership dispersion, costly information, and IPO
    underpricing, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 41, No. 2, pp. 291-310

11. Boudoukh, J., and Whitelaw, R.F., 1993, Liquidity as a Choice Variable: A Lesson from
    the Japanese Government Bond Market, The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp.
   265-262

12. Brennan, M.J., Chordia, T., and Subrahmanyam, A., 1998, Alternative factor specifications,
    security characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns, Jounral of
    Financial Economics, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 345-373

13. Breusch, T.S., and Pagan, A.R., 1979, A Simple Test for Heteroscedasticity and Random
    Coefficient Variation, Econometrica, Vol. 47, No. 5, pp. 1287-1294

14. Brimmer, A.F., 1960, Credit Conditions and Price Determination in the Corporate Bond
    Market, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 353-370

15. Cai, N., Helwege, J., and Warga, A., 2007, Underpricing in the Corporate Bond Market,
    The Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 20, No. 6, pp. 2021-2046

                                     39
16. Chen, L., Lesmond, D.A., and Wei, J., 2007, Corporate Yield Spreads and Bond Liquidity,
    The Journal of Finance, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 119-149

17. Chordia, T., Roll, R., and Subrahmanyam, A., 2001, Market Liquidity and Trading Activity,
    The Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 501-530

18. Conard, J.W., and Frankena, M.W., 1969, The Yield Spread Between New and Seasoned
    Corporate Bonds, 1952-63, in Jack M. Guttentag, Philip Cagan, Essays on Interest Rates,
    Vol. 1

19. Datta, S., Iskandar-datta, M., and Patel, A., 1997, The Pricing of Initial Public Offers of
    Corporate Straight Debt, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 1, pp. 379-396

20. Ederington, L.H., 1974, The Yield Spread on New Issues of Corporate Bonds, The Journal
    of Finance, Vol. 29, No. 5, pp. 1531-1543

21. Ellul, A., and Pagano, M., 2006, IPO underpricing and after-market liquidity, Review of
    Financial Studies, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 381-421

22. Ely, D.P., Houston Jr., A.L., and Houston, C.O., 2002, Taxes and the choice of issuing
    preferred stock vs. debt, The Journal of the American Taxation Association, Vol. 24, No. 1,
   pp. 29-45

23. Fabozzi, F.J., and Mann, S.V., 2005, The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities (The
   McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.)

24. Fooladi, I., and Roberts, G.S., 1986, On Preferred Stock, Journal of Financial Research,
    Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 319-324

25. Fung, W.K.H., and Rudd, A., 1986, Pricing New Corporate Bond Issues: An Analysis of
    Issue Cost and Seasoning Effects, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 633-643

26. Grinblatt, M., and Hwang, C. Y., 1989, Signalling and the Pricing of New Issues, The
    Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 393-420

27. Houston, A.L., and Houston, C.O., 1990, Financing with Preferred Stock, Financial
   Management, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 42-54

28. Houweling, P., Mentink, A., and Vorst, T., 2005, Comparing possible proxies of corporate
    bond liquidity, Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 29, No. 6, pp. 1331-1358

29. Howe, J.S., and Lee, H., 2006, The long-run stock performance of preferred stock issuers,
    Review of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 237-250

30. Ibbotson, R.G., 1975, Price Performance of Common Stock New Issues, Journal of
    Financial Economics, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 235-272

31. Irvine, P., and Rosenfeld, J., 2000, Raising Capital Using Monthly Income Preferred Stock:
    Market Reaction and Implications for Capital Structure Theory, Financial Management,
    Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 5-20

                                     40
32. Kooli, M., and Suret, J.M., 2004, The aftermarket performance of initial public offerings in
    Canada, Journal of Multinational Financial Management, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 47-66

33. Lindvall, J.R., 1977, New Issue Corporate Bonds, Seasoned Market Efficiency and Yield
    Spreads, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp. 1057-1067

34. Linn, S.C., and Pinegar, J.M., 1988, The Effect of Issuing Preferred Stock on Common and
    Preferred Stockholder Wealth, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 155-
   184

35. Ljungqvist, A., and Wilhelm, W.J., 2003, IPO Pricing in the Dot-com Bubble, The Journal
    of Finance, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 723-752

36. Loderer, C.F., Sheehan, D.P., and Kadlec, G.B., 1991, The pricing of equity offerings,
    Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 35-57

37. Loughran, T., and Ritter, J.R., 1995, The New Issues Puzzle, The Journal of Finance, Vol.
    50, No. 1, pp. 23-51

38. Loughran, T., Ritter, J.R., and Rydqvist, K., 1994, Initial public offerings: International
    insights, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2-3, pp.165-199

39. Matsui, K., 2000, Underwriting competition and issuing yields on straight bonds (futsu
    shasai no hikiuke kyoso to hakko rimawari), Modern Finance (Gendai Fainansu), Vol. 8,
    pp. 55-83

40. Matsui, K., 2006, Overpricing of new issues in the Japanese straight bond market, Applied
    Financial Economics Letters, Vol. 2, No. 5, pp.323-327

41. Mikkelson, W.H., and Partch, M.M., 1986, Valuation Effects of Security Offerings and the
    Issuance Process, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1-2, pp. 31-60

42. Miller, R.E., and Reilly, F.K., 1987, An Examination of Mispricing, Returns, and
    Uncertainty for Initial Public Offerings, Financial Management, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 33-38

43. Ritter, J.R., 1984, The “Hot Issue” Market of 1980, The Journal of Business, Vol. 57, No.
    2, pp. 215-240

44. Ritter, J.R., 1991, The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings, The Journal of
    Finance, Vol. 46, No.1, pp. 3-27

45. Rock, K., 1986, Why New Issues Are Underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
    15, No. 1-2, pp. 187-212

46. Sherman, A.E., and Titman, S., 2002, Building the IPO order book: underpricing and
    participation limits with costly information, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 65, No.
    1, pp. 3-29

47. Soe, A., and Brzenk, P., 2014, A Look Under the Hood of the Canadian Preferred Indices
   (S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, McGraw Hill Financial)

                                     41
48. Sorensen, E.H., 1982, On the Seasoning Process of New Bonds: Some are More Seasoned
    than Others, The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 195-
   208

49. Sorensen, E.H., and Hawkins, C.A., 1981, On the Pricing of Preferred Stock, The Journal
    of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 515-528

50. Spiess, D.K., and Affleck-Graves, J., 1995, Underperformance in long-run stock returns
    following seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp.
   243-267

51. Spiess, D.K., and Affleck-Graves, J., 1999, The long-run performance of stock returns
    following debt offerings, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 54, No. 1, pp. 45-73

52. Vayanos, D., 1998, Transaction Costs and Asset Prices: A Dynamic Equilibrium model,
    Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 1-58

53. Wasserfallen, W., and Wydler, D., 1988, Underpricing of Newly Issued Bonds: Evidence
    from the Swiss Capital Market, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 43, No. 5, pp. 1177-1191

54. Weinstein, M.I., 1978, The Seasoning Process of New Corporate Bond Issues, The Journal
    of Finance, Vol. 33, No. 5, pp. 1343-1354

55. Welch, I., 1989, Seasoned Offerings, Imitation Costs, and the Underpricing of Initial Public
    Offerings, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 421-449

56. White, H., 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
    Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica, Vol. 48, No. 4, pp. 817-838

57. Williams, H., Shutt, T., 2000, A comparison of IPO markets, The Conference Board of
   Canada, No. 296-00

58. Zheng, S.X., and Li, M., 2008, Underpricing, ownership dispersion, and aftermarket
    liquidity of IPO stocks, Journal of Empirical Finance, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 436-454

                                     42
Appendix

                Figure I: Sources of external financing in Canada (2002-2016)
                                 Source: Bloomberg

 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

   0%
      2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                Common stock Bond Preferred stock

                   Figure II: Canadian preferred stock market (2002-2016)
                                 Source: Bloomberg

 12 000                                                                                          5,0%

 10 000                                                                                          4,0%

   8 000
                                                                                           3,0%
   6 000
                                                                                           2,0%
   4 000
   2 000                                                                                           1,0%

      0                                                                                      0,0%
         2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

              Issued volume USDm (left axis) Yearly average Canadian interest rate, CORRA (right axis)

                         Figure III: Scatter plot of first-day excess returns

       8,0%
       6,0%
       4,0%
       2,0%
       0,0%
      -2,0% 0 50 100 150 200 250 300

       -4,0%
      day excess return-
       -6,0%
     First-8,0%

      -10,0%
      -12,0%
                                                        Firm ID

                                     43
                       Figure IV: Histogram of first-day excess returns

                                                                                           40
                                                                                           35
                                                                                           30
                                                                     -0.60
                                                                                           25
                                                                                           20
                                                                                                            Density
                                                                                           15
                                                                                           10
                                                                                            5
                                                                                            0
 -10,0% -8,0% -6,0% -4,0% -2,0% 0,0% 2,0% 4,0%
                                                   First-day excess return

         Table I: Indices correlation (Canada, July 22, 2002 – December 30, 2016)
                                Source: Bloomberg
                             S&P/TSX Preferred                            S&P Canada aggregate
                                                S&P/TSX Composite
                                  share index                             bond index
S&P/TSX Preferred share            1.00 0.10 -0.04
index

       Table II: Indices correlation (U.S., September 19, 2003 – December 30, 2016)
                                Source: Bloomberg
                             S&P Preferred stock      S&P 500 Composite Nasdaq Composite
                                     index
S&P Preferred stock index 1.00 0.57 0.56

                              Table III: Sample filter log
Filter Changes Number of observations
Original sample 422
Time period (2002-2016) -50 372
IPOs -14 358
Tap issues -6 352
N/A offer price -31 321
N/A first-day midpoint closing price -21 300
Convertible option -6 294
N/A market cap -28 266
Final sample 266

                                    44
               Table IV: Mathematical derivations of independent variables
Variable Mathematical derivations
Natural logarithm of gross proceeds = ln(𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖 ∗ 𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖)

Natural logarithm of market                               = ln(𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑓,𝑡)
capitalization

Gross proceeds to market                                                     𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠𝑖
                                        =
capitalization    𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑓,𝑡

Natural logarithm of firm age = ln (1 + (𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 − 𝐹𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 ))
                                                                                                               𝑖                            𝑓

Dummy financial N/a

Liquidity    𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖,𝑡
                                          =
                                                                                                  𝐼𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒𝑑 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖

Interest rate volatility                                                          𝑧=𝑡                  2
                                                                       ∑ 𝑧=𝑡−(𝑛−1)(𝑥𝑧 − 𝑥̅ )
                                      = √
                                                              (𝑛 − 1)
                                                                                                                      𝑧=𝑡
                                                                            𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑧          ∑ 𝑧=𝑡−(𝑛−1)(𝑥𝑧)
                                           𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑥𝑧 = ln (        ) , 𝑥̅ =               , 𝑛 = 15
                                                                          𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑𝑧−1                𝑛

Number of underwriters N/a

Dummy subsequent issue N/a

Issue i is the individual preferred stock issue, firm f is the issuing company related to issue i, time t is the issue date, n the
average number of working days in a three-week period, and yield the yield on a ten-year Canadian government bond index

                                    45
                          Table V: Variance Inflation Factor, VIF
                                       Original model Adjusted model

Variable VIF SQRT VIF VIF SQRT VIF
First-day excess return 1.43 1.20 1.43 1.20
Ln gross proceeds 2.35 1.53 1.48 1.22
Ln market cap 6.79 2.61 Omitted Omitted
Dummy gross proceeds to
                                  3.70 1.92 1.58 1.26
market cap
Ln age 1.32 1.15 1.30 1.14
Dummy financial 1.35 1.16 1.27 1.13
Liquidity 1.49 1.22 1.47 1.21
Interest rate volatility 1.20 1.09 1.18 1.09
Number of underwriters 1.20 1.10 1.15 1.07
Dummy subsequent issue 1.31 1.14 1.18 1.08
Average 2.21 1.34
The table above illustrates the Variance Inflation Factor, VIF, for each variable included in our regression model as stated
in section 5.3. First-day excess return is our main dependent variable, computed as the percentage change in price from offer
price to the first-day midpoint closing price and adjusted for the market return. Ln gross proceeds is the natural logarithm
of the offer price times the total number of shares issued. Ln market cap is the natural logarithm of the issuing company’s
equity market capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. Dummy gross proceeds to market cap is a dichotomous variable
defined as gross proceeds divided by market capitalization, whereby 1 signifies that the ratio is equal to or above the average.
Ln age is the natural logarithm of the time between the preferred stock issue date and founding date. Dummy financial is a
dichotomous variable whereby 1 signifies that the issuing company is active within the financial sector and 0 signifies that
the company is active within any other industry sector. Liquidity is the first-day preferred stock trading volume divided by
total issued volume. Interest rate volatility is calculated as the trailing three-week standard deviation of the natural logarithm
of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government bond index. Number of underwriters is
simply the number of underwriters involved in the issue. Dummy subsequent issue is a dichotomous variable, whereby 1
signifies that the issue is made within or exactly 6 months from the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering while 0
signifies that the issue is made more than 6 months after the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering.

                                    46
               Table VI: OLS regression using various dependent variables
Variable Standard model First-day raw Seven-day excess Seven-day raw

Ln gross              0.0107*** 0.0116*** 0.0146*** 0.0161***
proceeds               (0.0036) (0.0034) (0.0036) (0.0031)

Ln market cap Omitted Omitted Omitted Omitted

Dummy gross          0.0074** 0.0087*** 0.0089** 0.0117***
proceeds to
                        (0.0029) (0.0027) (0.0035) (0.0033)
market cap
                       0.0011 0.0010 0.0018* 0.0014
Ln age
                        (0.0007) (0.0007) (0.0010) (0.0010)
                        0.0022 0.0029 0.0019              0.0043
Dummy financial
                        (0.0021) (0.0019) (0.0028)             (0.0027)
                      0.2160*** 0.2100*** 0.2683*** 0.2712***
Liquidity
                        (0.0335) (0.0320) (0.0400) (0.0390)
Interest rate            -0.3517*** -0.2983*** -0.4459*** -0.3451***
volatility                (0.1241) (0.1114) (0.1394) (0.1312)
Number of               0.0001 -0.0001 -0.0001 -0.0001
underwriters           (0.0008) (0.0007) (0.0010) (0.0010)
Dummy               0.0042* 0.0046** 0.0043* 0.0037
subsequent issue        (0.0022) (0.0021) (0.0025) (0.0025)
                        -0.2253*** -0.2439*** -0.3014*** -0.3347***
Constant
                        (0.0700) (0.0648) (0.0692) (0.0606)

Observations 255 255 255 255
F-statistic 11.48 13.58 11.63 12.14
R-squared 0.3007 0.3316 0.3194 0.3524

The table above illustrates four regression models based on different dependent variables. Standard model is our final
adjusted model and includes the first-day excess return dependent variable. First-day raw denotes an adjusted regression
model in which the first-day raw return acts as dependent variable. Seven-day excess denotes an adjusted regression model
in which the seven-day excess return acts as dependent variable. Seven-day raw denotes an adjusted regression model in
which the seven-day raw return acts as dependent variable. Ln gross proceeds is the natural logarithm of the offer price
times the total number of shares issued. Ln market cap is the natural logarithm of the issuing company’s equity market
capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. Dummy gross proceeds to market cap is a dichotomous variable defined as
gross proceeds divided by market capitalization, whereby 1 signifies that the ratio is equal to or above the average. Ln age
is the natural logarithm of the time between the preferred stock issue date and founding date. Dummy financial is a
dichotomous variable whereby 1 signifies that the issuing company is active within the financial sector and 0 signifies that
the company is active within any other industry sector. Liquidity is the first-day preferred stock trading volume divided by
total issued volume. Interest rate volatility is calculated as the trailing three-week standard deviation of the natural logarithm
of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government bond index. Number of underwriters is
simply the number of underwriters involved in the issue. Dummy subsequent issue is a dichotomous variable, whereby 1
signifies that the issue is made within or exactly 6 months from the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering while 0
signifies that the issue is made more than 6 months after the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering. ***/**/* denotes
statistical significance at the 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

                                    47
     Table VII: OLS regression of first-day excess returns, as measured in percent, with
                                 robustness adjustments
Variable Standard model Market cap Clustered SE FE time and issuer

Ln gross              0.0107***                   0.0107*** 0.0096
                                          Omitted
proceeds               (0.0036) (0.0033) (0.0060)
                                         0.0042**
Ln market cap Omitted                     Omitted Omitted
                                               (0.0018)
Dummy gross          0.0074** 0.0107*** 0.0074*** 0.0050
proceeds to
                        (0.0029) (0.0041) (0.0027) (0.0124)
market cap
                        0.0011 0.0012 0.0011 -0.0139*
Ln age
                        (0.0007) (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0078)
                        0.0022 0.0007 0.0022
Dummy financial                                                          Omitted
                        (0.0021) (0.0022)             (0.0020)
                      0.2160*** 0.2248*** 0.2160*** 0.2015***
Liquidity
                        (0.0335) (0.0345) (0.0290) (0.0463)
Interest rate            -0.3517*** -0.3613*** -0.3517*** -0.3933
volatility                (0.1241) (0.1257) (0.1249) (0.2527)
Number of              0.0001 0.0003 0.0001 0.0000
underwriters           (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0008) (0.0021)
Dummy               0.0042* 0.0031 0.0042** 0.0057**
subsequent issue        (0.0022) (0.0024) (0.0020) (0.0029)
                        -0.2253*** -0.0605*** -0.2253*** -0.1738
Constant
                        (0.0700) (0.0185) (0.0643) (0.1280)

Observations 255 255 255 255
F-statistic 11.48 10.41 21.12 4.70
R-squared 0.3007 0.2490 0.3007 0.4778

The table above illustrates various regressions on our main dependent variable, the first-day excess returns, which is
computed as the percentage change in price from offer price to the first-day midpoint closing price thereafter adjusted for
the market return. Standard model is the final regression model as discussed in section 6.3, market cap denotes an adjusted
regression model in which ln gross proceeds is omitted and ln market cap instead is utilized. Clustered SE in column five
adjusts for clustered robust standard errors using issuing company. Lastly, FE time and issuer is the standard model adjusted
for both time- and issuer-fixed effects. Ln gross proceeds is the natural logarithm of the offer price times the total number
of shares issued. Ln market cap is the natural logarithm of the issuing company’s equity market capitalization at the preferred
stock issue date. Dummy gross proceeds to market cap is a dichotomous variable defined as gross proceeds divided by
market capitalization, whereby 1 signifies that the ratio is equal to or above the average. Ln age is the natural logarithm of
the time between the preferred stock issue date and founding date. Dummy financial is a dichotomous variable whereby 1
signifies that the issuing company is active within the financial sector and 0 signifies that the company is active within any
other industry sector. Liquidity is the first-day preferred stock trading volume divided by total issued volume. Interest rate
volatility is calculated as the trailing three-week standard deviation of the natural logarithm of the daily percentage change
of the yield on the ten-year Canadian government bond index. Number of underwriters is simply the number of underwriters
involved in the issue. Dummy subsequent issue is a dichotomous variable, whereby 1 signifies that the issue is made within
or exactly 6 months from the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering while 0 signifies that the issue is made more than
6 months after the firm’s most recent preferred stock offering. ***/**/* denotes statistical significance at the 1%/5%/10%
level respectively.

                                    48
    Table VIII: OLS regression of first-day excess returns, as measured in percent, with
                                 robustness adjustments
                                       Standard                                        FE time and
Variable                 FE time FE issuer
                                       model                                  issuer

                                   0.0107*** 0.0103*** 0.0115** 0.0096
Ln gross proceeds
                                      (0.0036) (0.0037) (0.0049) (0.0060)
Ln market cap Omitted Omitted Omitted Omitted
Dummy gross proceeds to market      0.0074** 0.0071** 0.0066 0.0050
cap                                  (0.0029) (0.0030) (0.0118) (0.0124)
                                        0.0011 0.0013 -0.0080 -0.0139*
Ln age
                                      (0.0007) (0.0008) (0.0055) (0.0078)
                                     0.0022 0.0014
Dummy financial                               Omitted Omitted
                                      (0.0021) (0.0021)
                                   0.2160*** 0.2224*** 0.2013*** 0.2015***
Liquidity
                                      (0.0335) (0.0412) (0.0403) (0.0463)
                                       -0.3517*** -0.5221*** -0.1559 -0.3933
Interest rate volatility
                                      (0.1241) (0.1944) (0.1544) (0.2527)
                                        0.0001 -0.0002 -0.0005 0.0000
Number of underwriters
                                      (0.0008) (0.0011) (0.0015) (0.0021)
                                    0.0042* 0.0045** 0.0055** 0.0057**
Dummy subsequent issue
                                      (0.0022) (0.0023) (0.0027) (0.0029)
                                       -0.2253*** -0.2137*** -0.2139** -0.1738
Constant
                                      (0.0700) (0.0737) (0.0934) (0.1280)

Observations 255 255 255 255
F-statistic 11.48 9.41 8.76 4.70
R-squared 0.3007 0.3246 0.4503 0.4778
The table above illustrates the standard model and three regressions adjusted for fixed effects. Standard model is the final
regression model as discussed in section 6.3. FE time is the standard model adjusted for time-fixed effects. FE issuer is the
standard model adjusted for issuer-fixed effects. FE time and issuer is the standard model adjusted for both time- and issuer-
fixed effects. Ln gross proceeds is the natural logarithm of the offer price times the total number of shares issued. Ln market
cap is the natural logarithm of the issuing company’s equity market capitalization at the preferred stock issue date. Dummy
gross proceeds to market cap is a dichotomous variable defined as gross proceeds divided by market capitalization, whereby
1 signifies that the ratio is equal to or above the average. Ln age is the natural logarithm of the time between the preferred
stock issue date and founding date. Dummy financial is a dichotomous variable whereby 1 signifies that the issuing company
is active within the financial sector and 0 signifies that the company is active within any other industry sector. Liquidity is
the first-day preferred stock trading volume divided by total issued volume. Interest rate volatility is calculated as the trailing
three-week standard deviation of the natural logarithm of the daily percentage change of the yield on the ten-year Canadian
government bond index. Number of underwriters is simply the number of underwriters involved in the issue. Dummy
subsequent issue is a dichotomous variable, whereby 1 signifies that the issue is made within or exactly 6 months from the
firm’s most recent preferred stock offering while 0 signifies that the issue is made more than 6 months after the firm’s most
recent preferred stock offering. ***/**/* denotes statistical significance at the 1%/5%/10% level respectively.

                                    49