The older the fiddle, the sweeter the tune?

   A study of the relationship between age and performance of actively
                managed Nordic equity mutual funds

                               By

                G ABRIEL  Y OUSEF AND  H ENNING  E LMBERGER

                             Department of Finance
                    S TOCKHOLM  S CHOOL OF  E CONOMICS

                             M AY 2017

              Keywords: Age and performance, Nordic equity mutual fund performance

                                                A BSTRACT

       his paper studies the relationship between the performance and the age of equity mutual
       funds in the Nordics. This is an important question because most institutional investors
Trequirement exists even though the performance of very young funds compared to older funds require funds to have existed for at least two to three years before investing in them. This

has not been extensively studied and lacks consensus. It could be that the requirement comes at
a cost of worse performance. We show that the prerequisite is unwarranted as the risk-adjusted
returns for funds younger than three years do not differ from the risk-adjusted returns of older
funds. Nor do we find any evidence for lower standard deviation or higher cumulative returns
among funds that are older than three years.

Despite the seeming lack of support for requiring funds to be three years or older before in-
vesting in them, the criterion still exists. Thus, we propose that qualitative factors, such as the
principal-agent conflict between investors (want high risk-adjusted returns) and fund managers
(want to keep their jobs) might have better success in explaining the prevalence of the criterion
and that future research should approach the subject from this perspective.

                                                                      i

                      D EDICATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

          e want to thank friends and family for lending us support throughout the thesis - no one
          mentioned, no one forgotten. We also want to thank our supervisor Assistant Professor
W Cristian Huse for helpful guidance and useful remarks.

                                                                      iii

                                         T ABLE OF  C ONTENTS

                                                                  Page

List of Tables                                                                    vii

List of Figures                                                                  ix

1   Introduction                                                            1
   1.1   Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
        1.1.1   Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
         1.1.2   Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
         1.1.3   Research question  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2
         1.1.4   Delimitations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
         1.1.5   Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3

2   Previous literature                                                       5
   2.1   Previous studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
         2.1.1   Performance persistence   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
         2.1.2   Size effect  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
         2.1.3   Manager tenure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
         2.1.4   Expense ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
         2.1.5   Age effect   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10

3   Methodology                                                          13
   3.1   Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   14
   3.2   Data preparation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
   3.3   Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17

4   Results and analysis                                                     19
   4.1   Manager tenure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
   4.2   Cumulative performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
   4.3   Monthly standard deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24
   4.4   Risk-adjusted returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26

                                        v
TABLE OF CONTENTS

5   Conclusion and discussion                                               29
   5.1   Conclusion and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30

6   Methodology criticism                                                   33
   6.1   Methodology criticism   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   34

A  Appendix A                                                       37
        A.0.1   Appendix - Overview of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
        A.0.2   Appendix - Regression outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39

B  Bibliography                                                      43

                                                   vi
                                               L IST OF  T ABLES

T ABLE                                                           Page

3.1   Descriptive statistics of the data used in the study.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16

4.1   Regression results for manager tenure 2012-2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20

A.1   Descriptive statistics of all the data used in the regressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   38
A.2   Descriptive statistics of the small cap fund data used in the regressions   . . . . . . . .   38
A.3   Descriptive statistics of the large cap fund data used in the regressions . . . . . . . . .   38
A.4   Regression output for the time period 2012-2017.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   39
A.5   Regression output for the timer period 2007-2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
A.6   Regression output for the time period 2002-2007   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   41
A.7   Regression output for the time period 1997-2002   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42

                                                       vii

                                              L IST OF  F IGURES

F IGURE                                                          Page

4.1   Cumulative performance, no indicating variable for age  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
4.2   Cumulative performance, indicating variable for age . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
4.3   Monthly standard deviation, no indicating variable for age  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
4.4   Monthly standard deviation, indicating variable for age  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25
4.5   Risk-adjusted returns, no indicating variable for age  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
4.6   Risk-adjusted returns, indicating variable for age   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27

                                                   ix

                              H A P T E R
     C 1

                   I NTRODUCTION

1
CHAPTER 1.  INTRODUCTION

1.1   Introduction

1.1.1   Background

This study will examine the relationship between fund age and performance. While many studies
have been conducted on fund performance in general, the relationship between fund age and
performance is still a fairly novel area of study. Various types of investors demand several years
of track record as a fundamental prerequisite before investing (this is supported by anecdotal
evidence, and further strengthened by e.g. Morningstar not rating a fund until it has at least three
years of performance history). Considering this, it is interesting to examine if the investment
criteria has merit to it. Do funds that are older actually yield better risk-adjusted returns than
new funds? If newer funds are found to outperform older funds, the investment criteria of solely
investing in funds that have existed for several years would be ill-advised.

Deciding where to invest capital is a very important question both for individuals as well
as society. Many studies have been conducted regarding funds’ performance; on one side, there
are studies that support the efficient market hypothesis which asserts that investors cannot
outperform the market (and thus the fund age should not matter), on the other side there are
studies that lend support to the notion that there are ways to consistently outperform the market.
The topic has been of major interest to many academics and investors over last decades.

Given the recent discourses and debates in the Nordics regarding funds’ performance, risk-levels,
integrity and excessive management fees, funds’ performance is a hot topic. As the integrity of
many funds is scrutinised, investors are looking for objective metrics to make their investment
decisions. One logical benchmarking measure is the track record of funds; the funds that have
persisted for a longer time ought to be a safer bet than newly created funds with no track record,
as they have stood the test of time. In this study, we will examine whether data supports this
hypothesis.

1.1.2   Aim

The aim of this study is to evaluate whether there is a relationship between age and risk-adjusted
returns in actively managed Nordic equity mutual funds to determine the soundness of having a
minimum fund age as an investment criteria.

1.1.3   Research question

Do Swedish active funds that have existed for a longer time (i.e. have a longer track record) have
a higher risk-adjusted return than younger funds? As risk-adjusted returns is related to absolute
performance and risk (i.e. standard deviation), these two metrics will be examined as well.

                                       2
                                                               1.1.  INTRODUCTION

1.1.4   Delimitations

The equity mutual funds used in the study are all domiciled in Sweden, Finland, Norway or
Denmark. In this study this geographical area, i.e. Nordics excluding Iceland, will be referred to
as the Nordics.

The focus of this study is the relationship between age and performance. Adjacent areas of
study include performance persistence and the relationship between fund characteristics and
performance. Although these topics will be discussed, it is only out of necessity, to set the appro-
priate framework surrounding the question of age and performance.

The question of pre- and post-expense performance of active managers compared to passive
management will not be examined further than what is needed to set the theoretical framework.

1.1.5   Definitions

Market efficiency : The market efficiency hypothesis (EMH) asserts that securities’ market
prices reflect all the available and relevant information, thus stating that it is impossible for
investors to outperform the market as all information already is reflected in the securities’ prices.

Alpha : Alpha, also called overperformance and excess returns, is a measure of performance
on a risk-adjusted basis. Alpha is the excess return over the predicted return according to an
equilibrium model such as the capital asset pricing model on a security or portfolio.

                                       3

                                                                      H A P T E R
             C 2

                                     P REVIOUS LITERATURE

        his literature review aims to describe and comment on the findings of fund characteristics
        that are of importance when studying fund age and performance. The existing literature is
Ton fund performance. split into two main areas: performance persistence and the effect of various characteristics

                                       5
CHAPTER 2.  PREVIOUS LITERATURE

2.1   Previous studies

2.1.1   Performance persistence

The relationship between performance and persistence is interesting to examine because it is
possible that a correlation between performance and age is found. However, this correlation would
not necessarily imply causality between performance and age because if performance persistence
exists; the funds that have performed well are more likely to remain, while poor performing funds
would be more likely to drop out. In this story, age would not be the driving performance factor
due to survivorship bias. Thus, it is important to investigate if performance persistence exists, to
make sure that results regarding fund age and performance are not actually the sole effect of
performance persistence leading to survivorship bias among older funds.

Several previous studies have found that funds’ prior performance cannot predict the funds’
future performance. One of the earliest mutual funds studies was conducted by Treynor (1965)
and found no support for performance persistence. Drawing on Treynor’s results, Sharpe (1966)
studied the risk-adjusted returns of 34 open-end mutual funds from 1954-63 and found that a
fund’s performance was positively correlated to volatility and that "there is no assurance that
past performance is the best predictor of future performance" (p.127).

Jensen (1968) confirmed Sharpe’s results by examining the performance of mutual funds in
the period 1945-1964. The study, based on 115 open end mutual funds, both found that the funds
on average were not able to earn higher risk-adjusted returns than index, and that there is
little proof that any individual fund significantly could outperform a randomly selected fund.
These studies lend support to the efficient market hypothesis, suggesting that a fund manager is
not able to systematically outperform the market portfolio on a risk-adjusted basis. Thus, the
conclusions of these studies formed the framework for a new paradigm which essentially all
ensuing studies of mutual funds have been benchmarked against.

However, these studies have been disputed by several economists. McDonald (1974) studied
the monthly performance of 123 American mutual funds between 1960-69 to evaluate their
risks and returns. McDonald found that the mutual funds’ performance implies "success in stock
selectivity or market timing" (p.324).

Grinblatt and Titman (1989) compared abnormal returns of active and passive funds. In con-
trast to previous studies, Grinblatt and Titman used a sample of mutual funds not subject to
survivorship bias from 1975-84. The funds’ gross returns were estimated through the quarterly
holdings and were used alongside with the funds’ net returns. This enabled Grinblatt and Titman
to measure whether abnormal performance existed. The study indicated that the gross returns of

                                       6
                                                              2.1.  PREVIOUS STUDIES

some funds on a risk-adjusted basis were significantly positive and that "there is evidence that
this measured performance is at least partly generated by active management of the funds" (p.
394-395).

However, the study did not provide information regarding whether a fund’s past performance is
an important factor when deciding which fund to invest in. Consequently, Grinblatt and Titman
examined the relation between past and future performance in a study 1992 by examining a
sample of 279 mutual funds’ performance from 1974-84, by using an extension of Jensen’s perfor-
mance measure from 1968 (p.1979). Their results indicate "that there is a positive persistence in
mutual fund performance" (p.1983).

A similar study by Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1992) supports that specifically the most
recent past performance is the most important indicator for future performance. Hendricks, Patel
and Zeckhauser (1993) reaffirmed these results by finding that funds’ performance persistence is
"predominantly a short-run phenomenon" (p.94). Moreover, Goetzmann and Ibbotson (1994) also
found that a fund manager’s track record could provide information regarding future performance.

Thus, the previously accepted paradigm of the efficient market hypothesis from the early 1970s
clearly became disputed by the early 1980s.

However, several later studies have reaffirmed the original conclusions of the studies conducted
in the 1960s. Elton et al. (1993) showed that Ippolito’s earlier study from 1989, which found
that "mutual funds earned a positive alpha before load charges" contained benchmarking errors.
Thus, after adjusting for errors and biases, Elton et al. found that Ippolito’s findings are reversed,
consequently providing support to the market efficiency hypothesis.

Malkiel (1995) found, by studying mutual fund returns from 1971-1991, that there is no reason
"to abandon a belief that securities markets are remarkably efficient." Similarly, Carhart (1997)
when studying 1,892 American equity mutual funds from 1962-93, found evidence consistent
with the market efficiency hypothesis (p.80).

Clearly, it is hard to draw an accurate conclusion of performance persistence based on pre-
vious studies as they have shown conflicting conclusions. There are many plausible reasons
that might explain these contradictions. One explanatory variable might be survivorship bias as
some studies do not take into account that well performing funds are the ones that prevail, thus
mistaking that a track record per se can provide information about future performance.

Moreover, benchmarking errors and biases can explain why previous studies have shown opposing

                                       7
CHAPTER 2.  PREVIOUS LITERATURE

conclusions. Using different benchmarks as market return proxies have effect on the results. For
instance, using the Standard and Poor’s 500 index as a benchmark will cause bias towards small
cap funds as the Standard and Poor’s 500 index is a large market-cap index. Ippolito (1989) found
that active mutual funds performed better than index funds on a risk-adjusted basis. However,
Elton et al. (1993) showed that Ippolito’s result stemmed from an incorrect benchmark as well as
data errors that led to bias. Further benchmarking errors include estimating alpha through a
single benchmarking model since the funds that are analysed may be heterogeneous.

Benchmarking biases can be derived from several factors. For example, financial models such
as the capital asset pricing model and the four-factor model might not consider all risk factors
attributable to a fund, possibly engendering false risk-adjusted performance persistence as all
risk factors are not adjusted for.

Furthermore, the number of fund specific factors used in the regressions can cause the con-
tradictory conclusions. It is important to examine several factors simultaneously in the regression
to fully determine the drivers behind a fund’s performance. However, using too many variables in
a regression also poses a problem as it leads to multicollinearity.

2.1.2   Size effect

The relationship between the size of investments and performance is of interest in this study. If
there is a relationship, e.g. if funds that invest in large cap stocks perform worse on a risk-adjusted
basis than other funds, this would have to be controlled for, as there is a positive correlation
between fund age and size of investments. Otherwise, an ostensibly negative correlation between
fund age and performance might in reality be caused by size differences.

Previous studies concerning the relationship between small-, mid- and large cap investing
and performance are numerous. Stocks with larger market capitalisation have been shown to
have lower average risk-adjusted returns than small- and mid-cap stocks by many studies (e.g.
Banz (1981), Basu (1983), Fama and French (1992, 1996) and Daniel and Titman (1997). For
example, Daniel and Titman (1997) found that the return premium for the smallest quintile of
equities over the largest quintile is 30-50 basis points per month. Banz (1981) found that small
NYSE firms have had significantly larger risk-adjusted returns than large NSYE firms over a
forty-year period, and this effect is most pronounced for the smallest firms in the sample. The
explanation for this effect is however not determined, and Banz is open for both the interpretation
that size is a factor and that size is a proxy for one or more true but unknown factors correlated
with size.

Dahlquist, Engstrom and Soderlind (2000), in a study of Swedish equity mutual funds’ per-

                                       8
                                                              2.1.  PREVIOUS STUDIES

formance during 1993-1997, found that mutual fund size has a strong and robust negative
relation to the funds’ performance. Implementing a trading strategy of buying all large Swedish
equity mutual funds and selling the small ones generated an underperformance of 2.33% per
year during the time period. The proposed explanation for this is that funds that are relatively
large compared to their respective markets may simply be too large to adopt aggressive trading
strategies. The theory of diseconomies of relative scale is validated by the observation that the
underperformance is less pronounced/disappears when small and medium-sized equity funds
are compared. Furthermore, for money market funds that in general are small compared to the
relevant markets, larger funds instead have a weak positive correlation with performance - which
is attributed to economies of scale in fund management. As smaller mutual funds on average
invest in smaller companies, the results complement previous studies (Banz, Titman) that have
shown underperformance of larger stocks.

In the debate about the size effect on performance, there are other results that oppose the
previously described paradigm. Carhart (1997), Grinblatt and Titman (1994) and Prather, Bertin
and Henker (2004) found that there is no correlation between fund performance and fund size.
Grinblatt and Titman find that, when analysing the monthly returns of 279 mutual funds and
109 passive portfolios between 1974 and 1984, the size of the funds do not affect the risk-adjusted
returns. Grinblatt and Titman (1992) suggest that studies of the size effect suffer from benchmark
biases. For example, CAPM and ATP-based benchmarks favour small capitalisation and high
dividend-yield stocks, leading to that small-firm funds and dividend-oriented funds may appear
to outperform other funds due to the benchmark biases.

2.1.3   Manager tenure

If manager tenure has implications for fund performance, this would have implications for the
study of fund performance and fund age as manager tenure and fund age are positively correlated,
and thus should be controlled for.

In a study performed on 530 mutual funds’ performance between 1988 and 1990, Golec (1996)
found that tenure and alpha are strongly positively related, indicating that experience pays and
perhaps that poor performers are quickly eliminated. The short time period studied mitigates the
effect of survivorship bias. More specifically, Golec found that managers younger than 46 years
old with tenure of more than 7 years and MBA degrees had the best risk-adjusted performance.
Per the study, an additional year of tenure leads to a direct 0.165 increase in annual alpha.
Different proposals are put forward as the explanation for the tenure’s positive correlation with
excess returns. For example, tenure is negatively related to expense ratio and negatively related
to number of trades (keeping transaction costs low). Further, tenure measures the manager’s
survivorship at the job. Golec writes: "Long tenure may imply greater job security, and hence, less

                                       9
CHAPTER 2.  PREVIOUS LITERATURE

short-run behaviour by the manager." Prather et al. (2004) studied the performance of over 5,000
equity funds during the period 1996-2000. They find that the coefficient estimates for tenure are
positive when regressing on alpha, but the coefficient is not statistically significant. The study
thus complements Golec’s study, but does not find nearly as strong correlations between tenure
and performance as Golec did.

Other studies show very slight evidence consistent with skilled or informed mutual fund man-
agers. Carhart (1997) found very little support for informed mutual fund managers. The only
result regarding manager skill is not robust to model misspecification, and overall the evidence is
consistent with the market efficiency hypothesis. Instead, Carhart found that investment costs
(expense ratios, transaction costs and load fees) account for almost all the important predictability
in mutual fund returns.

2.1.4   Expense ratio

The expense ratio is negatively related to fund age (e.g. Golec 1996). Due to this, the variable is
interesting when the relationship between fund age and performance is being studied.

Sharpe (1966) studied the performance of 34 mutual funds 1954-1963. In the study, he found
that good performance is associated with low expense ratios. Sharpe found that differences in
performance to a major extent can be explained by differences in expense ratios and transactions
costs. This is in a sense a support of the efficient market hypothesis, where skill is not a factor
in investment: rather the fund managers that can keep the costs (e.g. expense ratio) low are
the managers that perform well. Golec (1996) found that the coefficient for expense ratio on
risk-adjusted performance is negative, but statistically insignificant.

Carhart (1997) found that buying last year’s top-decile mutual funds and selling last year’s
bottom-decile funds yields a return of 8 percent per year. Of this spread, expense ratios explain
0.7 percent (transaction costs 1%, differences in the market value and momentum of stocks 4.6%).
In the study, he found that expense ratios are significantly and negatively related to performance.
Carhart also found that large management fees do not necessarily imply poorer performance,
indicating that large management fees can signal superior investment skill.

2.1.5   Age effect

Older fund age indicates that the fund has succeeded in the past, implying manager’s ability
and good performance. One may argue that older funds should perform better as young funds
might face some learning costs in the beginning. One could also argue that young funds will be
more alert and nimble, which could lead to better returns. Bauer, Koedijk and Otten (2002) found
that younger funds underperform, with the explanation that they are subject to higher market

                                       10
                                                             2.1.  PREVIOUS STUDIES

risk as they are less diversified at the beginning of the investment period. Opposing this view,
Otten and Bams (2002) found a negative relation between age and performance. Carhart (1997)
found that fund age is negatively correlated to excess returns (but this is statistically insignifi-
cant). Prather et al. (2004) found no relationship between fund age and risk-adjusted performance.

In summary, the evidence for the relation between fund age and performance is mixed and
there are plausible reasons for both positive and negative correlation between fund age and
performance.

                                       11

                   H A P T E R  3
                                        C

                               METHODOLOGY

        ata on Nordic equity mutual funds was collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream,
         the funds’ annual reports and Morningstar. After the data collection- and preparation
Dvariables risk-adjusted returns, cumulative performance and monthly standard deviation andwas done, regressions were run to determine the relationship between the dependent

 the independent variables expense ratio, fund age, manager tenure and size of fund investments.

                                       13
CHAPTER 3.  METHODOLOGY

3.1   Data collection

This study uses data on equity mutual funds collected mainly from Thomson Reuters Datastream,
accessed via Stockholm School of Economics e-resources. Datastream aggregates data regarding
performance, fund age, expense ratios and much more on mutual funds. Further, specific fund
characteristics such as manager tenure were retrieved from the respective funds’ websites and
annual reports. Manager tenure was difficult to get historical information on and thus manager
tenure was only retrieved for circa half of the funds studied, and only for some of the time periods.
The effect of manager tenure on fund performance is studied for the available data, to examine
the importance of this variable.

The fund performance data on a monthly basis was collected from Datastream.

The mutual funds used in the study are all domiciled in Sweden, Finland, Norway or Den-
mark. The reason for this is that these are the funds that exhibit the geographic investment
criteria that are used in the study: At least 50% of the investments should be in the Nordics and
at least 85% of the investments should be in the Western world. The reason for the geographic
criteria is that these investments are subject to similar risk exposures and thus are more compa-
rable than for example a Southeast Asian-oriented fund and a North American-oriented fund.
The reason for not applying even stricter criteria (for example 90% Nordic investments) is that
this reduced the sample size very significantly. It was a trade-off between a clean and a large
data set.

The passively managed mutual funds (index funds) were manually removed from the data
set, through checking the fund’s annual report and Morningstar for fund profile. Furthermore,
non-mutual funds such as hedge funds, funds of funds and exchange traded funds were removed.

A criterion of having at least 80% invested in equities was used, as other asset classes pro-
vide different return characteristics. Thus, fixed-income, money-market- and multi-asset mutual
funds were removed from the data set. The data on investment per asset class was collected from
Morningstar and the fund’s annual reports. As with the geographic criteria, a stricter criterion
could be used (e.g. having 100% in equities) but this would reduce the sample size significantly.

The size of the mutual fund’s investments is categorised as small and large cap, as the two
groups of funds show different return characteristics. Inspired by Morningstar’s style box that
defines large cap stocks as the group that accounts for the top 70% of the capitalisation of each
geographic area, mid cap the next 20%, and small cap stocks the last 10%, an asset-weighted
average of the underlying stocks’ size scores is used to create the overall fund score. The dif-
ference between our categorisation and Morningstar’s style box is that small cap and mid cap

                                       14
                                                            3.2.  DATA PREPARATION

stocks are grouped together as small cap (i.e. last 30% of market cap) and large remain large
cap (i.e. largest 70% of market cap in geographic area) in our categorisation. The reason for our
changed split is twofold: to get a larger sample size of small cap funds, and that the size effect is
most pronounced for very small- contra very large stocks (and there seems to be no significant
difference between small- and mid-cap stocks (Dahlquist, Engstrom and Soderlind) (2000)). As
Morningstar’s classification was partly used, only funds that were listed on Morningstar’s website
were used (which was a small restriction, as the Morningstar’s website had very broad coverage).

The funds that did not have a performance record for the whole five-year period were removed.
Thus, the time period used has implications for the extent of survivorship bias in the data. The
longer the time period, the larger the survivorship bias, as more funds will be eliminated from
the data set.

Mutual funds that were inactive today, but had been active for at least one full five-year period,
were kept in the data set, to mitigate survivorship bias.

3.2   Data preparation

Having obtained the funds’ performance and the data on fund characteristics, the performance of
the funds was split into four five year periods: 1997-2002, 2002-2007, 2007-2012 and 2012-2017.
The reason for why 1997 was chosen as the starting period is that before that, there were few
equity mutual funds in the Nordics and the sample size for small Nordic funds 1992-1997 was
very small. The time period five years was chosen because it was deemed an appropriate time to
measure performance. Five is in some sense an arbitrary number: three, four, six or seven years
could also have been chosen. 3-7 years is the standard time frame to evaluate fund performance
in studies - shorter time periods might not give the fund enough time to show performance, and
longer time periods would have led to a higher risk that the initial fund characteristics (e.g. age,
expense ratio) would not be relevant for the whole time interval (e.g. a fund with an age of two
years at the beginning of a 10-year period will be twelve years at the end of the period).

Using different time periods over a long time interval has the benefit of spreading out the
effects of different substantial market events that otherwise could skew the results in favour of
specific types of funds. For example, our time periods cover the global stock market cash flash in
October 1997, the dot-com bubble in 2000, the September 11 attacks in 2001, the financial crisis
of 2007-2008 and the European sovereign debt crisis in 2010.

The funds’ ages at the start of each time period was calculated. The cumulative performance (in
%) of the funds was calculated as:

                                       15
CHAPTER 3.  METHODOLOGY

                              (P rice o f f und t ) ° (P rice o f f und t °1 )
(3.1)
                                          (P rice o f f und t °1 )

Where t is the time at the end of a time period of five years and  t °1  the beginning.
The monthly standard deviation of the funds was calculated. Then, the risk-adjusted return
measure was calculated as:

                                                       (Cumulative per f ormance)
(3.2)            (R isk ° ad justed return) =
                                                      (Monthl y standard deviation)

The fund size metric (large versus small cap) was transformed into a dummy variable, where
the value 1 indicated large cap. Fund age (in years), expense ratio (in percentage of assets under
management) and manager tenure (in years) were used as standardised variables, and calculated
at the beginning of each time period. Fund age was also transformed to dummy variables, where
0-3 years and 3+ years were the two categories, and fund aged 0-3 years were given the dummy
value 1, to see if there was a difference between very young funds and older funds.

Descriptive statistics of the funds used in the study can be seen in Table 3.1. More descrip-
tive statistics on the data of the funds in different time periods can be found in the appendix.

                  Descriptive statistics of the data used in the study
                                              Small cap   Large cap        All
                                   Funds         62        108       170
                                      Age       8.911       9.590      9.351
            Performance (5 year cumulative)    77.711%    40.143%   53.317%
                           Monthly std.dev     5.725%     5.147%    5.334%
                       Risk-adjusted returns      17.351       9.288     12.116
                             Expense ratio     1.465%     1.206%    1.296%
                 Management tenure (years)       4.460       3.715      4.018

                  Table 3.1: Descriptive statistics of the data used in the study.

    As can be seen in Table 3.1, the funds’ ages seem to be similar for small- and large cap mutual
funds (8.911 and 9.590 years, respectively). Small cap stocks seem to have significantly higher
performance than large cap stocks, 77.711% versus 40.143%, which is in line with theory. This
higher absolute performance seems to come at the cost of a higher risk, as standard deviation
is 5.725% for small cap funds and 5.147% for large cap funds, which is also in line with theory.
Small cap stocks seemed to have higher risk-adjusted returns. Expense ratios were similar, but
slightly higher for small cap stocks. Management tenure was slightly longer for small cap stocks
than large cap stocks.

                                       16
                                                                  3.3.  DATA ANALYSIS

3.3   Data analysis

Step 1

The relationship between manager tenure and the dependent variables cumulative performance,
monthly std. dev and risk-adjusted returns was studied. With manager tenure, ER (expense
ratio), fund size (dummy for large cap which takes on the value 1 when the fund is large cap) and
fund age, two regressions were run per dependent variable, one with fund age and one with fund
age as an indicating variable (with the value 1 for funds under three years of age).

(3.3)
D e pendent variabl e = Ø0 + Ø1 § ER + Ø2 § F und size + Ø3 § F und age + Ø4 § Manager tenure + ≤

Step 2

Regressions were run on cumulative performance, monthly std. dev and risk-adjusted returns
with expense ratio, fund age (non-dummy) and fund size (with a dummy for large cap, i.e. the
dummy takes the value one when the fund is a large cap fund) as independent variables. For
each time period, three regressions were run (one on each dependent variable) and in total there
were four time periods, so twelve regressions of this kind were run in total.

(3.4)      D e pendent variabl e = Ø0 + Ø1 § ER + Ø2 § F und size + Ø3 § F und age + ≤

ER was only available for the two latest of the four time periods. For the other two, regression
(3.4) was run, but without ER as an independent variable.

Step 3

Regressions were run on cumulative performance, monthly std. dev and risk-adjusted returns
with expense ratio, fund size and fund age (dummy for funds younger than three years old, i.e. the
dummy takes the value 1 when the funds are younger than three years old) as the independent
variables. For each time period, three regressions were run (one on each dependent variable), and
in total there were four time periods, so twelve regressions of this kind were run in total.

(3.5)    D e pendent variabl e = Ø0 + Ø1 § ER + Ø2 § F und size + Ø3 § F und age (Dumm y) + ≤

ER was only available for the two latest of the four time periods. For the other two, regression
(3.5) was run, but without ER as an independent variable.

                                       17

                                                                      H A P T E R
             C 4

                                    R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS

        he regression results indicate that age generally does not have a statistically significant
        relationship with performance, standard deviation and risk-adjusted returns. Size had
Talike the age variable, did not show statistically significant results in most cases. Similarly, the strongest (negative) relationship with the three dependent variables. Expense ratio,

manager tenure did not have a significant relationship with any of the variables, though this
relationship was only examined for 2012-2017 due to lack of data.

                                       19
CHAPTER 4.  RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

4.1   Manager tenure

The regressions performed on manager tenure for the time period 2012-2017 showed insignificant
results for all dependent variables both when using age as an indicating variable and not. This,
in combination with the lack of data, prompted the removal of manager tenure as a variable to
examine further. These findings oppose Golec (1997), who found a positive relationship between
manager tenure and fund performance. However, these findings are in line with Prather et. al
(2004), who did not find a statistically significant relationship between manager tenure and fund
performance. Though, the sample size of 77 manager tenures (in comparison to the 155 funds
that were studied in the time period 2012-2017), is low. Thus, there is a possibility of sample
selection bias as there could be a relationship between having manager tenure publicly available
and fund performance characteristics. Optimally, manager tenure would be studied for all time
periods and for all the funds, but the results of manager tenure being insignificant for at least
one time implies that it is not a very important variable that is being omitted from the model
(however, this could of course change in another time period).

                  Regression results for manager tenure 2012-2017
              Cumulative   Cumulative   Std. Dev   Std.   Dev  Risk-      Risk-
               performance  performance            (Indicator)   adjusted   adjusted
                              (Indicator)                            returns     returns
                                                                                      (Indicator)
   2
 R             0.185         0.205         0.117      0.132       0.201       0.184
 Observations  77           77           77        77          77         77
 Constant     31.971***     1.200***      0.042***  0.038***    1.306***   32.190***
                (4.012)         (0.158)         (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.156)     (4.069)
 Manager     -0.356        -0.010        0.000     0.000       -0.012     -0.361
 tenure        (0.318)        (0.012)        (0.000)    (0.000)       (0.012)     (0.316)

                 Table 4.1: Regression results for manager tenure 2012-2017

  Unstandardised coefficients main metric, standard errors in parenthesis. Significance levels:
 ***p<0.01, **p<0.05 and *p<0.1. Regression for time period 2012-2017, manager tenure, fund
age, fund size and expense ratio as independent variables (resulting coefficients only shown for
 manager tenure). As can be seen in the highlighted row, manager tenure shows no statistical
                              significance in any of the regressions.

                                       20
                                                  4.2.  CUMULATIVE PERFORMANCE

4.2   Cumulative performance

As illustrated in Figure 4.1 and 4.2, size has a negative relationship with cumulative performance
in three out of four time periods, both when using age as an indicating variable and not. The time
period that showed a positive relationship between size and cumulative performance was 1997-
2002. A reason for this surprising result could be that the dot-com bubble burst circa 2000-2001.
While the stock market in general was affected, particularly small- and mid-cap IT-companies (i.e.
companies held by small cap equity mutual funds) took the largest hit. Apart from the 1997-2002
deviation, the findings are in line with previous literature, e.g. Fama and French (1982) and
Daniel and Titman (1997), whose studies found higher cumulative performance for small cap
stocks.

Expense ratio does not have a relationship with cumulative performance, neither for age without
indicating variable nor with age as indicating variable. This contrasts the findings of Sharpe
(1966), Golec (1996) and Carhart (1997) that expense ratio is negatively correlated with perfor-
mance. The idea of these original results was the assumption that no mutual fund managers had
any skill to pick the winners (but not losers either). In that case their expected overperformance
before fees should be 0 and after fees 0 less fees. Thus, the higher the fees, the lower the after-fee
performance. Indeed, these studies pointed to this direction. However, our result can be explained
by assuming that some mutual fund managers are more skillful than others, and due to their
past track record investors are willing to invest with them even if they charge higher fees. In this
story the higher fees and higher skills might exactly offset each other and thus, no correlation
can be found. This is in line with Carhart’s (1997) findings which indicate that large management
fees can signal superior investment skill.

Another explanation for this finding is that it could be that pre-expense alpha is correlated
with the expense ratio, but that the net alpha is uncorrelated. In this case the manager is either
extracting, or dissipating, all gross alpha through the expenses.

Depending on whether an indicating variable is used or not, the age variable has different
effects on cumulative performance. When no age indicator is used, age is insignificant in three
time periods and has negative effects (i.e. older fund have lower cumulative performance) on
cumulative performance in the time period 1997-2002. The reason for this is unclear as the time
period was characterised by very high volatility and saw both the rise and the fall of IT-stocks,
which makes it hard to reason regarding causalities. Figure 4.2 shows that when age is used as
an indicating variable it was positively related to cumulative performance in two time periods,
negatively related in one (1997-2002) and statistically insignificant in one. Very young funds
thus seem to have higher cumulative performance than funds that have existed for at least three
years. As for 1997-2002, a possible explanation for the underperformance of funds that are under

                                       21
CHAPTER 4.  RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

three years of age could be that the IT-boom which started in the mid 90’s attracted new investors
and lead to establishment of funds capitalising on easily accessible capital. When the bubble
burst, these funds were likely to have had a larger exposure to the IT-sector.

                                       22
                                                 4.2.  CUMULATIVE PERFORMANCE

              Cumulative performance, no indicating variable for age

    F IGURE  4.1. *Significance level at least 90%. The figure describes the number of
         observations from the regressions split into positive (statistically significant),
         negative (statistically significant) and not significant coefficients. Cumulative
         performance is the dependent variable. Size, expense ratio and age (no indicator)
         are independent variables. For age and size, there are 4 regression results (one
         from each time period), for expense ratio, the results are only from 2 time periods,
         2007-2012 and 2012-2017 (due to lack of data). For more detailed regression output,
         see appendix: regression output.

Cumulative performance, indicating variable for age, where the dummy value takes
              the value 1 for funds that are younger than three years

    F IGURE  4.2. *Significance level at least 90%. The figure describes the number of
         observations from the regressions split into positive (statistically significant),
         negative (statistically significant) and not significant coefficients. Cumulative
        performance is the dependent variable. Size, expense ratio and age (indicator)
         are independent variables. For age and size, there are 4 regression results (one
         from each time period), for expense ratio, the results are only from 2 time periods,
         2007-2012 and 2012-2017 (due to lack of data). For more detailed regression output,
         see appendix: regression output.

                                      23
CHAPTER 4.  RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

4.3   Monthly standard deviation

Size has a negative correlation to monthly standard deviation, both when using age as an indica-
tor and not, in three out of four time periods. In the period when the relationship was insignificant
(2002-2007), the coefficient was negative. The magnitude of the relationship is large: between
2007 and 2012, funds that invested in large cap stocks had 1.5 percentage points lower monthly
standard deviation (on an average standard deviation of 6.3 percentage points for all funds in the
period). The most plausible explanation for this is that large cap stocks on average have lower
standard deviation than small cap stocks, which reflects on the standard deviation of portfolios
consisting of respective stocks.

As illustrated in Figure 4.3 and 4.4, expense ratio is statistically insignificant when age without
the indicating variable was used and positive in one of the time periods when age was used as an
indicating variable. The positive relationship may be a consequence of that more active managers
charge higher expense ratios. These managers are probably more likely to trade more often and
take more risky bets than the less active counterparts - leading to higher standard deviation.

Age has a positive relationship with monthly standard deviation when no indicating variable
for age is used for two out of four time periods. For the two other time periods, no significant
relationship can be found. The positive relationship with monthly standard deviation for 50
percent of the observations suggests that older funds are riskier. This finding is unexpected as a
positive relationship between age and standard deviation is not established in previous literature.
A possible explanatory reason for this relationship is that older funds already have tried using
different conventional investment ideas, and now might need to resort to more volatile invest-
ments to be able to invest all its assets or to continue outperforming. However, this relationship
is not as clear when using age as an indicator as one time period showed a negative relationship
and another period showed a positive relationship (two time periods still showed no significant
relationship).

                                       24
                                             4.3.  MONTHLY STANDARD DEVIATION

           Monthly standard deviation, no indicating variable for age

  F IGURE  4.3. *Significance level at least 90%. The figure describes the number of
       observations from the regressions split into positive (statistically significant),
        negative (statistically significant) and not significant coefficients. Monthly standard
       deviation is the dependent variable. Size, expense ratio and age (no indicator) are
       independent variables. For age and size, there are 4 regression results (one from
       each time period), for expense ratio, the results are only from 2 time periods,
       2007-2012 and 2012-2017 (due to lack of data). See appendix: regression output.

Monthly standard deviation, indicating variable for age, where the dummy value
          takes the value 1 for funds that are younger than three years

  F IGURE  4.4. *Significance level at least 90%. The figure describes the number of
       observations from the regressions split into positive (statistically significant),
       negative (statistically significant) and not significant coefficients. Cumulative
       performance is the dependent variable. Size, expense ratio and age (indicator)
       are independent variables. For age and size, there are 4 regression results (one
       from each time period), for expense ratio, the results are only from 2 time periods,
       2007-2012 and 2012-2017 (due to lack of data). For more detailed regression output,
       see appendix: regression output.

                                     25
CHAPTER 4.  RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

4.4   Risk-adjusted returns

Size is negatively correlated with the dependent variable (i.e. risk-adjusted returns), both when
using age as an indicator and not, in three out of four time periods. The time period that showed
a positive relationship between size and risk-adjusted returns was 1997-2002. This negative
relationship implies that small funds provide higher risk-adjusted returns than large funds
which is well-established in previous literature and again is consistent with the conclusions of
Dahlquist, Engstrom and Soderlind (2000), as they found that that mutual fund size had a strong
and robust negative relation to the performance of the funds.

No relationship could be found between risk-adjusted returns and expense ratio which again is
surprising considering previous studies which indicate that expense ratio is negatively correlated
to risk-adjusted returns. A possible explanation for this is that firms with higher expense ratio
actually outperform other funds pre-expense owing to superior investment skills. However, this
overperformance might be dissipated through higher fees.

The relationship between age and risk-adjusted returns is negative for one out of four ob-
servations when age as an indicator was not used which suggest that older funds perform worse
on a risk-adjusted basis. When using age as an indicator (i.e. indicator for funds that are younger
than three years old), the relationship between age and risk-adjusted returns still hold. Funds
that are younger than three years old have a positive relationship with risk-adjusted returns in
one out of four time periods (1997-2002), while the result is insignificant for three periods. In
both cases, the young funds risk-adjusted overperformance is solely due to higher cumulative
performance (age has no statistically significant effect on standard deviation in the time period).

                                       26
                                                      4.4.  RISK-ADJUSTED RETURNS

                Risk-adjusted returns, no indicating variable for age

    F IGURE  4.5. *Significance level at least 90%. The figure describes the number of
         observations from the regressions split into positive (statistically significant),
         negative (statistically significant) and not significant coefficients. Risk-adjusted
         return is the dependent variable. Size, expense ratio and age (no indicator) are
         independent variables. For age and size, there are 4 regression results (one from
         each time period), for expense ratio, the results are only from 2 time periods,
         2007-2012 and 2012-2017 (due to lack of data). See appendix: regression output.

Risk-adjusted returns, indicating variable for age where the dummy value takes the
                value 1 for funds that are younger than three years

    F IGURE  4.6. *Significance level at least 90%. The figure describes the number of
         observations from the regressions split into positive (statistically significant),
         negative (statistically significant) and not significant coefficients. Risk-adjusted
         return is the dependent variable. Size, expense ratio and age (as an indicator)
         are independent variables. For age and size, there are 4 regression results (one
         from each time period), for expense ratio, the results are only from 2 time periods,
         2007-2012 and 2012-2017 (due to lack of data). See appendix: regression output.

                                      27

                   H A P T E R  5
                                        C

                          CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

      nvestors’ common prerequisite of funds having existed for at least two to three years before
     they invest in them seems to be unwarranted in the Nordic equity mutual market. On the
adjusted returns due to this investment criterion (the results are ambiguous as three time periodsIcontrary, if anything, the results suggest that investors could be missing out on higher risk-

show no statistical significance, while one time period shows positive risk-adjusted returns, see
Figure 4.6).

                                       29
CHAPTER 5.  CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

5.1   Conclusion and discussion

The main conclusion in this study is that older funds do not exhibit higher risk-adjusted returns
than young funds. Rather, the relationship between fund age and performance is statistically
insignificant in 75% of the time periods, and negative in 25% of the time periods, i.e. older age
indicates lower risk-adjusted performance. This also holds when age is used as a dummy variable,
with funds under three years of age showing higher risk-adjusted returns in 25% of the cases.
For the rest of the time periods, age shows no statistical significance. These results are in line
with Carhart (1997) and Prather et. al (2004), as these studies showed no relationship between
fund age and risk-adjusted performance. Furthermore, Otten and Bams (2002) found a negative
relationship between fund age and performance, which finds some support in this study as the
negative relationship holds in 25% of the time periods.

Although the relationship between risk-adjusted returns and fund age seems to be weak, there
could be some merit to investing in older funds. From the professional investor’s perspective, it is
important to legitimise portfolio choices to the stakeholders, especially if a fund underperforms.
Even if the rationale for buying two different funds ex-ante is similar, ex-post the underperfor-
mance, it could be easier for the investor to rationalise an investment in an older fund. As the
investment adage goes: no one ever got fired for buying IBM.

When an indicating variable is used for age, one period showed a negative relationship and
another period showed a positive relationship with standard deviation, and the other two peri-
ods showed no significant relationship. In terms of this study’s focus, the implications are that
very young funds (< 3 years old) do not seem to systematically differ from funds that are older
than three years in terms of standard deviation. However, age had a positive relationship with
monthly standard deviation in 50% of the time periods when no indicating variable for age was
used, the other 50% showed no significance. Thus, there seems to be a correlation between fund
age and standard deviation, but not in the age intervals that are relevant for investors that
demand at least three years of fund existence. It could be interesting to analyse age and standard
deviation for different fund age cohorts, e.g. funds aged 3-5 or 5-7 years to determine if there is
an interval where risk-averse investors could benefit. When age is used as an indicating variable,
younger funds had higher cumulative performance than old funds (but the result was ambiguous
as the results from different time periods differed). When age was not used as an indicator, a
negative effect was found between fund age and cumulative performance. One explanation can
be that younger funds are more eager to prove themselves than their competitors as they need to
demonstrate capabilities to attract more capital. Older funds, on the other hand, might be more
satisfied with the status quo.

We found that the size of investments was negatively correlated to standard deviation, cu-

                                       30
                                                 5.1.  CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION

mulative performance and risk-adjusted returns. Thus, we confirmed the current consensus.
However, our metric of risk-adjusted return does not overcome the commonly faced problem in
performance measurement - that it is always a joint hypothesis test, i.e. the model (in this case
cumulative performance/standard deviation) is also tested. A seemingly higher risk-adjusted
return for funds investing in small cap stocks might be the result of the risk-adjusted model not
accounting for all relevant risk-factors.

In general, the results of this study are not very definite. When a statistically significant re-
lationship was shown, it often did not hold in the next period. The only exception to this was
the size effect. The lack of definite results is not surprising considering the efficient market
hypothesis. If the hypothesis holds, or approximately holds, there should be no large difference in
risk-adjusted returns). If large differences existed, the hypothesis predicts that the differences
would be arbitraged away by rational investors. The existence of the size effect is surprising in an
efficient market framework, but could be explained by popular risk-adjusted performance metrics
not being complete.

                                       31

                   H A P T E R  6
                                        C

                         METHODOLOGY CRITICISM

        s with most studies regarding fund performance, this study is sensitive to two sources
        of biases: sample selection bias and a imperfect metric of risk-adjusted returns. Also,
Ato maximise risk-adjusted returns. However, considering recent behavioural finance advancesan underlying assumption throughout the thesis is that the fund manager’s objective is

regarding principal-agent theories, the underlying assumption might not hold. This could be an
 area of further studies.

                                       33
CHAPTER 6.  METHODOLOGY CRITICISM

6.1   Methodology criticism

One shortcoming of the study is that there is a problem with sample selection bias. In this study,
there is a requirement of funds having shown five years of performance to be included, as this is
deemed to be an appropriate period of time to judge fund performance. However, this leads to that
funds that existed for less than five years are excluded from the sample. This could be a problem
as newly started funds that perform very poorly might be taken off the market in less than five
years - either due to lack of investments or the fund company saving face. An implication of this
is that young funds in our sample, at the beginning of a time period, are not representative for
all young funds at the beginning of a time period. Rather, they probably perform better than the
average funds, as it is unlikely that high performing funds are taken off the market. One way to
deal with this problem is to include funds that did not survive the entire examined period of five
years (by for example extrapolating their performance) or to decrease the examined cohort period
to e.g. two or three years, and to contrast these results to the results when the criteria of survival
is used, to get a measurement of sample selection bias.

Like other studies that focus on risk-adjusted return, there are problems with the metric of
risk-adjusted returns. There are many different performance metrics: e.g. Sharpe Ratio, Treynor
Ratio and Jensen’s Alpha. However, none of the metrics are complete, which can lead to erro-
neous conclusions. Proponents of the efficient market hypothesis often criticise studies that show
excess returns with this reasoning. To further ascertain the findings, a range of risk-adjusted re-
turn metrics could be used (however, this does not fully solve the problem, by the same reasoning).

Further, most previous studies have shown relationships between manager tenure and fund
performance. In this study, data for manager tenure was only available for circa 50% of the funds
in the last time period (2012-2017). For this time period, manager tenure was statistically in-
significant for all our dependent variables, which, although comforting, is not completely assuring
in our choice to omit the variable. It is possible that the 50% data points we got were subject
to sample selection bias, and it is also possible that other time periods would have shown other
results. Also, it could be interesting to track individual managers rather than studying manager
tenure, as this is a rather unexplored area of research that makes intuitive sense to study - but
due to time constraints, it was out of the scope of this study to explore.

As we find no support for only buying funds over three years of age when examining the data
from a quantitative perspective, it could be interesting to approach the subject from a qualitative
angle. The portfolio manager’s goal might not always be to maximise the risk-adjusted returns,
which is the underlying assumption throughout this and most other studies on the topic. Rather,
the portfolio manager does not want to be fired and therefore a lot of the manager’s work is about
legitimising investments and not striving too far away from other investors. Approaching the

                                       34
                                                     6.1.  METHODOLOGY CRITICISM

subject with a stronger focus on for example this agency-conflict (investors want to maximise
risk-adjusted returns, portfolio managers want to keep their jobs) could possibly have larger
explanatory value for why institutional investors shy away from very young funds rather than
only looking at the data on risk-adjusted returns.

                                       35

      P P E N D I X  A
                  A

                 APPENDIX A

37
APPENDIX A.  APPENDIX A

A.0.1   Appendix - Overview of data

             Descriptive statistics of all the data used in the regressions
                                1997-2002     2002-2007     2007-2012     2012-2017
 Observations (n)               66           102          119          155
 Expense ratio (%)                                         1.28          1.31
 Age (years)                     4.95          7.29          10.92         11.44
 Manager tenure (years)                                                  3.95 (n = 77)
 Cumulative performance (%)      71.86         56.95         (17.65)        97.52
 Monthly standard deviation (%)   6.68          5.41          6.26          3.89

             Table A.1: Descriptive statistics of all the data used in the regressions

The data is split into the four different time periods. Manager tenure only available for the time
         period 2012-2017, expense ratio only available for 2007-2012 and 2012-2017.

       Descriptive statistics of the small cap fund data used in the regressions
                                1997-2002     2002-2007     2007-2012     2012-2017
 Observations (n)               23           31           39           62
 Expense ratio (%)                                         1.45          1.48
 Age (years)                     4.25          7.59          10.51         10.44
 Manager tenure (years)                                                 4.46 (n=33)
 Cumulative performance (%)      54.49         131.56        (14.35)        117.31
 Monthly standard deviation (%)   7.33          5.65          7.33          4.07

       Table A.2: Descriptive statistics of the small cap fund data used in the regressions

The data is split into the four different time periods. Manager tenure only available for the time
         period 2012-2017, expense ratio only available for 2007-2012 and 2012-2017.

       Descriptive statistics of the large cap fund data used in the regressions
                                1997-2002     2002-2007     2007-2012     2012-2017
 Observations (n)               43           71           80           93
 Expense ratio (%)                                         1.18          1.20
 Age (years)                     5.33          7.16          11.12         12.10
 Manager tenure (years)                                                 3.57 (n=44)
 Cumulative performance (%)      81.11         24.37         (19.26)        84.37
 Monthly standard deviation (%)   6.33          5.31          5.73          3.77

       Table A.3: Descriptive statistics of the large cap fund data used in the regressions

The data is split into the four different time periods. Manager tenure only available for the time
         period 2012-2017, expense ratio only available for 2007-2012 and 2012-2017.

                                       38
A.0.2   Appendix - Regression outputs

                  Regression output for the time period 2012-2017
                      Cumulative  Cumulative   Std. Dev    Std.   Dev  Risk-      Risk-
                        perfor-      performance              (Indicator)   adjusted   adjusted
                       mance      (Indicator)                           returns    returns
                                                                                               (Indicator)
   2
 R                     0.195       0.205         0.065       0.078       0.145       0.147
 Observations         155         155          155        155         155        155
 Constant             1.179***    1.098***      0.042***   0.041***    28.507***  27.659***
                          (0.094)       (0.96)          (0.002)      (0.002)       (2.406)      (2.485)
 Age                 -0.005                    0.000                  -0.045
                          (0.031)                      (0.000)                   (0.089)
 Age  (Younger  than              0.124**                 0.002**                1.351
 three indicator)                      (0.063)                     (0.001)                   (1.616)
 Size (Large indicator)   -0.313***    -0.314***     -0.003***   -0.003***    -6.874***   -6.861***
                          (0.059)       (0.058)         (0.001)     (0.001)       (1.513)     (1.500)
 Expense ratio         0.030       0.025 (0.055)   0.000      -0.001       0.953      0.928
                          (0.057)                      (0.001)     (0.001)       (1.459)     (1.426)
 Manager tenure        -              -               -            -              -            -

                  Table A.4: Regression output for the time period 2012-2017.

  Unstandardised coefficients is the main metric, standard errors in parenthesis. Significance
                            levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05 and *p<0.1.

                                       39
APPENDIX A.  APPENDIX A

                  Regression output for the time period 2007-2012
                      Cumulative  Cumulative   Std. Dev    Std.   Dev  Risk-      Risk-
                        perfor-      performance              (Indicator)   adjusted   adjusted
                       mance      (Indicator)                           returns    returns
                                                                                               (Indicator)
   2
 R                     0.042       0.046         0.321       0.283       0.100       0.101
 Observations         119         119          119        119         119        119
 Constant             -0.112**     -0.123***     0.065***   0.066       -1.659**   -1.861**
                          (0.043)       (0.045))        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.762)      (0.798)
 Age                 0.001                    0.001***               0.056
                         (0.002)                      (0.000)                   (0.043)
 Age  (Younger  than              0.047 (0.049)             0.004                  1.195
 three indicator)                                                  (0.005)                   (0.882)
 Size (Large indicator)   -0.058**     -0.051*        -0.016***   -0.015***    -1.656***   -1.443***
                         (0.027)       (0.026)         (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.473)     (0.472)
 Expense ratio         -0.032       -0.018        0.001      0.005**     -0.619      -0.155
                         (0.028)       (0.026)         (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.505)     (0.468)
 Manager tenure

                 Table A.5: Regression output for the timer period 2007-2012

  Unstandardised coefficients is the main metric, standard errors in parenthesis. Significance
                           levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05 and *p<0.1.

                                       40
                 Regression output for the time period 2002-2007
                     Cumulative  Cumulative   Std. Dev    Std.   Dev  Risk-        Risk-
                      perfor-      performance              (Indicator)   adjusted     adjusted
                     mance      (Indicator)                           returns      returns
                                                                                               (Indicator)
  2
R                     0.584       0.592         0.128       0.072       0.529        0.531
Observations         102         102          102        102         102         102
Constant             1.227***    1.341***      0.050***   0.057***    23.734***    24.455***
                        (0.103)       (0.077))        (0.003)      (0.002)       (2.104)       (1.584)
Age                 0.012                    0.001***               0.069
                        (0.084)                      (0.000)                   (0.186)
Age  (Younger  than              -0.198*                  -0.007**                 -1.538
three indicator)                      (0.102)                     (0.003)                     (2.112)
Size (Large indicator)   -1.067***    -1.047***     -0.003      -0.003       -19.736***   -19.574***
                        (0.920)       (0.091)         (0.002)     (0.002)       (1.876)       (1.889)
Expense ratio
Manager tenure

                 Table A.6: Regression output for the time period 2002-2007

Unstandardised coefficients is the main metric, standard errors in parenthesis. Significance
                          levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05 and *p<0.1.

                                      41
APPENDIX A.  APPENDIX A

                  Regression output for the time period 1997-2002
                      Cumulative  Cumulative   Std. Dev    Std.   Dev  Risk-        Risk-
                        perfor-      performance              (Indicator)   adjusted     adjusted
                       mance      (Indicator)                           returns      returns
                                                                                                 (Indicator)
   2
 R                     0.182       0.197         0.102       0.099       0.179        0.190
 Observations         66          66           66         66          66          66
 Constant             0.703***    0.403***      0.074***   0.073***    10.518***    6.133***
                         (0.101)       (0.095)         (0.004)     (0.004)       (1.655)       (1.556)
 Age                 -0.037***                 0.000                  -0.546**
                         (0.014)                      (0.001)                   (0.227)
 Age  (Younger  than              0.297***                0.000                   4.320**
 three indicator)                      (0.102)                     (0.004)                     (1.665)
 Size (Large indicator)   0.307***    0.319***      -0.010**    -0.010**     5.275***     5.444***
                         (0.103)       (0.103)         (0.004)     (0.004)       (1.685)       (1.681)
 Expense ratio
 Manager tenure

                  Table A.7: Regression output for the time period 1997-2002

  Unstandardised coefficients is the main metric, standard errors in parenthesis. Significance
                           levels: ***p<0.01, **p<0.05 and *p<0.1.

                                       42
                P P E N D I X  B
                                           A

                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY

Banz, R. 1981. The Relationship Between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks. Journal
of Financial Economics. 9:1, pp. 3-18.

Basu, S. 1983. The relationship between earnings yield, market value, and return for NYSE
common stocks: Further evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 12:129-56.

Carhart, M. 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. The Journal of Finance, 52(1),
57-82.

Dahlquist, M, et al. 2000. Performance and Characteristics of Swedish Mutual Funds. The
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 35, no. 3, 2000, pp. 409-423.

Daniel, Kent and Titman. 1997. Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional variation
in stock returns. Journal of Finance 52:1-34.

Elton, E, Gruber, M, Das, S, and Hlavka, M. 1993. Efficiency with costly information: a reinter-
pretation of evidence from managed portfolios. Review of Financial Studies 6(1), 1-22.

Fama, E and French, K. 1992. The cross-section of expected returns. Journal of Finance 47:427-65.
Golec, J.H. 1996. The Effects of Mutual Fund Managers’ Characteristics on Their Portfolio Perfor-
mance, Risk, and Fees. Financial Services Review 5, no. 2: 133-147.

Fama, E. 1996. Multifactor portfolio efficiency and multifactor asset pricing. Journal of Fi-
nancial and Quantitative Analysis 31, no. 4:441-65

                                       43
APPENDIX B.  BIBLIOGRAPHY

.
Goetzmann, W. and Ibbotson, R. 1994. Do winners repeat? Journal of Portfolio Management(Winter),
9-18.

Golec, J. 1996, The effects of mutual fund managers‚Äô characteristics on their portfolio perfor-
mance, risk and fees, Financial Services Review 5, 133-148.

Grinblatt M. and Titman, S. 1989. Portfolio Performance Evaluation: Old Issues and New
Insights. Review of Financial Studies 2 (3), 1989, 393-421.

Grinblatt M. and Titman, S. 1992. The Persistence of Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of
Finance 47 (5), December 1992, 1977-1984.

Grinblatt, M and Titman, S. 1994. A Study of Monthly Mutual Fund Returns and Performance
Evaluation Techniques. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis. pp. 419-444.

Hendricks, D, Patel, J and Zeckhauser, R. 1993. Hot hands in mutual funds: short-run per-
sistence of relative performance, 1974-88. Journal of Finance 38(1), 93-130.

Ippolito, R. 1993. On studies of mutual fund performance, 1962-1991. Financial Analysts Jour-
nal(1), 42-50.

Ippolito, R. Efficiency with Costly Information: A Study of Mutual Fund Performance, 1965- 1984.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (1989), pp. 1-23.

Jensen M. 1968. The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-1964. Journal of Fi-
nance 23, May 1968, 389-416.

Jensen, M. 1987. The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945- 1964. Journal of Finance
23 (1987), pp. 16-26.

McDonald, J. 1974. Objectives and Performance of Mutual Funds, 1960-1969. The Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 9, no. 3, 1974, pp. 311-333.

Malkiel, B. 1995. Returns from investing in equity mutual funds from 1971 to 1991. Jour-
nal of Finance 50(2), 549-572.

Moore, O. 2016. Mutual Fund Age, Performance, and the Optimal Track Record.

                                       44
Otten, R. and Bams, D. 2002 European Mutual Fund Performance. European Financial Manage-
ment, 8, 75-101.

Otten, R, Bauer, R and Koedijk, K. 2002. C. G., International Evidence on Ethical Mutual
Fund Performance and Investment Style (March 7, 2002). LIFE Working Paper No. 02.59.

Patel, J., Zeckhauser, R and Hendricks, D. 1992. Investment flows and performance: Evidence
from mutual funds, cross-border investments and new issues. Japan and International Financial
Markets: Analytical and Empirical Perspectives (Cambridge University Press).

Prather, L, Bertin, W and Henker, T. 2004. Review of Financial Economics, 2004, vol. 13, issue 4,
pages 305-326.

Sharpe, W. 1966. Mutual Fund Performance. Journal of Business 39 1966, pp. 119-38.

Treynor, J and Mazuy, K. 1966. Can Mutual Funds Outguess the Market? Harvard Business
Review 44 (1966), pp. 131-36.

Treynor J. 1965. How to Rate Management of Investment Funds. Harvard Business Review.
January-February 1965, 63-75.

                                       45
