STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

Pre-issue  attention  and the performance
              of an IPO

                                                 1                                2
                  Dag Tuvberger (23395) & Klas Vestergren (23367)

                                 May 2017

ABSTRACT:  This study  looks at IPOs on Swedish stock exchanges between the years 2000
and 2017. It aims to investigate if a relationship exists between investor attention for a company
before its IPO and the subsequent returns of its stock in the early trading after the IPO. The
study  builds on research by  Barber and Odean (2008) which showed that investors  use
attention-grabbing  factors  such as news coverage  to satisfy a  need of information  to select
investments. Consequently, data on news coverage is used as a proxy for investor attention in
our  model. We find that a significant relationship exists between the number of times  a
company is mentioned in the media  six months  prior to its IPO,  and the  returns  for  its stock the
first day of trading after its IPO.  Our results contribute to  earlier  research conducted on the
North American markets and show that the relationship holds on the Swedish market and even
though a ten-fold increase in publicity has been seen since.

Keywords:  behavioral finance,  IPO,  noise traders,  investor attention, publicity

Tutor:  Cristian Huse, Assistant Professor

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:  We would like to  extend  our sincerest  gratitude  to our tutor
Cristian Huse for valuable support and advise  during the process of writing this thesis and  to
the Swedish House of Finance for allowing us access to data that made our research possible.

1
 23395@student.hhs.se
2
  23367@student.hhs.se
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

1    Contents
1.    INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 3
  1.1      PURPOSE OF STUDY ............................................................................................... 4
  1.2     PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND NOVELTY OF OUR CONTRIBUTION ....................... 4
  1.3      HYPOTHESIS OF OUR STUDY ................................................................................ 5
  1.4      BRIEF RESULTS AND IMPLICATIONS ................................................................... 6
2    THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND PREVIOUS RESEARCH.................................... 6
  2.1     THE EFFICIENT MARKET HYPOTHESIS ................................................................ 6
  2.2      BEHAVIORAL FINANCE ......................................................................................... 7
     2.2.1    HERD BEHAVIOR ................................................................................................ 8
     2.2.2    VISIBILITY EFFECTS ON INVESTORS  ............................................................... 9
  2.3     IPO PRICING AND THE ROLE OF NEWS .............................................................. 10
3    DATA AND METHODOLOGY ...................................................................................... 11
  3.1      DATA ..................................................................................................................... 11
     3.1.1    IPO DATA .......................................................................................................... 13
     3.1.2    CONTROL DATA ............................................................................................... 14
     3.1.3    PUBLICITY DATA ............................................................................................. 16
     3.1.4    DATA LIMITATIONS ......................................................................................... 18
  3.2      METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................... 18
     3.2.1    STATISTICAL METHOD .................................................................................... 18
     3.2.2    REVERSE CAUSALITY ...................................................................................... 18
     3.2.3    DEPENDENT VARIABLE ................................................................................... 19
     3.2.4    INDEPENDENT VARIABLES ............................................................................. 19
     3.2.5    CONTROL VARIABLES ..................................................................................... 19
  3.3      MODELS ................................................................................................................ 19
     3.3.1    MODEL I ............................................................................................................ 19
     3.3.2    MODEL II ........................................................................................................... 20
     3.3.3    ROBUSTNESS TEST AND TEST OF THE MODELS ........................................... 20
4    RESULTS ....................................................................................................................... 21
  4.1      MODEL I ................................................................................................................ 21
   4.2      MODEL II ............................................................................................................... 24
  4.3      REVERSE CAUSALITY.......................................................................................... 25
5    CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS ........................................................................ 26
6    REFERENCES ............................................................................................................... 28
7    APPENDIX ..................................................................................................................... 30
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

   1.  INTRODUCTION
Just as a company turn to an investment bank when going public, more and more also hire a
public relations  firm to handle the publicity  issues.  The amount and quality of publicity a
company receives before its initial public offering seems to be something companies are
increasingly concerned about.
        From a traditional finance scholar stand-point, the concern for amount and quality of
publicity before an initial public offering (IPO) seems irrelevant. The efficient market
hypothesis (EMH) states that, in a liquid market, assets prices fully reflect all available
information and as a consequence all assets should be at fair value. Repetition of information,
or how it is presented, should not matter.
       However, finance scholars have been struggling to explain certain phenomena in an
EMH perspective. If, for instance, an investor would be best off holding the market portfolio  -
why does she choose a less beneficial investment?  If it was random, such irrational behavior
would not be a problem in an EMH perspective. When it is systematic and spread however,
asset pricing will be affected. To explain such systematic phenomena, which affect the market,
behavioral finance has arisen  as a prominent research field.
       What is central in behavioral  finance is to explain why investors are making irrational,
systematic decisions and driving them away from fundamentals. Behavioral finance also
describes how you make take advantage of such errors.
       Some enticing situations described empirically where the irrational behaviors of
investors become apparent are that stock returns tend to be higher when the weather is sunny
in the location of the stock exchange, the fact that riskier investments are preferred in the spring
rather than in the autumn, and that  the demand for stocks which draw attention, such as having
been featured in  the news recently, is greater.
       An anecdote from the Swedish stock market about irrational investor behavior and news
coverage,  is  the  IPOs  of  the  so  called  welfare  companies,  namely  Academedia  and
Internationella Engelska Skolan. As a heated debate existed regarding the companies’ business
models and their morality and legality, both companies were widely featured in the news prior
to going public. Both companies also experienced tremendously high first day trading returns.
Drawing from this, it is interesting to examine whether IPO stock behaviors are part of  a
systematic pattern  where  company publicity  is  being associated with higher investor attention
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

and in turn with higher first  day trading returns, or if the cases of Academedia and
Internationella Engelska Skolan are nothing more than anecdotes.
       IPOs in particular are interesting when examining the relationship between publicity,
attention and returns as they help relieve the model of causality issues. As often no widespread
trading of a company’s stock has occurred before its IPO, one can be  reasonably  certain that it
is not the market movements that affect the publicity.

1.1   PURPOSE OF STUDY
This thesis aims to investigate if a relationship exists between the amount  of attention a
company receives  prior to its IPO and  the initial returns of its stock in  the first  trading  day. The
amount of attention a company receives will be estimated by  analyzing  the amount of  news
coverage it sees prior to going public. Hence, the study sets out to answer the following research
question:

      Is the amount of publicity for an IPO-company prior to its IPO associated with the
            subsequent returns in the trading of its stock  on  the first trading day?

      In  practice, this is done through a  study of Swedish initial public offerings  (IPOs) from
the year 2000 up  to  and including 2017. An ordinary least squares regression  of the amount of
mentions of a company in print and web media six months prior to its IPO, and the initial return
(a relation between the closing price of its stock on the first trading day and the IPO offer price)
is carried out to estimate the relationship.

1.2   PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND NOVELTY OF OUR CONTRIBUTION
The effect of publicity  and other attention-grabbing factors  on investor behavior has been

studied in several papers. Grullon et al. (2004) found that a relationship exists between a firm’s

overall visibility and the liquidity of its stock. The study defined overall visibility in a different

sense than news coverage  -  by looking at its product marketing. Seasholes (2007) looked at

stocks on the Shanghai stock exchange and found that stocks that hit upper price limits

commonly exhibited three features, among which  one  was high news coverage. Barber and

Odean (2008) confirmed a hypothesis of attention-driven buying among investors, simply

meaning that investors will buy stocks which draw attention and that news coverage is a factor
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

that helps draw attention. More specifically on IPOs, Cook et al.  (2006) studied the effects of

pre-IPO publicity on first day trading returns on a sample of American IPOs from 1993 through

2000 and found that pre-IPO publicity (divided into headline and article mentions in media for

a company) was positively correlated  with both the number of retail investors (individual

investors) trading in the stock and its returns during the first day of trading. To our knowledge,

however, no similar study has been made on Swedish or Nordic IPOs. It is therefore interesting

to see if  the same relationship holds in the Swedish market. Furthermore, there has been

significant changes to the media landscape since the Cook et al. study, primarily in the sense

that the amount of publicity has increased. This new landscape may seriously question the

conclusions of the Cook et al. study, as most IPOs are now much more featured in the news

resulting in more  ‘noise’  to investors. To put this in real figures: in our dataset, the average

number of full text articles per IPO was approximately 268 while Cook et al. reports

approximately 25 articles per IPO  (see table A.6. in appendix). While the hypothesis is that

publicity still has some  significant effect on first day trading returns,  this almost ten-fold

increase makes this more uncertain. The effect seen in the Cook et al. study could be smaller,

given the larger amount of ‘noise’ in the market which may ‘blur’ the image for retail investors,

or larger if investors are now increasingly led in their investment decisions by publicity.

      In summary, it is interesting to investigate the relationship between publicity of an IPO

company and the subsequent first trading day returns of its stock in a more recent setting  (with

a larger amount of publicity)  and on a market outside of North America.

1.3   HYPOTHESIS OF OUR STUDY
Drawing from the previous research, especially Cook et al., we expect to see a positive

correlation between the  amount of publicity for an IPO  company and the subsequent initial

return of its stock in the first trading day. We also expect this correlation to be stronger for

headline mentions than for article mentions.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

1.4   BRIEF RESULTS AND IMPLICATIONS
Controlling for various factors, we find a significant relationship between the number of articles
about an IPO  company and the subsequent initial  return of its IPO on the Swedish market. We
cannot, however, establish a significant relationship between the number of mentions in the
headline of an article about an IPO-company and the subsequent initial return of its IPO. This
implies that our hypothesis can only partly be confirmed. A reason behind this can be that a
rather large number of companies on the Swedish market never receive any headline publicity
at all in the time six months prior to their IPO.
      With previous research in mind, our results imply two important points about publicity
and returns. First, it is likely so that,  as only limited trading in a stock exists before an IPO, it
is not the prior market returns that affect  publicity. Secondly, as the relationship between
publicity and initial returns holds  for all types of publicity (positive as well as  negative), it is
likely not company-specific circumstances  (such as pre-IPO financial performance)  that affect
publicity and returns.  Had this been the case, a negative relationship should arise between the
amount of negative publicity and initial returns, offsetting any positive relationship between
positive publicity  and initial returns.  Rather, it looks like the amount of publicity in itself  (the
visibility of a company)  may affect  returns.
      Our results have possible implications on several stock market participants acting on the
Swedish stock market. If publicity matter for  returns,  taking it into concern  could  be important
for investment bankers, market analysts, and investors, to name a  few.

2   THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND PREVIOUS RESEARCH

2.1   THE EFFICIENT MARKET HYPOTHESIS
The Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH)  described by Eugene Fama in 1970 states that the
price of an asset fully reflects all the information available and that stocks therefore always
trade at their fair value  (Berk and DeMarzo, 2014).  It would then be impossible to beat the
market  since the market prices only reacts to changes in discount rates or new information.
        A requirement of the EMH is that all agents operating in the market,  in aggregate, have
rational expectations  on the information they possess  (i.e. that the use the information they do
have in the optimal way) and when new information is revealed they adjust their expectations
accordingly. An implied assumption of the EMH is also that investors only care about risk and
return in their decision making, something known as the utility theory  (see Kahneman and
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

Tversky, 1979). The EMH hold even though some agents will deviate from the above, for
instance overreact or underreact to information, since what is required is that their reactions are
random and follow a normal distribution, so that abnormal profits cannot be exploited.
Implications from this is that investors must systematically depart from this requirement to
violate the EMH.
       The efficient market hypothesis is commonly stated in three different forms, weak form
efficiency,     semi-strong     form     efficiency     and     strong     form     efficiency.

      •   In the weak form,  it should not be possible to profit from information available in
                                              historical prices
     •   In the semi-strong form,  market prices  reflect all public information and react  to any
           new public information very rapidly  making it  impossible to profit from public
                                          information
       •   In the strong form, prices reflect all information, both public and private and it is
                               impossible to earn excess returns

2.2   BEHAVIORAL FINANCE
There are however substantial criticism and empirical claims against the EMH. An example is
the 1995 paper by Dreman and Berry, where the authors observed that stocks with a low  price-
to-earnings multiple (“value stocks”) saw greater returns than stocks with a high price-to-
earnings multiple (“growth stocks”). According to an earlier paper by Dreman, a higher beta
of the value stocks could not explain the difference.
       To attempt to  explain  some of these deviations from the EMH, behavioral finance has
arisen as a research field. In a well-cited paper by Nobel laureate Kahneman and his colleague
Tversky (1979), the utility theory,  which in an EMH perspective is thought to explain how
investors make decisions under risk, is criticized. The authors instead provide their own
descriptive model on how individuals makes decisions under uncertainty and risk, called the
prospect theory. The theory states that people tend to evaluate outcomes  relative to a reference
point, for instance the sales price of a stock is compared to its purchase price. Furthermore, the
model predicts that people tend to be risk averse in the case of sure gains, and risk seeking to
avoid sure losses. Kahneman and Tversky’s model has been tested empirically in many studies,
e.g. Barber et al. (2007) which found that investors were twice as likely to realize gains in
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

stocks as they were to realize losses, a result that supports the prospect theory idea that investors
are  more likely to take risks in the  face of losses than in gains.
       Other than the above, there are more than a couple of more bizarre examples of clear
irrational  behavior  in  the  market,  possibly  violating  the  utility  theory  of  the  EMH.
For instance, studies  by D. Hirshleifer and T. Shumway (2003) and A. Edmans et al. (2007)
showed that the return was higher if it was a sunny day at the location of the stock exchange.
The same effect could be seen at the occasion of major sport events. The investors own
experience is also of importance according to Malmendier and Nagel (2011). If an individual
grew up during a time when the stock market performed well, he is more likely to invest in
stocks than people who grew up during a time when stock markets  performed  worse.

2.2.1   HERD BEHAVIOR
Another explanation model to why investors  are making correlated trading error is because of
so called herd behavior. Herd behavior is characterized by a lack of individual decision-making
and instead investors follow the behavior of other investors.
       There are several possible explanations  to herd behavior. According to Avery and
Zemsky (1998),  investors  may believe that other investors possess  superior information  than
they themselves do. This is known as the  information cascade effect,  where investors ignore
the information they have themselves to profit from the information of others.
       DeMarzo  et al.  (2008)  argue  that due to relative wealth concerns  investors  benchmark
the performance of their investments to those of their peers, and copies the investments of the
same  peers  out of fear of  being relative underperformers.  The copying would then create  herd
behavior.
       Even institutional investment managers may suffer from  a  herding instinct. Scharfstein
and Stein (1990) states that since institutional investors’  reputations  may be at risk if their
investments depart too far from  those of their peers, they may be unwilling to do so, leading to
a herd-like behavior.
       The concept of herd behavior, and the psychological explanations  to why it appears  are
crucial to understand why publicity and the actions taken by  a  company to attract attention to
its  IPO  could  affect investor behavior. If  all investors where acting rationally,  publicity and  the
company’s actions  should have no effect. But if one views this issue in the light of herd
behavior, where investors copy their peers, publicity could indeed have an effect since it
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

mimics the herd mechanism by exposing an investor to a certain company repeatedly, possibly
making the investor feel as all his peers are indeed evaluating an investment in the company.

2.2.2   VISIBILITY EFFECTS ON INVESTORS
Far from every investor is a  full time trader and those that are not often have limited time to
spend on gathering important information for their investments and analyzing it. Research from
Grullon et al. (2004) showed that a firm’s overall visibility to investors, measured by its product
advertising, has a positive correlation with the liquidity of its stock and the number of both
institutional   and   individual   investors   trading   in   the   stock.   In   addition,   Frieder   and
Subrahmanyam (2005) showed that individual investors are more likely to hold stocks in highly
visible firms with easily recognized products.
      More specifically on publicity,  Seasholes and Wu (2007) showed  how  stocks on the
Shanghai stock exchange that hit upper price limits typically had three characteristics, of which
news coverage was one.  Alanyali (2007) found that a greater number of mentions  in the
Financial Times at any given morning corresponded to a greater volume of trading and a greater
change in the  price of the stock mentioned.
        Further Barber and Odean (2008) argue that individual investors solve the  information-
gathering  problem it would mean to be well informed  by choosing to invest  only  in  stocks that
have recently caught their attention, with news coverage as a factor that increase the attention
of a stock.  They show that individual investors have  an  attention-driven buying behavior and
that they are overrepresented  on days with high trading volume  and when stocks are in the
news. They also show  that attention-based trades  by many  investors temporarily inflate the
price of a stock.  Barber & Odean’s research provides an explanation to why publicity would
have a causal effect on investor sentiment and in turn on trading volume and returns, something
they also verify empirically. Consequently, one can conclude from their research that a reverse
causality argument regarding publicity and investor sentiment  –  that it is in fact investor
sentiment that  determines publicity  –  is without merit.
        Interesting concerning publicity is the effect on individual decision-making after being
exposed to repetitive information.  DeMarzo et al.  (2003) describes what they call the
persuasion bias  to refer to the fact that people fail to adjust properly to  information that they
receive repeatedly.  An example from outside the world of finance is that people,  when
repeatedly  reading a newspaper with a  well-known  political agenda,  fail to adjust properly for
this agenda. The  persuasion bias could have an effect in the world of behavioral finance in the
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

sense that repetitive information that an investor receives through publicity could sway this
investor’s  judgment, and change his or her expectations of the stock’s value away  from its
intrinsic value.
        To conclude, within the field of behavioral finance, attention-grabbing factors in
general and publicity  in  particular have an impact on the trading and pricing of stocks, perhaps
because they are used by individual investors to  relieve themselves of a tiresome information
search.

2.3   IPO PRICING AND THE ROLE OF NEWS
In this next section, the institutional background on IPOs and what role publicity plays in them,
will be examined.  In an EMH perspective, investors are treated as if they have access to the
same information about a security and have rational expectations about this information, or
should they not have access to the same information  –  it is assumed  they at least treat the
information they do have access to in an optimal way. This gives rise to the notion that investors
have homogenous expectations about a security. In the case of IPOs, this would mean that the
closing price of the first trading day is the unbiased estimate of the security’s value. Ofek and
Richardson (2003)  showed  however, that relaxing the so  often prevalent short sale constraints
of an IPO had tremendous effects on its price. The paper built on the research of Miller (1977),
which stood in contrast to the EMH perspective by saying that investor expectations in an IPO
could in fact be heterogeneous, given that an IPO is associated with much value uncertainty,
and that the short sale constraints biases this value uncertainty upwards, making the price of
the IPO stock an upwards-biased estimate of its true price.  This upwards bias would then,
consequently, be higher if more investors had more optimistic expectations of an IPO stock.  In
a behavioral finance perspective then, the effects of  attention-grabbing factors (such as
publicity) on  investor  attention  and  consequently  on investor expectations are interesting to
study because they imply effects on returns.
      Reese (2003) argues  that investor interest, measured by  the  number of citations  in
newspapers, is crucial if an  IPO experience high initial returns. He argues that the offer price,
set by underwriters is highly correlated with the investor  interest, and stocks with high  investor
interest tend to be underpriced while stocks with low  investor  interest tend to be more at fair
value or overpriced. He further argues that the degree of oversubscription in a new issue, which
is a function of the level of underpricing and investor attention, directly influences the initial
trading volume and its initial return.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

      A question that can be posed when discussing  investor attention and IPO initial returns
is if not the offer price of an IPO would simply be revised upwards if increased investor
attention was seen (leading the investment banker to think that the market’s valuation of the
IPO being biased upwards). This is a point made by Benviniste and Spindt (1989), but is refuted
by Derrien (2005) and Ljungqvist et al. (2006), as well as by Cook et al. (2006).
      Derrien and Ljungqvist et al., as well as Cook et al. all argue that there is a certain
category of investor to which most of the optimistic expectations can be attributed, and that
category should consequently be responsible for the price run-up in IPOs. This is the retail
investor, also known as the sentiment or noise investor, contrasted by the institutional or regular
investor.  In Derrien’s model for instance, institutional or regular investors are thought of as
valuing the company at its ‘intrinsic’ value, while the retail investors or noise traders have more
optimistic expectations.  Cook  et al.  argue that pre-issue publicity attracts retail investors and
that consequently  (as they have more optimistic expectations)  the  initial  return of the IPO will
be higher. In their research they use a sample of IPOs in the U.S between 1993 and 2000 and
use average traded volume on the first trading day as a proxy for the presence of retail investors.
They find a significant relationship between  the pre-issue publicity and  their proxy for the
number of retail investors,  between  the  amount of  publicity and the initial return, and  between
their proxy for the number of retail investors and the initial return.

3   DATA AND METHODOLOGY

3.1   DATA
In this section the data collection process, and the final data set, will be described in detail.

Furthermore, the applied econometric methodologies  are laid out.

      Before we go into the data collection process, it is necessary to provide an explanation

to why it is publicity in particular that this study will look at. We are aware of the fact that

publicity is only one of the  parameters that may affect  investor attention before an IPO. An

underwriter or  the  company  itself  can use  different methods to  promote  its  company prior to

the IPO, like advertising etc.  Likewise, social media like blogs and microblogs could have an

impact on investor attention. Publicity is however a very easy metric to look at accessibility-

wise, unlike other metrics where data is often proprietary and hard to get  by.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

      While previous research examined the relationship between first day trading returns and

publicity for North American IPOs during the 1990s, our study sought to examine the same

relationship but for Swedish IPOs and for a later time period, given the hypothesis that the

media landscape has changed since with the increased adoption of the Internet. The time period

chosen  was the year 2000 up to and including the year 2017. The year 2000 was chosen as it

was the end year in the data set of the Cook et al. study of 2006.

      To conduct the study, three categories of data were needed. First and foremost, IPO data,

which includes  identifying the relevant IPOs to study and find their dates, offer prices and

closing prices the first day of trading. Secondly, control data is needed to construct various

control variables. This includes, among other items,  sales data for the last fiscal year before the

IPO of each company. Thirdly, and lastly, publicity data is needed to conduct the main

regression. The collection of data for each category is reported upon below.  In figure 1, an

overview of the data collection process is given.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

 Figure 1.  Timeline of data collection

                                         Publicity
                                          data
                                         collected for
                                        the period

  - 6                                                                   - 1 day     IPO      + 1 day
 months

                                                                                    Closing
                                                                                                      price of first
                                                                                        trading day
                                                                                            collected

3.1.1   IPO DATA
First, we identified all the realized Swedish IPOs between the years 2000 up to and including

the year 2017. The definition “Swedish” was set to mean that the IPO was conducted on a

Swedish securities exchange, while allowing for all countries of registration of the IPO-

company. The IPOs to be included in our data set was identified using the database SDC

Platinum from the company Thomson Reuters. From the same database we extracted the

following information for each IPO; issue date, name of issuing company (the “IPO

company”), the Standard Industry Classification Code (“SIC” Code), the country of registration

of the IPO company, the ticker symbol of the IPO company, the primary securities exchange

on which the  IPO was conducted, the name of the industry corresponding to the SIC Code and

the Offer Price of the IPO for each IPO Company.  Data for the entire population between  the
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

years 2000 and 2017 was extracted. IPO companies with an offer price of less than 10 Swedish

Krona (SEK) per share were excluded from the dataset, a practice our study has in common

with the Cook et al. study of the North American market which excluded companies with an

offer price of less than one dollar per share. Additionally, extreme outliers (with extremely high

initial returns) and companies for which we could not retrieve financial data for, were excluded.

The final sample consists of 130 companies (this figure excludes the eight companies for which

sales data could not be found as is  reported on below).

        As the method of the study is to regress the return of the first day of trading for each

company with the amount of news coverage it has seen, the variable first trading day return

(“Initial Return”) must be constructed. The variable is defined as:

                                          𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  𝑜𝑓  𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐷𝑎𝑦
             𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  =                                     − 1
                                                   𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  𝑜𝑓  𝐼𝑃𝑂

       While the offer price was extracted from the database SDC Platinum, the closing price
of the first trading day was not completely covered in the same database. It was therefore
extracted using the database Thomson Datastream. The variable extracted from Datastream
was the unadjusted price (“UP”), which is unadjusted for stock splits etc, to ensure it
corresponds to the offer price. After extracting the closing price of the first trading day, the
variable Initial Return was constructed according to the equation above.

3.1.2   CONTROL DATA
While the fact that a company is receiving much publicity can be a predictor of the subsequent
initial return of its IPO, it is also likely that the size of a company affects the amount of publicity
it receives. With  larger  size it is reasonable to assume more employees and more interaction
with stakeholders such as suppliers and customers. This could itself trigger publicity, possibly
without affecting the initial return of an IPO.  Drawing from this, a conclusion could be that it
is necessary to control for the size of a company in the model. Previous research (Cook et al.
from 2006) found that sales is  a relevant proxy for the size of a company. To account for this
effect, the IPO companies’ sales  at the time of the IPO were collected. For eight companies,
sales figures could not be retrieved. The IPOs of these companies were excluded from the
dataset.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

       Sales data was defined as the net sales the last fiscal year  (LFY)  before the IPO took
place. The information was gathered from primarily the company’s annual report (if accessible)
or the prospectus of the IPO. For instance, if a company made an IPO in August of 2016 while
closing its books in July of 2016, the figures from the annual report in July were used. In the
prospectus, pro forma figures were used when applicable.  A regression between the described
sales figures and the number of article mentions of an IPO-company six months prior to its IPO
is carried out in table  A.1. in the appendix  and shows a significant relationship between these
two with sales explaining a considerable degree of the publicity a company receives. This
regression supports controlling for sales in the model.
       Finally, sales figures were then divided into groups according to their size, creating  a
variable called Sales Groups.
        A company could also see higher initial returns in its IPO due to the industry it operates
in being more popular with investors per se. The same effect possibly exists for the year of the
IPO,  if IPOs where generally more popular with investors in one year.  In table  A.3. in the
appendix, descriptive statistics of initial returns for IPOs between different industries are
shown. It is evident that for instance the services industry, including internet and  ‘welfare
companies’   (like   AcadeMedia   and   Internationella   Engelska   Skolan   described   in   the
introduction), have outperformed other industries regarding initial  returns. This motivates
controlling for industry.  In table  A.4. in the appendix, the same statistics is shown for different
years of IPOs in our sample. It is from this table apparent that IPOs in the years  2015 and 2016
outperformed earlier  years,  motivating controlling for the year of the IPO in the model.  To
control for these effects, the IPO companies’ SIC Codes and the dates of their respective IPOs
(both retrieved from the SDC Platinum database, as mentioned above) were used.
       If the investor sentiment in the economy is  generally more bullish  at the time of the
IPO, this  could produce higher initial returns. To control for this, the returns of the OMXS30
index for the preceding 15-day period for each IPO was collected.  Controlling for the general
investor sentiment as opposite to the specific investor sentiment towards an IPO is important,
as  it is the effect of publicity of  the specific sentiment that is interesting to investigate. This
methodology is shared by our study with Cook et al. (2006).
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

3.1.3   PUBLICITY DATA
Publicity or news coverage data was examined using the media research database Retriever.
An important consideration is to draw a line from how long back in time publicity is to be
counted. Cook et al. (2006) used a six month prior-to-IPO window, with the motivation that
firm marketing efforts often start around six months prior to the IPO. We found this motivation
sufficient for our research and the same time frame was used in our data collection process. In
practice this meant collecting publicity from the day six months before the IPO date as
identified using the SDC Platinum database.  Publicity was collected for the entire period  up
to and including the day before the IPO date. Care were exercised as to not include the actual
IPO day, as this could result in the data containing reactive publicity reporting on the trading
returns of the IPO stock.
       When choosing what media to include there has a been balancing between including
quality news and not excluding  news that can be categorized as noise, since our hypothesis is
that this as well may have an effect on investor attention. We have excluded press releases and
articles from news bureaus, since they may have been initiated by the company itself and likely
do not reach the public. If these news items do reach the public, it is likely in the form of news
articles and they will be included in the publicity data as such. The media categories, according
to   how   Retriever   defines   them,   that   have   been   included   in   the   model   are:

                                   •   Metropolitan press
                                  •   Prioritized local press
                                      •   Trade press
                                     •   Magazines
                                   •   Swedish television
                                    •   Swedish web

        Care was also taken to, in the case that an IPO-company’s name corresponded with the
name of another subject receiving publicity, ensuring that data collected only contained
publicity regarding the IPO-company.
       Further analysis on mentions in specific newspapers and media, to see if they have a
certain explanatory value,  has not been done due to accessibility issues of such data. The
decision is also made based on the previous research by Cook et al. (2006), which did not make
such a  granular  analysis  of specific media.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

       In our study, we have  also not made any division between negative and positive news.
This would require a manual analysis  of each news since there are few  reliable tools to use.
Previous research of Cook et al. (2006) has also shown that in general  news  is  descriptive,
rather than biased  in any direction.  Also, consideration have not been taken to international
media. One  could argue that it should be included since some of the companies are registered
in another country but still listed in Sweden. However, since our hypothesis is that it is retail
investors that are  responsible for the price run-ups in IPOs, it is less  interesting  to examine
international media  since  the  majority of  retail investors  likely trade on domestic stock
exchanges. Adding international media could also contribute to more noise in the model, by
adding publicity with less of explanatory value.
       When collecting the publicity data, we have not set  the  number of article mentions
relative to the total amount of  publicity  during the same period.  It  is a fact that  publicity  has
increased during the time period we have researched, but  there are reasons to not consider
company-specific publicity as a proportion of the total publicity anyway.  Setting it in relation
to the total number of news  articles  would imply that  the attention each mention generates,
decreases by the same speed as the total number of news  articles  increases, something we have
no evidence for.
       The publicity data was collected by counting the number of mentions in print and web
media for each IPO-company according to the specifications above. The mentions were divided
into article mentions  (the name was mentioned in an article) and headline mentions  (the name
was mentioned in the headline of an article).
    Finally, the number of mentions in articles  and headlines  of articles for each IPO-company
were  logarithmized according to the following equation:

                    𝐿𝑛  𝐴𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒  𝑀𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  =  𝐿𝑛  (𝐴𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒  𝑀𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  )  +  1

       The notion of  logarithmizing the publicity variable rests on a belief that the amount of
publicity has a diminishing effect on initial returns. For instance, for a company with a high
number of mentions,  the effect  of one additional mention would probably be small on investor
attention. By logarithmizing, we account for this diminishing effect.  This methodology is
supported     by     the     previous     research     by     Cook     et     al.     (2006).
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

3.1.4   DATA LIMITATIONS
Previous research suggests  that a correlation between pre-IPO publicity and initial return for
an IPO-company is largely due to the presence of retail investors in the market. While our study
seeks to evaluate the overall relationship between publicity and initial returns for IPOs,  it has
not been possible to gain insight into investor distribution in IPOs due to limitations in what
data has been available  for the Swedish market.
        Furthermore, previous research has used volatility in the initial trading of an IPO and
the percentage of public float for an IPO-company as control variables as these variables likely
help explain a significant amount of variance in initial returns. For our dataset, where several
of the companies have ceased to exist, such data have  not been available.

3.2   METHODOLOGY

3.2.1   STATISTICAL METHOD
To evaluate the relationship between publicity and initial return of an  IPO, we have conducted
a  study where the initial returns of Swedish IPOs between  the year 2000 and the year 2017
have been regressed to their pre-IPO publicity measures using an  ordinary least squares
multiple linear regression analysis.

3.2.2   REVERSE CAUSALITY

As earlier mentioned, studying publicity effects on IPOs in particular is interesting because in
these cases, one can generally ensure oneself that it is not market movements that affect
publicity (and thus implying opposite causality).
       Even though one can be reasonably assured that market movements do not affect
publicity in the case of an IPO, it is  a  natural  thought  that a company that performs  well
financially  should receive both  more  publicity and a higher initial return in its IPO.  This could
imply difficulties in establishing a relationship between publicity and IPO returns respectively.
However, for the following reasons we believe our methodology is  robust against such biases.
First, a company that performs well financially prior to its IPO  would likely see a higher offer
price or an upwards offer price revision in its IPO. As we study initial returns, we adjust for
this by calculating how much the first trading day closing price deviates from the offer price.
Secondly, a well-performing company would likely receive positive publicity whereas a worse-
performing company would likely receive negative publicity. By performing this study on all
publicity in an aggregate, we can be reasonably assured that should a positive relationship be
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

found between publicity and initial returns, it is publicity that drives investor attention and in
turn initial returns, and they are not both simply a result of a company  being well-performing.
Should they both simply arise from a company’s pre-IPO financial performance then it follows
that lower initial returns should be correlated with a higher amount of publicity (of negative
nature). Consequently,  if a  positive  relationship is established between the sheer amount of
publicity and initial returns, both these parameters  are unlikely to  arise simply as a response to
a company’s pre-IPO financial performance.

3.2.3   DEPENDENT VARIABLE
The dependent variable of  all regressions have  been the initial return of the IPO in question,
described above.

3.2.4   INDEPENDENT VARIABLES
The independent variables are different publicity measures, also described above. Both
headline and total article mentions have been used as independent variables  in logarithmized
form.

3.2.5   CONTROL VARIABLES
As has been discussed, the effects of an IPO company’s sales on publicity, and the effects of
its industry,  year since IPO  and the  general investor sentiment on initial return could have a
profound impact on the model as a whole.  Accordingly, these variables have been included as
control variables. Industry, year since IPO and sales groups were included in the model as fixed
effects,  by  transforming  them  into  dummy  variables.  The  general  investor  sentiment
(represented by the 15 day pre-IPO OMXS30 index  return)  was  included as  a control variable.

3.3   MODELS

3.3.1   MODEL  I
The first hypothesis to be tested  was  that the number of company-specific mentions in news
articles six months prior to its IPO should be positively correlated with the initial return in the
first trading day of its stock. The following model was  evaluated to test this:
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

              𝑌𝑖  =  𝐿𝑛  𝐴𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒  𝑀𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  +  𝑂𝑀𝑋  +  𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦  𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠
               +  𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠  𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  +  𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟  𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒  𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  +  𝜀

𝒀𝒊  =  𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  𝑜𝑓  𝑎𝑛  𝐼𝑃𝑂
𝑳𝒏  𝑨𝒓𝒕𝒊𝒄𝒍𝒆  𝑴𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏𝒔  =  𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑  𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓  𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦  𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  𝑖𝑛  𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑠
𝑶𝑴𝑿  =  15 − 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑂𝑀𝑋𝑆30 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛
𝑰𝒏𝒅𝒖𝒔𝒕𝒓𝒚 𝑭𝒊𝒙𝒆𝒅  𝑬𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒔  =  𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  𝑜𝑓  𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  −  𝑑𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑡  𝑆𝐼𝐶  𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒
𝑺𝒂𝒍𝒆𝒔  𝑮𝒓𝒐𝒖𝒑𝒊𝒏𝒈  𝑭𝒊𝒙𝒆𝒅  𝑬𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒔  =  𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  𝑜𝑓  𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠  𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑠  𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑡𝑜  𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒  𝐴2
𝒀𝒆𝒂𝒓  𝑺𝒊𝒏𝒄𝒆  𝑰𝑷𝑶  𝑭𝒊𝒙𝒆𝒅  𝑬𝒇𝒇𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒔  =  𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  𝑓𝑜𝑟  𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟  𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑡𝑜  𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒  𝐴4
𝜺  =  𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟  𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚

3.3.2   MODEL II
The second  hypothesis to be tested was that the number of company-specific mentions in the
headlines of news articles six months prior to its IPO should be positively correlated with the
initial return in the first trading day of its stock and with a stronger relationship  than seen in
the case of company-specific mentions in articles.

    𝑌𝑖  =  𝐿𝑛  𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒  𝑀𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  +  𝑂𝑀𝑋  +  𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦  𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠
                    +  𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠  𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  +  𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟  𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠  +  𝜀

𝑳𝒏  𝑯𝒆𝒂𝒅𝒍𝒊𝒏𝒆  𝑴𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏𝒔  =  𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑  𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓  𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦  𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠  𝑖𝑛  ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑠

3.3.3   ROBUSTNESS TEST AND TEST OF THE MODELS
Risks for certain flaws in the model have been identified and these flaws have then been
evaluated using established statistical methods. As explained in the data section of this paper,
it is believed that the size of a company (measured in its sales figures) has a profound impact
on the amount of publicity it generally receives. As sales are also controlled for in the model,
a risk for multicollinearity arises, implying that the publicity coefficient could be biased.
Multicollinearity has been evaluated using the variance inflation factor.  To be assured that the
model includes the appropriate control variables, a model specification test  has been carried
out. The Breusch-Pagan test for heteroscedasticity has also been conducted, although no
specific  suspicion for heteroscedasticity has arisen.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

4   RESULTS

4.1   MODEL I

In our first model, we evaluated the relationship between the logarithmized value of the six
months pre-IPO article mentions, represented by the variable  Ln Article Mentions, and the
initial return of the IPO.

 Figure 2.  Scatter of initial returns to logaritmized article mentions

     A slight linear relationship is evident between  the  initial return and the  logaritmized number of article
                                  mentions for an IPO-company

        The scatter plot implies a linear relationship between the variables; i.e. that IPOs with
higher initial returns in the first trading day generally has seen more publicity six months prior
to their IPO. The large variance seen in the plot is partly explained by the fact that the plot is
“simple”, and utilizes no control variables. As has been said earlier, publicity may vary
significantly between companies with respect to their size and the industry they operate in etc.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

                           Table 1.  Model I Regression.

                         VARIABLES         Initial  Return

                       Ln Article Mentions      0.0226**
                                                        (0.0105)

                    OMX               0.744**
                                                         (0.329)

                          Constant                  -0.217
                                                         (0.156)
                       Observations              130

                                   A significant relationship exists between the
                                      logarithmized number of pre-IPO article
                               mentions of a company and its initial return in
                                                       its IPO.

        Evaluating the regression results  in table 1, it is evident that the estimated coefficient
of our six-month  publicity variable,  Ln Article Mentions  is approximately 0.0226 and is
significant at a 3.3  % level. This coefficient can be rather hard to interpret, as the publicity
measure has been logarithmized, but essentially establishes a significant relationship  on the
Swedish market  between the publicity an IPO-company receives six months  prior to its IPO
and the  return of its stock the first trading day.  A concern when conducting this research has
been whether the general increase in publicity seen in society (as  seen in table A.6. in the
appendix, our sample had a mean of 268 articles per company compared  to 25 articles per
company in  the study by Cook et al. of 2006) would have a diluting effect on publicity impact
on investor attention and in turn on trading returns. This seems not to be the case – a significant
relationship still exists.  The coefficient  is however smaller than in previous studies on the
American market, but it is hard to draw conclusions if this difference is attributable to a dilution
effect, or to differences in methodology or differences between the markets.
        To ensure that our regression is robust and not affected by any statistical bias, a number
of tests have been carried out.  A Breusch-Pagan test implies no concern of heteroscedasticity
in our model, and a replication of the model with a robust regression  in table A.5. in the
appendix  shows a significance of the publicity variable,  Ln Article Mentions, at a 3.1  % level.
As described earlier, publicity could be heavily correlated with a company’s size, the industry
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

it operates etc. A concern for multicollinearity therefore arises. A variance inflation factor  test
stills this concern however, showing no multicollinearity for the main explanatory variable (the
publicity variable). Lastly, a model specification test has been carried out to make  sure  that the
appropriate control variables have been included in our model. No concern  arises from this test
either.
        In summary, we can confirm our hypothesis that six months pre-IPO publicity measured
in number of articles for an IPO-company should be positively correlated with the subsequent
initial returns of its stock in the first day of trading.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

4.2   MODEL II

In our second model, the relationship between the logarithmized value of the six months pre-
IPO headline mentions, represented by the variable Ln Headline Mentions, and the initial return
was  evaluated for each IPO.

 Figure 3.  Scatter of initial returns to logarithmized headline mentions

    A slight linear relationship between initial return and  the logarithmized number of headline mentions is
   evident for companies receiving a higher amount  of headline publicity, but not for companies with a lower
                                        amount of headline publicity or a lack thereof.

       Analyzing the plot, it is easy to see that a number of companies never receive any
headline publicity in the period sex months prior to their IPO (represented by the  Ln Headline
Mentions  equal to 1, as 1 has been added to the logarithmized number of headline mentions),
while still experiencing a wide variation in initial returns in the first trading day of their stock.
       This would intuitively mean that  it is hard to draw conclusions of a relationship, if a
significant  number  of companies receive no headline publicity at all while still experiencing a
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

variance in initial return. This intuition is confirmed by our regression results, which indicate
that the 6 months pre-IPO headline publicity variable is insignificant.

                            Table 2.  Model II Regression.

                         VARIABLES           Initial  Return

                         Ln Headline Mentions      0.0135
                                                        (0.00928)

                    OMX                0.751**
                                                           (0.333)
                          Constant                   -0.146
                                                           (0.152)
                        Observations               130

                                  No significant relationship can be established
                               between the number of headline mentions of an
                                    IPO-company prior to its IPO and the
                                              subsequent initial return

       An interesting take-away from  figure 3  is however that, for companies experiencing
more headline publicity, a linear relationship seems to be present. Intuitively, this would mean
that for larger companies (as a correlation between size and publicity exists), the relationship
could still exist. This could explain why previous research on the North American market has
found  significant relationships between headline publicity and initial returns in IPO cases.
       For the Swedish market however, no significant relationship is seen between the
number of headline mentions a company receives six months prior to its IPO and the
subsequent initial return of its IPO. In conclusion, our hypothesis that headline mentions should
have a bigger impact on initial returns of IPOs than article mentions, is therefore rejected.

4.3   REVERSE CAUSALITY
Recapping the discussion about reverse causality in  the methodology section, it is evident that
our results imply that no reverse causality is present. As a positive relationship is established
between the sheer amount of publicity and the initial returns of an IPO, it is unlikely that the
IPO-companies pre-IPO financial performance should be the  explanation  to both  publicity and
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

initial returns. A worse-performing company should in that case receive negative publicity and
lower initial returns. Had this been the case, negative publicity should be correlated  with lower
initial returns. This would imply a negative relationship between the sheer amount of publicity
and initial returns if only considering the worse-performing companies (and for IPOs as a whole
–  inconclusive results  –  as the negative relationship for worse-performing companies should
be offset by a positive relationship for well-performing companies). In our results however, a
significant  positive relationship exists. It follows that publicity and initial returns  likely do not
arise  simply  from a  company’s pre-IPO financial performance, but  instead that publicity in
itself  may have  an effect on initial returns.
       With this said, one should be cautious to  call the relationship between publicity and
initial returns causal. There are still possibilities that worse-performing companies in general
receive less publicity (that it would be more common for media to publish articles about
“success stories” rather than the opposite). The idea that media reports on negative stories as
frequently as they do on  positive ones, if not more so, is as likely to be true, though.

5   CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
To tie the knot of this study, one can look back at the initial question posed. On the Swedish
market, is pre-IPO publicity of a company associated with the subsequent returns of its stock
in its first trading day? Looking at the results of this study in the light of past research, the
answer seems undoubtedly to be yes. This relationship may be a causal one with a possible
explanation being that publicity stimulates the attention of retail investors, who uses publicity
as a tool to relieve themselves of a tiresome information search, and who start to trade in the
stock. And, at the presence of short-sale constraints common in IPOs, the price of the stock
rises. The number of articles is the relevant measure to look at to estimate the effect of publicity
for IPOs as a whole, but for larger companies it may also be relevant to separate the number of
those articles where the companies are mentioned in the headline.
       In  the introduction the question was raised whether the increase in publicity seen since
other studies on publicity and  IPOs (i.e. Cook et al. of 2006)  would have diluted  or otherwise
changed  the effect of publicity on investor attention and in turn on initial returns. Given that a
significant relationship is found on the Swedish market, we can say that the increase in publicity
has not completely diluted the effect it has on investor attention.
       The implications of finding a relationship between the amount of  publicity and initial
returns is a rather fundamental one for finance research. It casts serious doubt over the efficient
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

market hypothesis in that it seems to matter not only what information is available to investors,
but also  how much  of this  information.
        With this said, the effect described in this study is a rather weak one. Studying the plots
of the main regressions, one can easily see that the variance of initial returns to publicity is high
and merely slightly linear. This is not surprising. Looking at only the sheer number of articles
published about a company prior to its IPO will likely produce very general and rough results.
        An interesting topic for future research in the area of behavioral finance is to see if one
can extend the general results of our study to predictive results, to aid an investor on how to
exploit the systematic bias that publicity produces. The right path to walk is likely to dig down
into publicity as a concept and analyze its different properties. Is publicity affecting investor
sentiment positively or negatively? Further research utilizing sentiment analysis of publicity
could tell, even though the vast majority of publicity  likely  is neutral and descriptive. The
impact of one article might also differ from the impact of another, which would make it
interesting to look at the impact properties of different articles and media  –  such as its
circulation (readership)  etc.
       One can only get so far in looking at publicity though. To measure investor attention,
it is likely interesting to go to the source  –  the investors. Studying social media would be an
interesting way to do this.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

6   REFERENCES
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean. "All that glitters: The effect of attention and news
on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors."  Review of Financial Studies
21.2 (2008): 785-818.

Barber, Brad M., et al.  "Is the aggregate investor reluctant to realise losses? Evidence from
Taiwan."  European Financial Management  13.3 (2007): 423-447.

Berk, Jonathan B., and Peter M. DeMarzo. Corporate finance. Pearson Education, 2007:
441,459

C. Avery and P. Zemsky,  “Multidimensional Uncertainty and Herd Behavior in Financial
Markets,”  American Economic Review  88 (1998): 724–748.)

Cook, Douglas O., Robert Kieschnick, and Robert A.  Van Ness. "On the marketing of
IPOs."  Journal of Financial Economics  82.1 (2006): 35-61.

DeMarzo, Peter M., Dimitri Vayanos, and Jeffrey Zwiebel. "Persuasion bias, social
influence, and unidimensional opinions."  The Quarterly Journal of Economics  118.3 (2003):
909-968.

Dreman, David N., and Michael A. Berry.  "Overreaction, underreaction, and the low-P/E
effect."  Financial Analysts Journal  (1995): 21-30.

Edmans, Alex, Diego Garcia, and Øyvind Norli. "Sports sentiment and stock returns."  The
Journal of Finance  62.4 (2007): 1967-1998.

Fama, Eugene F. "Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work."  The
journal of Finance  25.2 (1970): 383-417.

Frieder, Laura, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam.  "Brand perceptions and the market for
common stock."  Journal of financial and Quantitative Analysis  40.01 (2005): 57-85.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

Grullon, Gustavo, George Kanatas, and James P. Weston. "Advertising, breadth of
ownership, and liquidity."  Review of Financial Studies  17.2 (2004): 439-461.

Hirshleifer, David, and Tyler  Shumway.  "Good day sunshine: Stock returns and the
weather."  The Journal of Finance  58.3 (2003): 1009-1032.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. "Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk."  Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society  (1979): 263-291.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. "Depression babies: do macroeconomic
experiences affect risk taking?."  The Quarterly Journal of Economics  126.1 (2011): 373-416.

Miller, Edward M.  "Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion."  The Journal of finance
32.4 (1977): 1151-1168.

Odean, Terrance.  "Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?."  The Journal of finance
53.5 (1998): 1775-1798.

Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson.  "Dotcom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock
prices."  The Journal of Finance  58.3 (2003): 1113-1137.

P. DeMarzo, R. Kaniel, and I. Kremer, “Relative Wealth Concerns and Financial
Bubbles,”  Review of Financial Studies  21 (2008): 19–50.))

Reese Jr, William A. "IPO underpricing, trading volume, and investor interest." (1998).

Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein.  "Herd behavior and investment." The
American Economic Review (1990): 465-479.

Seasholes, Mark S., and Guojun Wu.  "Predictable behavior, profits, and attention."  Journal
of Empirical Finance  14.5 (2007): 590-610.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

7   APPENDIX

                          Table  A.1.  Reg. of Sales and Publicity

                      VARIABLES      Article mentions

                         Sales                 0.0289***
                                                (0.00368)

                        Constant               182.5***
                                                   (32.83)

                       Observations             130
                       R-squared              0.328

                                 The size of company measured as sales  last
                             fiscal year  explains  to a high extent the  amount
                                    of  publicity a company  receives.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

 Table  A.2.  Grouping of IPO-companies by size of their sales

     Approximated  sales LFY in MSEK                    Sales group

                   0                                     1
                   20                                    2

                  100                                    3
                  500                                    4
                  5 000                                    5

                  20 000                                   6

   Sales is controlled for by dividing  companies  into different groups  according to the table  based on their net
                                                          sales LFY.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

 Table A.3.  Descriptive statistics of initial returns for different industries

                                                                           Standard
                                   Mean., of      Max., of       Min. of
                                                                                Dev. of
 Industry               SIC          Initial         Initial         Initial
                                                                                               Initial
                                  Return       Return       Return
                                                                         Return

 Natural
                       1        .0657919      .13125          0         .0475235
 Resources

 Manufacturing          2         .0228628      .3723404        -.24        .1364814
 Manufacturing          3         .0301496      .3972603       -.185        .1237602

 Transportation,
 Communications,
 Electric, Gas,           4        -.0028981     .3474576       -.495        .233903
 And Sanitary
 Services

 Wholesale Trade        5         .1047847       .50625      -.2289474      .1623823

 Finance,
 Insurance, And         6         .0310413      .1575342        -.15        .0833667
 Real Estate
 Services               7        .11730913     .4340659     -.2153846      .1629598

 Services               8         .1241619        .475       -.0862069      .1922261

   Industry  is controlled for in the model as large differences in mean initial return is seen between industries.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

 Table A.4.  Descriptive statistics  for  Year Since IPO (0= 2017, 17=2000)

 Year             Mean of Initial    Max. of Initial    Min. of Initial    Standard Dev.
                       Return           Return           Return       of Initial Return

 0                    -0.652174         -0.652174         -0.652174             .
 1                   .1322334           .475             -.185           .1806285
 2                   .0821728          .50625            -.24           .1738271

 3                   .0905067         .3225806         -.1710526         .1100729

 4                   .0528302         .0528302         .0528302             .
 5                           .                    .                    .                    .

 6                   .0035914         .0283019         -.0103448         .0145217
 7                   -.0926394         .0543478           -.495           .2022244

 8                           .                    .                    .                    .
 9                   .0214286         .0214286         .0214286             .

 10                  .0368341         .1361111         -.0135135         .0472381

 11                  .0562158         .3723404         -.2153846         .1394636

 12                 .0745729          .1875             0            .0819688

 13                  .0732478         .2777778           -.08            .154472
 14                          .                    .                    .                    .

 15                  .0107992         .0769231         -.0897436         .0766809

 16                  -.1131625         .0350877         -.2289474         .1124661

 17                  .0326841         .2083333           -.15           .0983434

      The mean of initial returns differs significantly between IPO years and  ‘Year Since IPO’  is therefore
                                            controlled for in the model.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

                           Table A.5.  Robust  reg. of Model I.

                         VARIABLES          Initial  Return

                        Ln Article Mentions      0.0226**
                                                        (0.0104)
                    OMX               0.744**

                                                         (0.329)
                          Constant                 -0.217**
                                                        (0.0894)

                       Observations              130

                                     A significant relationship between the
                                      logarithmized number of pre-IPO article
                               mentions of a company and its  initial return in
                               its IPO remains when conducting a robust OLS
                                                   regression.
STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of finance
Bachelor thesis in finance
Spring 2017

                     Table A.6.  Descriptive statistics  for
                    publicity

                                         Article          Headline
                                    Mentions        Mentions

                 Mean              268.2538        82.43077
                Max                4067            800
                 Min                  3              0

                  Standard            420.8625         100.2617
                  Deviation

                    The mean number of article mentions per IPO was roughly 268,
                            which supports the idea that the amount of publicity has
                           increased since earlier studies (for instance Cook et al. where
                               mean article mentions per IPO was roughly 25).