Macroeconomic determinants of the time-varying correlation between
       stock and bond returns: A study of the Swedish market

                       Oskar Wilhelmsson & Jakob Mårtensson

                                      Bachelor thesis
                           Stockholm School of Economics

                                  May 14, 2017

                                    Abstract

      This paper investigates  how and  to what extent realized fundamental macroeconomic factors affect
       the time-varying correlation between stock and bond returns on the Swedish financial market. We
      use daily return data of the OMXS30 and Swedish government bonds, and monthly or quarterly
      data of macroeconomic factors. We begin by estimating quarterly values of the time-varying
      correlation between stock and bond returns, using both a sample rolling window model of the
      Pearson product-moment correlation, and a constant conditional correlation GARCH model. An
      ordinary least squares multiple regression model is then applied for examining the effect of each
      macroeconomic factor on the time-varying correlation.  Our first finding  is  that increased  realized
      stock market volatility has a significant negative impact on the correlation, implicating  the
      potential  existence  of a  “flight-to-quality”  phenomenon. Our second finding is that currency value
      also  has  a  significant  impact,  where  a  depreciation  of  the  currency  tends  to  increase  the
       correlation. Due to the non-occurrence of research on currency value in this context, three possible
      explanations  are  outlined  in  which  the  relationship  between  currency  value  and  inflation
       expectations, interest rate differentials and the current account,  respectively, are discussed.

      Keywords:  Time-varying correlation, stock-bond correlation, macroeconomic determinants, flight-
       to-quality, currency value

      Acknowledgements:  We  would  like  to  thank  Irina  Zviadadze  for  valuable  input  and  help
       throughout the process.

                                     1
Contents

1. INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................ 3
2. PREVIOUS LITERATURE  ............................................................................................... 4
3. VARIABLE SELECTION AND DESCRIPTION OF DATA ......................................... 7
  3.1 RETURN DATA FOR STOCKS AND BONDS ............................................................................ 7
  3.2 MACROECONOMIC DETERMINANTS ................................................................................... 7
4. METHODOLOGY  .............................................................................................................. 9
  4.1 ESTIMATING CORRELATION ............................................................................................... 9
  4.2 OLS REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECT OF MACROECONOMIC DETERMINANTS ........ 10
  4.3 VARIABLE SMOOTHING .................................................................................................... 11
5. EVALUATION OF MODEL SPECIFICATIONS ......................................................... 13
  5.1 STATIONARY EXPLANATORY VARIABLES ......................................................................... 13
  5.2 HETEROSCEDASTICITY  .................................................................................................... 14
  5.3 MULTICOLLINEARITY ...................................................................................................... 14
  5.4 RESIDUAL AUTOCORRELATION ........................................................................................ 14
  5.5 RESIDUAL DISTRIBUTION ................................................................................................. 15
  5.6 OMITTED VARIABLES BIAS ............................................................................................... 15
  5.7 EVALUATION OF OLS REGRESSION MODEL  ..................................................................... 15
6. RESULTS  ........................................................................................................................... 16
  6.1 OVERVIEW OF CORRELATIONS ......................................................................................... 16
  6.2 THE EFFECT OF THE MACROECONOMIC VARIABLES.......................................................... 17
  6.3 WHY MAY STOCK MARKET VOLATILITY AFFECT THE TIME-VARYING CORRELATION? ..... 20
  6.4 WHY MAY CURRENCY VALUE AFFECT THE TIME-VARYING CORRELATION? ..................... 21
7. CONCLUSION  .................................................................................................................. 22
8. LIMITATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH......................... 23
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................... 24
APPENDIX ............................................................................................................................. 26

                                     2
1. Introduction

The purpose of this study is to analyze  how and  to what extent realized fundamental
macroeconomic factors affect the time-varying correlation between  stock and bond returns.
Analysis of the stock-bond correlation has regularly been on the agenda since it provides
significantly useful information  to investors and institutions on the financial market. Previous
studies have concluded that this correlation constantly fluctuates, and that macroeconomic
factors may be important determinants as to why the correlation is very time-varying. To
identify these key factors and gain knowledge about how they affect the  correlation  is
important for a number of reasons.  The major one is that portfolio allocation strategies are
heavily dependent on the correlation between stock and bond returns due to its implications
for diversification possibilities. Thus, an understanding of this correlation and the related
macroeconomic factors  is  vital for asset allocation and risk management.
       Existing literature has mostly focused on perceptions of the expected macroeconomic
environment,   where   the   empirical   findings   have   shown   that   the   correlation   varies
substantially  over  time  as  a  consequence  of  the  market’s  expectations  of  the  future
macroeconomic   landscape.   Some   consensus   also   occurs   about   how   a   few   certain
macroeconomic factors influence the correlation of stock and bond returns. For instance,
expected inflation tends to affect the correlation positively while  expected or  implied
volatility has  a negative effect.  The former corresponds to the effect of expected inflation on
discount rates, and the latter finding is consistent with the “flight-to-quality” phenomenon,
which we will return to later in this study. Apart from these two factors, conclusions tend to
differ depending on time  span, market of interest and also methodology.
       The analysis in this paper is based on daily  data of  Swedish stock and bond returns,
and monthly or quarterly data on several macroeconomic factors: GDP growth, inflation rate,
the  repo rate and currency value.  Furthermore, stock market volatility is also included in the
analysis.  We employ the OMXS30 stock index as a stock portfolio proxy and a 5-10 year
government bond index as a bond portfolio proxy, together with macroeconomic data
gathered from the Swedish Riksbank and Statistics Sweden, covering a 13 years time span
between 2004-2016. We begin by measuring the quarterly values of the time-varying
correlation between stock and bond returns, using both a sample rolling window model of the
Pearson product-moment correlation, and also a  CCC (constant conditional correlation)
GARCH (Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedastic) model, proposed by
Bollerslev (1990). The latter one covers the drawbacks of the former one, by better capturing

                                     3
the  dynamics of  the stock-bond correlation. An ordinary least squares multiple regression
model is then applied for examining the effect of each macroeconomic factor on the time-
varying correlation.
       The first contribution of this paper to existing literature is the examination of the
dynamics on the Swedish  market, which to our best knowledge, has not been investigated
before. Another difference from  previous  literature is that we focus on the effect of realized
macroeconomic   factors,   instead   of   expected   values.   Historically,   studies   about
macroeconomic forecasts have dominated and proven its influence on the correlation between
the asset classes. Hence, we find it valuable to understand if that influence only lies in the
expectation itself or if realized values, per se, also affect the correlation. If realized
macroeconomic factors are able to help predicting the correlation between stock and bond
returns, they could help investors to better understand the dynamics of the stock-bond
correlation, in order to  make more rational choices concerning portfolio allocation. Moreover,
realized values might also act as a more tangible tool for some investors, compared to
expected values.
        The empirical findings in  this paper  are  that there is a short-term negative relationship
between realized  stock market volatility and  the time-varying correlation  of  stock and bond
returns on the Swedish market, which could be explained by a flight-to-quality behavior
meaning that investors tend to prefer safer assets during times of market  turbulence.  We also
find  that currency  value also has a significant impact, where  depreciation  in  the currency
tends to increase the correlation. A discussion of potential explanations to this is presented,
regarding how currency value relates to inflation expectations, interest rate differentials and
the current account, respectively.

2. Previous literature

The  correlation  between  the  stock  and  bond  returns  is  a  topic  that  has  been  under
investigation for a long period of time and many studies have  explored  the subject.
Irrespective of the approach  of different studies, the pattern clearly shows that there is not a
constantly lasting mean for the correlation coefficient. Recent studies prove this point
through results of either slightly positive or negative correlation. A study of the US and
German markets by Andersson et al. (2008) showed that from 1993 through 2003, there was
on average a positive correlation in both countries. Proof of high fluctuation in the correlation
was made, observing a range between  -0.87 and 0.80 in the US during the sample  period.

                                     4
Chiang and Li (2009) used a time span ranging from 1996 through 2008 and, conversely,
found a negative correlation on average between the asset classes. This clarifies that the
correlation may have historically proved to be highly fluctuating and  periods of sustained
negative, as well as positive, stock-bond correlation during the last decades have been
observed. Furthermore, Baker and Wurgler (2012) focused on different types  of stocks and
the associated effect  on the comovement between stock and  bond returns. They divided the
stocks into either bond-like stocks, reflected in more mature and stable firms, or speculative
stocks. This resulted in a positive correlation of bonds and more bond-like stocks, while
speculative stocks were more negatively  correlated to bonds.
       Research on  the underlying determinants of the time-varying correlation between
stock and bond returns is more scarce,  and the  complexity has led to a variety of empirical
findings depending on what macroeconomic factors are investigated, what markets are
examined, and which angle of approach that is adopted for examination, among other things.
However, existing studies are fairly unified about how a few certain factors do affect this
correlation. Particularly, expected inflation and volatility are the two determinants where
there is most consensus about the effect on the correlation between stock and bond returns.
Ilmanen  (2003),  among  others,  concludes  that  higher  expected  inflation  increases  the
discount rate, which decreases the present value for bonds and hence leads to short-term
negative returns. Equivalently, if the discount rate is affected more than expected cash flow
for stocks, the implications are the same as for bonds and therefore a short-term positive
correlation occurs.  On the contrary,  a  high implied  or expected  stock market volatility
decreases  expected  risk-adjusted returns for  stocks, which might lead to a flight-to-quality
behavior  where the stock and bond returns take different directions as investors transfer their
investments from stocks to bonds.
        The flight-to-quality phenomenon, as a consequence of a volatile stock market, recurs
regularly in the literature (see e.g.  Cappiello et al., 2003;  Connolly et al., 2005; Andersson  et
al., 2008; Baur and Lucey, 2008; Chiang and Li, 2009). Although, Beber et al. (2009) claim
that this “flight behavior” is mainly an effect stemmed from liquidity concerns and thus most
of it could be derived from the “flight-to-liquidity” phenomenon. Irrespectively, consensus
occurs concerning that when there is a high degree of uncertainty about the stock market,
investors tend to become more risk  averse and reallocate their portfolios towards more stable
fixed-income bonds. Moreover, Perego and Vermeulen (2016), who  analyzed  the stock-bond
correlation in different regions, also found results aligned with theory and previous studies

                                     5
regarding expected inflation and stock market volatility. In addition, they  also  noticed that  the
current account has  a positive effect on the correlation in one  of the examined regions.
       The vast majority of investigated countries within this area of research are perceived
as very large and important economies, like the US and Germany. Consequently, there is a
lack of potentially important findings from smaller economies. One of  a  few breaking this
pattern is Skintzi (2017). He considers peripheral economies and found a difference between
these compared to core economies regarding the effect of certain macroeconomic factors on
the correlation between stock and bond  returns. Among other things, it turned out that
domestic stock market uncertainty leads to flight-to-quality only in the core economies and
that global stock market uncertainty, on the other hand, is what pushing that correlation in a
negative direction in  the peripheral economies. Thus, this shows that the dynamics of the
time-varying correlation are not the same for all economies, which opens the way for more
research of smaller  ones.
      In this study, both a sample rolling window method and a CCC bivariate  GARCH
model will be employed to estimate the correlation between stock and bond returns. The
rolling window methodology has been widely used throughout history and included in many
studies that consider correlation between asset classes. Previous studies  that applied similar
models as in this study are e.g. Chiang and Li (2009) and Andersson et al. (2008). The latter
limited the study to three specific macroeconomic factors under consideration; expected
inflation, economic growth expectations and  implied  stock market uncertainty. The authors
found a positive correlation when expected inflation  is  high and that flight-to-quality
dynamics occurs during periods of stock market uncertainty. This corresponds to the results
of Chiang and Li, who also stated the occurrence of a flight-to-quality phenomenon during
periods of expected economic turbulence. Chiang and Li additionally found  that expected
credit spread has  a negative effect on the correlation, and that expectations in net capital
inflows, growth of real  GDP and federal funds rate,  respectively, have positive effects.
       We can draw the conclusion that  discordance  occurs among existing literature
regarding what underlying macroeconomic factors that have implications for the stock-bond
correlation. The effect of expected inflation and stock market uncertainty are quite constantly
prevalent through most studies, but apart from those the results seem to depend on approach,
time  span and market of interest. As this study focuses on the dynamics on the Swedish
financial market, and also on the effect of realized values of macroeconomic factors rather
than expectations, we may help to fill some of the gaps left by existing literature in this
relatively scarce body of research.

                                     6
3. Variable selection and description of data

3.1 Return data for stocks and bonds
To measure the correlation between stock and bond returns, two different indices are used as
portfolio proxies for the asset classes. For the stock portfolio proxy we use the OMXS30
index and for the bond portfolio proxy we use a 5-10 years Swedish government bond index.
Data for the respective indices are gathered from Reuter’s Datastream, and both are reported
as total return indices. A total return index is calculated as if all proceeds are reinvested in the
portfolio. Practically, this means that dividends of stocks are reinvested to purchase more
stocks, while yields and face values for bonds are reinvested to purchase more bonds. The
reason why a total return index is a more suitable choice than a price index, is because a price
index only captures the capital gain component of returns, while a total return index captures
both the capital gain component and the dividend/yield component. The indices  and quarterly
return data  are presented in  Graph 1 and Table 1  & 2  in  Appendix.

3.2 Macroeconomic determinants
Some macroeconomic factors tend to recur for analysis in many previous studies and
generate unified results. However,  by  changing perspective and applying a realized value-
based approach,  conclusions  may be drawn  whether this generates different results. The
factors examined in this study are outlined below.
       A vital factor with huge impact on the overall economy,  which  we choose to include
in this paper, is the  inflation rate. The development of the inflation rate is crucial to the
economy as inflation is substantially connected to discount rates, which are key figures in the
stock-bond correlation as mentioned earlier. Hence, the variable constitutes a central point of
the economy and the investigation of whether its realized value has any explanatory value
regarding the stock-bond correlation is of major interest. To examine the effect of the
inflation rate, data of the CPI index are  gathered from  Statistics Sweden, SCB, which are
reported at monthly frequency. The development of the CPI  index is presented in  Graph  2  in
Appendix.
      As GDP measures the economic growth and thereby provides a comprehensive
picture about the overall health of the economy, we also consider this factor to be a given. Its
positive correlation with consumer spending and the subsequent impact on corporate profits
support  our  choice  of  the  variable.  Although  previous  literature  mostly  shows  little
significance from GDP on the correlation, our differentiated approach and choice of market

                                     7
makes   the   factor   still   highly   relevant   to   examine.   Data   of   inflation-adjusted   GDP,
benchmarked to 2015 years prices, are  reported at quarterly frequency and gathered from
SCB, Sweden. The GDP development is presented in  Graph 3  in Appendix.
       Most of the existing literature covers the US financial market but as mentioned
earlier, Skintzi (2017) concludes that smaller economies may be characterized by different
dynamics. Therefore, apart from including the most common factors to investigate we also
aim to examine forces more important and significant for the Swedish economy.  Compared to
the US, Sweden is more so dependent on exports, which is highly affected by the nation’s
currency. Potentially, this might have an impact on the correlation and consequently we  will
add  currency value  as a variable of interest to our analysis  in order to examine its effect.
Furthermore, the currency value is also connected to interest rate differentials and inflation
expectations, where the latter has in earlier studies been concluded to have a positive effect
on the time-varying correlation. To include currency value, we gather quarterly data of
average values of the TCW  index from the Swedish Riksbank. The TCW  index is a total
competitiveness index, measuring the strength of the  Swedish currency compared to a
portfolio of other currencies, constituted by different weights depending on how important
they  are to the Swedish export sector. An overview of the development of the TCW index is
presented in  Graph  4,  and the different weights of the TCW index are  reported  in  Table 3, in
Appendix.
        We also find it valuable to examine the effect of the official interest rate (in Sweden
this rate is referred to as  the repo rate).  Macroeconomic factors in general, and inflation in
particular, are all affected by the state of and changes in the repo rate. This relationship is
known as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, which describes how the repo rate
impacts several mechanisms in the economic puzzle simultaneously. A change in the repo
rate affects the money-market interest rates and thus indirectly the deposit and lending rates.
Some of these factors might affect the inflation quite immediately while the implications of
other mechanisms appear at a much later stage. Thus, the implications from the repo rate on
the monetary policy and general economy makes it an important and interesting factor to
explore and determine whether its realized state contains any explanatory value related to the
correlation between stock and bond returns.  Data of average quarterly values of the repo rate
are  gathered from the Swedish Riksbank, and are  presented in  Graph  5  in Appendix.
       Discussions about the stock market often involve  psychological aspects as well.
Uncertainty about the stock market outlook  makes the risk averseness of investors apparent,
as outlined in previous literature. These studies show empirical findings of great significance

                                     8
of a negative  effect of implied  and expected  volatility  on the correlation between stock and
bond returns. Hence, insecurity about the future stock market environment has turned  out to
be consistent with the flight-to-quality  phenomenon and in order to decide whether this
finding  also  is applicable to realized  stock market fluctuations, we add  volatility  as the last
factor in our analysis. The realized volatility parameter is calculated based on the total return
data for the OMXS30, and a more detailed explanation is covered in the next section.

4. Methodology

4.1 Estimating correlation
Two methods are used in order  to measure the correlation between the daily total stock
returns and the daily total bond returns. Firstly, a  sample  rolling window correlation is
estimated, using the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. The Pearson product-
moment correlation  coefficient is measured at the last trading day of each quarter, using a
window  consisting  of  all  past  trading  days  the  bygone  quarter.  The  rolling  window
correlation can be summarized as following:

                                !
                                       !!! ((𝑟!,!!!  − 𝑟!,!)  (𝑟!,!!!  −  𝑟!,!))
                      𝜌!!,!!,!  =
                                !              !    !               !
                                     !!! (𝑟!,!!!  − 𝑟!,!)     !!! (𝑟!,!!!  − 𝑟!,!)

where  t  is the last trading day of quarter  q,  n  is the number of trading days during the quarter,
𝑟!,!  denotes the total stock return on day  t, and  𝑟!,!  denotes the total bond return on day  t.
Although the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient may be able to give a good
clue of the realized stock-bond correlation, it is sometimes considered to be too simple to
capture the dynamics of the covariance between the two asset classes.
       To better capture these  dynamics  by taking  volatility clustering  into account, we  also
apply   a   CCC   (constant   conditional   correlation)   bivariate   GARCH   (Generalized
Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedastic) model to measure the quarterly time-varying
correlation between the assets. The model, firstly proposed by Bollerslev et al. (1990), has the
ability to measure covariance in heteroscedastic financial time-series data by allowing the
conditional covariance to be modeled as a non-linear function of the conditional variances for
each asset class. Bollerslev’s model estimates the parameters by maximum log-likelihood and
is  summarized in  Appendix.  In this paper, a CCC(1,1) bivariate GARCH model is specified

                                     9
with one ARCH (𝛼!)  and one GARCH (𝛽!)  term for each quarter and the daily total returns
for stocks and bonds as the independent variables  𝑦!,!. Neither a mean component  𝛾!, nor a
lagged term of  𝑟!,!  is  included in function of  𝑦!,!, since those parameters are not consequently
significant during each quarter. The  daily index returns are hence simplified to follow a
random walk,  𝜖!,!. No explanatory variables are included in the model, because  as for the
sample  Pearson product-moment  correlation, the CCC(1,1)  bivariate GARCH  model is
applied to estimate quarterly correlations and not to examine the effect of macro-variables on
the time-varying conditional correlation. This is due to uneven frequencies between stock and
bond returns and macroeconomic data, where much of available macro-data is reported at
quarterly or monthly frequencies. Instead, we apply a similar method like Andersson et al.
(2008) by performing multiple regression analyses on the quarterly Pearson product-moment
correlation coefficients and the quarterly CCC(1,1)  bivariate  GARCH  correlation coefficients
to examine these effects.  The estimated correlations are presented in Table  4  in Appendix.

4.2 OLS regression analysis of the effect of macroeconomic determinants
In  order  to estimate the effect of macroeconomic  variables on the time-varying correlation
between total returns for stocks and bonds, two OLS multiple regression analyses are
performed. In these regression analyses, the quarterly Pearson product-moment correlation
coefficients and the quarterly CCC(1,1)-modeled correlation coefficients are regressed on the
given set of macro-variables. However, since the dependent correlation coefficients only vary
between  −1, 1  whereas the independent variables are not restricted, there may occur errors
when estimating the regression coefficients. In order to smooth the restriction of the
correlation coefficients, we apply a similar method like Li (2002) by performing a Fisher
transformation, in which the flexibility of the  dependent correlation coefficient increases by
letting it vary between  −∞, ∞  :

                                       1   1 + 𝜌
                              𝐹𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑟𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟  =   ln
                                        2    1 − 𝜌

The following regression is used to estimate the effect of the macroeconomic determinants on
the time-varying correlation.

            𝑦!,!  =  𝛽!  + 𝛽!𝐼𝑛𝑓!  + 𝛽! 𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃!  + 𝛽!𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜!  + 𝛽! 𝑑𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟!  + 𝛽!𝑉𝑜𝑙!

                                    10
where  𝑦!,!  is the fisher-transformed correlation coefficients for the rolling window and the
CCC(1,1) during the examined quarters  q.  The macroeconomic variables are presented in the
following section.

4.3 Variable smoothing
When it comes to time-series data, there is a usual problem of the variables not being
stationary. Having stationary variables without unit roots is an important criterion as non-
stationary variables may lead to strong autocorrelation  of the regression residuals. To smooth
the  macro-variables and make them more stationary, the log-difference between average
quarterly values of the different indices is calculated, which is an approximation of a
percentage change. This is not only a way  to make the variables more stationary, as it is also
economically intuitive to look at the changes in the key macroeconomic levels rather than
index values. However, the repo rate and the stock market volatility variable are treated
differently, shown below.
       The daily return of each asset class is calculated as the logarithmic change of either
the total  return index value for OMXS30 or the total return index for Swedish 5-10 years
government bonds, depending on asset class, between two consecutive days:

                                                                           𝑇𝑅𝐼!,!
                                𝑟!,!  =  ln             ×100
                                                         𝑇𝑅𝐼!,!!!

where  𝑟!,!  denotes the daily return of asset class  i  at day  t, and  𝑇𝑅𝐼!,!  is the total return index
value for asset class  i  at day  t.
       Since quarterly inflation rate is computed using monthly data of the CPI index,
quarterly inflation rate is calculated as the logarithmic change of the average CPI levels
between two consecutive quarters:

                                             1  !
                                𝐶𝑃𝐼!                     !!! 𝐶𝑃𝐼!
                                                              𝑛
               𝐼𝑛𝑓!  =  ln          ×100  =  𝑙𝑛               ×100
                             𝐶𝑃𝐼!!!               1  !
                                                  !!! 𝐶𝑃𝐼!
                                                   𝑚

                                    11
where  q  denotes quarter,  n=1,2,3  denotes each month during quarter  q  and  m=1,2,3  denotes
each month during quarter  q-1.

        Since fixed-price levels of GDP are reported at quarterly frequency and GDP growth
is calculated as the logarithmic change of GDP level between two consecutive quarters:

                                                   𝐺𝐷𝑃!
                          𝑔𝐺𝐷𝑃!  =  ln           ×100
                                             𝐺𝐷𝑃!!!

where  q  denotes quarter.

        Data of quarterly averages of the repo-rate are gathered from the Swedish Riksbank,
but this variable is not transformed through a log-difference. Instead, the normal difference is
examined as changes in the repo rate are  more often discussed in terms of changes of
percentage units, rather than relative measures of percentage. However, as the repo rate is not
a cumulative index,  this should still be enough to make the variable stationary. The normal
change of the repo rate is calculated as following:

                        𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜!  =  (𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜!  − 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜!!!)×100

where  q  denotes quarter.
       Since the effect of currency value is examined, data of the TCW  index are  collected
from the Swedish Riksbank.  The TCW  index is a  “total competitiveness weights”  index that
measures the value of the Swedish krona against a portfolio of other currencies. The weight
of each currency in the portfolio is determined by how important different countries are to
Swedish export. The quarterly change is computed as the logarithmic change of  average
levels of the TCW  index between two consecutive quarters:

                                                 𝑇𝐶𝑊!
                          𝑑𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟!  =  ln           ×100
                                            𝑇𝐶𝑊!!!

where  q  denotes quarter,  n=1,2,3  denotes each month in the quarter  q  and  m=1,2,3  denotes
each month in quarter  q-1.

                                    12
       The stock market volatility variable is computed using the stock returns that are
computed from the data of the total return OMXS30 index. In the absence of intraday
volatility, the volatility variable in this study is calculated as the standard deviation of daily
stock returns according to the OMXS30 total return index. The standard deviation is then
transformed to a quarterly measure by multiplying it with the root of the median amount of
trading days during each quarter, which are 65:

                                       !             !
                                             !!!(𝑟!,!  −  𝑟!,!)
                        𝑉𝑜𝑙!  =                 ×  65
                                                       𝑛

where  q  denotes quarter,  n  is the number of trading days in quarter  q,  t  is each trading day out
of  n  trading days during the quarter  q,  𝑟!,!  denotes total stock return at day  t  and  𝑟!  is the
average return during quarter  q.  Summaries of quarterly values for the variables are presented
in Table 5  in Appendix.

5. Evaluation of model specifications

To evaluate the OLS regression model and search for potential misspecifications,  a  number of
tests are  performed to examine if there are any  clear evidence of violations of  the OLS
regression assumptions. The regression specification tests are performed using the CCC(1,1)
modeled correlations, as these are the ones of major interest, which will be covered in the
results section later.

5.1 Stationary explanatory variables
To examine whether the macroeconomic variables achieve the criterion of being stationary or
not, a Phillips-Perron test for a unit root is performed. The results are presented in  Table  6,
and the null hypothesis of a unit root can be rejected for all variables, except the repo rate, at
5% significance level. Regarding the repo rate, the null hypothesis can be rejected at 10%
significance level. This could possibly be due  to the softer treatment of the variable, but we
consider 10% as good enough. The test results therefore indicate that the explanatory
variables are likely to be stationary.

                                    13
5.2 Heteroscedasticity
If there are misspecifications in the model, errors may not be characterized by constant
variance, which leads to heteroscedasticity in the residual distribution. Presented in  Graph 6,
the relationship between fitted values and regression residuals is examined. The graph does
not give clear indications of  heteroscedasticity,  as the residuals seem to  have a constant
variance that  is not depending on fitted values. To test this, a Breusch–Pagan & Cook-
Weisberg test is performed for fitted values, independent variables and also  for  the time
variable as the regression is based on time-series. The results are presented in  Table  7, which
show that the null hypothesis of constant variance cannot be rejected at any reasonable
significance level for any tested variable. The tests results indicate no evidence against
homoscedastic residuals, however they neither prove them. Therefore, caution is taken
regarding the residual variance and hence a robust regression is applied to account for some
of the potential model misspecifications. Further tests are consequently based on the ordinary
least squares regression with robust standard errors.

5.3 Multicollinearity
To test for multicollinearity among the explanatory variables, a cross-correlation matrix is
presented in  Table 8. When looking at the cross-correlations, it can be determined that there
is some collinearity between all explanatory variables, though there are no signs of perfect
multicollinearity. Relatively high values of collinearity are a recurring issue when it comes to
macroeconomic   data,   where   much   of   macroeconomic   effects   are   usually   somewhat
correlated. Especially the repo rate and the inflation rate seem to be quite correlated, which is
reasonably  expected,  as one of the main objectives of the repo rate is to control inflation. To
further examine this, variance  inflation factors of the explanatory variables are presented in
Table  9.  The  variance  inflation  factors  are  not  dramatically  high  and  as  the  overall
multicollinearity is far from perfect, this should not invalidate any potential results.

5.4 Residual autocorrelation
Furthermore, for every OLS regression and especially when using time-series data, there is a
major risk of autocorrelation in the residuals. To examine if the residuals are biased and
random or not, we look for potential autocorrelation with a  Bartlett’s correlogram and
periodogram, presented in  Graph 7 and Graph 8.  The correlogram indicates that there seems
to be no autocorrelation for any residual lag within a 95% confidence interval, and the same
conclusion can be drawn from the periodogram.

                                    14
       Bartlett’s test and a Portmanteau (Q) test are used to formally test the null hypothesis
that the residuals are a white-noise process of uncorrelated, random variables, having a
constant mean and a constant variance. For both tests, the null hypotheses cannot be rejected
at any reasonable significance level. However, this does not prove that the residuals are
uncorrelated, random and with a constant mean and a constant variance, but it does tell us
that we can neither prove the opposite.  The results are presented in Table 10.

5.5 Residual distribution
This leads to a further examination of whether the residuals are normally distributed or not. A
histogram of the residual distribution is visualized in  Chart  1,  which shows that it  has many
characteristics of  a normal distribution, but with the higher end potentially affected by an
outlier. To formally test if the residuals may be normally distributed, a Jarque-Bera test and
D’Agostino’s Skewness-Kurtosis test are performed. Both test indicate that we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that the residuals are normally distributed. Results are provided in  Table
11.

5.6 Omitted variables bias
Lastly, potential omitted variable bias and non-linearity should be taken into consideration.
Ramsey’s   regression   specification-error   test   is   performed   to   test   whether   non-linear
combinations  of  the  fitted  values  would  make  the  OLS  regression  to  have  a  higher
explanatory value. As seen in  Table 12, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the current
linear combinations are the best fit. Though, it is important to remember that this does not
prove the absence of omitted variables bias, as the test rather tells us that presence cannot be
proved.

5.7 Evaluation of OLS regression model
There  are  no  clear  indications  that  the  OLS  regression  model  suffers  from  severe
misspecifications, but some of the tests neither indicate that the model is flawless since these
tests are based on null hypotheses that there  are no misspecifications. However, the model
appears acceptable in the most  important aspects of OLS regression, and there is no evidence
of any assumptions being violated.

                                    15
6. Results

6.1 Overview of correlations
An overview of the variations in correlation over time  is  presented in the graph and table
below, and it is noticed that the rolling window correlation and the CCC(1,1)-modeled
correlation vary quite similarly. This is not particularly unexpected since the quarterly
windows are relatively small, not allowing for great differences  between the techniques.

                              Correlations over Time

                    Summary Statistics for Estimated Correlations

            Estimation         N     Mean     Std. Dev.     Min       Max
             RWC              49    -0,3151      0,2395      -0,7973      0,2073
             CCC(1,1) GARCH    49    -0,3205      0,2383      -0,7677      0,1589

Some interesting observations can be made through examining the  results. First of all, the
correlation varies a lot  with standard deviations almost as large as the means for both
estimations. Furthermore,  the  correlation  tends  to be more negative than positive.  Especially
from the end of 2007 to the beginning of 2013, which is during the financial crisis, the
correlation varied on a substantially lower level than during times of non-crisis. These years
were considerably turbulent, which makes the observation  to  align with a potential flight-to-
quality phenomenon. Apart from this,  there are no clear trends and the correlation seems to
change quite dramatically between quarters, as in the last decade.

                                    16
6.2 The effect of the macroeconomic variables
When looking into the results of the multiple regression analyses we see that in both
regressions there are two variables, currency value and stock market volatility, which  show
significant impact on the time-varying correlation at 1% significance level. A positive change
in the TCW  index, which is a depreciation of the currency, seems to increase the stock-bond
correlation. An increase in stock market volatility seems to have the opposite effect, as the
correlation becomes more negative if stock market volatility increases. No other variables
show significant impact at any reasonable significance level. This means that a change in the
repo rate, the approximate GDP growth rate and the approximate inflation rate do not help
explain the time-varying correlation in the regression. This is interesting since previous
literature has found that especially expected inflation is an important determinant, which lead
us to conclude that this effect is limited to expectations and no valuable information can be
gathered from its realized values.
       As for the difference between the regressions, we note that  the regression of the
CCC(1,1)-modeled correlations generates a higher R-squared value (44.75% compared to
42.15%), indicating that the macroeconomic variables could better explain the CCC(1,1)-
modeled correlations than the sample rolling window correlations. Further analyses are due to
this based on the CCC(1,1) OLS regression. Results of the regressions are presented in
regression table 1 & 2.

             Regression Table 1:  RWC with Pearson-product moment  correlation

                               𝜷         Std. Error    P-value            95 % CI

      gGDP                0.0026         0.0045      0.5690         -0.0065     0.0116
      Inf                    0.0078         0.0756       0.918          -0.1447     0.1604
      dCurr               0.0496***       0.0137       0.001          0.0219     0.0773
      Vol                  -0.0395***        0.0082       0.000          -0.0560     -0.0230
      dRepo                 -0.0680         0.1030       0.512          -0.2757     0.1396
      Constant               0.0334         0.0784       0.672          -0.1247     0.1915

      Number of obs                                                         49
      F(5, 43)                                                                   8.62
      Prob > F                                                               0.0000
      R-squared                                                            0.4215
     Root MSE                                                          0.2310
                                              *** p-value<0.01

                                    17
                      Regression Table 2: CCC(1,1)-modeled correlation

                               𝜷         Std. Error    P-value            95 % CI
      gGDP                0.0034         0.0042       0.427         -0.0051     0.0119
      Inf                    0.0090         0.0727       0.903          -0.1377     0.1556
      dCurr               0.0484***       0.0130       0.001          0.0221     0.0746
      Vol                  -0.0405***        0.0081       0.000          -0.0569     -0.0242
      dRepo                 -0.0729         0.0992       0.466          -0.2729     0.1270
      Constant               0.0367         0.0791       0.646          -0.1229     0.1963

     Number of obs                                                         49
      F(5, 43)                                                                   9.37
      Prob > F                                                               0.0000
      R-squared                                                            0.4475
     Root MSE                                                          0.2246
                                              *** p-value<0.01

       Furthermore, the economic magnitude of currency value and stock market volatility
can be  interpreted in the regression results. Since a logarithmic change in the TCW index is a
close approximation of a percentage change  of the currency value, the CCC(1,1) OLS
regression results indicate that a one-percentage decrease in currency value compared to the
TCW-portfolio currencies, leads  to an increase of approximately 0.048 in the time-varying
correlation. It can also be seen that an increase of one percentage unit in stock market
volatility leads  to a decrease of approximately  0.041 in the stock-bond correlation. When
considering how this affects the  risk of a stock-bond  portfolio, we may  examine  its traditional
measure:

                         !            !  !      !  !
                      𝜎!"#$%"&'" =  𝑤! 𝜎! + 𝑤!𝜎! + 2𝑤!𝑤!𝜎!𝜎!𝜌!"

A  one-percentage  decrease  in currency value  therefore leads  to an approximate increase of
0.048 × 2𝑤!𝑤!𝜎!𝜎!  units  of  variance  to  the  portfolio.  Furthermore,  an  increase  of  a
percentage unit in quarterly stock market volatility leads to an approximate decrease  of
0.041 × 2𝑤!𝑤!𝜎!𝜎!  units of  variance  in  the portfolio. To examine the economic magnitude
and importance of these effects,  a summary of the quarterly values for the explanatory
variables that are used in the regression is presented in  the summary table below.

                                    18
                         Summary  Statistics:  Explanatory Variables

    Variable            N           Mean        Std. Dev.        Min          Max
     dRepo              49           -0,051          0,421         -2,1371         0,4239
     Inf                 49           0,2702         0,5741         -1,4447         1,627
    gGDP              49          0,7566         8,5693        -11,2034        13,4072
     dCurr               49           0,1276         2,5004         -4,5021         9,2567
    Vol                49          10,1157        4,9268         5,0206        29,9132

It can be  concluded  that the mean of volatility is considerably higher than the mean of
changes in  currency value. This means that stock market volatility  usually has  a greater effect
than changes in  currency value  on the fitted values of the regression. However, this has  fewer
implications  when considering portfolio  allocation. When investors  constantly reallocate  their
portfolios, they  are more likely to  consider the magnitude of which the variables tend to
change the stock-bond correlation on a quarterly basis.
       To examine this, focus shifts to the standard deviations of the two significant
variables in the regression. The standard deviation of stock market volatility is  4.9 percentage
units,  while the standard deviation of changes in  currency value  is  2.5 percentage  units.  Thus,
multiplying the variable coefficients with their respective standard deviations, we can
conclude that  a standard deviation of changes in currency value changes the stock-bond
correlation with  0.12 units, while a standard deviation of the  stock market volatility changes
the same correlation with 0.20  units. Considering that the correlation only varies between
(-1,1), this is not a major change  but still very considerable  as  0.12 units and  0.20  units
translates to  6%  versus  10%  of  its maximum range. This  means that  a  standard deviation  of
changes  in  currency value  changes the  variance  of a stock-bond portfolio with  0.12 ×
 2𝑤!𝑤!𝜎!𝜎!  units, while  a  standard deviation of quarterly volatility changes the  variance  the
same portfolio with  0.20 × 2𝑤!𝑤!𝜎!𝜎!  units.  Consequently, it can be  concluded  that  stock
market   volatility   usually   change   the   quarterly   stock-bond   correlations   with   a   larger
magnitude than  changes  in currency value, and  the volatility parameter  is hence a more
important macroeconomic factor for investors to examine when reallocating their portfolios.
       However, it is important to remember that stock market volatility explicitly, and
currency value perhaps implicitly, affect the risk of each asset class. This means that the total
change of portfolio risk is ambiguous.  Furthermore, assume an investor want to maximize her
portfolio Sharpe ratio:

                                    19
                                            𝐸  𝑟!  −  𝑟!
                                 𝑆𝑅  =
                                                     𝜎!

It can be seen that not only  the ambiguous total  portfolio risk, but also changes in expected
returns,  must be analyzed in order to make a rational choice of allocation. However, the
results of this study still bring valuable understanding of how the macroeconomic landscape
may affect the covariance risk parameter on a quarterly basis, a factor that is sometimes more
or less ignored in favor of how the macroenvironment affects returns and asset specific risks.

6.3 Why may Stock market volatility affect the time-varying correlation?
In accordance with existing literature our results showed a volatility parameter with a
significant negative effect on the stock-bond  correlation. This  indicates a potential  transfer of
investments from the stock market to the bond market,  which implies a  potential  existence of
a flight-to-quality  behavior. In other words, investors decrease  their exposure against the
current turbulent stock market, resulting in a bearish stock market sentiment  with falling
stock prices. This crowd psychology makes the stable bond returns temporarily more
appealing to the investor majority, which consequently chooses the  flight  to the safer asset.
Therefore, our aforementioned result of a sustained negative correlation during the crisis
period makes perfect  sense,  as these periods are associated with a deteriorating stock market
sentiment. Our interpretation of a “flight  behavior” is supported by Baur and Lucey (2008),
who established that a flight only exists if  a considerable change in the stock-bond correlation
level occurs within a relatively short period of time. Whether the flights are mainly caused by
quality or liquidity concerns, or the combination of the two theories, lies beyond this paper’s
sphere. We are content  with just  ascertaining the  potential  existence of such  a flight.
       However, the most interesting finding to point out is that our approach of  examining
realized volatility also leads to indications  of this  behavior. Thus, not only expected  and
implied,  but also realized stock market  volatility  has  implications for portfolio allocation
decisions. This provides new  valuable  information to this body of research as the result
indicates that the effect on the stock-bond correlation doesn’t only lie in  the expectation
itself, but also in the realized state of the stock market volatility, per se.

                                    20
6.4 Why may currency value affect the time-varying correlation?
When analyzing the result that currency depreciation has a positive impact on the time-
varying correlation between stock and bond returns, the first thing that should be taken into
account is the mechanisms behind  depreciation. A few examples of traditionally documented
determinants of a country’s exchange rate are interest rate differentials and expected inflation
rates.
       Although realized inflation has  no significant effect according to the regression
model, expected inflation may still have an effect on the time-varying correlation between
stock and bond returns. The relationship between inflation  and exchange rates can be
analyzed from a relative purchasing power parity perspective, where a depreciation of the
domestic currency could be explained by increased domestic inflation expectations. Such a
relationship has been concluded by several researchers, e.g. Ebiringa et al. (2014). As
mentioned earlier, researchers such as Andersson et al. (2008) and Ilmanen (2003) have also
concluded that expected inflation seems to have a positive impact on the stock-bond
comovement. Their explanation to this is that in times of increased inflation expectations,
discount rates for both bonds and stocks increase and hence the assets are affected in a similar
way, causing the comovement between the assets to increase. When inflation expectations are
low, discount rates are more stable and the comovement between the assets become less
apparent, and this explains why there may be a positive relationship between correlation and
inflation expectations.
       Shifting focus to interest differentials and examining their relationship to exchange
rates, conclusions are very similar among researchers. For example, Hacker et al. (2009)
studied the mechanisms on the Swedish markets, and one of their key findings is that there is
short-term negative relationship between the exchange rate, expressed as domestic-currency
price of foreign currency, and the nominal interest rate differential, expressed as domestic
interest rates minus foreign interest rates. Hence,  currency  depreciation could possibly be
explained by a decreasing interest rate differential. As domestic interest rates are controlled
for to a certain degree by including the repo rate in the regression, the decreased differential
is more likely to be caused by increasing foreign interest rates. Furthermore, Engel (2016)
among some  researchers  concludes that countries with higher interest rates tend to have
higher short-term expected returns, even when controlling for interest rate parity. This means
that through increases in foreign interest rates, investors on the Swedish market  are given
possibilities to greater returns on the international market, which hence should increase the

                                    21
opportunity cost of capital of investing in Swedish assets. If assumed that investors’ discount
rates are affected by their opportunity cost of capital, Ilmanen’s reasoning on how discount
rates affect the stock-bond correlation could be reapplied in this context. A potentially
possible explanation to the effect of  currency  depreciation could therefore be that when
foreign interest increases, also discount rates on Swedish assets increase due to a rise in the
opportunity costs of capital, which causes the comovement between stocks and bonds to
increase as well.
       The results can lastly be analyzed through the effect of currency depreciation on the
current account. Assuming that Sweden’s exports and imports are relatively elastic, a
depreciation of its currency would lead to an increase in exports and a decrease in imports.
Hence an increase in the trade balance can be expected, which in turn increases the current
account.

  𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡  𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡  =  𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡  +  𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒  𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚  𝐴𝑏𝑟𝑜𝑎𝑑  +  𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡  𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑠

As previously mentioned, Perego and Vermeulen (2016) concluded in their study that the
current account may have a significant positive effect on the correlation, which could explain
why a currency depreciation then also may have a positive effect on the correlation in this
study.
       This paper does not provide definite answers as to why currency depreciation affects
the correlation between stock and bond returns. Though, three potential explanations have
been outlined, which are based on the relationship between exchange rate and inflation
expectations, interest rate differentials and the current account,  respectively.

7. Conclusion

The   purpose   of   this   study   has   been   to   analyze   how   and   to   what   extent   realized
macroeconomic factors affect the time-varying correlation between stock and bond returns on
the Swedish financial market. As neither this specific angle of approach nor the  Swedish
market has been examined within this rather unexplored area of research, this paper
contributes to  new valuable understanding  concerning  diversification dynamics on especially
the Swedish market, but also in general.
       The results show that realized  volatility  has  a negative effect on the correlation at 1%
significance level. This finding aligns with those of previous studies on expected  and implied

                                    22
volatility, and implicates the existence of a potential flight-to-quality  behavior  on the
Swedish market. This flight may occur when investors decrease their exposure to the
turbulent stock market in  favor  of the safer, thus temporarily more appealing, bond market.
       The results also show that currency value has a positive effect on the time-varying
correlation at 1% significance level. This variable is of certain interest  due to its historical
non-occurrence in this area of research.  Since the effect of this variable has not been
documented prior to this study, there is no explicit research as to how currency value may
affect the correlation. However, this  paper  outlines three possible explanations in which the
relationship between currency value and expected inflation rates, interest rate differentials
and the current account, respectively, are analyzed  and  how these mechanisms in turn may
act as determinants of the time-varying correlation between stock and bond returns.
       To  conclude,  by  taking  another  angle  of  approach,  our  study  brings  relevant
implications to research and portfolio allocation strategies.  We state that realized values of
stock market volatility and currency value  on the Swedish market  may act as determinants of
the correlation between stock and bond returns.

8. Limitations and suggestions for future research

One of the empirical findings of  this study is that currency value seems to have a positive
effect on the time-varying correlation between stock and bond returns. However, since
currency value is both affected by, and also affects, many other parameters, the underlying
mechanisms behind  this effect are  ambiguous. Hence, the causality between currency value
and the correlation between stock and bond returns is ambiguous as well, and currency value
itself may not actually be the most appropriate factor to examine. However, this study has
outlined three potential explanations as to why the observable effect of currency value might
exist. Therefore, our suggestion to future research within this field is to better understand how
the underlying mechanisms of especially  interest  rate differentials, but also the current
account, affect the time-varying correlation between stock and bond returns, since research
on these factors are absent and scarce,  respectively. It would also be valuable to examine  if
this effect is persistent on other markets than the Swedish.
        Furthermore, as Baker and Wurgler (2012) have concluded, the correlation may also
depend on different types of stocks, such as growth or value stocks. Therefore it would be
valuable to understand if our findings can be applied to all, or just certain types of stocks.

                                    23
References

Andersson, M., Krylova, E. & Vähämaa, S. (2008). “Why does the correlation between stock
and bond returns vary over time?”.  Applied Financial Economics, 18 (2), pp. 139-151.

Baker, M. & Wurgler, J. (2012). “Comovement and Predictability Relationships Between
Bonds and the Cross-Section of Stocks”.  Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 2 (1), pp. 57-87.

Baur, D.G. & Lucey, B.M. (2008). “Flights and contagion  -  An empirical analysis of stock-
bond correlations”.  Journal  of Financial Stability, 5 (4), pp. 339-352.

Beber, A., Brandt, M.W. & Kavajecz, K.A. (2009). “Flight-to-Quality or Flight-to-Liquidity?
Evidence from the Euro-Area Bond Market”.  Review of Financial Studies, 22 (3), pp. 925-
957.

Bollerslev, T. (1990). “Modeling the coherence in short-run nominal exchange rates: a
multivariate generalized ARCH model”.  Review of Economics and Statistics, 72, pp. 498-
505.

Cappiello, L., Engle, R. & Sheppard, K. (2003). “Asymmetric dynamics in the correlations of
global equity and bond returns”.  European Central Bank Working Paper Series, No 204.

Chiang, T. & Li, J. (2009). “The Dynamic Correlation between Stock and Bond Returns:
Evidence from the U.S. Market”.  SSRN Electronic Journal.

Connolly, R.A. Stivers, C.T. & Sun, L. (2005). “Stock Market Uncertainty and the Stock-
Bond Return Relation”.  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 40, pp. 161-194.

Ebiringa, T.O. & Nneka B, C.A. (2014). “Exchange Rate, Inflation and Interest Rates
Relationships: An Autoregressive Distributed Lag Analysis”.  Journal of Economics and
Development Studies, 2 (2), pp. 263-279.

Engel, C. (2016). “Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and the Risk Premium”.  American
Economic Review, 106 (2), pp. 436-474.

                                    24
Hacker, R.S., Huynjoo, K. & Månsson, K. (2009). “The Relationship between Exchange Rate
and Interest Rate Differentials  -  a Wavelet approach”.  Centre of Excellence for Science and
Innovation Studies/CESIS, No. 2017.

Ilmanen, A. (2003). “Stock-Bond Correlations”.  Journal of Fixed Income, 13 (2), pp. 55-66.

Li, L. (2002). “Macroeconomic factors and the correlation of stock and bond returns”.  Yale
ICF Working Paper, No. 02-46.

Perego, E. & Vermeulen, W.N. (2016). “Macroeconomic determinants of European stock and
government bond correlations: A tale of two regions”.  Journal of Empirical Finance, 37, pp.
214-232.

Skintzi, V.D. (2017). “Determinants of stock-bond comovement in the Eurozone under model
uncertainty”.  Munich Personal RePEc Archive, No. 78278.

                                    25
Appendix

The CCC GARCH model proposed by Bollerslev can be summarized as:

                                           𝑦!  =  𝐶𝑥!  +  𝜖!

                                                     !/!
                                               𝜖!  =  𝐻!   𝑣!

                                                   !/!    !/!
                                           𝐻!  =  𝐷!   𝑅𝐷!

where:

𝑦!  is an  𝑚  × 1  vector of independent variables;

𝐶  is an  𝑚  × 𝑘  matrix of parameters;

𝑥!  is a  𝑘  ×  1  vector if independent variables, which may contain  lags of  𝑦!;

  !/!
𝐻!   is the Cholesky factor of the time-varying conditional covariance matrix,  𝐻!;

𝑣!  is an  𝑚  × 1  vector of normal, independent, and identically distributed innovations;

𝐷!  is a diagonal matrix of the conditional variances,

                                        !
                                       𝜎!,!    0     …     0
                                     !    …    0
                                                0     𝜎!,!
                              𝐷!  =
                                           ⋮      ⋮      ⋱      ⋮
                                                             !
                                     0     0    …    𝜎!,!

               !
in which each  𝜎!,! evolves according to a univariate GARCH model in the form of

                                 !            !!      !         !!      !
                                 𝜎!,! =  𝑠!  +   !!! 𝛼!𝜖!,!!! +   !!! 𝛽!𝜎!,!!!,

where  𝛼!  are ARCH parameters and  𝛽!  are GARCH parameters;

                                                                                          !/!
𝑅  is a matrix of time-invariant unconditional correlations of the standardized residuals  𝐷!   𝜖!,
                                      1    𝜌!"   …   𝜌!!
                                     𝜌!"    1    …   𝜌!!
                             𝑅  =
                                            ⋮      ⋮      ⋱    ⋮
                                  𝜌!!   𝜌!!   ⋯   1

The unconcentrated log-likelihood function  based on the multivariate normal distribution for
observation  t  is

                                                                     !/!             !!  !
          𝑙!  =  −0.5𝑚× log  2𝜋  − 0.5× log  det  𝑅   − 𝑙𝑜𝑔  det  𝐷!     − 0.5𝜖!𝑅  𝜖!

             !!/!
where  𝜖!  =  𝐷!    𝜖!  is an  𝑚  ×  1  vector of standardized residuals,  𝜖!  =  𝑦!  −  𝐶𝑥!, and the log-

                      !
likelihood function is   !!! 𝑙!

                                    26
       Graph  1: Total Return Indices for Stocks and Bonds

        400

        350

        300

        250

        200

        150
       Normalized Index
        100

         50

          0

                                                    Date
                                             Stocks            Bonds
Note: The graph shows normalized indices of the development of total returns for bonds and
stocks. The OMXS30 is used as the proxy portfolio  for total stock returns, and a 5-10  years
government bond index is used as the proxy portfolio for total bond returns. Data of for the
total return indices are gathered from Reuter’s Datastream from 2004-10-01 to 2016-12-31.

                                 27
       Table 1: Quarterly Data of Stock Returns

   Quarter        N       Mean     Std. Dev.      Min        Max
    2004 Q4         65         0,052        0,799       -2,370        1,713
    2005 Q1         64         0,061        0,778       -1,819        1,470
    2005 Q2         65         0,148        0,738       -2,262        1,537
    2005 Q3         66         0,131        0,651       -1,572        1,653
    2005 Q4         65         0,106        0,699       -1,568        2,288
    2006 Q1         65         0,157        0,733       -2,060        1,380
    2006 Q2         65         -0,121       1,791       -4,880        5,351
    2006 Q3         65         0,129        1,069       -1,759        3,948
    2006 Q4         65         0,152        0,917       -2,949        2,167
    2007 Q1         65         0,094        1,139       -3,860        2,600
    2007 Q2         65         0,087        1,018       -3,839        1,871
    2007 Q3         65         -0,041       1,559       -3,484        3,564
    2007 Q4         66         -0,185       1,278       -3,724        3,324
    2008 Q1         65         -0,193       1,974       -4,253        4,092
    2008 Q2         65         -0,104       1,389       -3,356        3,452
    2008 Q3         66         -0,165       2,290       -5,897        8,597
    2008 Q4         66         -0,225       3,710       -7,511        9,874
    2009 Q1         64         -0,018       2,502       -5,323        5,544
    2009 Q2         65         0,356        1,972       -4,893        5,584
    2009 Q3         66         0,183        1,390       -2,652        3,305
    2009 Q4         66         0,090        1,196       -3,326        2,791
    2010 Q1         64         0,119        0,849       -2,223        1,983
    2010 Q2         65         0,010        1,703       -3,379        6,240
    2010 Q3         66         0,120        1,215       -2,577        3,641
    2010 Q4         66         0,092        0,820       -1,838        2,429
    2011 Q1         64         -0,015       1,001       -2,499        1,870
    2011 Q2         65         0,011        1,081       -2,553        2,548
    2011 Q3         66         -0,307       2,429       -6,972        6,033
    2011 Q4         65         0,126        2,001       -4,605        5,022
    2012 Q1         65         0,148        1,116       -3,700        2,753
    2012 Q2         65         -0,010       1,613       -4,691        3,955
    2012 Q3         65         0,079        1,012       -2,344        2,602
    2012 Q4         66         0,045        0,739       -1,766        2,339
    2013 Q1         64         0,151        0,685       -1,556        2,257
    2013 Q2         65         -0,026       1,049       -3,134        2,548
    2013 Q3         66         0,137        0,753       -1,715        1,775
    2013 Q4         66         0,086        0,693       -1,802        2,020
    2014 Q1         64         0,060        0,817       -2,484        2,067
    2014 Q2         65         0,046        0,623       -1,429        2,057
    2014 Q3         66         0,029        0,779       -1,612        1,923
    2014 Q4         66         0,065        1,107       -2,946        3,056
    2015 Q1         64         0,226        0,971       -2,327        2,457
    2015 Q2         65         -0,093       1,105       -3,060        2,792
    2015 Q3         66         -0,127       1,595       -4,606        3,801
    2015 Q4         66         0,033        1,149       -2,677        3,072
    2016 Q1         65         -0,068       1,771       -4,314        3,774
    2016 Q2         65         -0,010       1,657       -8,801        3,178
    2016 Q3         66         0,129        0,828       -1,715        1,874
    2016 Q4         65         0,086        0,729       -1,255        1,807
Note:  The table shows  quarterly  summary statistics of  the  total return data
(in %)  for stocks on the OMXS30 index.  Data are  gathered from Reuter’s
Datastream from 2004-10-01 to 2016-12-31

                           28
       Table 2: Quarterly Data of Bond Returns

    Quarter        N       Mean     Std. Dev.      Min       Max
     2004 Q4         65         0,064        0,233       -0,572       0,566
     2005 Q1         64         0,045        0,252       -0,666       0,990
     2005 Q2         65         0,093        0,256       -0,447       0,822
     2005 Q3         66         0,000        0,212       -0,540       0,419
     2005 Q4         65         -0,018       0,210       -0,498       0,473
     2006 Q1         65         -0,022       0,206       -0,502       0,359
     2006 Q2         65         -0,026       0,242       -0,611       0,604
     2006 Q3         65         0,055        0,218       -0,415       0,467
     2006 Q4         65         -0,004       0,189       -0,478       0,434
     2007 Q1         65         0,000        0,197       -0,455       0,635
     2007 Q2         65         -0,042       0,183       -0,630       0,330
     2007 Q3         65         0,032        0,246       -0,623       0,602
     2007 Q4         66         0,014        0,301       -1,246       1,180
     2008 Q1         65         0,052        0,316       -0,712       0,641
     2008 Q2         65         -0,046       0,283       -0,643       0,448
     2008 Q3         66         0,082        0,353       -1,058       0,817
     2008 Q4         66         0,161        0,495       -1,343       1,526
     2009 Q1         64         -0,025       0,373       -0,900       0,788
     2009 Q2         65         -0,030       0,319       -0,799       0,864
     2009 Q3         66         0,033        0,328       -0,582       0,970
     2009 Q4         66         0,018        0,277       -0,555       0,796
     2010 Q1         64         0,039        0,230       -0,592       0,799
     2010 Q2         65         0,058        0,384       -1,462       0,809
     2010 Q3         66         0,022        0,286       -0,657       0,669
     2010 Q4         66         -0,073       0,300       -0,686       0,693
     2011 Q1         64         0,009        0,276       -0,582       0,858
     2011 Q2         65         0,061        0,262       -0,550       0,646
     2011 Q3         66         0,149        0,559       -1,424       1,695
     2011 Q4         65         0,034        0,498       -0,888       1,926
     2012 Q1         65         -0,034       0,345       -0,969       0,669
     2012 Q2         65         0,049        0,515       -2,787       0,896
     2012 Q3         65         0,027        0,390       -1,017       0,781
     2012 Q4         66         -0,004       0,249       -0,613       0,521
     2013 Q1         64         -0,020       0,330       -0,817       0,799
     2013 Q2         65         -0,042        0,348        -1,167        0,768
     2013 Q3         66         -0,013       0,343       -1,051       0,624
     2013 Q4         66         0,006        0,237       -0,620       0,490
     2014 Q1         64         0,055        0,234       -0,615       0,548
     2014 Q2         65         0,059        0,193       -0,364       0,467
     2014 Q3         66         0,056        0,233       -0,548       0,564
     2014 Q4         66         0,071        0,273       -0,676       1,127
     2015 Q1         64         0,072        0,333       -0,650       1,232
     2015 Q2         65         -0,074       0,352       -1,234       0,596
     2015 Q3         66         0,032        0,391       -1,040       0,998
     2015 Q4         66         -0,035       0,328       -0,991       0,581
     2016 Q1         65         0,067        0,278       -0,580       0,805
     2016 Q2         65         0,066        0,335       -0,691       1,814
     2016 Q3         66         0,019        0,237       -0,669       0,577
     2016 Q4         65         -0,048       0,286       -1,254       0,480
Note:  The table shows quarterly summary statistics  of  the total return data
for bonds  (in %)  in the 5-10 years  Swedish  government bond index. Data are
gathered from Reuter’s Datastream from 2004-10-01 to 2016-12-31

                           29
                 Graph 2: CPI Development

     120

     115

     110

     105

     100
    Normalized Index Value
      95

      90

           Sep 2004Feb 2005Jul 2005 Oct 2006 Jan 2008Jun 2008 Sep 2009Feb 2010Jul 2010 Oct 2011 Jan 2013Jun 2013 Sep 2014Feb 2015Jul 2015 Oct 2016
                  Dec 2005May 2006Apr 2007Aug 2007Nov 2008Mar 2009  Dec 2010May 2011Apr 2012Aug 2012Nov 2013Mar 2014  Dec 2015May 2016
                                                      Date

Note: The graph shows the development of monthly values of CPI  Index from September
2004 to  December 2016. Data for the CPI  index is gathered from the official website of
Statistics Sweden, SCB.

                 Graph 3: GDP development

    150

    140

    130

    120

    110

   Normalized Index
    100

     90

     80

         2004 Q32005 Q12005 Q32006 Q12006 Q32007 Q12007 Q32008 Q12008 Q32009 Q12009 Q32010 Q12010 Q32011 Q12011 Q32012 Q12012 Q32013 Q12013 Q32014 Q12014 Q32015 Q12015 Q32016 Q12016 Q3
                                                      Quarter
Note: The graph shows the development of quarterly values of  GDP  from 2004Q3 to
2016Q4.  The data are  reported with fixed-price levels, benchmarked to prices year 2015.
Data are  gathered from the official website of  Statistics Sweden, SCB.

                                 30
                    Graph 4: TCW Index

      120

      115

      110

      105

      100

       95
     Normalized Index
       90

       85

       80

                                                      Date
Note: The graph shows the development of  quarterly average values of TCW  Index  from
2004Q3 to 2016Q4. The TCW  Index is a total competitiveness weights index that measures
the value of the Swedish currency in relation to a portfolio of other currencies. Data are
gathered from the official website of the Swedish Riksbank.

                Table 3: Weights in the TCW  index
       Country                  Currency          TCW-weight (%)
       USA                     USD               11.63
        Austria                      ATS                  1.71
       Belgium                    BEF                 3.55
       Canada                    CAD                1.16
        Switzerland                  CHF                 2.74
       Germany                  DEM               22.28
       Denmark                   DKK                 5.6
        Finland                      FIM                  6.69
        France                      FRF                  7.15
       UK                      GBP               11.56
        Italy                          ITL                   6.05
        Japan                        JPY                   5.2
       Netherlands                 NLG                 4.24
       Norway                   NOK                5.58
       Australia                   AUD                 0.27
        Spain                       ESP                  2.48
       Greece                     GRD                 0.27
        Ireland                        IEP                   0.77
       New Zealand                NZD                 0.14
        Portugal                     PTE                  0.93
        Note: The table shows the weights of  different currencies in the TCW  index.
        Weights are based on each country’s importance to Swedish export. Data of
        the weights are gathered from the official website of the Swedish Riksbank.

                                 31
             Graph  5: Development of the Repo Rate

Note: The graph shows the development of quarterly average values of the official interest
rate, the repo rate, in Sweden from 2004Q3 to 2016Q4. Data are  gathered from the official
website of the Swedish Riksbank.

                                 32
       Table 4: Quarterly Correlations
      Quarter         Rolling Window            CCC(1,1)
       2004 Q4                -­‐0,256                    -­‐0,320
      2005 Q1             0,151                 0,122
       2005 Q2                -­‐0,092                    -­‐0,171
       2005 Q3                -­‐0,157                    -­‐0,161
       2005 Q4                -­‐0,086                    -­‐0,111
       2006 Q1                -­‐0,324                    -­‐0,244
       2006 Q2                -­‐0,194                    -­‐0,219
       2006 Q3                -­‐0,052                    -­‐0,035
       2006 Q4                -­‐0,188                    -­‐0,107
       2007 Q1                -­‐0,064                    -­‐0,068
       2007 Q2               -­‐0,161                    -­‐0,096
       2007 Q3                -­‐0,604                    -­‐0,567
       2007 Q4                -­‐0,402                    -­‐0,415
       2008 Q1                -­‐0,687                    -­‐0,674
       2008 Q2                -­‐0,383                    -­‐0,358
       2008 Q3                -­‐0,559                    -­‐0,575
       2008 Q4                -­‐0,367                    -­‐0,343
       2009 Q1                -­‐0,298                    -­‐0,268
       2009 Q2                -­‐0,362                    -­‐0,325
       2009 Q3                -­‐0,520                    -­‐0,492
       2009 Q4                -­‐0,317                    -­‐0,325
       2010 Q1               -­‐0,369                    -­‐0,372
       2010 Q2                -­‐0,768                    -­‐0,797
       2010 Q3                -­‐0,445                    -­‐0,460
       2010 Q4                -­‐0,345                    -­‐0,353
       2011 Q1                -­‐0,505                    -­‐0,506
       2011 Q2                -­‐0,426                    -­‐0,369
       2011 Q3                -­‐0,728                    -­‐0,686
       2011 Q4                -­‐0,707                    -­‐0,715
       2012 Q1                -­‐0,442                    -­‐0,416
       2012 Q2                -­‐0,614                    -­‐0,585
       2012 Q3                -­‐0,450                    -­‐0,507
       2012 Q4                -­‐0,463                    -­‐0,398
       2013 Q1                -­‐0,548                    -­‐0,536
      2013 Q2             0,159                 0,207
       2013 Q3                -­‐0,075                    -­‐0,072
      2013 Q4             0,020                 0,021
       2014 Q1                -­‐0,391                    -­‐0,385
       2014 Q2                -­‐0,209                    -­‐0,251
       2014 Q3                -­‐0,275                    -­‐0,261
       2014 Q4                -­‐0,309                    -­‐0,396
      2015 Q1              -­‐0,002                   0,035
       2015 Q2                -­‐0,076                    -­‐0,039
       2015 Q3               -­‐0,640                    -­‐0,636
      2015 Q4             0,003                 0,021
       2016 Q1                -­‐0,567                    -­‐0,539
       2016 Q2                -­‐0,548                    -­‐0,601
       2016 Q3                -­‐0,004                    -­‐0,028
       2016 Q4                -­‐0,058                    -­‐0,064
Note:  The table shows the estimated correlation coefficients
for each quarter using the sample rolling window correlation
of   the   Pearson   product-moment   correlation,   and   the
CCC(1,1)-modeled correlation

                      33
        Table 5:  Macroeconomic  variable values
    Quarter       dRepo        Inf        gGDP       dCurr        Vol
     2004 Q4        0,000       -0.101       13.407       -2.611       6,443
     2005 Q1        0,000       -0.303       -6.593       0.487        6,273
     2005 Q2        -0.048       0.466        6.211        2.401        5,946
     2005 Q3        -0.452       -0.001       -9.993        2.174        5,247
     2005 Q4        0,000       0.597       13.074       1.435       5,638
     2006 Q1         0.277        -0.304       -3.417       -1.691        5,907
     2006 Q2        0.252        1.262        3.671       -1.144       14,440
     2006 Q3         0.29        0.133       -8.636       -1.128        8,619
     2006 Q4        0.367        0.498       12.882       -1.368       7,392
     2007 Q1        0.423       0.098       -4.132       0.258       9,179
     2007 Q2        0.153       1.129       3.375       0.104       8,205
     2007 Q3        0.287        0.232        -9.18        0.036       12,570
     2007 Q4        0.361        1.627       13.099       -0.896       10,304
     2008 Q1        0.198        0.229       -6.793       0.227       15,917
     2008 Q2        0.141        1.627        5.267       -1.799       11,195
     2008 Q3        0.284        0.731       -11.203       1.678       18,463
     2008 Q4        -0.881       -0.039       7.366        9.257       29,913
     2009 Q1        -2.137       -1.445       -7.773        6.331       20,172
     2009 Q2        -0.908       0.266        4.315       -2.002       15,900
     2009 Q3        -0.339       -0.235       -10.01       -3.806       11,203
     2009 Q4        -0.019       0.632       11.826       -1.224       9,639
     2010 Q1         0,000        -0.003       -3.169        -2.31        6,844
     2010 Q2        0,000        0.465        7.025       -0.981       13,729
     2010 Q3        0.299        0.032       -9.114       -2.199       9,794
     2010 Q4        0.404        1.263        13.17       -2.829       6,614
     2011 Q1        0.424        0.695       -5.559       -3.716       8,074
     2011 Q2        0.306       1.129       4.294       0.538       8,716
     2011 Q3        0.305        0.166       -8.781       2.351       19,583
     2011 Q4        -0.016       0.664        9.403        0.355       16,135
     2012 Q1        -0.332       -0.139       -4.492       -1.746        9,000
     2012 Q2        -0.141       0.498        3.716        1.351       13,003
     2012 Q3         -0.05        -0.368       -9.726       -4.502        8,158
     2012 Q4        -0.22        0.166       10.141       1.177        5,962
     2013 Q1         -0.23        -0.271        -3.75        -3.23        5,520
     2013 Q2        0,000       0.265       3.984       0.455       8,460
     2013 Q3        0,000        0.033       -8.997       0.759        6,068
     2013 Q4        -0.024       0.132       11.254       1.425        5,584
     2014 Q1        -0.226       -0.775       -4.312       -0.195        6,584
     2014 Q2        0,000       0.665       4.584       2.485       5,022
     2014 Q3        -0.455       -0.134       -8.888        2.516        6,281
     2014 Q4        -0.215        0.2         11.77        1.052        8,927
     2015 Q1        -0.141       -0.507       -4.456        3.743        7,827
     2015 Q2         -0.19        0.398        5.381        -0.105        8,911
     2015 Q3        -0.092       -0.101       -8.572        0.742       12,859
     2015 Q4        -0.008        0.199       12.651        -1.25        9,264
     2016 Q1        -0.074        0.066        -5.976        -0.55        14,274
     2016 Q2        -0.076        0.598        6.284        -0.67        13,358
     2016 Q3        0,000        0.233       -10.612       2.119        6,674
     2016 Q4        0,000       0.566       13.057       2.747       5,881
Note: The Table shows the quarterly values of  the variables used in the OLS
regression models, presented in section  4. Methodology.

                           34
                 Table 6: Phillips-Perron unit root test

Variable        MacKinnon P-value for unit root      N     Newey-West lags
dRepo                     0.0696                 48              3
Vol                       0.0472                 48               3
dCurr                     0.0009                 48               3
gGDP                    0.0000                48              3
lnf                         0.0000                 48               3
Note: The table shows P-values of  the Phillips-Perron test for unit roots in the smoothed
variables. The test uses  a null hypothesis of the variables having a unit root.

              Graph 6: Residuals and Fitted values

   Note: The graph shows the residuals from the OLS regression using the CCC(1,1)-
   modeled quarterly correlations, against the fitted values of the regression.

                                 35
             Table 7: Breusch-Pagan & Cook-Weisberg

Variable                            𝝌𝟐-value                       P-value
Fitted Values                          0.66                         0.4182
dRepo                              0.06                        0.7997
Vol                                0.94                        0.3330
dCurr                               0.06                        0.8141
gGDP                            0.34                      0.5580
Inf                                   0.02                         0.9014
Time  variable                         0.00                        0.9846
Note: The Table shows P-values  of  the Breusch-Pagan & Cook-Weisberg  heteroscedasticity
test for the variables used in the OLS regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly
correlations. The test tests the null hypothesis of constant variance of  the residuals in the
regression.

                    Table 8: Correlation Matrix

 e(V)            dGDP      dInflation      dTCW        dVol        dRepo
 gGDP          1.0000
 Inf              -0.5574        1.0000
 dCurr            -0.1696        -0.1439        1.0000
 Vol             0.3858        0.2308        -0.1784        1.0000
 dRepo           0.1857        -0.6944        -0.4245        0.3623        1.0000
Note: The Table shows the correlation matrix between the explanatory variables in  the OLS
regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly correlations.

                Table 9: Variance Inflation Factors

 Variable                             VIF                      1/VIF
 dRepo                                2.28                     0.437680
 Vol                                   1.41                      0.709473
 dCurr                                  1.43                      0.701091
 gGDP                               1.56                    0.641901
 Inf                                     2.45                       0.408723
 Mean                                1.83
Note: The  Table shows the correlation matrix between the explanatory variables in the OLS
regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly correlations.

                                 36
            Graph 7: Bartlett’s Correlogram

Note: The  Bartlett’s correlogram  shows the  level of autocorrelation  for
different lags of the residuals from the OLS regression of the CCC(1,1)
modeled quarterly correlations.

             Graph 8:  Bartlett’s  Periodogram

   Note: The Bartlett’s periodogram shows distribution of residuals from the
   OLS regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly correlations.

                            37
           Table 10: Bartlett’s and Portmanteau (Q) test

Test                                  Statistic                  P-value
Portmanteau (Q) statistic                  27.1572                   0.2053
Bartlett's (B) statistic                     0.8569                    0.4509
Note: The Table shows P-values for Bartlett’s test and the Portmanteau (Q) test for the
residuals from the OLS regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly correlations. Both
tests use a null hypothesis of the residuals being a white-noise process of uncorrelated,
random variables, having a constant mean and constant variance.

                  Chart  1: Residual distribution

            Note: The chart shows the distribution and a Kernel density
            estimation curve for  the residuals  in  the OLS regression  of  the
           CCC(1,1)  modeled quarterly correlations, compared to a normal
             distribution curve.

                                 38
Table 11: Jarque-Bera  test  and  D’Agostini’s  Skewness & Kurtosis test

 Test for Residuals                         X2-statistic              P-value
 Jarque-Bera                                  0.3012                 0.8602
 Skewness & Kurtosis                          0.11                 0.9451
 Note: The table shows P-values for a Jarque-Bera test and D’Agostino’s Skewness &
 Kurtosis for the residuals from the OLS regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly
 correlations. Both tests use a null hypothesis of the residuals being normally distributed

                 Table 12: Ramsey’s RESET Test

  Test results
  F-statistic                                                       1.11
  P-value                                                     0.3557
 Note: The table shows P-values for Ramsey’s regression equation specification error test
 (RESET) using the variables used in the OLS regression of the CCC(1,1) modeled quarterly
 correlations. The test uses  a null hypothesis of that the relationship of between the response
 variable  and  the  explanatory  variable  is  best  fitted  when  using  the  current  linear
 relationships

                                  39