    Contracting on the Streets, Agency Problems in Term Sheets:
 A Case Study on Financial Contracts in the Swedish Venture Capital
                             Industry

         Casper Norden (23039)* Wilhelm Kugelberg (23189)**

                      Tutor: Associate Professor Daniel Metzger Ph.D.,
                  Department of  Finance at Stockholm School of Economics

                                        Abstract

This paper studies how a Stockholm-based venture capital firm addresses principal-agent conflicts and other
risks associated with startup investing through the design of its term sheets. We begin by  providing a detailed
review on the predictions of  financial  contract theory and proceed to assess its alignment with the term sheets
in our sample. We find that the term  sheets issued by our VC of study to a great extent align with the
predictions of theory. However, we also discover disparities between theory and the real world. Most
importantly, we find that the VC we study does not negotiate contingent control mechanisms to the extent
predicted by theory, implying that the VC is less concerned with assuming control in bad states of the world
than otherwise suggested.

                      Keywords:  Venture Capital, Term Sheet, Contract Theory

Acknowledgements:  we would like to thank our tutor Daniel Metzger, Lars Jörnow at EQT
Ventures, Staffan Helgesson at Creandum, and  everyone else who contributed to our thesis.

                                                                                  1
* 23039@student.hhs.se ** 23189@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents

1. Introduction                                                                     4

2. Literature Review                                                                5

3.  Theoretical Predictions on Financial Contracts                                        7
   3.1 Entrepreneur Effort and Moral Hazard                                            8
    3.2 Entrepreneur Ability and Adverse Selection                                         9
   3.3 Future Disagreements                                                         10
    3.4 Human Capital and Hold-up Problems                                             11
    3.5 Exit-Related Hold-Up Problems                                                     12
    3.6 Double-Sided Moral Hazard & Investor Effort                                       14
    3.7 External Risk                                                                 15
   3.8 Execution Risk                                                               16

4. Empirical Observations                                                         17
   4.1 Sample Description                                                           17
   4.2 Sample Limitations                                                            18

5. Term Sheet Components                                                      19
   5.1 Opening Information                                                         19
    5.2 Securities to be Issued                                                           19
    5.3 Capital Structure                                                               21
   5.4 Conversion                                                                  21
   5.5 Use of Proceeds                                                              21
   5.6 Employee Stock Option Program                                               22
    5.7 Participation Right                                                              22
    5.8 Exit                                                                          23
   5.9 Dividends                                                                   23
    5.10 Board Rights                                                                 24
    5.11 Protective Provisions                                                          24
   5.12 Voting Rights                                                                25
    5.13 Information Rights                                                            30
   5.14 Liquidation Preference and Liquidation Event                                     26
   5.15 Conversion                                                                26
    5.16 Right of First Refusal                                                            27
    5.17 Drag-Along                                                                   27
    5.18 Tag-Along                                                                    27
    5.19 Non-Competition and Non-Solicitation                                           28

                                                                                  2
    5.20 Founder Vesting, Lock-up, Good Leaver & Bad Leaver                              30
   5.21 Due Diligence                                                               28
    5.22 Warranties                                                                    29
   5.23 Fees and Expenses                                                           29
    5.24 Exclusivity and Confidentiality                                                  29
    5.25 Non-Binding Effect                                                             30
   5.26 Governing Law and Venue                                                   30

6. Empirical Observations in Relation to Theoretical Predictions                        30

7. Conclusion & Outlook                                                         32

8. References                                                                   33

9. Appendix                                                                    33

                                                                                  3
1. Introduction
Venture capital investments are subject to pronounced principal-agent conflicts, uncertainties
associated with the company’s outside environment and uncertainties related to difficulties of
operational execution (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004). If unresolved, these risks will deny some
promising startups funding and inhibit them from growing into mature companies (e.g. Ackerlöf,
1970; Brennan, 1987). A large body of literature has developed theory on how contract design can
solve or at least mitigate such risks  and their adverse effects. These theories dictate that
improvements in financial contracts should enable more promising startup companies to receive
financing, scarce resources to be allocated more efficiently, and improve the conditions for
entrepreneurs  and VCs to succeed in building large companies (e.g. Brennan, 1987). Empirical
literature has also emerged with the purpose of examining the alignment of theory with practice in
the real world (e.g. Kaplan & Strömberg 2003, 2004; Bengtsson & Sensoy, 2011;  Cummings &
Johan, 2013). This paper seeks to contribute to literature by examining real-world financial contracts
(“term sheets”) issued by a Stockholm-based venture capital firm (“VC”) when investing in Swedish
startups.
        Our paper is structured as a case study and examines three term sheets issued by an
established Stockholm-based VC. A term sheet is a non-binding offer by a VC to an entrepreneur
that outlines the basic terms and conditions under which the VC is willing to make an investment
(Metrick & Yasuda, 2011). If the entrepreneur accepts the offer, the VC proceeds to due diligence. If
the due diligence is successful, the parties sign a binding investment agreement. Whilst a term sheet
is non-binding, it serves as an anchor for the negotiations on the investment agreement. We have
chosen to use term sheets as the medium for our study as these contracts provide a simple yet
comprehensive representation of the contractual agreements that govern the relationship between
entrepreneurs and investors after  a venture capital investment (Metrick & Yasuda, 2011).
        Our case study is divided in two parts and begins by reviewing the predictions of theoretical
literature on contract design as well as the findings of empirical work. We then move on to
introduce the  terms sheets in our sample, provide detailed descriptions on their various components,
and examine these components through the theoretical perspective developed in the first part of our
paper. As a final exercise, we assess the extent to which the term sheets in our sample comply with
the predictions of theoretical literature. Whilst we find that the term sheets in our sample to a great
extent align with the predictions of theory, we also identify deviations. Most significantly, we find
that the VC we study does not negotiate contingent control to the extent predicted by theory,

                                                                                  4
implying that the VC is less concerned with downside protection than theory envisions. This
observation could be an interesting starting point for future research.
       Our paper is  organized  as follows. First, related literature and gaps are outlined.
Second, we provide a review of theoretical and empirical literature on financial contracts relevant to
venture capital. Third, we introduce our sample and provide detailed descriptions about each of their
components and comment on their alignment with theoretical predictions and previous empirical
findings. Fourth and final, we discuss our findings and conclude.

2. Literature Review
The principal-agent relationship and its inherent conflicts is the most well-developed aspect of
contract theory. In fact, most VC-related contract theory centers on how agency conflicts affect
security design, contract design, ex-ante information collection and ex-post monitoring (Kaplan &
Strömberg, 2004). Theoretical literature on financial contracting in a VC-setting spans  across the
entire investment lifecycle, i.e. from the screening and selection of targets, to contracting,
monitoring and exiting of portfolio companies (Burchardt et al, 2016). Whilst a large body of
theoretical work has been completed on how contract design can address agency conflicts between
VCs and their portfolio companies, empirical support is less developed (Burchardt et al, 2016). Also,
an important notion about existing empirical work is its stark concentration on the U.S. venture
capital industry.  Despite the  globalization  of the venture capital industry in recent years, few
empirical studies provide an international dimension that accounts for regional differences. In this
context, this paper aims to serve two purposes: (i) to bridge the research  gap between theory and
practice by providing a detailed study of the contracts issued by an established venture capital firm,
and (ii) offer an international dimension to, and contribute with a new regional extension on,
existing empirical literature through focusing on the Swedish venture capital industry.
        Since our paper is not theoretical in nature and because we provide a detailed review of the
predictions of VC-related contract theory in the following section, we will not account for it in this
section. However, given the nature and focus of our study, a more comprehensive review of related
empirical literature is motivated.
        Notable empirical research on financial contracts in venture capital includes the work of
Kaplan and Strömberg (2003, 2004) as  well as Cummings & Johan (2013). Kaplan and Strömberg
(2003) study a sample of 213 investments in 119 portfolio companies by 14 VC firms. Whilst they
find that the analysis of their sample to a large degree supports the predictions of principal agent

                                                                                  5
theories (e.g. Holmström, 1979) and control theories (e.g. Aghion and Bolton, 1992), they find that
real world contracts are more complex than theory predicts and therefore conclude that more
theoretical research on the subject is motivated. In their 2004 paper the authors pursue extended
analysis on 67 portfolio investments by 11 VCs, a subset of the sample in their 2003 paper, by
constructing direct measures of risk and uncertainty, rather than using indirect measures such as firm
age, firm size and industry  R&D intensity. By doing this, they are able to offer a more nuanced
description of how VCs design contracts in response to risks and uncertainties
       Cummings and Johan (2013) provide a broad study on venture capital contracts and use
several different samples to  analyze  different aspects of contracts design. Their perhaps most
relevant work relates to their analysis of 223 entrepreneurial firms financed by 35 VCs in 11
European countries in the context of security design. Important to note however is that most of
their data is interview-  and survey-based. Also, neither any ventures nor any VCs in their sample are
Swedish. Their study provides several interesting results regarding institutional differences between
Europe and the U.S., such as for example the use of convertible securities in the U.S., which is not
observed to the same extent in their European sample.
        Whilst the previously mentioned empirical studies differ in their scope and analysis, they
both have in common that their data is increasingly outdated. The sample of Cummings & Johan
(2013) stretches across the period of 1995-2002, and the sample of Kaplan and Strömberg (2003)
stretches between 1996 and 1999. Neither study thus accounts for any possible changes in contract
design practice after the 2008 financial crisis. Furthermore, Kaplan and Strömberg’s sample with
certainty also does not account for any possible changes in contract design practice after the Dot-
Com Bubble of 2000, a weakness that Cummings and Johan’s sample most likely shares.  Given that
the term sheets in our sample were all issued during 2016 (except for one, which was issued in late
December of 2015), we believe that our study offers an up-to-date perspective on contract design
practice.

                                                                                  6
3. Theoretical Predictions on Financial Contracts
Most financial contracting theory centers around principal-agent conflicts. These conflicts exist in
essentially every contractual agreement between two or more parties and arise as a result of
information asymmetry and moral hazard. More  specifically, principal-agent conflicts occur when
parties have different interests and information, when the agent is able to make decisions on behalf
of the principal, and when the principal cannot directly ensure that the agent is acting in the
principal’s best interest.
         In venture capital the main principal-agent relationship of focus is that between the
VC/investor/principal and the entrepreneur/agent. Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) outline four
generic agency problems that VCs face: (i) the concern that the entrepreneur will not work hard to
maximize value after the investment is made (ii) the concern that the entrepreneur knows more
about his/her ability than the VC (iii) the understanding that post-investment disagreements
between the parties may arise where the VC may want to take control of the company (iv) hold-up
concerns where the entrepreneur threatens to abandon the company. Most VC-related contract
theory aims to address how these agency problems affect security design, contract design, ex-ante
information collection and ex-post monitoring (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004).
        Because the above mentioned risks are directly related to the individual venture and the
relationship between the contractual parties such risks are denoted internal risks. However, venture
capital investments also involve external risks that relate to the venture’s outside environment and
that are equally uncertain for both parties. Examples of external risks are uncertainties regarding the
future customer demand for the venture’s  products, the response and development of the
competitive landscape, and the state and appetite of financial markets when investors seek to exit
their investment. Contract theory predicts that also external risks influence the design of venture
capital contracts. However, these predictions are weaker than those regarding internal risks and far
less pronounced (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004).
        Finally, venture capital investments also face risks that are equally uncertain to both parties
but that to some extent are under the control of the entrepreneur (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004).
These risks are commonly referred to as executions risks and are by definition neither internal nor
external. The two main types of execution risks featured in venture capital investments  are
uncertainties relating to the difficulty of executing on the venture’s strategy and developing the
venture’s technology.

                                                                                  7
        We will now review the predictions of contract theory relating to internal, external and
execution risks inherent in venture capital investments in order to provide a theoretical context in
which to  analyze  the term sheets in our sample.

3.1 Entrepreneur  Effort and Moral Hazard
The first generic agency conflict outlined by Kaplan and Strömberg, moral hazard relating to the
unwillingness of entrepreneurs to  maximize  firm value after a venture capital investment, stems
from two observations. First, that VCs  face difficulties and costs in observing the entrepreneur’s
efforts, and second that a venture capital investment disaligns the objectives of entrepreneurs and
VCs. The disalignment of objectives is rooted in the notion that a venture capital investment allows
the entrepreneur to diversify risk at the expense of the investor. Prior to investment all, or at least a
great portion, of the entrepreneur’s future wealth is tied to the performance of the firm. But with the
infusion of capital into the firm the entrepreneur is able to receive payoff, e.g. salary and dividends,
in more states of the world. A venture capital investment thus alters or at least relaxes the incentives
for the entrepreneur to pursue the VC’s objectives, which is to maximize firm value. Contract theory
assumes that VCs are sophisticated investors who are aware that their investments give rise to issues
of moral hazard and predicts that they will tie the entrepreneur’s compensation to performance to
realign the entrepreneur’s incentives with their own. Furthermore, contract theory predicts that the
degree of this relationship will be positively correlated with the extent of the underlying information
problem (Kaplan Strömberg, 2004).
       The moral hazard problem in venture capital is intricate and not only  materializes  through
low effort by the entrepreneur. Theoretical literature predicts that contracts are designed to not only
protect VCs from negligence (low effort), but also from another type of expropriation  -  malice
(Metrick and Yasuda, 2011). Perhaps better understood as stealing or self-dealing, malice can be
defined as activities that involve indirectly transferring funds from the venture to the
agent/entrepreneur, e.g. by contracting expensive services from friends or selling assets at
underprice to relatives. Whilst one may reason that performance-contingent compensation schemes
should mitigate also such  behavior, contract theory predicts that VCs will construct contracts that
include also specific protections against expropriation beyond those inherent in a performance-
based compensation scheme.
        Literature suggests that VCs will include separate control rights in their contracts because
monetary incentive schemes are not enough to discipline managers and protect investors from

                                                                                  8
expropriation (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994). First, VCs often receive board rights to mitigate the
information gap underlying the moral hazard problem and exert influence on management decisions
(Lerner, 1995). However, whilst board representation provides some degree of influence, empirical
literature shows that VCs seldom receive board seat majority, implying that such actions are unable
to guarantee absolute authority in enforcing certain decisions (Bengtsson & Sensoy, 2011).
Therefore, as an alternative solution, VCs often include negative covenants (hereafter referred to as
protective provisions) that give VCs the right to veto certain decisions. Whilst protective provisions
theoretically could be related to a range of decisions, empirical research shows that protective
provisions mainly concern financing decisions, the sale and acquisition of assets, the hiring of talent,
compensation to executives, and capital expenditure (Bengtsson & Sensoy, 2011; Hellman 1998).
Contract theory predicts that the prevalence and magnitude of VC board rights is positively
correlated with the magnitude of the underlying information problem and monitoring costs (Lerner,
1995).

3.2 Entrepreneur Ability and Adverse Selection
As opposed to moral hazard, which stems from ex post information asymmetry, Kaplan and
Strömberg’s second generic agency problem deals with the conflicts resulting from ex ante
information asymmetry. Because entrepreneurs know more about their own ability than the VC
does, VCs face tangible risks relating to adverse selection. Theoretical literature predicts that VCs
can mitigate such risks by designing contracts that appeal more to desirable entrepreneurs whose
ability to a greater degree corresponds to that which is sought by the VC.
        First, Lazear (1986) shows  that contracts with more performance-contingent compensation
can prevent exploitation by the entrepreneur and mitigate adverse selection through self-selection,
i.e. that only good entrepreneurs will agree on investments that have such conditions attached.
Second, Diamond (1991) shows that entrepreneurs whose private information indicates a lower risk
of default are more prone to accepting stricter liquidation terms. Hence, VCs can more accurately
separate good entrepreneurs from bad by including stringent  liquidation rights and performance-
contingent compensation schemes in their contracts.
        Theoretical literature on financial contracts also predicts that VCs can leverage their choice
of financial instrument to separate good entrepreneurs from bad and mitigate issues of adverse
selection (Cumming & Johan, 2013). Because bad entrepreneurs, whose private information indicate
low expected returns, face low opportunity cost in giving up ownership, these entrepreneurs will be

                                                                                  9
more willing to accept the use of common equity. On the other hand, entrepreneurs whose private
information suggests high variability in returns (and the possibility of a very high future valuation)
face high opportunity costs in giving up ownership, leading these entrepreneurs to  favor  preferred
equity and non-convertible debt (Stiglitz & Weiss, 1981). The reasoning being that this awards
investors lower ownership stakes but greater seniority.
        Entrepreneurs who don’t necessarily expect low returns, but do expect low variability in
returns, will  favor  convertible securities (Brennan, 1987). This observation is not only useful for
VCs, but also for “good” entrepreneurs, as the above implies that the security choice allows
entrepreneurs to reveal private information credibly to investors and signal their superior ability.
        Another possible avenue for solving problems of adverse selection supported by theoretical
literature involves contingent control rights. Dessein (2005) shows that investor control follows an
increasing function of ex ante information asymmetry and that increased investor control can
function as a signaling mechanism for entrepreneur ability and objectives. Given that contingent
control rights shift control to investors in only bad states of the world, good entrepreneurs face low
opportunity cost in giving up such control rights to investors. Good entrepreneurs can thus signal
their quality by relinquishing some of their control rights and by allowing investors to specify
contingency-based control rights.
       To summarize, VCs face  adverse selection problems in the investment process due to
information asymmetry regarding the entrepreneur’s own ability. To mitigate such problems,
theoretical literature suggest that VCs will design contracts that to a higher degree make
compensation contingent on performance, feature stronger liquidation rights, and  utilize  preferred
equity or convertible securities in structuring their investments. Furthermore, theoretical literature
predicts that VCs will negotiate stronger contingency-based control  rights when facing greater
information asymmetry problems and greater risks of adverse selection.

3.3 Future Disagreements
The perhaps most fundamental criteria for a venture capital investment is that the VC and
entrepreneur agree on the vision and execution plan for a venture ex ante. However, VCs are
sophisticated investors who  realize  that venture capital investments are risky and that reality ex post
seldom unfolds according to the ex ante plan. With this in mind, VCs understand that there is
significant probability of situations unfolding after the investment where the VC and entrepreneur
find themselves in disagreement. In such situations, the VC will want to take control of the venture

                                                                                 10
and enforce decisions. Contract theory  recognizes  that financial  contracts are inherently incomplete
and that it is impossible for contracts to account for all possible conflicts between parties ex ante.
Given this notion, contract theory predicts that VCs and entrepreneurs will construct mechanisms
for the contingent  allocation of control in order to allow the VC to enforce decisions in some states
of the world and the entrepreneur in others.
        Contract theory outlines a range of mechanisms that support contingent allocation of
control. The most fundamental mechanism involves the capital structure choice between voting
equity and debt. Pioneered by Aghion and Bolton (1992), this approach suggests that entrepreneurs
seek a financial structure that balances the giving up of control to new shareholders against the
possibility of default, in which debt investors seize control of the venture. However, theory predicts
VCs will negotiate more comprehensive control rights beyond those inherent in the financial
relationship (Kirilenko, 2001). As previously mentioned, theoretical literature predicts that VCs will
negotiate control rights separate from cash flow rights to mitigate issues of moral hazard. However,
theoretical literature also predicts the use of separate and distinct control rights for the purpose of
ensuring contingent control mechanisms relating to ex post disagreements. For example, theory
suggests that VCs will seek to include specific control shifting covenants in order to assume control
in more states of the world and construct a more multifaceted control allocation scheme that not
only accounts for extreme situations, such as e.g. default (Chan, 1990). Another prediction of theory
is that VCs will want to include the right to discharge and replace senior management in order to
enforce their decisions (Hellman, 1998).
        To summarize, VCs understand that their investments are risky and that future
disagreements with the entrepreneur may arise when they will want to assume control and enforce
decisions. To ensure such capabilities, contract theory predicts that VCs will construct contingent
control allocation mechanisms beyond those implied by their financial relationship with the
entrepreneur. These mechanisms include control shifting covenants, such as the right to discharge
and replace management.

3.4 Human Capital  and Hold-up Problems
In simplified terms, the VC screening phase can be described as comprising of two tests, the market
test and the management test (Metrick and Yasuda, 2011). Many VCs (including those interviewed in
this study) openly state that, whilst they in theory invest in companies, in practice they invest in
entrepreneurs and their perceived ability to build successful companies. Given that VCs assign the

                                                                                 11
entrepreneur’s human capital  high value, VCs are concerned about the possibility of the
entrepreneur “holding up” the VC by threatening to leave the venture (Hart & Moore, 1994).
Literature shows that concerns of hold-up situations follow an increasing function of the perceived
portion of human capital to total firm value and is usually regarded  particularly high in very young
companies, e.g. in pre-product or pre-launch ventures (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003).
        Contract theory makes several predictions relating to the entrepreneurial hold-up problem.
First, theory predicts that contracts are more likely to feature investment staging when the
entrepreneur’s human capital is particularly valuable (Burchardt et. al, 2016). In such cases, and when
the entrepreneur cannot commit to not renegotiating the investor’s claim once the investment has
been “sunk”  into the venture, staging allows the VC to build up collateral in the venture through the
entrepreneur’s work during the first round of investment in anticipation of following rounds (Neher,
1999). Since staging allows the investor the freedom to refuse further investment participation,
staging also adds value to the VCs investment in the form of a value-enhancing real option of exiting
the investment (Bigus, 2006). Furthermore, contract theory suggests that VCs will incorporate
vesting provisions that delay the effectiveness of the entrepreneur’s ownership claim in order to
mitigate entrepreneurial hold-up (Cumming & Johan 2013). Empirical literature finds that vesting
provisions are more common and pronounced in pre revenue investments, indicating that the
vesting provisions are positively correlated with the human capital to firm value ratio (Kaplan &
Strömberg, 2003).

3.5 Exit-Related Hold-Up Problems
VCs are financial intermediaries who invest capital on behalf of their investors and have a
contractual obligation to return capital to these investors within a given timeframe (Metrick &
Yasuda, 2011). Therefore, in addition to investing and monitoring, a  key activity for VCs is exiting.
Given the central importance of a successful exit to the VC, it seems natural that VCs will want to
secure their ability to pursue the most attractive exit opportunity when needed and solve possible
exit-related hold-up problems prior to investment. Indeed, contract theory suggests that exits often
give rise to conflicts of interest and makes several  predictions  about their influence on financial
contracts.
        A VC can take several different exit routes when disinvesting from  a successful venture but
typically pursues either an initial public offering (IPO) or a trade sale (acquisition) since these
options tend to offer the most lucrative returns. Given this observation, VCs preplan their exit

                                                                                 12
outcomes only as IPOs or acquisitions (Cumming & Johan 2013). Hence, VCs tend to design
contracts to ensure their ability to complete an IPO or a trade sale.
        Preplanned acquisition exits have greater effects on contracts than preplanned IPOs
(Cumming & Johan, 2013). In the event of a trade sale, the entrepreneur is effectively removed from
the venture as the CEO (Black & Gilson, 1998) and may therefore oppose the VC’s exit decision to
protect private owner-manager benefits (Cumming & Johan, 2013). Furthermore, entrepreneurs
usually find permanent ousting from the firm they founded very emotional, adding to their
reluctance to agree on an acquisition exit. In contrast, entrepreneurs retain control of their venture
in case of an IPO exit, rendering it less likely that they should engage in hold-up activities under
such circumstances (Cummings & Johan 2013).
        Contract theory predicts that VCs who preplan acquisition exits and anticipate a potential
conflict of interest with the entrepreneur will seek to negotiate stronger control rights and protective
provisions (Cumming & Johan 2013). First, VCs may negotiate greater veto rights, as these can be
used as threat points in negotiation and influence the exit outcome (Cumming & Johan 2013).
Secondly, VCs with exit hold-up concerns will seek to negotiate greater control rights, such as the
right to replace the entrepreneur as CEO, which is deemed particularly relevant in relation to exit
hold-up situations (Cumming & Johan 2013). Thirdly, theory predicts that VCs can mitigate exit-
related hold-up problems by including drag-along rights (forcing the entrepreneur to sell at the same
terms as the VC). Furthermore, VCs will negotiate redemption rights in cases of exit-related hold-up
concerns, which force the entrepreneur to redeem the VC’s shares and are  particularly effective if
the entrepreneur is not in the financial position to do so. Veto power of issuance of new equity
through protective  provisions can  also be used to solve exit-related hold up problems, as these give
the VC more bargaining power over additional financing rounds (Cummings & Johan, 2013). Whilst
theory predicts that stronger control rights in general allow VCs to mitigate exit-related hold-up
problems, the above mentioned rights are regarded as particularly effective. Whilst most theoretical
literature on exit-related hold-up problems deals with how VCs contractually can secure the ability to
divest from a well-performing venture, contract theory also predicts that VCs will negotiate control
rights that protect them from the entrepreneur wanting to sell the venture. To remedy such
concerns, theory predicts that VCs will include co-sale rights (tag-along rights), and right of first
refusal (Cumming & Johan, 2013).

                                                                                 13
3.6 Double-Sided Moral Hazard & Investor Effort
An extensive body of empirical and theoretical literature has come to support the notion that the
relationship between VCs and entrepreneurs is far more complex than a simple up-front capital
transaction in return for future cash flows (e.g. Casamatta, 2003). VCs are active investors who
remain deeply involved in their portfolio companies after investment and offer a range of value-
enhancing services to promote the growth of their holdings. Some of the most recognized value-
added services include assistance  on hiring (Hellmann & Puri, 2002), monitoring of the firm (Lerner,
1995), managerial advice (e.g. relating to business strategy, financial policy, implementation of
organizational  structures, sourcing) (e.g. Metrick & Yasuda 2011), and business introductions to
other portfolio companies (Lindsey, 2008). Such services can be highly valuable to entrepreneurs,
especially if the entrepreneur does not have a background in business or experience from running a
company. The promise of such benefits can have a profound influence on the entrepreneur’s choice
of which VC to partner with, or even the decision to raise venture capital in the first place. In fact,
empirical literature has shown that VCs who are known to provide value-added service invest at a
significant discount (Hsu, 2004). Given this notion, entrepreneurs want to mitigate any problems of
moral hazard by the VC (commonly referred to as “double-sided moral hazard”), i.e. concerns that
the VC will not contribute effort in the venture through value-added  services. Contract theory
therefore predicts that entrepreneurs will negotiate contracts that  incentivize  VCs to undertake
supportive actions (Kaplan Strömberg 2003).
        First, literature shows that the allocation of cash flow rights affect the effort that VCs will
contribute to the venture (Cummings & Johan, 2013). Casamatta (2003) predicts that VC effort
increases with the VC’s equity stake in the venture, which is confirmed by empirical literature
(Kaplan Strömberg, 2003). Moreover, contract theory predicts that entrepreneurs will  favor
convertible securities (convertible debt or convertible preferred equity) rather than common equity
when concerned about investor moral hazard, since such securities provide effort incentives to
investors both in good states  of the world and in states of financial distress (Cumming & Johan,
2013; Schmidt, 2003; Houben, 2002). Second, empirical literature supports that the allocation of
control rights has an impact on VC effort. Cumming & Johan (2013) show that VC effort, especially
advising, increases with the level of control given to the VC in the form of veto rights. Kaplan
Strömberg (2004) also shows that management intervention from the VC is related to VC board
control. This suggests that entrepreneurs can address concerns about low VC effort through
offering the VC control rights, such as veto rights and board rights.

                                                                                 14
        To summarize, entrepreneurs seek venture capital not only for the direct benefits of a capital
injections, but also to benefit the value-added services that VCs can provide. In order to ensure the
realization  of such services, entrepreneurs will give VCs greater cash flow and control rights to
incentivize  VC effort.

3.7 External Risk
As previously mentioned, venture capital investments not only involve internal risks that result from
imperfections in the principal-agent relationship, but also involve external risks that result from
uncertainties about the venture’s outside environment. Unlike internal risks, external risks are equally
uncertain for the investor and the entrepreneur and relate for example to uncertainties about future
customer demand for the venture’s products, the competitive landscape, and the state and appetite
of financial markets when investors seek to exit their investment (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004).
        Theoretical literature predicts that a higher degree of external risk will lead VCs to require
stronger control rights (Kirilenko, 2001). This is consistent with the empirical literature of Kaplan
and Strömberg (2004) which finds that external risk is associated with more VC board control.
Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) also find that VCs negotiate stronger redemption and liquidation
rights when external risks are greater, indicating that external risks also affect contractual cash flow
rights.
        An particularly interesting aspect of Kaplan and Strömberg empirical study (2004) is that
higher external risk is associated with more performance-contingent compensation. Contract theory
namely includes both arguments for and against such compensation schemes. First, one avenue of
literature argues that external risks make VC monitoring less efficient and that VCs as a result will
seek to mitigate ex post information asymmetries through making compensation more contingent
(Prendergast, 2002) and negotiating stronger control rights (Dessein, 2005). On the other hand,
traditional moral hazard theories argue that the entrepreneur’s compensation should not be made
contingent on factors that the entrepreneur cannot control, e.g. external risks, because such actions
would create an unhealthy division of risk between the risk-averse entrepreneur and the risk-neutral
VC (Holmström, 1979). Empirical literature thus suggests that VCs regard monitoring more
important than risk-sharing concerns when considering external risk (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004).

                                                                                 15
3.8 Execution Risk
Kaplan and Strömberg (2004) outline three broad categories of risks associated with the venture
capital investment process that affect contract design. Having in previous sections accounted for the
first two, internal and external risk, we now move on to describe and  analyze  the third and final
category, execution risk. Execution risk is risk associated with uncertainties about the difficulty to
realize  the venture’s business plan and making the venture’s product and technology work. These
risks are to some extent under the entrepreneur’s control (therefore not external), but by nature still
equally uncertain to both parties (therefore not internal), and hence require separate analysis (Kaplan
& Strömberg, 2004).
        Ventures that feature high execution risk are more reliant on the entrepreneur’s human
capital. Contract theory therefore predicts that execution risks expand the hold-up problem
developed by Hart & Moore (1994), suggesting that VCs will negotiate stricter vesting schemes for
entrepreneurs of such ventures in line with the reasoning in previous sections on entrepreneurial
hold-up problems (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004). Furthermore, theory also suggests that ventures
with high execution risk will feature contracts with more relaxed VC liquidation rights, since
collateral value is lower in ventures where more firm value is tied to the entrepreneur’s human
capital. In fact, empirical literature supports predictions that founder vesting provisions increase
with execution risk and that VC liquidation rights decrease with external risk (Kaplan & Strömberg,
2004)
        Execution risk is particularly high in ventures that require entrepreneurs to perform complex
and multidimensional tasks. In such ventures, success hinges on the entrepreneur handling all
aspects of the business, as opposed to spending too much effort on only one area and neglecting
others. Following this reasoning, contract theory predicts that execution risk is negatively correlated
with performance-contingent compensation schemes (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2004), as such
mechanisms tend to  incentivize  the entrepreneur to focus on a particular aspect of the business
instead of the bigger picture (Holmström & Milgrom, 1991).
        In closing, venture capital  investments feature risks associated with difficulties of execution.
Such risks make the entrepreneur's human capital more valuable relative the firm’s total value,
suggesting VCs will negotiate stronger vesting provisions and more relaxed liquidation rights.
Furthermore, theory predicts that execution risk decreases performance-contingent compensation.

                                                                                 16
4. Empirical Observations
Having reviewed the predictions of contract theory we now move on to examine our sample. First,
we begin by describing our sample  and its limitations. Second, we move on to examining each term
sheet component and the different variations found in our sample. Each term sheet component is
analyzed  in a separate section, beginning with a simple description of the component. Next, we
analyze  each term sheet component in the light of our previous theoretical discussion. Lastly, we
evaluate the effectiveness of our sample in mitigating the risks and uncertainties pertaining to
financial contracts in a separate discussion.

4.1 Sample  Description
Our sample consists of term sheets from three successfully completed series A investments in an
equal number of firms by one Swedish venture capital firm. The term sheets in our sample are all
based on one template used by the VC in question, and their differences reflect the unique qualities
of each investment, as well as the negotiation process between the VC and each respective founding
team. The fact that the term sheets in our sample each feature distinct deviations from their
common origin, indicates that the VC in question  customizes  its contracts to fit the unique qualities
of each target firm and evaluates the risks and negotiation prospects of each deal.
        Although we as part of our research have had access to a larger sample of term sheets, we
have chosen to limit the final sample of our case study to three term sheets. The reasoning is as
follows. First, we have chosen to limit our case study to venture capital investments in Swedish
companies because we want to exclude any effects of differences in legal systems. For similar
reasons, we have also chosen to limit our study to Sweden-based venture capital firms. Second, we
have chosen to limit our study to one venture capital firm, as we were generously granted access to
all their term sheets fitting our previously mentioned criteria and believe that our case study offers
more value if we (i) exclude the risk of including culture-  and process-specific differences across
venture capital firms, and (ii) exclude any selection biases inherent  in any VC’s choice of what term
sheets to share with us. At this point of filtration, our sample consisted of four term sheets. As a
final step, we decided to drop on term sheet from our sample for the reason that we wanted all term
sheets to feature similar investment rounds, that is, series A investment rounds. The fourth, now
excluded term sheets related to a seed-stage investment, which according to representatives of the
VC in question is not common practice for the firm and should be regarded as a definite outlier. As
a final remark, we believe that it is relevant to mention that all term sheets in our sample are less

                                                                                 17
than eighteen months old and therefore are appropriate also from a time and business cycle
perspective.
        To summarize, our sample consists of three term sheets relating to three series A
investments in Swedish companies by one Sweden-based venture capital firm. We have constructed
the scope of our study to minimize bias relating to geography, legal context, culture-  and process-
specific differences across firms, investment stage, time, and business cycle. Because each term sheet
in our sample also has its origin in the same document, we believe that we have constructed our
sample in a optimal way with regards to our aim of examining how a professional Swedish venture
capital firm leverages contract design to mitigates risks and agency conflicts.

4.2 Sample Limitations
When considering the limitations of our sample it is important to first note that our sample should
be viewed in the context  of a case study. The nature of a case study puts obvious limitations on the
conclusions that can be drawn from such a work and we caution our readers to be careful in taking
the findings of our study out of their context. That said, our sample has further  limitations that
require mentioning.
        First, the term sheets in our sample are subject to the effects of bargaining power between
the respective founders and the VC. The scope of our sample is limited to the content of our term
sheets, and hence do not take into account outside variables such as the competitive nature of the
deal and other factors related to the bargaining power between the parties. Second, the companies
that are the subject of our term sheets operate in different industries, a variable that we also do not
account for in our study. Third, the term sheets in our sample were issued in a range of 12 months,
implying that our sample is vulnerable to effects relating to economic market conditions, something
we have not adjusted for. Fourth, whilst our term sheets all feature series A investments, they
feature different investment sizes and different company valuations. Our sample does not assume
the granularity to account for such differences and instead treats all contracts equally in the context
of a series A investment. Fifth and finally, one should assume that each venture capital investment is
grounded in a unique investment hypothesis, that is a unique formulation about what such an
investment should achieve and how the investment target should use the proceeds from the
investment. As an example, one term sheets may be structured under the assumption that the
investment will be the last capital injection required before the company can finance its own growth,
whilst other term sheets may be structured with the intention of facilitating additional capital

                                                                                 18
injections in future investment rounds. Such strategies would most definitely have an impact on the
design of a term sheets and constitute a variable that we do not account for in our case study.

5. Term Sheet Components
In the following section we investigate the components found in our sample of term sheets. We
begin by describing each component and their respective purpose and then move on to  analyzing
each component in the light of our previous theoretical discussion. For illustrative purposes, we
have attached a term sheet template in appendix. The term sheets will be referred to a term sheet A,
B and C respectively.

5.1 Opening Information
The very  first sentence in in all our terms sheets reads as follows: “the following is a summary of the
principal terms with respect to the proposed investment”. It serves as brief introduction on the
purpose of the document and expresses the intention of the VC to  make an investment in the firm.
The sentence also alludes the non-binding character of the document and the fact that the terms are
to be seen as an outline subject to further negotiations. The section then stipulates the document’s
stakeholders, what company the investment is regarding, who the founder and investor is, the size of
the investment and the proposed subscription price.

5.2 Securities to be Issued
The next item in our term sheets states the type of securities that will be issued upon investment.
The terms sheets in our sample are diverse from a securities choice perspective and feature common
shares, convertible debt, and convertible preferred shares. Preferred shares are featured in term
sheets B and C, whilst A combines common shares and convertible debt.
        The type of securities used by a VC when investing in portfolio companies can be classified
into three main types, each with distinct characteristics and contractual implications. As mentioned,
our sample feature all three types. The first  option available to the VC is to use common shares that
have no control or cash flow rights beyond those implied by the financial relationship. Holders of
this security type are vulnerable to decisions of majority shareholders. Common shares are
predominantly issued in very early stages of the firm and to people who already have a trust
relationship with the entrepreneur, such as friends or family (Smeele, 2014).

                                                                                 19
        Convertible debt can be issued as an alternative to common shares. Convertible debt is a
form  of hybrid security that initially functions as a debt instrument but can be converted to equity at
a later point in time. The terms for conversion will be discussed thoroughly in a separate section. As
debt has seniority over equity the investor is better  protected in a bankruptcy while the convertibility
gives the investor an upside if the company performs well. The use of convertible debt is
advantageous in situations where the parties for some reason cannot, or will not, agree on a
valuation of the firm.  The issuance of convertible debt is also less complicated from a legal
perspective as the investor can piggyback on the terms set in later rounds. This security choice is
more commonly used by angel investors than by VCs as they invest in earlier stages and are less able
to engage in costly contracting and valuation activities. Entrepreneurs are also likely to request the
use of convertible debt in early stages as the degree of uncertainty regarding valuation is high (Linde,
2000).
        The third option is the  use of convertible preferred shares. Preferred shares have all
characteristics of common stock but in addition the holder has seniority in the event of default. The
holders of preferred shares will have their claim to assets fully satisfied before any other
shareholders receive proceeds from a liquidation. Besides this the preferred majority is often
contractually entitled to additional rights which will be discussed in greater detail under the
respective provisions. The terms for conversion of preferred shares into common shares are listed
under a separate provision in the term sheet.
        As outlined in our theoretical discussion the use of preferred shares is often favored by VCs
as it makes the entrepreneur more inclined to exert effort. The seniority of preferred shares will
cause the entrepreneur's wealth to remain dependent on the performance on the firm post
investment and makes liquidation more  unfavorable  for him or her as a holder of common stock. As
mentioned, research has also shown a tendency for entrepreneurs to self-select and to be more
willing to accept  harsh  liquidation terms if they possess private information indicating that
liquidation is unlikely (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003). Alas, issuance of preferred shares mitigates the
issue of adverse selection as an entrepreneur who knows that their own ability is poor and that the
business is likely to fail will be reluctant to issue such shares. Investments in common stock would
on the other hand be beneficial for an entrepreneur with low ability as a  liquidation of their
company would give them access to funds supplied by the outside investor. The use of common
stock and convertible debt in term sheet A suggests that the entrepreneur had significant leverage as
contracting theory predicts that a VC will favor preferred shares whenever possible.

                                                                                 20
5.3 Capital Structure
In all our term sheet we notice that the capital structure post investment will feature significant
ownership by the entrepreneur. The practice of only acquiring a minority stake contributes to the
entrepreneur retaining strong incentives to maximize firm value also post investment.

5.4 Conversion
Term sheet A features debt which can be converted into equity. This convertibility is doubled-sided
as both the VC and the firm can trigger conversion. The VC has the option to convert at any point
in time while conversion at the discretion of the firm is  conditional upon the achievement of three
out of four specified milestones.
        The implicit relationship between firm performance and the value of holding debt, rather
than equity, is inversely correlated. If the firm is struggling and faces risk of liquidation the VC will
prefer to not have its debt converted. However, the holders of stock will be interested in eliminating
the seniority of the convertible debt by triggering conversion. Conversely, in states of the world in
which the firm performs well the expected yield from equity will be higher than the expected value
of the debt and therefore the VC will trigger conversion.
       By making conversion by the firm contingent on milestones the VC can commit to
relinquish seniority in good states of the world while  still protecting itself from involuntary
conversion in bad states of the world. The success or failure of a firm in the startup phase often
hinges on few critical partnerships, patents or other uncertain developments. The VC effectively
limits part of its  exposure to both external and internal risks until the milestones has been achieved.
Additionally, this provision incentivizes the entrepreneur to achieve the milestones and provides an
instrument for him or her to credibly signal private information regarding the likelihood of achieving
said milestones.

5.5 Use of Proceeds
All term sheets in our sample give a brief description of what the proceeds from the issuance are to
be used for. The use of the proceeds is stated as follows: “[The use of proceeds] shall be used to
finance further growth and expansion as will be agreed upon in the business plan of the company”.
The statement then continues with an explanation regarding said business plan and states that it is
“to be agreed between the parties in connection with the investment or as soon as possible
following closing and attached to the shareholders’ agreement.”

                                                                                 21
        This item ensures that the VC and entrepreneur will be in agreement as to what the funds
supplied by the VC are to be used for once the investment is complete. The formation of a business
plan with tangible goals and budget is valuable as it puts in print what the VC and entrepreneur have
agreed upon. This document can later be used to evaluate firm performance and makes deviations
from said business plan obvious.

5.6 Employee Stock Option Program
The last item in our term sheets that relates to capital structure is the employee stock option
program (“ESOP”) clause. All of the term sheets in our sample contain a provision regarding the
establishment of an ESOP of ten percent of the shares. An ESOP is a pool of shares that is
earmarked for options that allow for future purchases of shares by key personnel at a fixed price.
The strike price is set above the current valuation but below the valuation  which the VC and
entrepreneur believe the firm can reach if the managers are competent and exert effort.
        The use of options serves two main purposes. Firstly, it attracts superior management as
options appear more appealing to managers whose private information suggests high ability.
Secondly, it motivates managers to exert effort as it aligns the incentives of the team with the those
of the entrepreneur and the investors by making compensation contingent on firm performance. A
third benefit of a large ESOP is that it shifts compensation of managers to a later point in time and
thus limits the effects on current cash flows. A drawback is that the use of ESOP exposes the
compensation of managers to external risks as the success of the firm is dependent on factors
outside of management’s control (Hand, 2008).
        The size of the option pool depends the investment stage, the size of the firm, the number
of key roles as well expectations of future financing and hiring. Most VCs will negotiate an ESOP of
around 10 to  20 per cent (Smeele, 2014). The size of the ESOP will often be controversial as it is
issued ex ante, meaning that it will dilute the entrepreneur's stake. The benefits of a large ESOP are
shared between the entrepreneur and VC, while the effects of dilution are borne solely by the
entrepreneur (Deng, 2014).

5.7 Participation Right
The term sheets in our sample all feature a participation rights clause formulated as follows: “the
investor will have the right, but not the obligation, to participate in subsequent issuances of any
equity securities on a pro rata basis”. Participation rights ensure that the VC will be able to protect

                                                                                 22
its ownership stake in case of subsequent investment rounds. “Pro-rata” means that the VC has the
right to supply funds in proportion to their initial investment. For example, if the VC initially
acquired a stake of twenty per cent, the VC will be entitled to contribute twenty per cent of the
capital in any further equity issuance. The purpose of a participation right is not directly related to
any of the contractual issues discussed in our theory section but  is rather a way for the VC to protect
its ownership stake.

5.8 Exit
This section in the terms sheets in our sample is not a contractual term or condition but rather a
clarifying statement by VCs that it intend to exit the investment within the given timeframe. The
statement reads as follows in all of our term sheets: “it is the intention to achieve an exit through a
sale of the majority of shares in the company to a third party or alternatively all, or substantially, all
of the assets of the company or by an initial public offering of the shares within the coming 6-8
years”. This statement makes the nature and planned timeframe of the investment clear to all
involved parties ex ante.
        It is interesting to note that this statement is not precise as to what  exit strategy the VC has
planned. A possible explanation is that the VC simply does not know ex ante what exit strategy will
be the most feasible. Another explanation is that the VC plans an acquisition exit but chooses to
refrain from revealing this. The  founder will in many cases be the CEO and thus opposed to an
acquisition that threatens his position within the firm. By not revealing its true intentions, the VC
can exploit the information asymmetry to negotiate stricter exit-rights with less opposition  than they
would face from a knowing entrepreneur. Additionally, the VC mitigates risks of the entrepreneur
purposely making the firm less attractive for an acquisition, e.g. through making the firm
incompatible with a potential acquirer or by not maximizing the firm value (Cumming & Johan
2013).
5.9 Dividends
Dividend payout is a common way to compensate investors and offer them return on their invested
capital. All term sheets in our sample explicitly restrict the paying out dividends with the following
formulation “the company’s dividend policy will be to not pay dividends”.
        First, this provision should be viewed in the growth context of startup companies. VCs
expect their portfolio companies to represent the most attractive investment opportunities, and
hence consider any possible earning best invested in the businesses of their portfolio companies.

                                                                                 23
Furthermore, this statement highlights to the entrepreneur that the VC is not particularly concerned
with dividends and is expecting to make returns on its investment by taking the firm public or by
completing a trade sale.
        Most importantly, a no-dividend policy ensures the VC that its investment is used to finance
the venture’s business and is not used as an avenue for entrepreneur compensation. Furthermore, a
free dividend policy would make the entrepreneur less dependent on firm performance and increase
the possibility of entrepreneur expropriation. The VC will usually provide the majority of the free
cash in exchange for a minority stake of the business (Metrick & Yasuda, 2011). Dividend payments
would benefit the entrepreneur disproportionately as he or she would be receiving a majority of the
dividends financed by the VC’s investment.

5.10 Board Rights
The board is responsible for hiring and firing senior management as well as continuous monitoring
of their performance. The board also approves proposed strategies and various corporate actions.
Thus, the party in control of the board has pronounced control over the firm.
        The term sheets in our sample all  contain a clause that stipulates the appointment of the
company’s board members. In our sample, term sheet A entitles the VC to nominate one of seven
directors, term sheet B entitles the VC to nominate one of four directors, and term sheet C entitles
the  VC to nominate one of five directors. In addition, term sheets B and C entitle the VC to
nominate one non-voting deputy director, and term sheet B entitles the VC to jointly with the
founders nominate an independent chairman.
        As described in the section on contract theory, board representation ensures the VC
influence and access to information. Theory assumes that contracts are inherently incomplete and
that neither party ex ante can anticipate all possible future states of the world nor perfectly align
their incentives or interests. Hence, board representation rights are of interest to the VC as it is keen
to monitor and, if needed, control its investment. Additionally, empirical literature suggests that
value-added services on behalf of the VC increases with VC board representation, hence
entrepreneurs also face incentives to relinquish some of their board rights (Casamatta, 2003)

5.11 Protective Provisions
As mentioned, theoretical literature predicts that VCs will negotiate a range of negative covenants,
commonly referred to as protective provisions, separate from their cash flow rights. An interesting

                                                                                 24
feature of our sample is that neither of our term sheets include any specifics details on such
provisions, instead stipulating that such negotiations will  take place later, to be included in the
shareholders’ agreement. Because these provisions are lengthy, and not generally considered
essential when entrepreneurs decide on whether or not to proceed with an investment, they are not
included in the term sheet with the purpose of expediting the investment process.
        The VC’s minority stake makes it vulnerable to decisions by the majority. For example, the
majority shareholder could engage in actions that benefit them at the expense of the VC. Protective
provisions give the VC veto power over certain corporate actions and are commonly related to the
sale, liquidation or alteration of the capital structure of the firm. Without protective provision the
majority-controlled firm could e.g. be sold at a fraction of the  value to a relative of the entrepreneur
or use the funds supplied by the VC to repurchase the entrepreneur’s shares at a price far above
their fair market value (Metrick & Yasuda, 2011).

5.12 Voting Rights
A range of corporate actions and decisions have  to be approved by the voting majority. These
specifics vary from one firm to another but voting decisions often relate to the sale or acquisition of
assets, financing, the election of board members and any other actions as agreed upon in the
shareholders’  agreement (Smeele, 2014). The term sheets in our sample all grant each preferred share
one vote.
        While voting rights constitute a means for exercising control, empirical literature shows that
VCs rarely achieve voting majority, rendering them unable to enforce decisions through voting
(Kaplan & Strömberg, 2003). Furthermore, voting is a slow and blunt tool in comparison to
protective provisions and board rights. The other provisions endow the VC with more direct control
rights, making voting rights less important.

5.13 Information Rights
All term sheets in our sample stipulates that the VC requires “standard information rights”.
According to the VC, these include audited financial reports, an annual budget and business plan as
well as the right to advise and consult with management of the company on a regular basis. In
addition, term sheets B and C specifically state the right to receive monthly and quarterly updates,
whilst term sheet A only stipulates standard rights. The VC may also visit all of the firms in our
sample given reasonable notice.

                                                                                 25
        The issue of efficient monitoring is central to the first principal-agent problem, relating to
the effort of the entrepreneur. A greater degree of information rights makes it easier for the VC to
asses the effort and ability of the entrepreneur. When establishing the extent of information rights
the VC needs to weigh the costs associated with providing and receiving information to the benefits
of said information. The degree of how much information the VC will request is dependent on the
extent of the monitoring need and the cost of information collection. When interpreting the
information it can be hard to disentangle the effects of the entrepreneur's effort and ability,
especially when the company is facing a high degree of external risks (Prendergast, 2002).

5.14 Liquidation Preference and Liquidation Event
VC investments are inherently risky and liquidation terms are therefore a central issue in the
negotiations between a VC and an entrepreneur. As mentioned earlier with regard to security types,
terms sheets B and C feature a liquidation preference while A does not.
         This clause in our term sheets clarifies the hierarchy of claims in the event  of liquidation.
Out of the proceeds in such an event, the assets to shareholders will be distributed in the  following
order. Firstly, the holders of preference shares shall receive an amount equal to their average
subscription price. Secondly, remaining funds are to be distributed to the holders of common stock
until they have received the same amount per share  as paid to the holders of preferred shares.
Thirdly, any remaining proceeds shall be distributed to all shareholders pro rata.
        As previously mentioned, the most important feature of the liquidation preference is its
effects on agent behavior. Although preferred shares  entitle  seniority to proceeds in events of
liquidation, the VC of study expressed in interviews that it was less interested in this feature as few
liquidable assets tend to remain in practice. Instead, the anticipated effect on the entrepreneur is
considered more valuable as increased effort is expected, as well as a reluctance by entrepreneurs of
low ability to agree to such terms.

5.15 Conversion
Because term sheets B and C feature preference shares, they also contain a conversion clause. The
conversion clause not only states that the VC at all times has the right to convert its preference
shares into common shares, but also states that the VC is forced to convert in the event of an IPO.
The automatic conversion should not be seen as a control right but rather as a commitment on the
VC’s part to relinquish its exclusive rights upon a successful IPO (Cumming & Johan 2013).

                                                                                 26
        Whilst preference shares are more valuable than common shares, due to their seniority, there
are cases in which the VC may wish to convert into common shares voluntarily. A common example
of when a VC may convert its shares voluntarily is when another investor is willing to invest in a
later round, but is unwilling to do so unless the VC gives up its preference rights.

5.16  Right of First Refusal
A right of first refusal clause entails that transfers of stock have to be offered to existing
shareholders before any outside investor can accept such offers. This protects current shareholders
from control being shifted to outside  investors. However, first refusal rights also reduce the liquidity
of shares as outside investors will be reluctant to initiate costly negotiations knowing that existing
shareholders will have priority in any secondary sales.

5.17 Drag-Along
All terms sheets in our sample feature drag-along rights that allow a shareholding majority that
includes the VC the ability to enforce a sale of the business to a bona fide third party or initiate and
execute a listing of the firm. The remaining shareholders will be  obliged to sell their shares at the
same price and terms as negotiated by the majority. If the exit strategy chosen by the majority is an
IPO all shareholders have to vote in  favor  (Smeele, 2014).
        Drag-along clauses are designed to prevent the hold-up of  a sale by a minority. In theory a
failure to include drag-along rights could enable the minority to extract all shareholder value derived
from a sale by holding up the deal. Drag-along rights are especially important when the preplanned
route of exit is a  trade sale. This is because a trade sale, as opposed to an IPO, often results in the
CEO being removed from the firm. As discussed, many venture-backed firms feature a CEO with
significant ownership who would be able to oppose a sale that threatens his or  her private owner-
manager benefits unless drag-along rights are included.

5.18 Tag-Along
The terms sheet we study all feature tag-along rights. These rights are designed in symmetry with the
drag-along rights, but rather than being an obligation to sell,  tag-along rights give all shareholders the
option to sell at the same terms as another selling shareholder at a pro-rata basis. This means that a
shareholder may participate in a sale resulting from a negotiation conducted by any shareholder.
Large and institutional shareholders, such as the VC, are more capable to source buyers and have the

                                                                                 27
legal and financial resources to negotiate fair terms. This means that tag-along rights offer minor
shareholders greater liquidity of their shares. Shares in unlisted companies, such as the subjects of
our term sheets, are difficult to sell, hence the inclusion of tag-along rights makes a VC-investment
more appealing (Smeele, 2014). In addition, tag-along rights mitigate the risk of hold-up. The clause
makes departure by key employees harder as they will be unable to fully divest from their minority-
holding if the remaining shareholders exercises their tag-along rights.

5.19 Non-Competition and Non-Solicitation
The skills, knowledge, and sensitive information that management possesses is at the heart of every
VC-investment. As the ratio of tangible assets to firm value shrinks, greater emphasis is placed on
protecting the firm’s intangible assets. To avoid that these assets are eroded or acquired by
competing firms, the  term sheets we study include a clause that make the investments conditional on
management signing non-compete and non-disclosure agreements. These actions prevent them from
starting or joining competing firms or disclosing sensitive information. This provision also mitigates
hold-up risks as it increases the cost for entrepreneurs to leave their firms.

5.20 Founder Vesting, Lock-up, Good Leaver & Bad Leaver
As mentioned, a departure from the business by the entrepreneur or key employees could render a
VC-investment worthless. Therefore, in addition to first refusal and tag-along clauses, the term
sheets in our sample also include another measure that aligns incentives and mitigates entrepreneur
hold-up — vesting.
       Vesting makes premature departure  unfavorable, as it freezes the shares of the entrepreneur
until a certain time period has passed. The vesting period in all our term sheets is four years. During
this period the ownership of the entrepreneur will be gradually released from lock-up. Any shares
that have not been vested upon departure can only be sold to subscription price, as opposed to a
potentially higher market value.

5.21 Due Diligence
All term sheets in our sample include a due diligence clause. Prior to a term sheet offering, the VC
has only limited insight into the firm's operations and finances. Because of this, a condition for the
completion of the investment is a successful due diligence. The due diligence process gives the VC

                                                                                 28
the right to make a thorough investigation into the firm under the commitment of completing the
investment if no irregularities are found.
        The inclusion of a pre-planned due diligence mitigates information asymmetry by allowing
the entrepreneur to signal company performance credibly, as inaccurate or exaggerated claims by an
entrepreneur will likely be ineffective. As the VC knows that the entrepreneur expects a due
diligence, the VC can expect that the claims  by a rational entrepreneur during negotiations to be
consistent with what a due diligence of the firm would reveal.

5.22 Warranties
The warranties clause in all our term sheets is stated as follows: “the founders shall severally and not
jointly give standard warranties to the lead investor”. Warranties are guarantees that the entrepreneur
gives to the VC. These serve a similar purpose as the due diligence clause, and are a way for the
entrepreneur to credibly guarantee certain statements. Standard warranties requested by VCs include
the assurance that there are no ongoing litigations against the firm or the entrepreneur and that there
exist no conflicting agreements. The specification that warranties cannot be submitted jointly implies
that the warranties  should be guaranteed by all founders individually. Individual warranting ensures
that false warranties are litigable in a court of law (Smeele, 2014).

5.23 Fees and Expenses
The term sheets in our samples all include a statement that the companies, not the investor, will
carry the legal and due diligence costs associated with completing the investment. The reasoning is
that the VC wishes to avoid the entrepreneur walking away from the deal after the VC has spent
significant resources completing its due diligence.

5.24 Exclusivity and Confidentiality
As the negotiating process and the activities in preparation of the investments are costly and time-
consuming for the VC, all our term sheets feature a clause stipulating exclusivity. The formulation is
as follows: “for a period of forty days from signing of this term sheet the company and the founders
agree to not solicit offers from other parties for an equity financing of the company or a sale of
shares in the company or the company's business.” This means that the entrepreneur may not seek
equity financing from other investors after the terms sheet is signed. The VC is committed to the

                                                                                 29
process by their invested effort and therefore seeks to secure the entrepreneur’s commitment before
proceeding to final negotiations.
        Furthermore, a term sheet contains sensitive information that needs to be protected by a
confidentiality clause. This clause prohibits the founder from disclosing the existence of the term
sheet or any of its contents to other parties than the entrepreneur’s legal and financial advisors.
Disclosure of the term sheet could be damaging from a competitive standpoint as the VC has spend
time and effort into soliciting and evaluating the firm.

5.25 Non-Binding Effect
The non-binding clause is formulated as follows: “The provisions of this term sheet express the
parties' mutual intent and shall be non-binding obligations with exception of this section and the
sections entitled Expenses; Exclusivity and Confidentiality and Governing Law and Venue.” This
clause underscores that the term sheets is a letter of intent and that it should be viewed as a starting
point for future negotiations.

5.26 Governing Law and Venue
The final section in all our term sheets stipulates that Swedish law should govern in case of any
future disputes. This section also states that any disputes shall be settled in court of arbitration rather
than a court of law. There are several advantages  to settling disputes in an arbitration court. The
proceedings are faster, the language of proceeding is free to be agreed upon by the parties and the
settlement can be made confidential. Additionally, the parties can chose their own tribunal which
can be advantageous as many disputes will be of a technical character.

6. Empirical Observations in Relation to Theoretical Predictions
The central issue of VC-related contract theory is that VC investments are subject to pronounced
principal-agent problems as well as uncertainties associated with the company’s outside environment
and uncertainties related to difficulties of execution. As detailed in our literature review, contract
theory predicts that VCs and entrepreneurs will attempt to solve, or at least mitigate, these risks
through contract design. We now revisit the issues raised by theory and compare their predictions
on contract design with the observations in our sample.
       The first issue highlighted in our theoretical review is that of moral hazard and  entrepreneur
effort. To mitigate such risks, contract theory predicts that VCs will make compensation contingent

                                                                                 30
on performance and negotiate control rights separate from the cash flow rights inherent in the
financial relationship. Whilst theory predicts that VCs will negotiate stronger board rights in cases of
elevated moral hazard risk, theory also suggests that such rights are insufficient and that the VCs will
negotiate negative covenants. In line with theory, all term sheets in our sample entitle the VC board
representation and stipulate the establishment of large employee stock option programs to enable
performance-contingent compensation. Furthermore, all term sheets also stipulate that the VC will
seek to negotiate negative covenants. Whilst the final results of these negotiations are not included
in the term sheets in our sample, representatives from the VC have in interviews confirmed that the
VC usually secures veto rights relating to asset sales, capital structure and capital expenditure. Hence,
the observations in our sample are in line with the predictions of theory.
        A similar issue covered in our theoretical review relates to uncertainties on the effort
commitment of the VC. Because entrepreneurs often seek venture capital also for the benefit  of the
VC’s value-added services, contract theory predicts that entrepreneurs will relinquish some of their
control rights to  incentivize  VC effort. As mentioned, all term sheets in our sample feature more
comprehensive VC control rights than implied by the financial relationship, which corresponds with
the predictions of theory.
        Another issue highlighted in our theoretical review is that of entrepreneur ability and adverse
selection. To mitigate such problems, theory predicts that VCs will design contracts that feature
performance-contingent compensation, stronger liquidation rights, and create control mechanisms
that shift control to the VC in bad states of the world. In line with theory, we find that the term
sheets in our sample feature performance-contingent compensation through establishing employee
stock option schemes and by ensuring that the entrepreneur retains a significant ownership stake
after the investment. Secondly, our sample suggests that the VC insists on liquidation rights, either
through  the use of debt or through preferred shares. We do however not observe any contingency-
based control rights in our sample, an observation that contrasts with the predictions of theory.
       Our theoretical review also covered risks relating to possible disagreements between the VC
and entrepreneur after investment. Given that the VC will want to enforce its will in such situations,
theory predicts that the VC will construct contingent control allocation mechanisms, including
control shifting covenants, such as  the right to discharge and replace management. Despite these
predictions, we again find the term sheets lacking such mechanisms. A partial explanation for this
observation, based on interviews with representatives of the VC, is that the VC in question has
limited resources and must  prioritize  which of its portfolio companies it should spend effort on.

                                                                                 31
History has shown that only very few companies in a VC portfolio generate most of its returns
(Metrick & Yasuda, 2011). Hence, the VC believes that its limited time and effort is better spent
making its promising portfolio firms even more successful rather than exercising control rights to
steer non-performing firms in a new direction. This stance renders its interest in additional control
rights in non-performing firms low.
        Our theoretical review addresses concerns related to hold-up problems in firms where the
human capital of the entrepreneur is particularly valuable. The high ratio between human capital and
other assets in firms receiving VC investments makes them vulnerable to talent departure, especially
when facing high levels of execution risk. Theory predicts that the VC will seek to mitigate this issue
by preventing an entrepreneur from abandoning the business or credibly threatening to do so. These
theoretical predictions align well with the provisions in our sample that make departure costly for
the entrepreneur. Vesting, tag-along rights and rights of first refusal make the entrepreneur unable to
quickly divest from the firm and any such threats are  thus rendered non-credible. Our sample also
feature drag-along rights that addresses the related issue of exit-related hold-up predicted by theory.
        Lastly, theory predicts that a higher level of external risk will make monitoring of the
entrepreneur's effort harder and thus increase the degree of performance-
contingent compensation. However, as we are unable to asses the level of relative exposure to
external risk in our sample we cannot determine whether or  not our sample  aligns with theory in this
regard.

7. Conclusion & Outlook
In this paper we studied the terms by which a Stockholm-based venture capital firm addresses the
inherent principal-agent issues associated with startup investing and how said terms relate to their
counterparts in financial contracting theory. Our study began with a comprehensive review of
theoretical literature on how principal-agent conflicts and other factors are expected to influence
contract design in venture capital. We then introduced an empirical dimension by decomposing the
components of three real  world term sheets and proceeded to  analyze  their alignment with the
predictions of theory. We find that the terms sheets issued by our VC of study to a great extent align
with the predictions of theory. However, we also discovered  interesting  disparities  between theory
and the real world. Most importantly, we found that the VC we study does not negotiate contingent
control to the extent predicted by theory, implying that the VC is less concerned with assuming
control in bad states of the world than otherwise suggested.

                                                                                 32
8. References

Akerlöf, G. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.”  The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84, no. 3, 1970, pp. 488–500.

Aghion, P and Bolton, P, “An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial Contracting”.  Review of
Economic Studies, 59, issue 3,1992 pp. 473-494

Bengtsson, O. “Covenants in Venture Capital Contracts.”  Management Science, vol. 57, no. 11, 2011,
pp. 1926–1943.

Bengtsson, O. & Sensoy, B.A. (2011). “Investor Abilities and Financial Contracting: Evidence from
Venture Capital”.  Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 20 no. 4, pp. 477-5021

Bergström, B. “Swedish Tech Funding Report 2016”.  Stockholm: Industrifonden, 2016. Web.
08/05/2017. http://industrifonden.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/ Swedish-Tech-Funding-
Report-2016.pdf

Bigus, J. “Staging of Venture Financing, Investor Opportunism and Patent Law”  Journal of Business
Finance & Accounting, 2006 pp: 939–960.

Black, B and Gilson, R. “Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: banks versus stock
markets”,  Journal of Financial Economics, 47, issue 3, 1998 pp. 243-277

Brennan, M, and Alan K. “Efficient Financing Under Asymmetric Information.”  The Journal of
Finance, vol. 42, no. 5, 1987, pp. 1225–1243.

Burchardt,  J., Hommel, U., Kamuriwo, D. S. and Billitteri, C. “Venture Capital Contracting in
Theory and Practice: Implications for Entrepreneurship Research”.  Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, vol. 40, no. 1, 2016, pp. 25–48.

                                                                                 33
Casamatta, C. “Financing and Advising: Optimal Financial Contracts with Venture Capitalists”,
Journal of Finance,  58, issue 5, 2003 pp. 2059-2086,

Cumming, D and Johan S. “Venture Capital and Private Equity Contracting: An International
Perspective.”  London: Elsevier, 2014. Print.

Deng, J. Alleywatch “What Happens to the Employee Option Pool after an Acquisition?"  Web.
08/05/2017  http://www.alleywatch.com/2014/01/vc-101-  what-happens-to-the-employee-option-
pool-after-an-acquisition/

Dessein, Wouter. “Information and Control in Ventures and Alliances.”  The Journal of Finance, vol.
60, no. 5, 2005, pp. 2513–2549.

Dewatripont, M, and Jean T. “A Theory of Debt and Equity: Diversity of Securities and Manager-
Shareholder Congruence.”  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, no. 4, 1994, pp. 1027–1054.

Diamond, Douglas W. “Debt Maturity Structure and Liquidity Risk.”  The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 106, no. 3, 1991, pp. 709–737.

Hand, John R.M “Give everyone a prize? Employee stock options  in private venture-backed firms”
Journal of Business Venturing  vol. 23, Issue 4, July 2008, pp. 385–404

Hart, O. and John M. “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital.”  The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, no. 4, 1994, pp. 841–879.

Hellmann, T. and Manju P. “Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-up Firms:
Empirical Evidence.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 57, no. 1, 2002, pp. 169–197.

Holmström, B. “Moral Hazard and Observability.”  The Bell Journal of Economics, vol. 10, no. 1, 1979,
pp. 74–91.

                                                                                 34
Holmstrom, B, and Paul M. “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset
Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, vol. 7, 1991, pp. 24–52

Houben, A. and Kakes, J. ICT Innovation and Economic Performance: The Role of Financial
Intermediation. Kyklos, 2002 pp. 543–562

Hsu, David H. “What Do Entrepreneurs Pay for Venture Capital Affiliation?”  The Journal of Finance,
vol. 59, no. 4, 2004, pp. 1805–1844.

Kaplan, S. and Stromberg, P. “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real World: An Empirical
Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts”,  Review of Economic Studies, 70, issue 2, 2004 p. 281-315,

Kaplan, S.  and  Stromberg, P. “Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence from Venture
Capitalist Analyses.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 59, no. 5, 2004, pp. 2177–2210.

Kirilenko, A. “Valuation and Control in Venture Finance”.  The Journal of Finance, 2001, pp. 565–587.

Lazear, E. “Retail Pricing and Clearance Sales”,  American  Economic Review, 76, issue 1, 1986, pp. 14-32

Lerner, J. “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 50, no.
1, 1995, pp. 301–318.

Linde, L. “Venture Support Systems Project: Angel Investors”  MIT  Entrepreneurship Center,  2000, p.
38.

Lindsey, L. “Blurring Firm Boundaries: The Role of Venture Capital in Strategic Alliances.”  The
Journal of Finance, vol. 63, no. 3, 2008, pp. 1137–1168.

Metrick, A. and Yasuda, A. “Venture Capital & The Finance of Innovation”.  S.l.: John Wiley & Sons,
2011. Print.

                                                                                 35
Neher, D. “Staged Financing: An Agency Perspective”,  Review of Economic Studies, 66, issue 2, 1999,
pp. 255-274,

Olszewski, T.  “Startups and Venture Capital in The Nordics”.  Dublin: Frontline Ventures,  2016.  Web.
08/05/2017. https://medium.com/at-the-front-line/startups-and-  venture-capital-in-the-nordics-
72229b428801

Prendergast, C. “The Tenuous Trade-­‐  off between Risk and Incentives.”  Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 110, no. 5, 2002, pp. 1071–1102.

Schmidt, Klaus M. “Convertible Securities and Venture Capital Finance.”  The Journal of Finance, vol.
58, no. 3, 2003, pp. 1139–1166.

Smeele, T. “The Recent Development of the Venture Capital Term Sheet : a Substantive Analysis of
the Impact of the ‘new Venture Capital Cycle’ on the Terms and Conditions of Venture Capital
Contracting”.  Universiteit van Tilburg. International Business Law, 2014.

Stiglitz, J and Weiss A. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information, American
Economic Review, 71,  issue 3, (1981) pp. 393-410

                                                                                 36
Appendix A, Term Sheet Template

           TERMS FOR EQUITY INVESTMENT IN [Company name]
                                       [Date]

This term sheet (“Term Sheet”) summarizes the main terms with respect to an equity investment in
[Company Name], a private limited  liability company incorporated in Sweden (the “Company”).

The offering terms

 Securities to Issue:    Ordinary shares of the Company (“Shares”).

 Investment          SEK [amount] in aggregate.
 Amount:

 Investors:            [Company Names, Company ID Numbers] (“Investors”).

 Lead  Investor:        [Company Name, Company ID Number] (“Lead Investor”).

 Founders:           [Company/Personal Names, Company/Personal ID Numbers]
                         (“Founders”). In this Term Sheet, “Founder” may refer to a
                        company and/or the physical person in control of such a company.

 Existing             [Company Names, Company ID Numbers].
 Shareholders:

 Subscription Price:    The price per each Share (the “Original Subscription Price”) is based
                         on a Company pre-money valuation of SEK [amount].

 Capitalization:        The Company’s capital structure before and after the completion of
                            the investment is set forth in  Exhibit A.

                                                                                 37
Option Pool:          [The parties agree and acknowledge that the Company, after the
                         investment, will issue warrants to current and future key employees,
                         corresponding to up to [10-15]% of the shares in the Company post-
                     money.]

Liquidation           [Upon a liquidation, merger, sale or other type of transaction in
Preference:            which control in the Company or substantially all of its assets are
                         transferred, the  Investors shall receive, per held share, the higher of
                         (i) one times the Original Subscription Price or (ii) the amount they
                        would receive if all shareholders received their  pro rata  share of such
                        assets or proceeds. The remaining proceeds shall be distributed to
                         the Founders and the Existing Shareholders on a  pro rata  basis.]

Financial             The Lead Investor will receive standard information, including but
Information:          not limited to monthly reporting of key business metrics and a
                        summary of the Company’s financial status. The other Investors will
                          receive quarterly financial reporting.

Participation Right:   The Investors will have the right, but not the obligation, to
                         participate in subsequent issuances of any equity securities on a  pro
                          rata  basis.

Protective             Approval of the Lead Investor is required to (i) amend the articles of
Provisions:            association; (ii)  issue, redeem or purchase shares or other equity
                           securities; (iii) adversely change rights of the Shares; (iv) declare or
                         pay any dividend or make a decision on other asset distributions; (v)
                        guarantee any indebtedness, save for trade accounts of the
                   Company, or incur any indebtedness in excess of SEK [amount]; (vi)
                        merge, demerge, liquidate or dissolve the Company or a subsidiary;
                           (vii) transfer, lease, license (other than licenses granted in the
                          ordinary course of business on a non-exclusive basis), pledge or
                         encumber assets or rights material to the Company; (viii) materially
                         amend the business plan; (ix) hire, fire or amend the terms of the
                       employment contract of the CEO; and (x) enter into any agreement
                       or assignment with a shareholder or its immediate  family member or
                        any entity controlled by a shareholder and/or its immediate family
                      member(s).

Board of Directors:    The Founders shall elect [three] of the directors. The Lead Investor
                       shall elect [one] of the directors. [The other Investors shall elect  one
                          of the directors.]

                                                                                38
Right of First         Transfer of shares in the Company is subject to other shareholders’
Refusal:               right of first refusal. A customary redemption clause shall be
                         included in the Company’s articles of association.

Drag-Along:          In the event  holders of more than [50]% of the Shares accept an
                         offer to sell or otherwise transfer their shares to an independent
                          bona fide third party, all other shareholders consent to sell or
                        otherwise transfer their shares on the same terms and conditions as
                       the majority shareholders who have accepted the offer.

Tag-Along:           The shareholders shall have the right to participate in any sale or
                        other transfer of shares in the same proportion and on the same
                         terms and conditions as offered to the selling shareholder.

Expenses:            [The Company shall reimburse counsels to the Investors for fees,
                        which shall not exceed SEK [amount]. If there is no investment,
                          each party shall pay its own fees.]

Vesting:              Shares held by the Founders will vest over four years (the “Vesting
                         Period”) as follows: 25% to vest one year after closing and the
                        remaining 75% to vest in equal monthly installments under the
                       following 36 months. During the Vesting Period, the Founders may
                             not transfer their shares without the consent of the Lead Investor.
                       During the Vesting Period, any unvested Shares of a Founder who
                        leaves the Company may be purchased by the other shareholders  pro
                         rata  at (i) quota value if the Founder is a ”bad leaver”, or (ii) market
                         value if the Founder is a ”good leaver”.

Non-Compete and   Each Founder is required to sign a non-competition and a non-
Non-                solicitation commitment, valid until one year from the date he/she
Solicitation:           ceases to be a shareholder in the Company.

Intellectual            The Founders and the Existing  Shareholders shall assign all relevant
Property:             intellectual property to the Company.

                                                                                39
 Warranties:           Each Founder shall severally and not jointly give standard warranties
                           to the Investors, including warranties on title, intellectual property
                        and complete information.

 Confidentiality:       This Term Sheet and the contents hereof are confidential to the
                         Founders, and they may disclose these terms only to their
                           representatives, directors and their legal or financial advisors.

 Closing:              Expected closing date is [date].  Definitive agreements will be based
                        on documents published at www.startupdocs.se.

 Exclusivity:           [The Founders agree not to discuss or accept any financing of the
                        Company from other parties before the expiry of the Term Sheet,
                         except as approved by the Lead  Investor.]

 Non-Binding        This Term Sheet is not legally binding, with the exception of this
 Effect:                 paragraph and the paragraphs entitled [Expenses, Exclusivity and]
                          Confidentiality, which shall be construed according to the laws of
                      Sweden.

 Expiration:           This Term Sheet expires on [date].

[Place] on [date]

  _______________________    _______________________    _______________________

 [Name Founder 1]             [Name Founder 2]             [Name Founder 3]

  _______________________    _______________________    _______________________

 [Name Investor 1]              [Name Investor 1]              [Name Shareholder 1]

                                                                                 40