   Do Green Buses Make Property Prices Rise?
               A Regression Discontinuity Approach

                     Olle Norén                       Tina Dalaei
                     23344                         23345

                 Bachelor  Thesis  in Finance
             Stockholm School of Economics
                             May 15, 2017

Abstract:
Residents in Stockholm had called for an improved physical environment regarding noise
reduction as well as better air quality and in August 2014, a fleet of environment-friendly city
buses was introduced on a limited number of bus lines in downtown Stockholm. This paper
means to examine a possible value created and  shown in rising prices of property in the
vicinity to the new buses. The study also aims to highlight and quantify the corporate social
responsibility, CSR, efforts made by the City of Stockholm as well as those made by the
public transportation sector. By using a highly explanatory hedonic pricing model, the
authors control for the characteristics valued when people purchase a home. In addition, the
remaining variance in the residuals is analyzed using a regression discontinuity (RD) design.
In the global  RD approach, a rise in property prices by approximately 6% is found. However,
the local RD method does not support this, indicating little evidence of increased property
value as a result of closeness to environment-friendly buses. It seems that despite the
importance of a healthy environment, other factors than the fuel used in the nearby buses, set
prices for inner-city apartments in Stockholm.

Keywords:  regression discontinuity,  hedonic pricing model, public transportation, CSR

Acknowledgements:
We would like to express our gratitude for the valuable input from our tutor Cristian Huse,
throughout the development of the thesis. Furthermore, we would like to thank Nikita
Koptyug for introducing us to web scraping and Karl Orton for providing us with  valuable
information about the new buses.
Table of Content

1 Introduction                                                                 2
2  Previous Literature                                                           4
3 Health Effects from Pollution and Environmental Impact of the New Buses             6
4 Data                                                                   10
5 Theory and Methodology                                                   14
  5.1  Hypothesis Development                                                  14
  5.2 The Hedonic Pricing Model                                               14
  5.3 Regression Discontinuity Design                                           16
    5.3.1 Graphical Analysis                                                  18
    5.3.2 Formal Regression                                                   18
      5.3.2.1 Global Polynomial                                                19
      5.3.2.2 Local Linear                                                      19
6 Results                                                                   21
  6.1 Hedonic Pricing Model                                                   21
  6.2 The Whole Sample                                                     23
    6.2.1 Global Polynomial                                                   23
    6.2.2 Local Linear                                                         25
  6.3 Dividing into Directly and In-Directly                                          28
    6.3.1 Global Polynomial                                                   28
    6.3.2 Local Linear                                                          29
  6.4 Sensitivities and Robustness Checks                                         31
    6.4.1 Manipulation of running variable                                        31
    6.4.2 Discontinuity and Non-Linearity                                           32
  6.5 Further Limitations                                                       32
7 Conclusion and Implications                                                  33
References                                                                  34
Appendix                                                                 38

                                     1
1  Introduction

It is common knowledge that property prices are higher close to public transportation
infrastructures.   What   is   less   known,   however,   is   whether   nearby   climate   friendly
transportation systems has an impact on property prices.  In this thesis, we examine the
possible value created by the introduction of more eco-friendly buses, commonly called

                                                                    1
“Green buses”. Our aim is to highlight and quantify the  CSR  efforts made by the City of
Stockholm and the public transportation sector. Furthermore, we study property prices as an
approximation   of   residents’   valuation   of   improved   environmental   quality   of   their
surroundings.

       The central parts of Stockholm have problems with air and noise pollution. In the
entire Stockholm area, there are almost 300 000 bus riderships a day  (AB Storstockholms
Lokaltrafik, 2016). Furthermore, the number of bus riderships is expected to rise as the
population of the city grows. This will result in more traffic and will increase the  demand for
more environmentally efficient solutions in public transportation. The resemblance between
Stockholm and numerous other European cities makes Stockholm an interesting city to study.
It has a well-developed public transit system, the population  is fast growing and the
awareness of environmental issues has increased considerably in the past years. Hence, the
results of this paper are applicable to many similar cities, and therefore of value to others.

        In August 2014, a fleet of environmental-friendly city buses was introduced on a
limited number of bus lines in downtown Stockholm. Following complaints from inner-city
residents and measures to reach climate objectives, the aim of the new fleet was to improve
air quality and reduce noise pollution.  Noise measurements are made every fifth year in
Stockholm (Länsstyrelsen Stockholm, 2017), which makes it impossible to quantify marginal
sound improvements due to certain actions. Accordingly, we use property prices as an
approximation of residents’ valuation of improved quality of their surroundings.

       A hedonic pricing model consisting of data on 1888 apartments sold between 2012
and 2017 is used to examine the inhabitants’ valuation of property characteristics and
external   factors.   Furthermore,   a   regression   discontinuity   (RD)   design   approach   is
implemented to capture the potential increase in value and is illustrated graphically. The brief
conclusion is that there is a price increase of approximately 6%, however, we cannot reliably

1
  Corporate Social Responsibility

                                     2
prove  that the increase is a result of better air quality and less noise caused by the change
from ethanol buses to biodiesel-hybrid buses.

       A quantification of the inhabitants’ appreciation of a cleaner environment is valuable
for a number of reasons. Firstly, policy makers can be influenced if they see that this
technology also brings monetary value, besides being good for the environment. Secondly,
the information can be useful for real estate developers and city planners when deciding on
proximity  to bus stations.

       Previous literature primarily focus on rail ways and the opening of new stations or
systems, and hence not on  buses  or  the change of fuel. Also, in the Scandinavian countries,
there is hardly any literature on the topic of public transportation systems and environmental
effects. Thus, this study  builds  on international literature and hopefully it might contribute to
further knowledge within this field.

       The remainder of this thesis is as follows. Previous research about the effect on house
prices, due to public transportation developments, is presented in Section 2. Section 3
provides information of health effects from pollution, and a background of the technology of
the buses before and after the change. Data collection and variables are  described in Section
4. Section 5 contains a brief review of the used empirical methods, namely hedonic pricing
model and RD Design, followed by a hypothesis development. Results are illustrated by
tables and graphs, and interpreted in Section 6. The most  important conclusions and
suggestions for further research are presented in Section 7.

                                     3
2  Previous Literature

There have been rigorous studies in what determines house prices. The reason for this is out
of interest in what people value when purchasing a home and perhaps also in hope to discover
undervalued real estate assets. Since properties are products with different attributes and
priced accordingly, they are considered to be heterogeneous commodities  (McLeod, 1984).
The value of these commodities is, from an analytic perspective, a composition of location,
rents and extrinsic effects  (Krantz, et al., 1982; Hickman, et al., 1984; Shefer, 1986; Strange,
1992; Can, 1992; Dubin, 1998).

       One extrinsic effect is access to  public transportation. It is well documented that
property prices are higher close to public transportation infrastructures (including  Bajic,
1983; Baum-Snow & Kahn, 2000; Bowes & Ihlanfeldt, 2001; Damm, et al., 1980; Dewees,
1976; McDonald & Osuji, 1995;  Voith, 1993).  However, the influence of these kinds of
external accessibilities differs among communities, based on what urban amenity is taken
into account. For instance,  Thériault, et al. (2007)  find that households in Quebec City value
schools higher than labor markets.

       Some studies particularly highlight the effects of air and sound  quality.  Chen &
Whalley (2012)  show that the opening of a new urban rail transit in Taipei reduced one key
tailpipe pollutant (carbon monoxide) by between 5% and 15%. In another empirical study of
the negative effects of noise pollution,  Wilhelmsson (2000)  finds that single-family houses in
Stockholm located near noisy roads sell for a 30% discount.  Davis (2008)  examines the effect
of a policy program in Mexico City which bans drivers from using their vehicles one
weekday a week on the basis of the digits on their license plate. Using high frequency
measures,  he  finds that there is no evidence of improved air quality, on the contrary, it
resulted in more high-emissions vehicles being in movement.

       The effect of  improved  transportation systems, including both railways and buses, has
been quantified and evaluated as well.  Des Rosiers, et al. (2010)  find that an increase of
regular bus frequencies results in a value decrease for properties close to regular routes.
However, the opposite was true regarding the Express lines. By offering fewer stops and
more comfort Express lines proved to be a good alternative to private cars, and thus, prices
were influenced positively.  Mulley &  Tsai (2017)  investigate whether a rapid bus transit
system, implemented in Sydney in 2003, affects land values or not. Although new transport
infrastructure is expected to increase land value through improved accessibility for local

                                     4
residents, this study  proves little price difference between properties close to the bus rapid
transit stations and those farther from the stations.

       The hedonic modeling approach has been widely employed in terms of methodology
for capturing the increased value due to a change in transportation systems. This model
incorporates property attributes and neighborhood characteristics which also are considered
to have an impact on the value of  the property  (Cervero & Kang, 2011; Concas, 2013; Dube,
et al., 2011; McMillen & McDonald, 2004; Mikelbank, 2004; Rodriguez & Mojica, 2009).

       To measure the effect of a policy implementation or an intervention, different
statistical methods can be used. A common method is  difference in difference, where the
price change due to a new intervention is compared to a control group that did not go through
the change. However, the heterogeneity of apartments makes finding a suitable control group
extremely hard.

       Another way to capture a rise in property value is the repeat sales approach. In this
method, the sample contains apartments that have been sold more than once during the time
span. The intuition for this is that it controls for all other aspects that determine house prices
since they are assumed to be unchanged. The dependent variable then is the difference
between the price of an apartment before and after the intervention  (Mulley & Tsai, 2017).
However, this requires an extremely large data set which makes it difficult to use. Taking
these drawbacks into consideration, discontinuity approach, is a suitable method. This
method is used by  Chen & Whalley (2012)  and  Bento, et al. (2011), and is further discussed
in Section 5.

                                     5
3  Health Effects from Pollution and Environmental
Impact of the New Buses

Policy makers should account for both benefits and costs of polluting activities, nevertheless
it can be hard to identify those who benefit and those who are harmed by these activities. The
negative byproducts of economic activity  are  an unavoidable fact which  Clay,  et al. (2016)
show when they investigate the effect of coal power plant emissions on infant mortality in the
US during the mid 20th century. They find that there were substantial negative health effects
associated with an expansion of the power grid line.  The benefits of access to electricity
however presented a clear tradeoff against the health costs of unregulated emissions. Given
limitations in transmitting the electricity across big distances, many of the households that
benefited from the power grid lines were the same to be exposed to the emissions. Access to
roads and public transportation face a similar tradeoff, where the benefits of accessible
transportation needs to be weighted against the costs of it.

       Economic cost benefit analysts of policies and development projects often involve
assigning economic values to the changes in the risk of fatality. A common term used in this
context is the value of statistical life (VSL). VSL reflects individuals’ willingness to pay for
risk reduction of fatality and therefore the economic value to society to reduce the statistical
incidence of premature loss of human life in the population by one  (Viscusi & Aldy, 2003).

       In addition to studying  Clay, et al. (2016)  we have looked into  Greenstone & Chay
(2003)  who investigate the effect total suspended particulates (TSPs) on infant deaths in
Mexico City. They find that a 10% reduction of TSPs reduce the number of infant deaths by
800 annually. To be able to connect monetary calculations to environmental efforts, human
lives have been given a price which differs between countries  (Ashenfelter, 2006).  This might
by many be seen as immoral and distasteful, nevertheless it is used as an economic
measurement.  Davis (2008)  studies  Greenstone & Chay  (2003)  and in his own report he adds
the value of a statistical life. To calculate the infant mortality rate, he uses the birth and infant
mortality rate published in the 2006 edition of the World Bank’s World Development
indicators. According to this, the reduction of infant mortality induced by a 10% TSP
improvement alone, would imply benefits of $1.48 billion.

                                     6
        In our study,  we have no mortality rates, and thus no figures on the economic benefits
of saving lives thanks to an improved environment. However, table 1 illustrates health and
environmental damage caused by different pollutants.

                                         Table 1
Substance   Effect on health                            Effect on environment

 Particles    Impact   respiratory   diseases,   reduction   in     Storage of heavy metals and organic
            lung function, worsening of asthma and other     environmental toxin in ground and
            lung  diseases.  Can  also  contribute  to  the     sediment.   Pollution   and   climate
            development  of  asthma.  Increased  risk  of     effects.
             death by heart and lung diseases and cancer.
             (Stockholms stad, 2014)
        2
  VOC     Benzene can cause cancer, mainly leukemia.     Formation   of   ground-level   ozone,
            Aldehydes   irritates   respiratory   tracts   and     which  damages plants and material.
            may   aggravate   asthma.   (Länsstyrelsen     (Länsstyrelsen Blekinge Län, 2005)
            Blekinge Län, 2005)
  NOx     Impacts respiratory conditions, worsens lung     Damages   vegetation.   Can   also
            function,     increases  allergens     response.     damage vegetation through reaction
             (Icopal, 2017)                                     with other pollutants in the creation
                                                             of ozone.  (Icopal, 2017)
  Noise     Temporary   negative   impact   in   terms   of
            higher   heart   rate   and   increased   blood
            pressure. Permanently, it can also damage
            hearing   ability,   cause   sleeping   problems,
            stress   and   worsened   concentration   and
             learning ability.  (Naturvårdsverket, 2017)

Note: This table contains health and environmental damage caused by  different  pollutants.

       In mid 2014, the company in charge of the bus traffic in central Stockholm, Keolis,
invested   in   52   new   buses,   included   in   the   Hornsberg   depot,   to   primarily   operate
Kungsholmen and Vasastan, and partly Södermalm. The new biodiesel-hybrid buses, which
also were the  first hybrid buses in Stockholm  (Maasing, 2013), replaced the older ethanol
driven ones. The aim of the purchase was to improve the ambient environment around the bus
stations by reducing noise and air pollution. The new buses  officially started  to run August
18, 2014  (Orton, 2017),  and fulfill the European Union’s highest environmental classification
Euro 6.

2
 Volatile organic compounds or  VOCs are a large group of organic chemicals that have a high vapor pressure at
ordinary room temperature.

                                     7
       Economic cost benefit analysts could also be expected to support investments in other
clean  technologies such as electric buses since it includes a profitability incitement for
companies. However, the electric bus line 73 in Stockholm, between Karolinska Institutet and
Ropsten, which originally was a EU project, was considered too expensive to continue even
though electric buses are markedly better from an environmental standpoint.
        Biodiesel is a fuel adopted for diesel engines. It is created by chemical processing of
vegetable and animal oils and fats, converting to fatty acid methyl esters (FAME) or
hydrogenated vegetable oil (HVO). These two types of biodiesel have slightly different
characteristics regarding environmental and health effects, with advantage for the HVO
alternative. However, the new buses use rape methyl ester (RME) (a type of FAME) (Böhlin,
2015), due to the lower costs compared to HVO  (Trafikförvaltningen Stockholms läns
landsting, 2014).
       Old ethanol buses versus biodiesel hybrid or electric buses make a difference for
Swedish public transportation companies in more than just the environmental aspect. Besides
bad reputation and customer losses, the companies bear the risk of getting legally punished if
they do not follow certain regulations. Both air and noise pollution are considered as
environmentally harmful activities if they cause disorders that according to medical or
hygienic assessment may affect health and which are not minor or purely temporary  (9th
Chapter  1st paragraph  Miljöbalken  (1988:808)). The penalty for causing this can be jail or a
fine  (Chapter  29th  and  32nd  Miljöbalken).  There  are  also  provisions  regarding  the
procurement of vehicles. This is meant to promote and stimulate the market for clean and
energy efficient vehicles, and improve the transport sector’s contribution to the European
Union common environmental, climate and energy policy  (Lag (2011:846) om miljökrav vid
upphandling av bilar och vissa kollektivtrafiktjänser, compare with  Directive 2009/33/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council  of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of clean and
energy-efficient road transport vehicles).  Table 2 illustrates a comparison between the old
and new buses in terms of emission costs, using a report made by  Ecotraffic (2015), ordered
by the Swedish Transportation Administration (Trafikverket). It can be noticed that the
emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) actually is higher for the new biodiesel-hybrid buses than
the older ethanol driven ones. Nevertheless, the large improvement is captured by the lower
amount of  particles,  VOC, nitrogen oxides (NOx) and noise, here measured in SEK. The
biodiesel-hybrid buses decrease the cost of these pollutants with approximately 20%.

                                     8
                                    Table 2
Consumption and emission costs                Old Buses: Ethanol       New Buses:
                                                                       Biodiesel Hybrid
                                                        (RME)
Fuel consumption in central Stockholm
(liters/km)                                           0.70                 0.40
CO2 emission (kg/km)                                 0.41                 0.51
CO2 cost (kr/km)                                     0.60                 0.74

Costs
Particles  (öre/km)                                     7.20                 4.50
VOC (öre/km)                                    0.50                0.00
NOx (öre/km)                                      1.80                2.30
Noise  (kr/km)                                       4.15                 3.30
Total  cost                                          4.245                3.368
Note: This table illustrates a comparison between the old and new buses in terms of emission costs

                                     9
4  Data

In this section, all variables which we originally considered using in the hedonic pricing
model and in the RD Design, are  presented and explained. This section also contains
information regarding the data collection process.

       The complete data set consists of 1888 apartments that were sold between the years
2012 and 2017  located on 305 different addresses in central Stockholm. Figure 1 plots the
addresses on a map showing central Stockholm. The apartments in the data set were selected
if they were either directly or indirectly located on streets trafficked by any of the five bus
lines that changed to cleaner fuel. To isolate the effect, the data set does not contain any
streets trafficked by buses that did not go through the transition to cleaner fuel. The term
directly located  implies that the apartment is facing the street where the bus passes and is

                                             3
within close distance to  the bus stop .  In-directly  located  implies that the apartment is facing
the same street but is further away from the bus stop, or facing a street which is connected to
the street where the bus passes. We have made this distinction in belief that apartments  closer
to where the bus stops are more affected by its noise and pollution.

                                      Figure 1

                                                                                           4
                   A map of the locations of the observations in our dataset

3
 We define close distance as approximately 50 m.
4
  A more detailed map of the  observations can be found in A1  in Appendix.

                                     10
       The data has been cleaned from outliers in the dependent variable, price. This is to
prevent extravagant  apartments, where prices are determined by very specific features, to
affect the estimated model. These features could for instance be a large roof terrace, indoor
pool etc.

       Data on sold apartments is available on broker websites such as Booli.se and
Hemnet.se, for people to check prices on sold apartments in the area where they consider
purchasing a home. The data is available, free of charge, to scroll through and for personal
use. However, it is not available for downloading. The easiest method to collect this data
would simply be to copy and paste from the web browser. Unfortunately, the amount of data
required to do regression analysis would be extremely time consuming to collect this way. A
more efficient way to extract this kind of publicly available data is to use a method called
web scraping.

       Web scraping is a software technique for extracting information from websites. This
technique focuses on the transformation of unstructured HTML data on web pages, into
structured data that can be stored in  a local database and analyzed in statistical software
packages. Web search and extraction of information is typically performed with a method
called  web crawling. A web crawler is a program or automated script that browses the web at
a systematic automated  manner. Web scraping is a more recent variant of web crawling,
where the aim is to look for specific information, such as prices of particular goods from
online retailers, or as in our case, information on sold apartments in Stockholm  (Vargiu &
Urru, 2013).
       To conduct the web scraping we used a programming software called  c#  to produce

                                                               5
the automated script for data extraction  (Monson, 2009).  The software then extracted the
data from Booli and exported it into a spreadsheet for  further use.

       The data extracted from Booli includes the price of the apartment, living area,
monthly fee, number of rooms and what floor the apartment is located on. This data is the
basis for the hedonic model, and is described in more detail in Table 3. Furthermore, the data
from Booli has been completed with additional variables that are commonly known for
affecting the final price of an apartment. These variables must to a certain extent been added
manually, as well as by using software such as Microsoft Excel add-ins DataStream and
Visual Basic.

5
  The code we produced can be found in A11  in Appendix.

                                     11
                                       Table 3
         Variable      Obs      Mean      Std. Dev.      Min         Max

          Price (SEK)    1 888    3,900,041     1,730,850     1,400,000     12,400,000
                          2
          Space (m )     1 887      52.1         22.3          18           141
          Fee (SEK)     1 888     2609.2       1088.0        307          7726
          Floor          1 617       3.0          1.8           1            10
          Rooms        1 888       2.0         0,85          1            5

             Note: Descriptive statistics on the data set which is the basis for the hedonic model

       Space  –  The living area is one of the top features of an apartment. In our hedonic

                                                                                                   2
model, we have included the variable space as well as a squared variable, space . This is to
capture the non-linear effect the living area has on prices (i.e the price difference between a

     2           2                                    2             2
20 m and 30 m apartment is bigger than a 90 m and 100 m apartment).

      Rooms  –  The number of rooms in an apartment is included since it dictates how many
people can live in the apartment. Even if an apartment is spacious, it is difficult to share with
others if it does not have rooms for each resident. Unfortunately, some listings on Booli lack
data on this variable, resulting in missing values.

      Fee  –  The variable fee is the monthly fee the owner of the apartment has to pay to the
tenant owner association. The tenant owner association owns the building in which the
apartments are situated, and is managed by its members, the residents. The monthly fee is
mainly used to pay interest and amortization on loans, but also maintenance costs. In general,
the fee can be considered as a reflection of the financial situation in the association. A high
fee can indicate a weak financial situation (high indebtedness), and thereby lower the price of

                                                         2
the apartment. We also test the value of fee , for the same reasons (non-linearity) as the

                 2
variable space .

       Floor  –  What floor the apartment is located on has an impact on  the price. Lower
level apartments tend to be cheaper because they are easier to see into and they are more
affected by street noise. Higher level apartments can be unattractive as well since many
apartment buildings in Stockholm are old and lack elevators.

       Subway proximity  –  The fastest way to travel in Stockholm is using the subway
which makes proximity to the closest subway station a natural component of the model. This
variable is calculated as the walking distance from the apartment to the nearest subway
station. There are several papers researching the effect on housing prices after an introduction

                                     12
of nearby high speed rail communication (e.g.  Chin & Chau, 2003). The data on distances is
manually collected using a geocoding application in Microsoft Excel Visual Basic to make
use of Google Maps distance services.

       Location  –  This distance is measured as walking distance from the Central Station in
Stockholm. It is collected the same way as the Subway Proximity and we use it as a dummy
variable. The dummy  variable equals one (1) if the observation is more than 2 km from
central Stockholm. Central Stockholm is in this context the Central Station. A publication
from Booli shows the decline in housing prices as the distance from central Stockholm
increases  (Booli Search Technologies AB, 2016).

       The two-year mortgage rate  –  We collect data on the two-year interest rates on
mortgages provided by Danske Bank via DataStream. Interest rates impact the monthly cost
of owning an apartment,  and could therefore be a valid variable to include in the model.
However, this effect could be captured by time fixed effects and/or time trends.

       Real estate pricing index (flats in Stockholm)  –  This index holds the effect of the
general price increase of  real estate in Stockholm fixed. This variable prevents us from
rejecting the null hypothesis when it is merely the prices in general that have risen. It captures
both the price increase that is due to a higher demand for apartments as well as the price
increase due to inflation. This effect could also be captured by using a polynomial time trend,
and/or including seasonal time variables, as well as time fixed effects.

                                     13
5  Theory and Methodology

In this section,  we present our hypothesis development and  a review of the theory covering
the statistical methods that we use. The hedonic pricing model is a method to determine what
factors are important and valued when people purchase an apartment. Furthermore, the
regression discontinuity design makes use of  the residuals from the hedonic model in order to
quantify the new buses’ value.

5.1  Hypothesis Development

Hypothesis 1:  The value of less noise and cleaner air is incorporated in real estate prices.

       Our belief/theory is that people value a calmer and cleaner environment in a similar
way that they value a beautiful view, a good location and other apartment characteristics. In
an efficient  market,  all aspect that affect the value of an asset should be included in its price
(Fama,  1970). Since apartments are sold in a market where the price is determined by supply
and demand, the same principles should be applicable. A reduction in noise is intuitively a
change that is more noticeable than a change in air quality to the people that live nearby. By
distinguishing between directly and indirectly located apartments we investigate whether
proximity to the bus stop makes a difference or not. This leads to our second hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2:  Properties located directly by the bus stop  are more affected than properties
that are not located directly by the bus stop.

5.2  The Hedonic Pricing Model

The hedonic pricing model is a simple method with an underlying goal to create an accurate
model for predicting the price of property.

       Buildings and apartments can be compared to a bundle of goods sold in a market. An
apartment can be decomposed into characteristics such as number of rooms, what floor it is
located on, or distance to the city center. Each of an apartment’s characteristics can be  seen as
items that sum up to the expected overall price. However, unlike a bundle of goods, the value
of an apartment’s different features cannot be directly observed (e.g. the value of an extra
bedroom relative to the overall value of the apartment). The  hedonic model can be used to
measure the influencing effect of these characteristics on the overall transaction price. They
might add or subtract value from the property.

                                     14
       The regression analysis in the hedonic model is multivariate regression using the
ordinary least squares (OLS) method. This method minimizes the sum of the squared
residuals (the difference between the observed and the predicted prices):

                      (   &     (         &    (               &
                 !"#   %)* $% =  %)* (,%  − ,%)  =   %)* (,%  − /  − /010) ,

where  ,%  is the observed final price of an apartment,  /%  are the estimates and  1%  the
explanatory variables. The explanatory variables are characteristics of an apartment that we
have chosen if

        i.       We believe they have explanatory  power when trying to value a property, and
        ii.       there is data available for them.

        In the process of choosing the hedonic model that explains the prices of the properties
in our data set, various combinations of different variables are considered. The four most
suitable combinations we find, are built as follows:  ,%2  is the price of the property, 1(BDH) is

                                                                     6
an indicator variable for properties sold after the change ,  3%2  is the time fixed effect in terms
of zip code over year and half year, and  42  is the standard error term which is clustered by zip
code times year and week.

        The four equations in question are:

                      ,2  =  /6 + /*  89:2  + /&1%2  + 3%2  + 42                  (1)

where  1%2  in equation (1) is the vector of covariates of the variables  space,  fee,  rooms,

                                                                                                               7
walking distance to  the closest metro  and  to Stockholm Central Station (integer variables ),
and  floor.

                      ,2  =  /6 + /*  89:2  + /&1%2  + 3%2  + 42                  (2)

6
 1(BDH) is a dummy variable, which takes the value 1 if the apartment is sold after the change and the value
zero otherwise.
7
 An integer variable creates a dummy variable for each value of the variable.

                                     15
where  1%2  in equation (2) is the vector of covariates of the variables  space,  fee,  rooms,
walking distance to the closest metro  and  to Stockholm Central Station  (integer variables),

                                         2
floor  (integer variable), and space ,

                      ,2  =  /6 + /*  89:2  + /&1%2  + 3%2  + 42                  (3)

where  1%2  in equation (3) is the vector  of covariates of the variables  space,  fee,  walking

                                                                                                                2
distance to the closest metro  and  to Stockholm Central Station  (integer variables),  space ,

                                                               2
floor  (integer variable),  rooms  (integer variable),  fee , and  quarter of year  (integer variable),

                      ,2  =  /6 + /*  89:2  + /&1%2  + 3%2  + 42                  (4)

                                                                                                         2
where  1%2  in equation (4) is the vector of covariates of the variables  space,  fee,  space , floor
(integer variable),  walking distance to the closest metro  and  to Stockholm Central Station
(integer variables),  rooms  (integer variable), and  quarter of year  (integer variable).

       The coefficient of special interest is  /*, which seeks to give us an estimate of the
uplift in properties due to the change of buses. Since we through the hedonic model want to
find a model that is appropriate over several years, it is important to include time-fixed
effects.

5.3  Regression Discontinuity Design

Thistlethwaite & Campbell (1960)  first introduced the regression discontinuity designs
(RDD) in order to  estimate and analyze how future academic outcomes is affected by merit
awards. These awards were allocated based on observed test scores: those that were above a
known cutoff point received the awards. The core idea of this research design was that
students with scores just below and just above the cutoff should be good comparisons  (Lee &
Lemieux, 2010). Thus, all other components were assumed to be continuous with respect to
the assignment variable  1. Since one cannot simultaneously observe the same unit (for
instance, student) both before and after the treatment, the average treatment effects over
populations are in focus, rather than those on unit level  (Lee & Lemieux, 2010).

                                     16
                                      Figure 2

       The treatment effect could be illustrated by the distance between B and A, shown in
Figure 2. The quantity, “the average treatment effect”, could be estimated by

               8 − ;  =  <"!=↓6?  ,  1  =  @ + 4  − <"!=↑6?  ,  1  =  @ + 4  ,
which equals
                             ?  ,2  1  − ,2  0  1  =  @  .

       It is implemented through a dummy variable taking the value 1 if the unit is on the
right side of the cut-off, and otherwise 0:
                                    1      1%  ≥  @
                          F%  =
                                   0  HIℎKLM"NK

       Above equation  illustrates the so called  sharp RD Design, where the units receive the
treatment just by passing the cut-off: the probability of receiving the treatment goes from zero
to one. In this thesis, a variant of RD Design,  the fuzzy RD Design, is applied in order to
capture that it is the probability that some unit is treated that changes discontinuously when it
passes the cut-off, where the probability could increase from 0 to less than 1. This is because
we do not expect the market to react immediately on the change, but with a delay, which
would not affect all properties simultaneously.

                                     17
       The impact of the treatment effect in the fuzzy RD Design is estimated through the
change in outcome either side of the  cut-off divided by the change in treatment either side of
the cut-off,
                     <"!=↓6?  ,  1  =  @ + 4  − <"!=↑6?  ,  1  =  @ + 4
                OP  =
                    <"!=↓6?  ,  9  =  @ + 4  − <"!=↑6?  9  1  =  @ + 4

where c is the cut-off, Y is the outcome variable, X,  is  the assignment variable and D is the
treatment dummy variable, taking the value zero for units being on the left side of the cut-off,
and one for units on the right side.

5.3.1  Graphical Analysis

Before running regressions, users of RD Design want to illustrate the raw data and treatment
effect graphically in an intuitive way. This is since if the discontinuity is not visible, there
will presumably not be any effect captured by the more advanced statistics that follow
(Brewer, 2015). Other advantages of the RD graph are that the magnitude of the treatment
effect (the “jump”) can be illustrated, and it also shows if any unexpected jumps occur at
other points in time.

       The RD graphs illustrate the behavior of the estimated regression function, where
1%  <  @  being the control group and  1%  ≥  @  being the treatment group. The construction of the
graphs is usually made by “dots” being local sample means over non-overlapping bins,
together with estimated global polynomial regression curves on both sides of the cut-off.
        This thesis includes  a graphical illustration of different bins used when the raw data is
plotted. Our benchmark for the size of the bins is 7 days, which corresponds to 100 and 133
bins on the right and left side of the cut-off, respectively. However, the estimates will be
imprecise if the size of the bins is too narrow (when the number of bins too large). On the
other hand, if the size of the bins is too wide (when number of bins is too small), the
estimates may fail to estimate the regression slope since they are biased  (Lee & Lemieux,
2010). Therefore,  we also illustrate the graphs of the doubled and halved the size of the bins
twice, where the size of the bins approximately is  29 and 14 days, as well as 3.5 and 2 days.

5.3.2  Formal Regression

The formal regression is made following two different approaches: global polynomial
regression and local linear regression.

                                     18
5.3.2.1  Global Polynomial

The parametric  global polynomial  approach within the RD Design, is  simply an OLS
estimation, where the coefficient of the treatment-dummy variable is the coefficient of
interest. The regression model used in this thesis is the best hedonic model found by
considering different variables affecting property prices. After choosing which variables to
include in the hedonic model, the model is tested for different time trends, with the aim to
capture underlying time variation of the data set and increase the explanatory power of the
hedonic regression model.

       The hedonic regression model, including the time trend variable, is run, and the
residuals  are saved. By considering the residuals of the property prices rather than the prices
themselves, the unexplained portion of the property prices is captured, which intuitively
should include the value of environmental qualities, thereby the buses’ switch to cleaner fuel.
Thus, it is the residuals that are plotted in the RD graphs that follow.

      When performing global polynomial RD Design, there might be a concern of an
unbalanced number of  observations on each side of the cut-off  (Bento, et al., 2011). In the
following  section,  we will present a local linear methodology with intention to confirm the
global polynomial results.

       For further knowledge and reading about global polynomial estimations within RD
Design, papers by Davis (2008)  and  Bento, et al.  (2011)  are recommended.

5.3.2.2  Local Linear

Regarding the non-parametric approach,  local linear/polynomial regression, our estimations
are made in two steps. First, the hedonic pricing model  -  including the same appropriate time
trend as in the global polynomial  -  is performed across the whole sample and the residuals are
saved. Then, we use the residuals to perform the RD analysis. The local linear approach
views the treatment effect as a local randomization and the analysis is limited to observations
close to the cut-off point, located within the  so-called  bandwidth  (i.e. “window”). Since the
local analysis only uses observations near the cut-off point, the sample size is smaller in
relation to the global polynomial analysis. Thus, the functional form of this regression is
expected to be close to linear. In this thesis, the bandwidth is chosen after visual examination
of the distribution of the assignment variable day, since we do not have a natural choice of
window around zero. Another alternative would be to adopt data-driven bandwidth selection

                                     19
methods, which seek to minimize the standard errors, taking into account whether the design
is sharp or fuzzy (see for  instance Calonico et al., 2017).

        Choosing the appropriate bandwidth is a trade-off between precision and bias. Larger
bandwidths  yield  more  precise  estimates  since  it  includes  more  observations  in  the
regression. However, it is less likely that the functional form will be linear, and thus, it could
bias the estimate of the treatment effect. In this thesis, different bandwidths are considered
and tested for. The shortest time it would take for inhabitants to react to less noise and cleaner
air through improved buses is assumed to be two weeks (15 days), why the smallest tested
bandwidth is 15 days on each side of the cut-off. The widest bandwidth tested for is 70 days
on each side of the cut-off. A data-driven bandwidth selection generates bandwidths between
180 and 400 days on each side of the cut-off, which in our case is assumed to be too wide.
The kernel function used in order to estimate the local polynomial is triangular, which is the
default one. In practice, the choice of kernel function is expected  to have little influence  (Lee
& Lemieux, 2010).

       For further knowledge and reading about local linear regression within RD Design,
papers by Lee  &  Lemieux (2010),  Calonico, et al. (2014)  and  Calonico, et al. (2017)  are
recommended.

                                     20
6  Results

In this section, we present our main findings. The best hedonic pricing model is chosen and
explained. The outputs of the RD Design are presented for the whole sample as well as for a
division between properties located directly and indirectly  by the bus stops. The global
approach provides some evidence of the new buses being priced by the market,  still, the local
approach does not support the global findings. Lastly, we perform sensitivity and robustness
checks concerning the RD Design.

6.1  Hedonic Pricing Model

           Note: This is a reduced version of table A2 which can be found in the Appendix. It
           reports the estimates from four separate regressions of equations (1), (2), (3) and  (4),
            that are made in order to capture the best fitting hedonic pricing model for the data set.
           The dependent variable is the property price in SEK (collected April 1st, 2017). The
          coefficients of the regression variables should be interpreted in monetary  terms, SEK.
            Standard errors are in parentheses and P-values of the OLS are in square brackets. R-
           squared ranges from 0.945 to 0.949, and adjusted R-squared ranges from 0.930 to
           0.935.

Table 4 shows the output from the four most appropriate regression models. When choosing
the best hedonic model to use in the RD Design, the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) is
used as benchmark. The lowest BIC-value,  and consequently the most appropriate model
according to the criterion, is received by equation (4). Equation (4) also has a coefficient of
1(BDH) that is within reasonable amounts. We expect a positive coefficient of the treatment

                                     21
variable, as an approximation of residents’ valuation of a cleaner local environment. Hence,
we choose equation (4) as the best fitting hedonic model.

       As illustrated in A2 in Appendix, all variables in equation (4) except number of rooms
and floor level are significant at either  1% or 5% significance level, indicating that they have
been of high importance for people in search for an apartment to purchase. It is important to
be aware of the seasonal trend in housing supply. As A3 in Appendix depicts, the property
transactions are  not evenly distributed throughout the year. Equation (4) includes an integer
variable for each quarter to control for this effect.

       A regression of equation (4) generates an adjusted R-squared over 0.93, which
indicates that more than 93% of the variation in the dependent variable closing price can be
explained by the chosen independent variables. The remaining 7% of the variation is within
the residuals, which will be further examined in the RD Design.

        The fixed effects that we include in equation (1)  -  (4)  concern zip code, year and half
year. This is to control for the unobserved factors within each zip code, factors that are

                                       8
expected to stay constant over time.  We test whether all these time fixed effects are jointly
equal to zero, receiving an F-value of 157.06, which allows us to reject the null hypotheses
that they are simultaneously zero. Including these fixed effects, economically means that we
are able to adequately capture unobserved heterogeneity.

8
  A table documenting the number of transactions in each zip code per half year is found in A4 in Appendix.

                                     22
6.2  The Whole Sample

6.2.1  Global Polynomial

   Note: This table reports the global estimates from nine separate regressions of equation (4), including each of the
   first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth order of polynomial time trend, respectively. The
   coefficients of the regression variables should be interpreted in monetary terms, SEK. Standard errors are in
   parentheses.

       Table 5 reports the outcome of nine separate regressions of equation (4) with different
polynomial time trends. To ensure that the effect is captured in the residuals, the treatment
variable  1(BDH)  is  excluded  from  this  regression.  The  coefficient  of  interest,  /*,  is
significant at a 5% significance level for all time trends, except for the first order of
polynomial, at which it is significant at a 10% significance level. All regressions generate an
R-squared and adjusted R-squared of above 0.93. The BIC is used as benchmark when

                                     23
deciding which polynomial of order to choose. However, the BIC tells us that all nine

                                   9
regressions are equally good .

        In order to find the best fitting time trend, we compare scatterplots of residuals from
the regressions reported in Table 5. Figure 3 (a) provides the scatterplot of residuals from a
fifth order polynomial time trend, which by visual examination proved to be the most suitable

    10
one . The fitted line smoothly follows the plotted residuals, implying that the underlying
time trend is adequately captured by the fifth-order polynomial. By studying Figure 3 (a) and
(b) one can see that the raw data is relatively smooth, which indicates a fair OLS estimation.
Furthermore, we notice a discontinuity in the property prices at  the intercept, 18th of August,
2014. Figure 3 (b) illustrates the same residuals as in Figure 3 (a), but includes confidence
intervals of 95% coverage for each bin. Once again, the smoothness of the data set can be
visualized since the confidence intervals of the residuals are rather tight, implying low
variance.

        With a fifth order of polynomial trend, the uplift in property prices due to the switch

                                                       11
to cleaner fuel is approximately 185,000 SEK  . To put this in perspective, the average price
of apartments during the two months leading up to the change was 3,048,036 SEK, which
implies an increase of 6.1%.

       The results of the global polynomial analysis provide evidence on the 5% significance
level that the uplift in the property prices is due to less noise and  cleaner air. This allows us to
reject the null hypothesis that there was no effect brought by the change of buses. Our
conclusion is further confirmed by the visible discontinuity in Figure 3.

9
 The difference between the BIC of these nine regressions is less than 2 in absolute terms, which according to
(Raftery, 1995)  provides low evidence that one is better than another one.
10
  See Appendix A5 for  illustration of different orders of polynomial time trends.
11
  This is the  value of the coefficient of 1(BDH) with a fifth order of polynomial  time trend, seen in Table 5.

                                     24
  Note:  Figure 3 (a)  plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4), excluding 1(BDH), including a
  fifth order of polynomial time trend, where each bin is 7 days. See A6 Appendix for a comparison of  different bin lengths.
  Figure 3 (b)  plots the residuals from regression of equation (4), excluding 1(BDH), including a fifth order of polynomial
  time trend, illustrating a 95% confidence interval for each bin. The bin  sizes are automatically chosen, mimicking the
  underlying data variability: each bin is 22.5 days on the left side and 30.8 days on the right side of the cut-off.

6.2.2  Local Linear

   Note: This table reports the local estimates from 24 separate regressions of the residuals in equation (4), excluding
   1(BDH), along with a fifth order of polynomial, using RD robust. The order of polynomial is based on the Bandwidths
   are in number of days. The coefficients of the regression variables should be interpreted in monetary terms, SEK.
   Conventional standard error in parenthesis, and conventional p-value in brackets.

                                     25
        Table 6 reports the estimates of the treatment effect of the change to cleaner fuels. To
ensure completeness, a range of bandwidths and polynomial orders are included. Since we
expect the functional form of the local RD approach to be close to linear, we include the
estimations from the first (i.e linear), second and third order of polynomial time trend. The
estimates indicate that there is generally little evidence of a discontinuity at the intercept.
Although the first order of polynomial has statistical significance for bandwidths 60 and  70
days, the explanatory value of the estimates can be questioned. As expected, the precision of
the estimates improves as we approach larger bandwidths, and thereby more observations.
The significance can therefore be explained by the larger bandwidths.  What is more, the size
of the 1(BDH) coefficient might seem unrealistically large. We also notice that as the order of
polynomial increases, the estimates vary more between different bandwidths.

       Figure 4 illustrates the treatment effect by plotting the residuals from equation (4),
excluding 1(BDH), along with a fifth order of polynomial. The graph only shows the part 60
days before and after the cut-off, which is why it takes the shape of a second order
polynomial.   The discontinuities indicated in Figure 4  are consistent with the estimates
reported in Table 6 for a second order polynomial with a bandwidth of 60 days. We observe
that a second order of polynomial explains the data relatively adequately. Yet, it is not as
smooth as illustrated in Figure 3, which is a consequence of using the local method. It is
visible that there are fewer observations on the left side of the cut-off, which again can be
explained by the seasonal trend in the housing market.

       Accordingly, the local RD approach does not reveal enough significant evidence to
reject the null hypothesis that the value of less noise and cleaner air is not incorporated in real
estate prices.

                                     26
Note: Figure 4 plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4),
excluding 1(BDH), including a fifth order of polynomial time trend, with the size of each
bin being one (1) day on each side of the cut-off. Bandwidth is manually chosen to 60 days
on each side of the cut-off.

                        27
6.3  Dividing into Directly and In-Directly

6.3.1  Global Polynomial

       Table A7  (a) and (b)  in the Appendix  illustrates global polynomial estimates of
regressions made based on the location of the properties. The coefficient for 1(BDH) is
insignificant for properties located directly by bus stops, while it is significant for those
located farther away from the bus stops, for all orders of polynomial. This is the opposite to
what hypothesis two suggested. However, it is likely due to the difference in number of
observations, where there are more apartments farther away from bus stops in our data set.
The BIC, once again, indicates that all orders of polynomial are equally fit to include in
equation (4). Based on this, we pick the best fitting time trend to include for each group of
properties by using visual analysis of the graph.

       As illustrated in Figure 5, the  fourth order of polynomial time trend adequately
describes the underlying data, both regarding properties directly located by the bus stops, as

                    12
well as indirectly.   Moreover, the results are smoother for properties located in-directly
(Figure 5 (b)) in comparison to those located directly by the bus stops, which supports the
findings in  Table A7.

       Hence, the results of the global polynomial analysis provide no evidence that the
uplift of properties directly located by the bus stops is due to less noise and air pollution.
However, the results confirm on a 10% and 5% significance level, that the increase on
properties located in-directly by bus stops are due to the switch to cleaner  fuel. These results
are also  in line with the illustrations in Figure 5.

12
  See A9 and A10 in Appendix for illustration of different orders of polynomial time trends.

                                     28
   Note:  Figure 5 (a)  plots the residuals from regression of equation (4) for properties located directly by bus stop,
   excluding 1(BDH), including a fourth order of polynomial time trend, with the size of each bin being 7 days. Figure 5
   (b)  plots the residuals from regression of equation (4) for properties located in-directly by bus stop, excluding
   1(BDH), including a fourth order of polynomial time trend, with the size of each bin being 7 days.

6.3.2 Local Linear

       Table A8  in the Appendix  reports the estimates of the treatment effect of the change
to cleaner fuels, divided into whether the properties are located directly or in-directly relative
to the bus stops. As in Section 6.2, a range of bandwidths and polynomial orders are included
for completeness. We see that none of the estimates for properties directly by bus stops are
significant, implying no evidence of a price increase as a result of the change of buses. Also,
as captured by the global method in Section 6.3.1, the local approach provides evidence on
10%, 5% and 1% significance level for the first order of polynomial time trend, indicating a
price uplift by more than 250,000 SEK. In addition,  we observe that, regarding properties
located in-directly by bus stops, the first order of polynomial time trend is best explaining the
underlying data distribution. This fulfills the expectation of the local linearity.

        Figure 6 illustrates the treatment effect by plotting the residuals from equation (4),
excluding 1(BDH), along with a fourth order of polynomial over the whole data set. The
figure only shows the part 60 days before and after the cut-off, and due to the low number of
observations, it takes the shape of a first order polynomial. A first order of polynomial
explains the data relatively adequately. It is not as smooth as Figure 5, which is a
consequence of a small bandwidth of 60 days.

                                     29
       The local linear approach provides some evidence of price increases of approximately
250,000 SEK for properties in-directly located by bus stops. No such evidence is found
regarding the properties directly located by bus stops. Furthermore,  we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that properties located directly or in-directly are affected the same way by the
change of buses.

   Note: Figure 6 (a) plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4) for properties located directly
   by bus stop, excluding 1(BDH), including a fifth order of polynomial time trend, with the size of each bin  being one (1)
   day on each side of the cut-off. Bandwidth is manually chosen to 60 days on each side of the cut-off.  Figure 6 (b)  plots
   the residuals from regression of equation (4) for properties located in-directly by bus stop, excluding 1(BDH), including
   a fourth order of polynomial time trend, with the size of each bin being one (1) day on each side of the cut-off.
   Bandwidth is manually chosen to 60 days on each side of the cut-off.

                                     30
6.4  Sensitivities and Robustness Checks

6.4.1  Manipulation of running variable

If there is a possibility for individuals to manipulate the running variable (the date of the
sale), the RD Design cannot correctly estimate the effect of treatment. To investigate this, we
test if the density around cut-off is smooth, i.e. if there are as many observations on the left
side as there are on the right side of the cut-off. Being able to manipulate the running variable
would in this case be to know that there will be a price increase in properties, and based on
that choose to purchase an apartment before the day of the change. Since  there was no
marketing  leading  up  to  the  change,  we  believe  this  is  highly  unlikely  in  our  case.
Nevertheless, we run  McCrary’s (2008)  density test for a discontinuity in the density of the
running variable.

        Figure 7 shows a visible discontinuity around cut-off: the lines are not smooth around
August 18th, 2014. In spite of this, we do not believe this is due to manipulation in the
assignment variable. A more reasonable explanation is the seasonal variety, illustrated in
figure A3 in Appendix, since there are much fewer apartments sold during the summer, than
after the end of August. This could, among other things, be  a reason for the non-  or low
significance of our results, and the difference between global and local estimations.

          Note: This figure shows the DC Density test of our assignment variable days, following McCrary
          (2007).
                                     31
6.4.2  Discontinuity and Non-Linearity

In the local linear RD (Tables 6 and A8) we include several different bandwidths and
polynomial  orders. It is clear that the results are not robust across a wide range of
polynomials. Both the standard errors and point estimates change when the polynomial of
order changes. Neither are the results robust when the bandwidth  varies. These are issues that
make it difficult to distinguish between discontinuity and non-linearity, which in turn lead to
insecure results.

6.5  Further Limitations

If  the change would have involved  a larger number of bus lines, the data set would have been
larger and the results plausibly more reliable. Capturing the environmental effect of the
public transportation systems’ eco initiatives is difficult since they tend to evolve gradually
over a long period of time; they do not have the resources to immediately switch all vehicles.

       A common difficulty in RD analysis is to specify the underlying time trend. If
improperly chosen, it can result in problems in terms of bias. If there are several variables
with different time trends, the specification is even more challenging. Our benchmark BIC
provides little guidance in choosing which the most appropriate trend is. A reason for this
could be that other variables in the hedonic model capture much of the time trend.

       Moreover, another challenging part of this study is the construction  of a hedonic
model with high explanatory value. Even though we find determining factors for pricing
apartments in central Stockholm, the unexplained part (i.e. the residuals) might be correlated
with the time trend. If that is the case, the residuals are  also correlated with 1(BDH), which
causes biased estimates of the coefficient for 1(BDH). As a result, this leaves the estimates
from the RD Design as well.

                                     32
7  Conclusion and Implications

It is generally agreed that people of today tend to be more aware  of the negative effects of a
bad environment. Variables such as air and noise pollution are factors that seem to be
important. The purpose of this thesis is to examine to what extent this is valid. The question
we have lifted is whether value is created by  the introduction of more environmental-friendly
buses in the  neighborhood. In other words: Does closeness to a bus stop trafficked by green
buses create a rise in property prices or are other factors more important?
       By using a highly justified hedonic pricing model we are able to control for most
factors that people value when they purchase an apartment. Thereafter, we analyze the
residuals by performing a RD Design analysis.
       The global RD estimates, making use of the entire data set, provide results of a  price
increase of between 150,000 and 190,000 SEK in properties as a result of the introduction of
more environmental-friendly buses. The local method however, does not support the findings
in global RD, indicating little evidence that risen prices on property are caused by the switch
to cleaner fuel. Furthermore, we compare apartments located closer and farther away from
the bus stops. However, our hypothesis that closer apartments are affected more is not
empirically supported. Moreover, whether the air and noise improvements went unnoticed, or
that they are not incorporated in housing prices is difficult to say. A larger and more evenly
distributed sample would help bring clarity to this.
       Yet, although our study present limited empirical evidence of an improvement in the
local environment through the change to cleaner fuels, the potential benefits from improved
air quality are large. Extensive research show the effect of pollutants on child mortality.
Again, if we are able to incorporate both health and non-health effects, the value of
environmental objectives can become more graspable for policymakers. The realization that
this technology, besides being good for the environment, also brings monetary value can
provide policymakers with further incentive to  take measures in order to create a cleaner
environment for people to live in and children to grow up in.
        Finally, it remains to be seen whether so called green buses create value to properties
or not. Our study has not given a clear answer to the question  asked. This might be explained
by the fact that our data was insufficient. On the other hand, the answer could simply be, that
closeness to some kind of public transportation is important whereas the fuel used is of less
importance and consequently does not affect property prices. Today we cannot present a clear
theory but perhaps the future holds an answer to the question.

                                     33
References

AB Storstockholms Lokaltrafik, 2016.  Fakta om SL och länet 2015,  Stockholm: AB
Storstockholms Lokaltrafik.

Ashenfelter, O., 2006. MEASURING THE VALUE OF A STATISTICAL LIFE: PROBLEMS
AND PROSPECTS, Cambridge: NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH.

Bajic, V., 1983. The effects of a new subway line on housing prices in metropolitan Toronto.
Urban Studies, 20(2), pp. 147-158.

Baum-Snow, N. & Kahn, M. E., 2000. The effects of new public projects to expand urban rail
transit..  Journal of Public Economics, 77(2), p. 241.

Bento, A., Kaffine, D., Roth, K. & Zaragoza-Watkins, M., 2011. The Effects of Regulation in
the Presence of Multiple Unpriced Externalities: Evidence from the Transportation Sector.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3), pp. 1-29.

Booli Search Technologies AB, 2016. Så dyra är bostäderna på din tunnelbanestation  -  Booli.
[Online]
Available at:  http://www.mynewsdesk.com/se/booli.se/pressreleases/saa-dyra-aer-bostaederna-
paa-din-tunnelbanestation-1393929
[Accessed 15 04 2017].

Bowes, D. R. & Ihlanfeldt, K. R., 2001. Identifying the Impacts of Rail Transit Stations on
Residential Property Values.  Journal of Urban Economics, 50(1), pp. 1-25.

Brewer, M., 2015.  Youtube.  [Online]
Available at:  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3FTwlRFwdfI
[Accessed 1 April 2017].

Böhlin, J., 2015.  Trafikförvaltningens hållbarhetsarbete i samband med trafikupphandling.
[Online]
Available at:  http://www.lansstyrelsen.se/stockholm/SiteCollectionDocuments/Sv/miljo-och-
klimat/klimat-och-
energi/Klimat%20och%20energi/Seminarier/Presentationer%20seminarium%2026%20maj%
202015/Presentation%20Johan%20B%C3%B6hlin,%20SLL%20Trafikf%C3%B6rvaltningen
.pdf
[Accessed 10 April 2017].

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. & Titiunik, R., 2014. Robust data-driven inference in the
regression-discontinuity design.  The Stata Journal, 14(4), pp. 909-946.

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M., Titiunik, R. & Farrell, M., 2017. rdrobust: Software for
Regression Discontinuity Designs.  The Stata Journal, 18 January, pp. 1-33.

Can, A., 1992. Specification and estimation of hedonic housing price models.  Regional
Science and Urban Economics, 22, pp. 453-474.

                                     34
Cervero, R. & Kang, C. D., 2011. Bus rapid transit impacts on land uses and land values in
Seoul, Korea.  Transport Policy, 18(1), pp. 102-116.

Chen, Y. & Whalley, A., 2012. Green Infrastructure: The Effects of Urban Rail Transit on
Air Quality.  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(1), pp. 58-97.

Chin, T. & Chau, K., 2003. A Critical Review of Literature on the Hedonic Price Model.
International Journal for Housing Science and Its Applications,  2(27), pp. 145-165.

Clay, K., Lewis, J. & Severnini, E., 2016.  Canary in a Coal Mine: Infant Mortality, Property
Values, and Tradeoffs Associated with Mid-20th Century Air Pollution,  Cambridge:
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH.

Concas, S., 2013. Accessibility and housing price resilience: Evidence from limited-access
roadways in Florida.  Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, 2357, pp. 66-76.

Damm, D., Lerner-Lam, E. & Young, J., 1980. Response of Urban Real Estate Values in
Anticipation of the Washington Metro.  Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 14(3),
pp. 315-336.

Davis, L., 2008. The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City.  Journal of
Political Economy, 116(1), pp. 38-81.

Des Rosiers, F., Thériault, M., Voisin, M. & Dubé, J., 2010. Does an Improved Urban Bus
Service Affect House Values?.  International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 4(6), pp.
321-346.

Dewees, D. N., 1976. The Effect of a Subway on Residential Property Values in Toronto.
Journal of Urban Economics, 3(4), p. 357.

Dube, J., Rosiers, F. D., Theriault, M. & Dib, P., 2011. Economic impact of a supply change
in mass transit in urban areas: A Canadian example.  Transportation Research Part A, 45(1),
pp. 46-62.

Dubin, R., 1998. Predicting house prices using multiple listings data.  The Journal of Real
Estate Finance and Economics, 17(1), pp. 35-60.

Ecotraffic, 2015.  Stadsbussar  -  Kunskapssammanställning EURO VI,  u.o.: Ecotraffic.
Fama, E., 1970. Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.  Journal
of Finance,  pp. 383-417.

Greenstone, M. & Chay, K., 2003. The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence
from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.  The Quarterly
Journal of Economics,  118(3), pp. 1121-1167.

Hickman, E., Gaines, J. & FJ, I., 1984. The influence of neighborhood quality on residential
values.  The Real Estate Appraiser and Analyst, 50(2), pp. 36-42.

                                     35
Icopal, 2017.  Nitrogen Oxide (NOx) Pollution.  [Online]
Available at:  http://www.icopal-noxite.co.uk/nox-problem/nox-pollution.aspx
[Accessed 9 Maj 2017].

Krantz, D., Waever, R. & TR, A., 1982. Residential tax capitalization: Consistent estimates
using micro-level data.  Land Economics, 58(4), pp. 488-496.

Länsstyrelsen Blekinge Län, 2005.  VOC-  lättflyktiga organiska ämnen (Volatile Organic
Compounds)..  [Online]
Available at:  http://www.lansstyrelsen.se/blekinge/Sv/miljo-och-klimat/verksamheter-med-
miljopaverkan/miljofarlig-verksamhet/Pages/voc-direktivet.aspx
[Accessed 9 Maj 2017].

Länsstyrelsen Stockholm, u.d.  Bullernätverket Stockholms Län.  [Online]
Available at:  http://www.bullernatverket.se/kartlaggning-2/
[Accessed 10 05 2017].

Lee, D. & Lemieux, T., 2010. Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.  Journal of
Economic Literature, June, 48, pp. 281-355.

Maasing, U., 2013.  Nästan 200 MAN-bussar till Keolis i Stockholm.  [Online]
Available at:  http://www.bussmagasinet.se/2013/12/nastan-200-man-bussar-till-keolis-i-
stockholm/
[Accessed 20 Mars 2017].

McCrary, J., 2008. Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test.  Journal of Econometrics, 142, pp. 698-714.

McDonald, J. F. & Osuji, C. I., 1995. The effect of anticipated transportation improvement on
residential land values.  Regional Science & Urban Economics, 25(3), p. 261.

McLeod, P., 1984. The demand for local amenity: an hedonic price analysis.  Environment &
Planning A, 16(3), pp. 389-400.

McMillen, D. & McDonald, J., 2004. Reaction of house prices  to a new rapid transit line:
Chicago’s midway line, 1983–1999.  Real Estate Economics, 32(3), pp. 463-486.

Mikelbank, B. A., 2004. Spatial analysis of the relationship between housing values and
investments in transportation infrastructure.  Annals of Regional Science, 38(4), pp. 705-726.

Monson, M., 2009. Valuation using hedonic pricing models.  Cornell Real Estate Review,  7,
pp. 62-73.

Mulley, C. & Tsai, C., 2017. Impact of bus rapid transit on housing price and accessibility
changes in Sydney: A repeat  sales approach.  International Journal of Sustainable
Transportation, 11(1), pp. 3-10.

Naturvårdsverket, 2017.  Nitrogen Oxide (NOx) Pollution  -  Health Issues  -  Icopal.  [Online]
Available at:  http://www.naturvardsverket.se/Sa-mar-miljon/Manniska/Buller/
[Accessed 10 May 2017].

                                     36
Orton, K., 2017. Stockholm. Reference at Keolis AB.

Raftery, A., 1995. Bayesian Model Selection in Social Research.  Sociological Methodology,
25, pp. 111-163.

Rodriguez, D. A. & Mojica, C. H., 2009. Capitalization of BRT network expansions effects
into prices of non-expansion areas.  Transportation Research Part A, 43(5), pp. 560-571.

Shefer, D., 1986. Utility changes in housing and neighborhood services for households
moving into and out of distressed neighborhoods.  Journal of Urban Economics, 19, pp. 107-
124.

Stockholms stad, 2014. Luften i Stockholm Årsrapport, Stockholm.

Strange, W., 1992. Overlapping neighborhoods and housing externalities.  Journal of Urban
Economics, 32, pp. 17-39.

Thériault, M., Des Rosiers, F. & Dubé, . J., 2007. Testing the temporal stability of
accessibility value in residential hedonic prices.  Scienze Regionali, 6(3), pp. 5-46.

Thistlethwaite, D. & Campbell, D., 1960. Regression-discontinuity analysis: An alternative to
the ex post facto experiment.  Journal of Educational Psychology, 51(6), pp. 309-317.

Trafikförvaltningen Stockholms läns landsting, 2014.  Delårsrapport augusti 2014 för
Trafiknämnden,  Stockholm: Trafikförvaltningen Stockholms läns landsting.

Vargiu, E. & Urru, M., 2013. Exploiting web scraping in a collaborative filtering-  based
approach to web advertising.  Artificial Intelligence Research,  2(1).

Wilhelmsson, M., 2000. The impact of traffic noise on the values of single family houses.
Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 43(6), pp. 799-815.

Viscusi, K. & Aldy, J., 2003.  THE VALUE OF A STATISTICAL LIFE: A CRITICAL REVIEW
OF MARKET ESTIMATES THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, Cambridge: NATIONAL
BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH.

Voith, R., 1993. Changing Capitalization of CBD-Oriented Transportation Systems:
Evidence from Philadelphia, 1970-1988.  Journal of Urban Economics, 33(3), p. 361.

                                     37
Appendix

A1

Note: All observations in Stockholm

                                     38
                   Note: Observations located in Vasastan

                 Note: Observations located on Södermalm

Note: Observations located on Kungsholmen, Lilla Essingen and Stora Essingen

                       39
A2
                                          Table A2
              Equation                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
             VARIABLES          price         price         price         price
               1.(BDH)               253,339**      230,676**      175,910**      175,559**
                                       (118,238)       (116,239)        (86,666)        (86,546)
               space                 66,532***       66,390***       35,055***       34,845***
                                         (2,843)         (2,804)         (6,001)         (5,654)
                 fee                      -198.9***        -198.4***         -169.7*         -163.3***
                                         (42.33)         (42.19)         (95.10)         (38.78)
                fee2                                              0.00101
                                                                                    (0.0157)
              wdm_x               155,354**      155,200**      172,064***      171,997***
                                        (72,424)        (72,763)        (62,761)        (62,841)
               space2                                          249.6***       251.1***
                                                                          (50.93)          (47.29)
               rooms                187,836***      189,575***
                                             (44,996)         (44,407)
               central                 453,693***      473,387***
                                         (110,808)        (110,153)
                floor                   67,239***
                                                (12,534)
               2.floor_int                          129,127***      116,520***      116,348***
                                                        (38,496)        (36,965)        (36,719)
               3.floor_int                          150,742***      140,938***      140,713***
                                                         (46,378)        (43,733)        (44,010)
               4.floor_int                          193,100***      193,902***      193,663***
                                                        (48,509)        (45,593)        (45,438)
               5.floor_int                          241,587***      236,916***      236,582***
                                                        (70,822)        (69,355)        (69,091)
               6.floor_int                          508,957***      460,443***      460,166***
                                                        (82,236)        (82,804)        (83,105)
                7.floor_int                           404,728***      404,527***      404,515***
                                                       (109,233)       (107,225)       (107,120)
               8.floor_int                          474,176***      361,913**       362,501**
                                                       (176,839)       (169,967)       (169,275)
               9.floor_int                           320,883*        276,470        276,431
                                                       (170,472)       (186,134)       (186,195)
               10.floor_int                           577,880        512,121        511,830
                                                       (402,016)       (444,199)       (444,230)
               1.central                                         365,424***      366,142***
                                                                       (105,664)        (104,767)
               2.rooms_int                                      158,542***      158,619***
                                                                         (36,634)         (36,551)
               3.rooms_int                                      395,618***      395,978***
                                                                         (81,014)         (81,279)
                4.rooms_int                                        432,012***      433,416***
                                                                       (165,001)        (160,676)
                 5.rooms_int                                             -98,071          -94,186
                                                                       (366,864)        (365,433)
               2.qq                                             73,233*        73,164*
                                                                         (43,522)         (43,359)
               3.qq                                           944,366***      944,306***
                                                                       (143,711)        (143,704)
               4.qq                                            950,171***      950,078***
                                                                       (149,763)        (149,650)
               Constant                78,035         140,345       732,303***      729,792***
                                       (135,170)       (132,637)       (160,789)       (152,834)
               Observations              1,617          1,617          1,617          1,617
               R-squared                0.945          0.945          0.949          0.949
                Adj. R-Squared             0.930          0.930          0.935          0.935
                                      Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                            *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                 Note: This table reports the estimates from four separate regressions of equations (1),
                  (2), (3) and (4), that are made in order to capture the best fitting hedonic pricing model
                  for the data set. The dependent variable is the property price in SEK (collected April 1st,
                 2017). The coefficients of the regression variables should be interpreted in monetary
                  terms, SEK. Standard errors are in parentheses and P-values of the OLS are in square
                 brackets. R-squared ranges from 0.945 to 0.949, and adjusted R-squared ranges from
                  0.930 to 0.935.

                                     40
A3

              Table A3(a)                                  Table A3(b)
       Year         Freq.                Month      Freq.      Percent

       2012           76                     1         163         8.63
       2013          347                    2         170         9.00
       2014          391                    3         235        12.45
       2015           440
                                           4         166         8.79
       2016           490
                                          5         194        10.28
       2017           144
                                           6         127         6.73
       Total           1 888                  7          51          2.70
                                           8         131         6.94
     Note:   This   table   shows   the
                                           9         185         9.80
      distribution  of  transactions  across
     years                                    10         199        10.54
                                          11         172         9.11
                                          12         95         5.03

                                          Total       1,888       100.00
                                                Note:   This   table   shows   the   distribution   of
                                                       transactions across months

  Figure A3

   Note: Monthly transactions of properties during 2012 to 2017.

                                     41
A4
                                    Table A4
                                                   Half-Year
 Zip Code   2012,2   2013,1   2013,2   2014,1   2014,2   2015,1   2015,2   2016,1   2016,2   2017,1   Total
   11124       1       5       1       5       7       2       2       3       2       1       29
   11215              1                             2       1                      1       5
   11216       3       3       2       1       3       8       4       3       3       2       32
   11218                      1                      4               1       4       2       12
   11222       2       8       4       3       5       3       5       8       6       3       47
   11223              2                                                                 2
   11233       1                      3       3       1               3               1       12
   11235              1                      1               1       4               2       9
   11236       1       3       3       2       1       3       3       1       1       1       19
   11237       3       6       6       5       3       2       6       5       10       5       51
   11239                                                          2               1       3
   11240                                                   1                             1
   11243       9       21       17       21      20       33      13       28       22      17      201
   11244       5       5       6       3       8       5       7       5       4       2       50
   11245                      1       2               1               3       4              11
   11246       4       9       9       11       5       12      13       8       13       5       89
   11248       2       9       8       10       9       13       8       13       10       5       87
   11250       1       8       5       7       12       6       7       11       5       5       67
   11251       4       6       7       16      20       15      12       20       20      13      133
   11254       1       4       2       2       1       2       1       1       3       1       18
   11255              3       1       3       5       6       1       5       1       2       27
   11256              2       2       1       3       5       3       4       9       3       32
   11258                                                                 3       2       5
   11259       1       2       2       1       3       5       3       6       3       3       29
   11262       7       7       7       3       11       14       8       8       9       5       79
   11263       7       16       7       21      11       24       9       23       16       9      143
   11264              2       1       1       1               1       2               1       9
   11266              1               1       3       2               3       1       2       13
   11267       1       1               1                      1                             4
   11269       1                                                                        1
   11324              1       1               1                             1              4
   11325                      1               2       1       2       3                     9
   11326                                                          1       1              2
   11329                      2       1       2                      2       2       1       10
   11348              1                                                                 1
   11349       1       2       3       2       5       8       3               1       2       27
   11353       5       12       4       11       6       19      12       17       14       9      109
   11354       1       2       5       6       5       6       3       3       8       3       42
   11355       1       8       12       11      17       24      16       19       16      10      134
   11358                             1       1               1                      2       5
   11420       1       1       1       2       1       1       1               2       3       13
   11421       3       8       2       4       3       8       3       3       3       2       39
   11423              4       2               3       3       1       2       1       3       19
   11639       1       7       4       6       6       7       2       4       4       5       46
   11640       2       8       6       5       4       6       2       4       6       2       45
   11642       6       12       10       13      10       13      13       24       19       8      128
   11643              4       1       1       1       1               2       2              12
   11668                             1                      1               1              3
   16668       1       4       2       1       1       4       1       1       5              20
   Total      76      199     148     188     203     269     171     255     235     144    1888
 Note: This table reports the number of transactions per zip code each half year during the years 2012 to 2017, showing a
  relatively smooth distribution.

                                     42
A5

                                     43
Note: This figure plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4), excluding 1(BDH), including each
of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth order of polynomial time trend, respectively. Each bin
is 7 days.

                                     44
A6

                Bin length: 29 days                               Bin length: 14 days

                Bin length: 7 days                                Bin length: 3.6 days

                 Bin length: 1.8 days

Note: This figure plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4), excluding 1(BDH), including a fifth
order of polynomial time trend. The base scenario, where the bin length is 7 days, is halved and doubled in order to
illustrate the

                                     45
A7

 Note: This table  reports global estimates from nine separate regressions of equation (4) for properties located directly
 by bus stop, excluding 1(BDH) and including each of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth
 order of the time trend, respectively. R-squared is 0.953 and adjusted R-squared is 0.935 for all nine regressions.

                                     46
Note:  This table) reports global estimates from nine separate regressions of equation (4) for properties located in-directly
by bus stops, excluding 1(BDH) and including each of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth
order of the time trend, respectively. R-squared is 0.959 and adjusted R-squared is 0.943 for all nine regressions. The
coefficients of the regression variables in  Table A7  (a) and (b) should be interpreted in monetary terms, SEK. Standard
errors are in parentheses.

                                    47
A8

 Note: This table reports the local estimates from 24 separate regressions of the residuals from equation (4) over
 the whole data set, excluding 1(BDH), including a fourth order of polynomial time trend. Bandwidths are in
 number of days. The coefficients of the regression variables should be interpreted in monetary terms, SEK.
 Conventional standard error  in parenthesis, and conventional p-value in brackets. N/A if there are too few
 observations to compute the estimate.

                                     48
A9

                                     49
Note: This figure plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4) for properties located directly by
bus stops, excluding 1(BDH), including each of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth order of
polynomial time trend, respectively. Each bin is 7 days.

                                     50
A10

                                     51
Note: This  figure plots the residuals (in thousands SEK) from regression of equation (4) for properties located in-directly by
bus stops, excluding 1(BDH), including each of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth order of
polynomial time trend, respectively. Each bin is 7 days.

                                     52
A11
Code  for  extracting  the  data  from  Booli
using  System;
using  System.Text;
using  System.Threading.Tasks;
using  System.Windows.Forms;
using  HtmlAgilityPack;
namespace  WindowsFormsApp7{
    public  class  HomeReview{
        public  string  Name  {  get;  set;  }
        public  string  Price  {  get;  set;  }
        public  string  Date  {  get;  set;  }
        public  string  Floor  {  get;  set;  }
        public  string  Fee  {  get;  set;  }
    }
    public  partial  class  Form1  :  Form
    {DataTable  table;
        HtmlWeb  web  =  new  HtmlWeb();
        public  Form1()
        {InitializeComponent();
            InitTable();
        }private  void  InitTable()  {
            table  =  new  DataTable("RealEstateDataTable");
            table.Columns.Add("Name",  typeof(string));
            table.Columns.Add("Price",  typeof(string));
            table.Columns.Add("Date",  typeof(string));
            table.Columns.Add("Floor",  typeof(string));
            table.Columns.Add("Fee",  typeof(string));
            RealEstateDataView.DataSource  =  table;}
        private  async  Task<List<HomeReview>>  RealEstateFromPage(int  pageNum)  {
            string  url  =  "https://www.booli.se/slutpriser/stockholms+innerstad/143/";
            if  (pageNum  !=  0)
                url  =  "https://www.booli.se/slutpriser/stockholms+innerstad/143/?page="  +
pageNum.ToString();
            var  doc  =  await  Task.Factory.StartNew(()  =>  web.Load(url));
            var  nameNodes  =  doc.DocumentNode.SelectNodes("//*[@id=\"js__search-
list\"]/ul//li//a/span[2]/span[1]");
            var  priceNodes  =  doc.DocumentNode.SelectNodes("//*[@id=\"js__search-
list\"]/ul//li//a/span[3]/span[1]");
            var  dateNodes  =  doc.DocumentNode.SelectNodes("//*[@id=\"js__search-
list\"]/ul//li//a/span[3]/span[3]");
            var  floorNodes  =  doc.DocumentNode.SelectNodes("//*[@id=\"js__search-
list\"]/ul//li//a/span[2]/span[2]");
            var  feeNodes  =  doc.DocumentNode.SelectNodes("//*[@id=\"js__search-
list\"]/ul//li//a/span[4]/span[2]");
            //If  these  are  null  it  means  the  nodes  couldn't  be  found  on  the  html  page
            if  (nameNodes  ==  null  ||  priceNodes  ==  null  ||  dateNodes  ==  null  ||  floorNodes  ==  null  ||
feeNodes  ==  null)
                return  new  List<HomeReview>();
            var  names  =  nameNodes.Select(node  =>  node.InnerText).ToList();
            var  prices  =  priceNodes.Select(node  =>  node.InnerText).ToList();
            var  dates  =  dateNodes.Select(node  =>  node.LastChild.InnerText).ToList();
            var  floors  =  floorNodes.Select(node  =>  node.InnerText).ToList();
            var  fee  =  feeNodes.Select(node  =>  node.InnerText).ToList();
            List<HomeReview>  toReturn  =  new  List<HomeReview>();
            for  (int  i  =  0;  i  <  names.Count();  ++i)
                toReturn.Add(new  HomeReview()  {  Name  =  names[i],  Price  =  prices[i],  Date  =  dates[i],
Floor  =  floors[i]  ,  Fee  =  fee[i]  });
           return  toReturn;  }
        private  async  void  Form1_Load(object  sender,  EventArgs  e)  {
            int  pageNum  =  0;
            var  rankings  =  await  RealEstateFromPage(0);
            while  (rankings.Count  >  0)  {
                foreach  (var  ranking  in  rankings)
                    table.Rows.Add(ranking.Name,  ranking.Price,  ranking.Date,  ranking.Floor,
ranking.Fee);
                pageNum++;
                rankings  =  await  RealEstateFromPage(pageNum);  }

                                     53