Does CSR Improve Financial Performance?*

                      Michael Bozyel†  and Selma Salah ‡

                   Stockholm School of Economics

                           May 15, 2017

                            Abstract

This study examines the relationship between corporate social performance (CSP) and
corporate financial performance (CFP) in a Swedish context, by using data on firms listed
on Nasdaq Stockholm between 2009 and 2014. Overall, our study mainly suggests a
neutral relationship between CSP and CFP on an aggregated level. By analyzing the link
on a disaggregated level, a weak positive relationship is found between social performance
and market-based CFP. Furthermore, we expand our study by examining whether risky
industries, in terms of exposure to environmental and social issues, show a more positive
relationship between CSP and CFP compared to other industries. Our results indicate
that there is a stronger positive relationship between social performance and market-based
CFP for socially risky industries compared to other industries. This finding suggests that
firms operating in these types of industries have more to gain financially from adopting
CSR practices aimed to address social issues.

Keywords:  Corporate Social Responsibility, Corporate Financial Performance, Industry
risk, Stakeholder theory

*
  First and foremost, we would like to thank our  tutor Farzad Saidi, Assistant Professor
at the Department of Finance at the Stockholm School of Economics, for his guidance
and support throughout the writing of this thesis. Furthermore, we would like to thank
Kerstin Fredriksson and Helena Kernell at GES International for making this thesis
possible by providing the environmental, social and industry risk ratings used in this
study. This paper was written as a bachelor thesis at the Department of Finance at the
Stockholm School of Economics.

†  23092@student.hhs.se
‡  22998@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents

1 Introduction ..................................................................................................... 3
2 Previous Literature .......................................................................................... 7
3 Theories and Hypothesis Development ...........................................................12
4 Data and Methodology....................................................................................17
5 Empirical Results and Analysis.......................................................................29
6 Discussion and Conclusion ..............................................................................37
7 Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research .........................................39
8 Tables .............................................................................................................42
9 References .......................................................................................................54
10 Appendix .......................................................................................................59

List of abbreviations

 CSR           Corporate social responsibility

 ESG          Environmental, social and corporate governance

 CFP          Corporate financial performance

 CSP           Corporate social performance

 ENV          Environmental performance

 SOC          Social performance

 ROA         Return on assets

 ROE          Return on equity

 ROS          Return on sales

 ER           Environmentally risky industries

 SR            Socially risky industries

 ESR           Environmentally and socially risky industries

                                  2
1 Introduction

Corporate social responsibility (CSR) has during the last few decades been a

debated concept, and has since its emergence as a conceptual framework in the

middle of the 20th century developed into an integral part of business theory and

modern corporations. CSR can be defined as a set of responsible actions that

corporations undertake in order to positively contribute to society. The most

frequently used concept to measure CSR is based on three dimensions of corporate

responsibility – environmental, social and corporate governance – referred to as

ESG.

   There are different views on CSR and its relevance in modern corporations.

Those   who   oppose   investments   in   CSR   argue   that   managers’   primary

responsibility is to act in the best interest of their shareholders and propose that

this is done by focusing on profit-maximization. This viewpoint is often referred

to as the  shareholder  theory. Proponents on the other hand, emphasize the

importance of incorporating the needs of stakeholders beyond shareholders and

argue that the adoption of CSR practices is a way to achieve this. This point of

view  is  commonly  known  as  the  stakeholder  theory.  These  opposing  views,

together with the unsettled case of no distinct answer to the question on what

kind of impact CSR has on corporate financial performance (CFP), have driven

many researchers to continue to look for an answer.

    Previous research in this field has tried to establish a relationship between

corporate social performance (CSP) and CFP, suggesting various results, such as

positive (Waddock and Graves, 1997), negative (Baron et al., 2011), and neutral

relationships (McWilliams and Siegel, 2000). According to Ullman (1985), the

ambiguous results can be attributed to deficiencies in the empirical databases

available to measure CSP. In addition, Ullman (1985) highlights a lack in theory

and inappropriate definitions of key terms, as contributing factors to the mixed

results.

                                  3
   Firstly, this paper re-examines the link between CSP and CFP by using recent

data  on  the  Swedish  market,  thus  contributing  to  existing  literature  with

additional  findings.  In  2007,  Sweden  became  the  first  country  to  require

sustainability  reporting,  in  accordance  with  the  Global  Reporting  Initiative

(GRI), for all state-owned firms (Government Offices of Sweden, 2010). In recent

years, Sweden has also received recognition as a leading country in regards to

environmental and social responsibility, indicating that CSR is highly valued

among its social institutions (Global Green Economy Index, 2014; Forum’s Global

Gender Gap Report, 2014). Therefore, we argue that Sweden is an interesting

market to examine from a sustainability perspective. As this market is scarcely

covered in previous literature, further research is needed.

   Secondly, this study examines the underlying industry-specific mechanisms,

in terms of environmental and social risk, of the relationship between CSP and

CFP. More specific, we investigate whether firms operating in risky industries, in

terms of exposure to environmental and social issues respectively, have more to

gain financially from investments in CSR than do firms operating in other

industries.

    The assessment of the industry risk level is based on general industry-specific

characteristics and incorporates different aspects of environmental and social risk,

such as pollution, energy use, discrimination, corruption and more. This will

enable us to identify industries that show an exposure to environmental and social

issues that is more extensive, and not only limited to certain areas, e.g. only

pollution or only corruption.

   With our industry-specific findings, we intend to contribute with insights

regarding why the link between CSP and CFP might differ depending on the risk-

profile of the industry a firm operates in. This industry-specific contribution has,

to best of our knowledge, not been done in this way before.

    Our results indicate that there is a neutral relationship between CSP and CFP

on an aggregated level. An analysis of the CSP-CFP link on a disaggregated level

uncover a weak positive relationship between social performance and the marked-

                                  4
based financial performance measure, Tobin's Q. This indicates that investors

value efforts that aim to address social issues. Furthermore, our results also

suggest that socially risky industries show a stronger positive relationship between

social performance and Tobin's Q compared to other industries. This implies that

investors in firms that operate in these types of industries value social efforts to

a higher degree than do investors in firms operating in other industries.

1.1 Purpose of study

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  examine  whether  investments  in  CSR  are

associated with financial benefits for firms. The aim is to study the link between

CSP and CFP for firms based in Sweden. Furthermore, the study will analyze

whether firms operating in industries that are to a higher degree exposed to

environmental and social risk, respectively, have more to gain financially from

investments in CSR than do firms operating in other industries. This is done to

gain a deeper understanding on the implications that the risk-profile of an

industry might have on the relationship between CSP and CFP.

1.2 Research boundaries

The study will focus on firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm in Sweden. Our study

covers the time period 2009-2014, and this limitation in time is set by the CSR

data – GES Risk Rating – retrieved from GES International. GES Risk Rating

includes ratings on the environmental, human rights and corporate governance

dimensions. Ratings covering corporate governance are not available for the entire

                                                                                                       1
time period covered in this study, and are therefore excluded from our analysis.

To measure CFP, both market-based performance measures, Tobin's Q, and

accounting-based performance measures, return on assets (ROA), are used.

1  Corporate governance ratings are only available for 2013 and 2014.

                                  5
1.3 Thesis outline

In the study's first section, a brief introduction to the concept of CSR together

with the purpose and boundaries of our study has been presented. Section 2

presents previous literature within this research field. This is followed by a

presentation of the theories used to develop our hypotheses and the hypotheses

themselves in section 3. In section 4, a detailed description of the data and the

methodological approach used in this study is presented. Results and analysis of

the research findings are presented in section 5. Discussion of our findings and

final conclusions are provided in section 6. Section 7 addresses limitations of our

study and implications for further research. Tables showing descriptive statistics,

regression results and more will be presented in section 8. Lastly, a list of

references and appendix is found in Section 9 and 10 respectively.

                                  6
2 Previous Literature

Since sustainability reporting is not standardized, CSR performance is complex

to measure. This has been one of the reasons for the inconsistent results in

previous studies regarding the nexus between CSP and CFP (Ullmann, 1985).

Studies examining the relationship between CSP and CFP conclude positive,

negative, and neutral relationships. There are different views on the relevance of

CSR, and what implications it might have on the financial performance of firms.

The different views in this field can be explained by a number of theoretical

frameworks:  shareholder-, institutional-, legitimacy-  and  stakeholder  theory. The

definition and measurement concept of CSR will be presented in section 2.1. In

section 2.2, we describe the fragmented previous research covering the relationship

between CSP and CFP.

2.1 CSR

In previous literature, we have encountered various definitions of CSR. Below, we

present two definitions, as stated by the European Commission (2011) and Carroll

(1979), that are commonly referred to in the literature:

 “Corporate social responsibility (CSR) refers to companies taking responsibility

      for their impact on society.” (European Commission, 2011)

 “The social responsibility of business encompasses the economic, legal, ethical

  and discretionary expectations that a society has of organizations at a given

                          point in time.” (Carroll, 1979)

   Simply, CSR is a set of responsible actions that corporations undertake in

order to positively contribute to society. There are several ways to measure CSR,

and the most frequently used concept is based on three dimensions of corporate

responsibility – environmental, social and corporate governance – referred to as

ESG. The environmental dimension, which has received the greatest attention,

                                  7
refers to actions that corporations take that influence the natural environment in

terms of pollution emissions, water waste, energy use, and natural resources

maintenance. The social dimension considers firms’ ability to handle human rights

issues, diversity, employees’  health and safety, and volunteer work. Finally,

corporate governance looks at firms’ management in terms of usage of proper

accounting methods, avoidance of conflict of interest that could lead to agency

problems and living up to good business ethics.

   Even though ESG is the most used concept when measuring CSR, Waddock

and Graves (1997) point out in their paper that due to a lack of standardized

methods to measure ESG factors, it is difficult to draw conclusions on the link

between CSP and CFP. Different CSR ratings build on different criteria causing

inconsistent and incomparable results.  Furthermore, the different terms used in

research, such as ESG, CSP and sustainable responsible investment (SRI), when

measuring  CSR  lead  to  complications  when  tracking  and  evaluating  CSR

performance. The measurement complexity within the CSR field has been one of

the main issues that may obscure any linkage when trying to examine the

relationship between CSP and CFP.

2.2 CSR and Financial Performance

Positive and Neutral relationship

According to Margolis et al. (2007), who conduct a meta-analysis on 167 different

studies from 1997 to 2007, the relationship between CSP and CFP is on average

positive. One of the studies that Margolis et al. (2007) analyze, that has been

able to find a positive relationship, is made by Waddock and Graves (1997). In a

study, in which they examine the majority of the companies in S&P 500 (469

firms), they use a CSR performance measure based on the KLD index and

accounting-based measures – ROA, return on equity (ROE), and return on sales

(ROS) – as proxies for financial performance. Their results indicate a two-way

relationship, meaning that CSP not only has a positive effect on CFP, but also

                                  8
that CFP has a positive effect on CSP. These results indicate that there may be

a presence of reverse causality, also referred to as simultaneous causality. This

complicates  any  attempts  to  conclude  whether  the  positive  relationship  is

explained by the fact that financially successful firms have the financial position

to invest more intensively in CSR related activities, referred to as  slack resources

theory, or whether CSR actually affects financial performance positively, known

as the  good management theory. Despite the uncertainty of causation, Waddock

and Graves (1997) emphasize the potential positive effect on the customer side

when investing in CSR, as it can function as a source of competitive advantage

to help attain and attract customers, and thus lead to increased sales.

   Another study, conducted by McGuire et al. (1988), uses Fortune magazine's

annual survey of corporate reputations as a CSR performance measure and a

dataset of the largest US firms in 20-25 industry groups. Using both accounting-

and market-based financial performance measures in their model, McGuire et al.

(1988) find a positive bidirectional relationship. Although, they suggest that the

slack  resources  theory  –  that  prior  financial  performance  of  firms  impacts

investments in CSR – is a more likely explanation of the relationship than the

good management theory. One of the reasons that the outcomes differ in the

study by McGuire et al. (1988) compared to the study by Waddock and Graves

(1997) can be attributed to their usage of different empirical databases and CFP

measures,  something  that  Ullmann  (1985)  also  points  out  as  a  reason  for

inconsistent   results.   Furthermore,   the   link   between   firm   risk   and   social

responsibility is highlighted by McGuire et. al (1988), implying that investments

in social sustainability may lead to reduced firm risk. Cruz (2009) discover a

similar  pattern  as  he  examines  the  link  between  CSR  and  supply-chain

management. He concludes that CSR can function as a risk management tool to

help minimize transaction costs associated with social and environmental risk.

His results indicate that investment in social responsibility activities is capable of

increasing profit and sales.

                                  9
   The bidirectional relationship found by Waddock and Graves (1997) is also

found by Orlitzky et al. (2003), who conducted a rigorous review by analyzing 52

previous studies on the relationship between CSP and CFP, resulting in a sample

of 33 878 unique observations. In addition, Orlitzky et al. (2003) show that by

using different financial performance measures, the conclusion regarding CSR’s

impact on CFP may be altered. They argue, however, that accounting-based

measures are better predictors of CFP than market-based measures.

   In a more recent study, Semenova and Hassel (2008) examine the link between

environmental performance and market value using a dataset of 563 US firms

between 2002 and 2006. Their findings suggest a positive link. The main point in

their study, however, is that the positive impact on CFP is achieved by a firm's

reputational benefits. They also show that environmentally risky industries tend

to have lower market value than low-risk industries, even if they are more

profitable.

   A more neutral approach to the relationship is concluded by McWilliams and

Siegel (2000). In their study, they replicate the regressions made by Waddock and

Graves (1997) with the exception that they additionally control for R&D and

advertising intensity, which they argue cause biased estimators if omitted. By

controlling for these variables, they find a neutral relationship. Their findings

highlight the importance of control variables, in this case the impact of R&D and

advertising intensity, on the relationship between CSP and CFP.

   In sum, the causality of the relationship between CSP and CFP is not fully

established. It is not clear whether firms are “doing good by doing well” or “doing

well by doing good”, and the empirical studies so far indicates ambiguous results

(Ullman, 1985; Aupperle et al., 1985).

                                  10
Negative relationship

Scholars who argue for a negative relationship between CSP and CFP are seeing

investments in CSR as unnecessary costs that reduce shareholder wealth in terms

of profit (Hull and Rothenberg, 2008). Empirical evidence suggesting a negative

linkage between environmental disclosure and stock performance have been found

by Shane and Spicer (1983). They study the reaction of US stocks in connection

with the releases of environmental reports on firms, regarding the pollution

control performance, by the Council of Economic Priorities. Their results indicate

that firms, two days after the release of the reports, experience negative abnormal

returns, regardless of whether the firms were highly or lowly ranked. Although,

those that were lowly ranked by the report showed negative results that were

more severe.

    Another reputed article in the field of business and society is written by Milton

Friedman (1970), who base his arguments on the shareholder theory. Friedman

(1970) states that managers’ primary responsibility is to act in the best interest

of  their  shareholders.  Investments  in  social  welfare  should  not  be  done  by

managers directly, because it is considered value decreasing for firms. Friedman

(1970) further states that great social welfare is achieved by the free market

capitalism.

   Moreover, Baron et al. (2011), who study 1.600 companies on the US market

between 1996 and 2004, find a negative relationship between the social dimension

of CSR and financial performance, measured by Tobin's Q, but not between CSR

overall and financial performance. In order to achieve a more accurate model,

firm fixed effects were used to control for unobserved heterogeneity. Furthermore,

to  capture  that  investments  in  CSR  take  time  to  translate  into  financial

performance, Baron et. al. (2011) used a one-year lag between CFP and CSP.

                                  11
3 Theories and Hypothesis Development

3.1 Theories

As presented in  section 2, different outcomes may occur when analyzing the

CSP-CFP link. Whether investments in CSR can lead to financial benefits or not,

and the differences in the implications of CSR across industries, will be explained

by several theories in this section.

Institutional theory

Institutional theory explains the impact of institutions on firms, and is based on

that social institutions – defined as formal or informal rules, regulations, norms

and acceptable behavior – influence and shape economic organizations (Morgan

et al., 2010).  Viewed from a CSR perspective, institutional theory explains CSR

implementation as a reflection of institutional influence rather than as voluntary

actions undertaken by a company, and that social institutions shape countries’

business  systems  (Brammer  et.  al  2012).  Social  institutions  also  influence

preferences and behaviors of stakeholders, and thus the theory may explain the

variation   of   stakeholders’   interests   across   nations,   cultures,   and   different

institutional contexts. Moreover, Matten and Moon (2008) suggest that CSR

actions can differ between countries due to differences in the institutions that

have been entrenched in the society for a long time. For example, Sweden is

considered a leading country in regards to environmental responsibility and

human rights issues (Global Green Economy Index, 2014; Forum’s Global Gender

Gap Report, 2014), indicating that sustainability is highly valued among social

institutions, and it can therefore be expected of companies operating in Sweden

to adopt such practices.

                                  12
Stakeholder- and Legitimacy theory

There have been various discussions about the connection between CSR and the

stakeholder theory, a theory referring to stakeholders’ importance to companies’

performance and decision processes (Carroll, 1991; Freeman, 1994; and Wicks et

al., 1994). Given that social institutions can influence stakeholders, the social

pressures on a firm to incorporate sustainability can differ across countries, as

explained previously.

   Freeman (1984) defines stakeholders as an entity that has an influence or is

influenced  by  an  organization’s  objectives  –  such  as  investors,  customers,

shareholders,   government   regulation,   union   labor,   and   political   activist

groups.  Carroll (1991) argues in his study that firms have an ethical and moral

accountability   towards   the   society,   and   that   stakeholders   expect   this.

Furthermore, Carroll (1991) explains that social responsibility change with time

and is dependent on the industry that a firm operates in, and firms need to build

a strategy to handle the social issues that are most important to them. Carroll

(1991) presents a model with a taxonomic approach, which is hard to evaluate

through data and lacks a clear measurement methodology. Nevertheless, his paper

still highlights the vital aspect of what stakeholders expect from business firms,

namely ethical responsibility. Moreover, by investing in CSR that is aligned with

the values and norms of the stakeholders, firms could strengthen their relationship

with their key stakeholders (Barnett, 2007).

    The fact that social responsibility is valued differently based on the industry

a firm operates in, is also supported in the study by Roberts (1992) which

highlights the variation of CSR actions across industries. By dividing industries

into high profile industries and low profile industries, Roberts (1992) finds that

firms  in  high  profile  industries  are  more  likely  to  communicate  their  CSR

activities. High profile industries are characterized as having higher levels of

political risk and greater consumer transparency. This reinforces the legitimacy

theory, which assumes that firms that operate in industries that have negative

                                  13
associations, for example high-polluting industries, need to disclose their CSR

more intensively to reduce the negative associations that stakeholders may have

(Campbell et al., 2003).

   Furthermore,  in  order  to  evaluate  what  impact  stakeholders  have  on

managers, there are three main attributes – power, urgency and legitimacy – that

stakeholders can be classified by (Mitchell et al., 1997). Stakeholders with power

can get firms to act in a way they would not otherwise do. Urgency stands for a

certain level in which stakeholders require instant action. Legitimacy is a general

assumption that firms should act in accordance with socially accepted norms,

beliefs and values (Suchman, 1995). Stakeholders can possess one, two or three

attributes at the same time, leading to different types of characteristics of a

stakeholder. Mitchell et al. (1997) state that a combination of two or more

attributes, which is likely to be more common in risky industries, increases the

responsiveness  of  firms,  and  thus  the  interaction  between  the  firm  and  its

stakeholders is likely to be more intense.

   Moreover, the consequences for firms that fail to act upon stakeholders’

expectations can, according to Bowie (1988), eventually lead to that a firm ceases

to exist. Freeman and Reed (1983) argue that stakeholders are crucial for firms

continued survival and managers must satisfy their stakeholders to achieve long

term success. And given that firms operating in risky industries have a more

intense relationship with their stakeholders, indicating higher expectations on the

firms, they are more exposed to potential negative consequences.

3.2 Hypothesis Development

The literature review and the theoretical framework presented in previous sections

provide the essential background to this study. Since sustainability is highly

valued in Sweden, and social institutions influence stakeholders’ behavior, we

argue that stakeholders in Sweden expect firms to invest in CSR.   Firms that

deviate from this norm and fail to incorporate sustainability into their business

                                  14
operations may experience negative financial impacts because of indirect costs

caused  by  reputational  damage  and  competitive  disadvantage.  Furthermore,

investments in CSR has a positive effect on the customer side, as it can function

as  a source  of  competitive  advantage to  help  attain  and  attract  customers

(Waddock and Graves, 1997), and as a result lead to increased sales. Therefore,

we state our first hypothesis as defined below:

Hypothesis  H1 :  There  is  a  positive  relationship  between  corporate  social

performance and corporate financial performance.

   Furthermore, the reasons to engage in CSR can vary depending on the

industry that a firm operates in. Firms in different industries have different gaps

to bridge between their actions and what society expects from them in terms of

values and norms. As Roberts (1992) suggests in his study, high-profile industries

are more likely to disclose CSR activities. Roberts’ (1992) finding reinforces the

legitimacy theory, which assumes that firms in industries that are exposed to

higher risk need to disclose their CSR more intensively in order to reduce the

negative associations with the firms. Furthermore, based on the version of the

stakeholder  theory  as  described  by  Mitchell  et  al.  (1997),  stakeholders  in

industries that are exposed to higher risk, in terms of environmental or social risk,

have a more intense relationship with firms. This implies that these types of

industries are more dependent on their stakeholders compared to other industries,

resulting in a greater economic damage for the firms if the needs and expectations

of aforementioned stakeholders are not considered. Furthermore, building on

legitimacy  theory,  firms  that  operate  in  risky  industries  may  have  higher

incentives to adopt CSR practices in order to reduce the negative associations

with the firms. Building on this, we argue that risky industries have more to gain

financially from adopting CSR practices related to the risk source they are

exposed to. Therefore, we state the following hypotheses:

                                  15
Hypothesis  H2a:  The  relationship  between  environmental  performance  and

corporate   financial   performance   is   more   positive   for   firms   operating   in

environmentally risky industries than for firms operating in other industries.

Hypothesis H2b:  The relationship between social performance and corporate

financial  performance  is  more  positive  for  firms  operating  in  socially  risky

industries than for firms operating in other industries.

   Building  on  the  discussion  for  hypotheses  H2a -H 2b,  we  argue  that  firms

operating in industries that are highly exposed to both environmental and social

risk have more to gain financially from adopting CSR practices aimed to address

both environmental and social issues, compared to firms operating in other

industries. Thus, we state the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis H2c:  The relationship between corporate social performance and

corporate financial performance is more positive for firms operating in industries

that are both environmentally and socially risky than for firms operating in other

industries.

                                  16
4 Data and Methodology

4.1 Sample

As the aim of this study is to analyze the relationship between CSP and CFP,

there is a need of both financial and CSR data. The financial and CSR data was

retrieved and prepared separately before the two datasets were matched and

merged  into  a  single  dataset  based  on  mutual  firm-year  observations.  The

limitation of our sample selection was set by our CSR data – GES Risk Rating

data – since it is limited to firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm between 2009 and

2014.

   The first step in our sample selection process was to retrieve the financial

data. Financial data was obtained from Thomson Reuters Datastream for firms

listed on Nasdaq Stockholm for the years 2009-2015. The initial sample included

a total of 546 firms, comprising of firms listed on both Nasdaq Stockholm and

Nasdaq First North since Datastream did not differentiate between the two in its

stock exchange categorization. At this stage, the financial panel data was not yet

undergoing further adjustments to achieve a balanced panel data. The next step,

to land at a final sample, was to collect the CSR data from the GES Risk Rating

database.

   GES Risk Rating contains CSR ratings for firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm

for the years 2009-2014, with the number of observed firms ranging between 250-

300 firms between the years. The difference in the sample period between the

financial and CSR data is due to a one-year time-lag between CFP and CSP in

our baseline model. This is in line with previous research studying the relationship

between CSP and CFP (Waddock and Graves, 1997). To balance the CSR panel

data, firms that were not observed during the whole sample period were dropped.

A plausible explanation behind the missing observations could be that the firm

either was being listed on or delisted from the stock exchange during the sample

period, explaining the abrupt nature of the majority of the missing observations.

                                  17
By  balancing  our  CSR  panel  data,  our  sample  was  reduced  to  206  firms.

Thereafter, to match the financial data with the CSR data, firm observations

that were non-mutual between the two datasets were excluded, reducing the firm

observations to 195 firms.

   As the financial and CSR data were matched based on mutual firm-year

observations, the datasets were merged into a single dataset taking the form of a

balanced panel data. Firm observations that had missing values for any variables

used in the baseline regression model were dropped, resulting in a final sample of

161 firms across the years 2009-2014 and 966 firm-year observations.  Table 1

shows an overview of the sample selection process.

Sample selection bias

As  we  collected  our  final  sample,  our  data  underwent  some  adjustments

throughout the process. A majority of the firm observations that were dropped

from our initial sample (351 firms) were excluded due to lack of CSR coverage,

since the GES Risk Rating data limits its coverage to Nasdaq Stockholm. Nasdaq

First North in general consists of smaller and growing firms compared to the more

established and mature firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm. Since these firms are

excluded from our sample collection, it might result in some bias towards more

established  firms,  which  are  more  likely  to  have  well-entrenched  corporate

sustainability systems and practices in place.

   Lastly, the firm observations that were dropped due to a lack of coverage

throughout the whole sample period were mostly firms that underwent IPOs

during the sample period or firms that were delisted from the Nasdaq Stockholm

stock exchange. The exclusion of these firms could potentially create bias to some

degree as they are likely to consist of relatively young firms on one hand and

economically struggling firms on the other hand.

   Overall, it appears to be some bias towards more stable firms in our sample.

We argue that this do not necessarily cause any issues for our analysis since this

type of sample will facilitate an isolation of the CSP-CFP relationship.

                                  18
4.2 Corporate Financial Performance (CFP)

Various financial performance measures have been used in previous research

analyzing the relationship between CSP and CFP. The financial performance

measures that have been used in previous research can be categorized into two

groups: (1)  market-based measures  and (2)  accounting-based measures  (Ullman,

1985). Some examples of market-based measures that have been used in previous

studies are stock price change (e.g. Moskowitz, 1972), Tobin’s Q (e.g. Dowell et

al., 2000) and market value added (e.g. Garcia-Castro and Ariño, 2010). Some

examples of accounting-based measures are the ROE (e.g. Griffin and Mahon,

1997), ROA (e.g. Waddock and Graves, 1997) and ROS (e.g. Elsayed and Paton,

2005).

   Accounting-based  measures  are  backward-looking  in  the  sense  that  they

reflect  firms’  contemporaneous  profitability.  On  the  contrary,  market-based

measures are forward-looking as they incorporate investors’ expectations of firms’

future profitability. In line with previous research, we argue that these measures

should be considered complements rather than substitutes (Elsayed and Paton,

2005). Therefore, we have decided to use one measure from each category: Tobin’s

Q and ROA. The definitions of these measures are not always consistent between

different studies. Thus, a detailed description of each measure follows below.

Tobin’s Q

In its original form, Tobin’s Q is defined as the ratio of the market value of a

firm to the replacement cost of the firm’s assets (Tobin, 1969). In equilibrium,

the ratio should be equal to one. A higher value indicates that the firm is

overvalued while a lower value indicates that the firm is undervalued. King and

Lenox (2001), however, define Tobin’s Q as a measure that  “reflects what cash

flows the market thinks a firm will provide per dollar invested in assets.”  They

continue further by stating that a higher value on Tobin’s Q signals that future

cash flows are expected to be either greater or less risky. Building on this, Tobin’s

                                  19
Q captures different forms of potential benefits deriving from CSR investments

and the intangible value of these benefits as assigned by investors (Guenster et

al., 2011).

    There are different approaches on how to measure Tobin’s Q in the literature.

We have decided to follow Albuquerque et. al (2013) and their formulation of

Tobin’s Q.  Table 2  contains definitions and formulations for the main variables

used in our regression.

ROA

ROA is an accounting-based measure that is frequently used as a proxy for

financial performance in previous research studying the CSP-CFP relationship.

ROA reflects the operational profitability of a firm and indicates how efficiently

it utilizes its capital. To mitigate distortion and incomparability between firms

caused by differences in tax policies and practices, we calculate ROA on a pretax

basis.

4.3 Measuring CSR - GES Risk Rating

The environmental and social performance scores used in this study as a proxy

for CSR performance were retrieved from GES International. Founded in 1992,

GES   International   has   since   established   themselves   globally,   providing

institutional  investors  with  support  and  guidance  on  how  to  incorporate

sustainability in their investment and business processes. GES Risk Rating was

introduced in 2005, evaluating firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm based on how

well they perform in regards to CSR related issues.

   GES Risk Rating evaluates the risk in firms’ methods and management of

processes  concerning  the  environment,  human  rights  (social)  and  corporate

governance and is based on international norms on ESG issues. The evaluation

uses a dynamic approach in the sense that it takes into account firms’ current

status and readiness for the future (GES International, 2010). Furthermore, GES

                                  20
Risk Rating has been used in a previous study by Semenova et al. (2009) which

examines the value relevance of environmental and social performance in a

Swedish context.

   The  environmental  performance  score  comprises  of  two  sub-dimensional

measures:  performance  and  preparedness. The performance dimension covers the

present aspect of a firm’s environmental activities and consists of, among others;

assessments of energy and water usage; greenhouse gas emissions; and waste

management. The preparedness dimension covers the future aspect of a firm’s

impact on the environment and takes into account to what extent a firm presents

environmental policies and targets, and the level of environmental requirements

on suppliers. Furthermore, it evaluates the firm's strategy for renewable energy

usage.

   The human rights score, referred to as the social performance score in this

study, comprises of three sub-dimensional measures:  employees,  community  and

suppliers. The employee dimension covers for example health and safety policies;

workplace diversity and discrimination; and to what extent a firm reports on child

and forced labor issues. The community dimension take into consideration firms’

programs and policies regarding community involvement and corruption, while

the supplier dimension evaluates firms’ policies on human rights in the supply

chain.

   Moreover, the environmental score is measured on a scale of 0-3, while the

social score is measured on a scale of 0-2. To make the scores more comparable,

we transformed them to a scale ranging from 0 to 100. Thereafter, since GES Risk

Rating does not include an aggregate CSP score, an equally-weighted CSP score,

based on the environmental and social scores, was created.

   Furthermore, GES Risk Rating provides ratings that evaluate the general risk

level of an industry, from an environmental and human rights (social) perspective,

on a 7-point scale. The scale is illustrated in  Figure 1. The industry classification

used in GES Risk Rating is based on the Global Industry Classification Standard

by MSCI and S&P which will be used throughout this study. The industry risk

                                  21
assessment  is  based  on  general  characteristics  of  each  industry,  related  to

environmental and social sustainability. This means that rating criteria used to

evaluate the environmental and social risk in industries are adjusted based on the

relevance for the specific industry. The industry risk ratings are used when

investigating hypotheses  H 2a -H 2c.

             Figure 1:  Industry risk rating by GES Risk Rating

                      Low-Risk                            Risky
    A        A-       B+        B        B-        C-       C

 This figure illustrates a 7-point scale by GES Risk Rating which is used to rate the
 general risk level of an industry, from an environmental and social perspective. The
 industry risk ratings are used to classify low-risk and risky industries in hypotheses
 H2a-H2c . We define risky industries as industries that have received the rating C or C+.

   Lastly,  due  to  our  research  scope  being  geographically  delimited  to  the

Swedish market, an important aspect is to obtain a sufficient coverage in terms

of CSR ratings. GES Risk Rating stands out in this aspect, by providing an

extensive coverage on firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm.

4.4 Control variables

To control for other factors that might influence the financial performance, and

cause biased estimators if left out, we include several control variables in our

regression model. Our set of control variables include proxies for firm size,

financial risk, growth and advertising intensity.

    In our research, we have decided to use total assets as a proxy for firm size.

Previous studies suggest that firm size may affect the financial performance of

firms (Waddock and Graves, 1997). A possible rationale behind this relationship

could be that larger firms might experience benefits deriving from the possibility

to capitalize on large scale operations, e.g. bargaining power and economies of

scale. Another important aspect is that firm size is argued to be linked with

                                  22
corporate social performance in terms of social and environmental performance

respectively (Ullman, 1985). Waddock and Graves (1997) argue that this might

be due to smaller firms not exhibiting as many overt socially responsible behaviors

as larger firms. A possible explanation could be that larger firms may face higher

external pressure to act responsibly than smaller firms. Given this, not controlling

for firm size will likely result in biased estimators due to omitted variable bias.

In accordance with previous studies, we logarithmically transform the variable in

our regression model. This is done since the distribution of firm total assets is

unlikely to be normally distributed.

   As a proxy for financial risk, we use the long-term debt to assets ratio.

Established corporate finance literature, addressing agency theory, concludes that

the level of debt at a firm can influence the actions of managers, potentially

affecting the financial performance. Furthermore, we have decided to include

revenue growth as a proxy for firm growth as it has been argued that there is a

positive  relationship  between  revenue  growth  and  firm  valuation  which  is

captured by Tobin’s Q in this context (Guenster et al., 2011).

   Lastly, in line with McWilliams and Siegel (2000) we have decided to include

a proxy for advertising intensity. The aim at first was to follow the methodology

of McWilliams and Siegel (2000) by using the advertising costs to sales ratio.

Unfortunately, due to a lack of advertising data, this was not possible. Therefore,

we have decided to follow Chapple et al. (2001) and Elsayed and Paton (2005)

and use intangible assets to sales ratio to capture the effect of advertising.

                                  23
4.5 Model specification and statistical tests

Baseline model and hypothesis H1

      ܲܨܥ  ௜௧  ߚ ൌଵ ܲܵܥ    ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ  ߚ ൅ܵଶ ܧܼܫ   ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ  ߚ ൅ܴଷ ܭܵܫ    ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ  ߚ ൅ସ ܪܹܱܴܶܩ       ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ
                           ߚ൅ହ ܸܦܣ  ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ  ߜ ൅௝௧  ߠ ൅௜  ݑ ൅௜௧

   :݁ݎ݄ܹ݁

 ܲܨܥ  ௜௧           is measured as Tobin’s Q or ROA for firm i at time t

 ܲܵܥ    ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ         is the aggregate CSR performance score as measured by GES Risk

                   Rating for firm i at time t-1

 ܧܼܫܵ        ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ         is measured as the natural logarithm of total assets for firm i at time

                   t-1

 ܭܵܫܴ        ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ        is measured as long-term debt to total assets for firm i at time t-1

 ܪܹܱܴܶܩ       ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ   is measured as the yearly sales growth for firm i at time t-1

 ܣܸܦ  ௜ሺ௧ିଵ  ሻ        is measured as intangible asset to sales ratio for firm i at time t-1

 ߜ௝௧            is a set of dummy variables that capture the industry-year fixed

                    effects

 ߠ            is a set of dummy variables that capture the firm fixed effects
   ௜
 ݑ ௜௧             is the error term

    Our baseline model is a fixed effects model controlling for firm- and industry-

year fixed effects respectively. Initially, we will test hypothesis  H 1  using the

aggregate CSP score. Next, we will test the same hypothesis on a disaggregated

level,  to  analyze  the  relationship  between  certain  dimensions  of  CSR,  as

represented by the environmental and social performance scores, and CFP. In

previous literature, it is often assumed that investments in CSR take time to

translate into improved financial performance. A common approach to address

this has been to introduce lagged independent variables. In our case, we have

followed Waddock and Graves (1997) by implementing a one-year lag between

CFP and CSP as well as for the control variables.

                                  24
Fixed effects

Endogeneity is a general cause of concern in regression analysis. Endogeneity

occurs when the explanatory variable is correlated with the error term and may

arise as a result of reverse causality or omitted variables. A consequence of

endogeneity is biased estimators and unreliable regression results. Since we use

panel data in our regression analysis, we will be able to effectively control for

some endogeneity  –  in the form of unobserved heterogeneity  –  through the fixed

effects model. A common approach in previous research, to control for time-

invariant unobserved heterogeneity, has been to include fixed effects at the

industry or firm-level, frequently in combination with year fixed effects to control

for time-specific effects (e.g. the state of the economy).  In our regression models,

we have decided to implement firm- and industry-year and fixed effects. By using

industry-year fixed effects, we describe the variation across firms within industries

at a specific time t. As a result, we will be able to control for unobserved effects

across industries and within industries over time. In other words, we will be able

to control for time-varying industry dynamics that might affect both the financial

performance and CSP of firms within industries and simultaneously remove

variation across industries that may be the result of unobserved heterogeneity.

   As previously discussed, industry-specific characteristics and industry and

time-specific  events,  such  as  the  industry  stakeholder  environment  and  the

industry business cycles, are likely to have an impact on the CFP and CSP of

firms respectively as well as on the relationship between them. Time-specific

events in the form of major scandals may shake the dynamics of the affected

industry and have a negative spillover effect on the financial performance of firms

across the industry. These types of events might also make firms in the affected

industry more willing to invest in CSR. Thus, it might appear that better CSP is

associated with inferior CFP. By implementing industry-year fixed effects, we will

be able to control for this.

                                  25
   Through the firm fixed effects, we will be able to control for unobserved

heterogeneity that is associated with time-invariant firm-specific characteristics

that might influence both the CFP and CSP of firms. The management and the

corporate culture in a firm are two examples of such firm-specific characteristics

and can be considered relatively time-invariant over a short time horizon.

    Given the above rationale leading to the use of firm- and industry-year fixed

effects, the unobserved heterogeneity is unlikely to be uncorrelated with the

independent variables which is the main assumption in the random effects model.

If this assumption does not hold, the random effects model produces inconsistent

estimators. In this case, the fixed effects model would be the preferable choice.

    To statistically substantiate our application of the fixed effects model in favor

of the random effect model, a heteroskedasticity-robust version of the Hausman

test was performed to determine whether the fixed effects model is the preferable

choice of model in our regression analysis. The Hausman test was performed for

both versions of the baseline model. For our baseline model where Tobin’s Q is

used as a dependent variable, the null hypothesis – that the random effects model

is preferred to the fixed effects model – can be rejected at a 1 % significance level.

The null hypothesis can be rejected at a 5 % significance level for our second

baseline model where ROA is used as a dependent variable. The same test was

performed for the adjusted baseline models, used to test hypothesis H2a -H2c , with

results concluding that the fixed effects model is preferred to the random effects

model. Therefore, we unanimously conclude that the fixed effects model is the

most appropriate model for our baseline regressions.

Hypothesis H2

In our second hypothesis, we will investigate whether risky industries show a

stronger link between CSP and CFP compared to other industries. To test

hypothesis  H2a -H2c,  we  will  introduce  marginal  adjustments  to  our  baseline

models.

                                  26
    The first step will be to define risky and low-risk industries. As previously

mentioned,  GES  Risk  Rating  includes  ratings  that  evaluate  the  level  of

environmental and social risk for each industry. For a more detailed description

of the industry risk ratings, see  section 4.3. We have grouped industries based

on their risk ratings within each CSR dimension. Industries that have received

the ratings C or C+ are defined as risky industries. Dummy variables are used to

identify risky industries within each dimension. Three types of risky industries

are recognized; environmentally risky industries (ER industries), socially risky

industries (SR industries) and industries that are both environmentally and

socially risky (ESR industries).  Table 3  describes the sample distribution across

industries and shows which risk-type category, as defined above, each industry

belongs to.

   The second step is to create interaction variables that will be used to test

hypotheses   H2a -H2c.   Firstly,   to   test   hypothesis   H2a ,   we   will   interact   the

environmental performance score variable (ENV) with the dummy variable that

is used to identify ER industries. Secondly, to test hypothesis H2b, the social

performance score variable (SOC) will be interacted with the dummy variable

that is used to identify SR industries. Lastly, we will apply the same methodology

to hypothesis H2c  where the aggregate CSP score (CSP) will be interacting with

the dummy variable that is used to identify ESR industries.

    Lastly, separate regressions will be run to test hypotheses H2a -H2c. Hypothesis

H2a  and H2b  will be tested by running regressions with the disaggregated CSP

scores, ENV and SOC, in combination with their respective interaction variables

to analyze whether risky industries show a more positive relationship between

ENV-CFP  (hypothesis  H2a )  and  SOC-CFP  (hypothesis  H2b)  respectively.  In

contrast, hypothesis H2c  will be regressed with the aggregated CSP score, CSP,

to analyze whether industries that are both environmentally and socially risky

show a more positive relationship between CSP and CFP. All our regressions

include a one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables, control for

                                  27
firm- and industry-year fixed effects and use standard errors clustered at the

industry-level.

Diagnostic tests

Heteroskedasticity

To test for heteroskedasticity, a Breusch-Pegan/Cook-Weisberg test was carried

out for our two baseline models. The results of the tests strongly indicate that

our data sample is heteroskedastic as the null hypothesis of the test – that the

data is homoscedastic – can be rejected at a 0.01 % significance level. To address

the presence of heteroskedasticity, robust standard errors will be used.

Serial correlation

The presence of serial correlation, meaning that residuals are correlated over time,

causes bias in the standard errors. Most importantly, serial correlation is a

violation of the Gauss-Markov assumptions leading to OLS estimators no longer

being the best linear unbiased estimators (Wooldridge, 2009). To test for serial

correlation  in  our  baseline  models,  a  Wooldridge  test  has  been  performed

(Wooldridge, 2002; Drukker, 2003). The null hypothesis, that no first order

autocorrelation is present, can be rejected at the 5 % significance level for our

baseline model where Tobin’s Q is used as proxy for CFP. To address this, we

have used clustered standard errors in all our regressions. We have decided to

cluster at the industry-level since it produces standard errors that are more

conservative compared to standard errors clustered at the firm-level.

Winsorization

To mitigate the effect from outliers, the variables ROA, Q  and GROWTH were

                         st           th
winsorized  to  the  1  and  99    percentile.  A  relatively  conservative  level  of

winsorization were chosen as the level of winsorization could potentially affect

our results.

                                  28
5 Empirical Results and Analysis

5.1 Descriptive statistics

Descriptive statistics and an overview of the Pearson’s correlation coefficients for

the main variables used in our regression can be found in  table 4  and  table 6

respectively. In  table  5, descriptive statistics for the main variables divided

between low-risk industries – defined as industries that are not considered risky

in either CSR dimension – and the three types of risky industries can be found.

   Table 5 adds some interesting insights regarding the differences in the CSR

performance scores across industries based on their risk-types. The level of risk

that an industry is associated with – in terms of exposure to environmental and

social issues – seems to drive the CSR performance scores. In other words, risky

industries seem to be associated with higher CSR performance scores. This is an

interesting finding since this may indicate that firms operating in risky industries

are aware of the increased risk they are exposed to through industry association

and invest more intensively in CSR. This could be interpreted as a form of risk

management by firms to mitigate against the increased risk level. Furthermore,

this could also serve as an indicator of our hypothesis that firms operating in

risky industries face higher expectations to act responsibly and will therefore, to

avoid repercussions from the various stakeholders, invest more intensively in CSR.

   That firms operating in risky industries are associated with higher CSR

performance scores appears to be systematic. Risky industries seem to perform

better within the CSR dimension in which they are exposed. To concretize, ER

industries have a higher average environmental performance score than do SR

industries; while SR industries have a higher average social performance score

than do ER industries. Logically, it follows that ESR industries maintain the

highest scores in all three CSR performance scores.

    Moreover, in comparison with low-risk industries, risky industries – on average

– seem to be associated with higher financial risk, larger firms, lower intangible

assets to sales ratio and lastly a lower Tobin’s Q.  Given that firms in risky

                                  29
                                                                is
         SD                              ESR   Q
              0.940.0918.9922.3916.961.520.160.280.22

                                                                  is measured
       ESR  1.420.05         9.510.200.050.13
          Mean    46.1551.2041.10
                                                   ADV

          Obs102102102102102102102102102


                                                           is the return on assets and is used
          SD 1.200.11         1.640.170.250.23
                     19.5322.8018.20
                                             ROA

       SR                                               is measured as the natural logarithm of total
           Mean1.700.0741.1743.8138.548.840.170.060.16
                                                                     SIZE
          Obs186186186186186186186186186

                                                                   is measured as the annual revenue growth.


                                              are defined as industries that are not considered risky in regards to                                     30
    Industry risk-typeSD 0.790.08         1.900.140.230.21
                     20.6723.7318.90
                                                                     GROWTH
     ER
           Mean1.560.0742.1647.6436.679.010.190.040.20

          Obs246246246246246246246246246  Low-risk industries
Summary statistics divided by industry risk-types
                                                     industries are defined as industries that are considered risky in terms of their exposure to
                                                              is a proxy for corporate social performance and is an equally-weighted score based on the
                                             ER
                                                        CSP

Table 5:  SD 1.630.15         2.340.170.260.56
                   16.1219.7416.04

                                                       industries are defined as industries that are considered risky in terms of their exposure to social issues.
           Mean1.830.0528.5326.4430.628.220.160.060.38
       Low-Risk                               SR

          Obs636636636636636636636636636
                                                                    is measured as long-term debt to total assets.


                                                          RISK



         VariableQ ROACSPENVSOCSIZERISKGROWTHADVThis table presents descriptive statistics including number of firm-year observations (Obs), means and standard deviations for themain variables divided by industry risk-types.neither environmental or social issues.environmental issues.industries are defined as industries that are considered risky in terms of their exposure to both environmental and social issues.the Tobin’s Q, one of two corporate financial performance (CFP) measures used in this study.as a CFP measure together with Q.environmental (ENV) and social performance (SOC) scores from GES Risk Rating.assets.as the intangible assets to sales ratio.
industries seem to act more responsibly than firms in low-risk industries it may

seem counterintuitive that they are associated with a lower intangible assets to

sales ratio as CSR performance is considered an intangible asset as a constituent

of  the  goodwill  of  firms  (Semenova  et  al.,  2009).  Important  to  take  into

consideration, however, is that the accounting valuation process of intangible

assets is complex, and therefore the value of the CSR performance may not be

fully reflected in the book value of intangible assets. A revisit to the definition of

                                                       2
Tobin’s Q, presented by King and Lenox (2001),  provides an intuition on how

to interpret the differences in Tobin’s Q ratio between the industry-types. The

lower average Tobin’s Q ratio for risky industries may reflect that firms that

operate in industries that are chronically associated with environmental and social

issues, a familiar example being the oil industry, are expected by investors to face

difficulties in the future to stay relevant and maintain their ability to generate

positive cash flows.

   Table  6  depicts  the  Pearson’s  pairwise  correlations  between  the  main

variables used in the baseline regression. The two financial performance measures,

Tobin’s Q and ROA, are positively correlated with each other as anticipated. The

two dimensions of CSP – ENV and SOC – show a strong correlation with each

other (ρ=0.7110). This indicates that firms performing well in one dimension are

more  likely  to  perform  well  in  the  other  dimension  as  well.  A  reasonable

explanation is that firms have a broad approach towards achieving sustainability

and not only aims to achieve sustainability within a certain dimension of CSR.

Furthermore, the highest correlation is found between CSP and ENV (ρ=0.9446).

This is expected since ENV is one of two constituents in the CSP variable together

with SOC, which also has a high correlation with CSP (ρ=0.9023).

   The extremely high correlations between the disaggregated CSP scores – ENV

and SOC – and CSP may cause concerns for potential multicollinearity. This is

2  King and Lenox (2001) define Tobin’s Q as a measure that “reflects what cash flows
the market thinks a firm will provide per dollar invested in assets.”

                                  31
not an issue since ENV and SOC are never used in conjunction with CSP in any

regression model. Therefore, multicollinearity will not pose any issues in this

context. Variance inflation factors (VIF) were used to detect and measure the

level of multicollinearity.  Table A1  shows that all our independent variables

have VIF values that are far below 10, which is used as a general rule of thumb

to detect severe multicollinearity. Thus, we conclude that the presence of severe

multicollinearity is not probable.

   Lastly,   the   strong   positive   correlations   between   SIZE   and   the   CSR

performance scores imply that larger firms are adopting CSR practices to a larger

extent than do smaller firms. This is consistent with the prior presented logic that

larger firms will more actively adopt CSR practices as they are facing higher

external pressure to act responsibly than do smaller firms.

5.2 Regression results

Hypothesis H1

Table 7  shows the regression results for our baseline model where hypothesis H1

– that there is a positive relationship between CSP and CFP – is tested. The

regressions are run with both the aggregated CSR performance score – CSP –

shown in regression (1) and (3) and the disaggregated performance scores – ENV

and SOC – shown in (2) and (4). The regression results for the baseline model

where Tobin’s Q is used are shown in regression (1) and (2) while regression (3)

and (4) show the results for the baseline model where ROA is used. All our

regressions include a one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables,

control for firm fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects and use standard

errors clustered at the industry-level.

    The four baseline regressions (1)-(4) mainly show no statistically significant

relationship between CSP and CFP. Regression (4) shows a negative relationship

between ENV and ROA (-0.0011, p<0.05). This result implies that an increase in

the environmental performance score of 10 units is associated with a ROA

                                  32
decrease of 1.1 percentage points, ceteris paribus. Thus, our baseline regressions

show no support for hypothesis H1 . These results are consistent with the findings

of McWilliams and Siegel (2000) and Elsayed and Paton (2005) who suggest a

neutral relationship. An interesting side note is that even though Elsayed and

Paton (2005) suggest a neutral relationship between environmental performance

and CFP in general, their results indicate a weak negative relationship between

environmental performance and ROA, which is in line with our results.

   A potential explanation to our insignificant coefficients could be that the

variation within firms for the CSR performance scores is low over time. This

would indicate that the CSR ratings are relatively time-invariant. If this is the

case, firm fixed effects should not be used as they will remove any firm-specific

time-invariant components. To estimate the level of variation within firms over

time, we have created dummy variables that identify firm-year observations that

are constant between at least two years for the three CSR performance scores

CSP, ENV and SOC. The results are shown in  table 9. Approximately 15-30 %

of the firm-year observations are constant across at least two years for CSP, ENV

and SOC. This indicates that the variation within firms is relatively low which

may  affect  our  results.  To  address  this,  we  will  perform  complementary

regressions in which firm fixed effects are excluded.

   Table  10  includes  the  regression  results  for  our  baseline  model  where

hypothesis H1  is tested without firm fixed effects. These results are a bit different

compared to our previous regression results in which firm fixed effects were

included. In regression (14) we see that the statistically significant negative

relationship  between  ENV  and  ROA  turns  insignificant  even  though  the

coefficient remains negative. In contrast to our previous regressions, we find a

weak  significant  positive  relationship  between  SOC  and  Q  (0.0129,  p<0.1).

Beyond these findings, we identify no real differences between our regressions

regarding the CSP-CFP relationship.

                                  33
   In order to assess the economic significance of this finding and put it into

perspective, we compare the standard deviations of Tobin’s Q and the social

performance score from  table 4,  which are based on all the firms in the sample.

One standard deviation increase in the social performance score is associated with

a 0.1539 standard deviations increase in Tobin’s Q.

Hypothesis H2

In  table 8  the regression results for hypotheses H2a -H2c  are shown. The results

show no support for neither of the hypotheses H2a -H2c  – that risky industries show

a more positive relationship between CSP and CFP compared to other industries.

These results imply that whether an industry is considered risky or not, in terms

of their exposure to environmental and social issues, do not affect the relationship

between CSP and CFP. As discussed in the previous section, the insignificant

coefficients  could  be  the  result  of  time-invariance  within  firms  in  the  CSR

performance scores. Therefore, we run regressions without firm fixed effects as

well. The results of these regressions are shown in  table 11.

    In table 11  we see that even though all the interaction variables have positive

coefficients, a majority of them remain insignificant. Nevertheless, a statistically

significant  positive  coefficient  (0.0410,  p<0.05)  is  shown  for  the  interaction

variable SOC*SR in regression (17), indicating that SR industries show a more

positive relationship between SOC and Q compared to other industries. This is

consistent with hypothesis H2b  and implies that investors in firms that operate in

industries that are more exposed to social issues, value social efforts to a higher

degree compared to investors in firms that operate in other industries.

   We  use  the  same  methodology  as  previously  to  assess  the  economic

significance of this result. For firms that operate in socially risky industries, one

standard deviation increase in the social performance score is associated with a

0.5269 standard deviations increase in Tobin’s Q.

                                  34
5.3 Robustness tests

To  test  the  validity  of  our  results  and  to  evaluate  our  statistical  model’s

sensitivity to alterations in some of its assumptions, we will perform a number of

robustness tests. The robustness tests will be based on our baseline regressions

that do not include firm fixed effects.

    Firstly, to analyze to what extent our results are affected by different levels

                                                                                   th           th
of  winsorization,  we  run  regressions  with  winsorization  to  the  5   and  95

percentile and without winsorization as well. Secondly, ROA is replaced with

ROE as proxy for CFP. This robustness test will help address any potential bias

deriving from the low ROA associated with financial services firms due to their

distinct capital structure. Thirdly, we follow Waddock and Graves (1997) in their

encouragement to use different time-lags other than one-year lags. We introduce

two-year lags and also run our regressions without lags as well. Lastly, we run

our baseline regressions with CSR ratings from Thomson Reuters ASSET4 to see

if and to what extent our results differ between the two CSR rating frameworks.

   Table A2  and  table A3  illustrate the results of our baseline regressions for

the different levels of winsorization. It appears that the statistically significant

positive relationship between SOC and Q turns insignificant when we winsorize

         th         th
to the 5  and 95  percentile and when no winsorization is used. Nevertheless, the

p-values remain close to the 10 % significance level (p=0.102 for winsorization to

      th         th
the 5  and 95  percentile and p=0.115 with no winsorization). Thus, we conclude

that our results are relatively unaffected by different levels of winsorization.

   The results from our regressions comparing ROE to ROA show that there are

no major differences between using ROE and ROA as proxy for CFP.

   Our model is mostly unaffected by the use of different time-lags. A clear

majority of the coefficients of our explanatory variables do not change signs and

those  that  do  are  statistically  insignificant  in  all  scenarios.  The  positive

relationship between SOC and Q that is found in our baseline regression is

amplified and show a higher statistical significance when no time-lags are used.

                                  35
In contrast, using 2-year lags weakens the relationship as it turns insignificant.

This pattern is illustrated in  table 12. This may capture that CSR is reflected

more immediate in market-based measures, since investors are able to incorporate

the effects  of CSR practices into their valuation directly. Furthermore, the

diminishing nature of the relationship between SOC and Q as longer time-lags

are used, may reflect that the positive effects of CSR practices have are time

diminishing. For hypothesis H2b, we find that the statistically significant positive

coefficient for the interaction variable SOC*SR is amplified when longer time-lags

are used. This implies that the positive effects deriving from adopting CSR

practices, that attempt to address different social issues, last longer for firms that

operate in SR industries. This finding can be observed in table 12.

   In  table  13, the results of our baseline regressions for the different CSR rating

frameworks are presented. Unfortunately, a relatively small sample – containing

41 firms – can be used to compare ASSET4 to GES Risk Rating. Regression (27)

and (28) show the results using GES Risk Rating for our full sample (161 firms).

To make the results more comparable, regressions were run using GES Risk

Rating with the same sample as for ASSET4. These results are presented in (29)

and (30). Important to point out is that the CSP score from ASSET4 is based on

all three ESG dimensions – environmental, social and corporate governance – in

contrast to GES Risk Rating which do not cover corporate governance in our

sample. To increase the comparability, we create an equally-weighted CSP score

for ASSET4 based on its environmental and social performance scores. Regression

(31) and (32) show regression results for ASSET4. As table 13 illustrates, there

are major differences in our results between the two CSR rating frameworks.

These results should be taken with great caution, however, as the reliability of

these results is questionable due to the small sample size that is used. Even

though, the results may to some extent illustrate the complexity of measuring

CSR and underscore how the lack of standardization complicates any attempts

to establish an unambiguous relationship between CSP and CFP.

                                  36
6 Discussion and Conclusion

In this study, the relationship between CSP and CFP is analyzed in a Swedish

context. A lot of emphasis has been put to try to isolate the relationship between

CSP and CFP. Therefore, panel data methods have been used to control for

unobserved heterogeneity that may cause bias if not controlled for.

    Overall, our results indicate that there is a neutral relationship between CSP

and  CFP.  A  main  finding,  however,  suggest  that  there  is  a  weak  positive

relationship   between   social   performance   and   the   market-based   financial

performance measure Tobin’s Q. This finding indicates that investors value

efforts that aim to address social issues related to the operations of the firm. In

their study, Hillman and Keim (2001) conclude that activities related to the

management of relations with customers, employees, suppliers and communities

are value-creating. They argue that since these stakeholders are more integrated

with the operations of the firm, managing and investing into these relationships

will translate into operational benefits and competitive advantages that the firm

will be able to capitalize on financially. Applying this reasoning to our results,

the positive relationship between social performance and Tobin’s Q could indicate

that investors may view the efforts to address social issues, as activities that

generate value to the firm in terms of human capital, improved firm reputation

and  supplier  loyalty  to  name  a  few.  This  could  also  help  explain  why

environmental  performance  show  no  significant  relationship  with  CFP,  as

environmental sustainability may be viewed as purely discretionary and is not

considered to generate any real value for the firm.

    The use of different time-lags reveal that the positive relationship weakens as

longer time-lags are used. The strongest relationship is found when no time-lags

are used and the positive relationship turns insignificant when 2-year lags are

implemented.   This   suggests   that   the   positive   effects   deriving  from  social

performance diminish over time. For firms that operate in SR industries, we find

that the suggested positive effect appears to last longer.

                                  37
   Furthermore,   we   find   that   the   positive   relationship   between   social

performance and Tobin’s Q is amplified for SR industries. Building on the

previous interpretation, this indicates that investors in firms that operate in SR

industries, value the adoption of CSR practices that aim to address social issues,

to a higher degree than investors in other industries.

   Important to point out is that our results diverge as firm fixed effects are

included  in  addition  to  the  industry-year  fixed  effects.  This  illustrates  the

importance of having an appropriate empirical approach that takes into account

the characteristics of the data on hand. In our case, as the variation within firms

is considered to be relatively low for the CSR performance scores, we argue that

the inclusion of firm fixed effects is not appropriate in this context.

   Even  though  a  majority  of  our  results  indicate  that  there  is  a  neutral

relationship between CSP and CFP, one should not underestimate the long-term

value and need of CSR for the society as a whole. Activities related to CSR

contribute with value to society that despite their financial implications for firms

should  be  given  recognition.  Building on  this,  the  neutral  relationship  may

illustrate that CSR has become such an integral part of society and the code of

business conduct, that the inclusion of it does not necessarily lead to improved

financial performance while the exclusion of it could potentially have indirect

negative implications.

                                  38
7 Limitations and Suggestions for Further
Research

This study aims to provide valid results and great effort has been put in the

empirical approach in order to analyze the relationship between CSP and CFP

thoroughly.  Although,  before  drawing  any  generalized  conclusions  from  our

results, there are limitations in this study that need to be addressed.

   There are shortcomings in our model specification. Previous research has

highlighted the importance of controlling for investments in R&D as it has been

shown to be an important determinant of firm performance (McWilliams and

Siegel,  2000).  Due  to lack  of  data,  we  are  not  able  to  control  for it.  Our

recommendation for future research in this field is to control for investments in

R&D as it could have implications on the outcome. Furthermore, McWilliams

and Siegel (2000) also emphasize the importance of controlling for industry

advertising intensity. As in the case with R&D, we do not have enough data to

control for it in our sample. To address this issue, we have decided to follow

Chapple et. al (2001) and Elsayed and Paton (2005) and use intangible assets to

sales ratio to capture the advertising effect. Nevertheless, this is to be considered

a limitation in our model specification.

   The potential presence of endogenous explanatory variables – in this case

CSP, ENV and SOC respectively – could have implications on our results. A lot

of emphasis has been put to control for some endogeneity – in the form of

unobserved heterogeneity – through the fixed effects model. Although, fixed

effects are not able to capture potential endogeneity to a full extent. A relatively

common approach to detect potential endogeneity in the explanatory variables is

called  instrumental variable estimation. This study has not implemented this

approach which may be viewed as a limitation.

   Furthermore,  there  are  limitations  related  to  the  general  measurement

complexity of CSR. It is not clear what type of activities that are covered by the

CSR  concept.  Whether  the  scope  is  limited  to  include  purely  discretionary

                                  39
activities, or whether it should include activities that is the result of legislative

requirements in the country a firm operates in, could have implications on the

measurement  of  CSR  and  complicate  research  on  the  CSP-CFP  link.  This

highlights the importance of coherence regarding the scope and definitions of CSR

to achieve consistency in this research field.

   There may be limitations due to potential deficiencies in the empirical data

used in this study – GES Risk Rating. A limitation in our data is related to the

exclusion   of   corporate   governance   which   restricts   us   to   only   cover   the

environmental  and  social  dimension  of  CSR  in  our  analysis.  Any  potential

implications of corporate governance on the corporate financial performance is

therefore not investigated in this study. Furthermore, since CSR is difficult to

measure, the CSR ratings used in this study may not fully capture CSR, which

could have implications on the CSP-CFP link. Ullman (1985) points out that

these types of deficiencies could help explain the inconsistency in this research

field.

    Moreover, we would like to address potential limitations with the sample used

in this study. Our data is limited to firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm, implying

that mainly Sweden-based firms were studied in this sample. Therefore, the

generalizability outside of Sweden is limited. Another potential consequence of

this limited scope is a sample size that may not be sufficiently large. To address

this in future research aiming to study the CSP-CFP link in Sweden, markets

that are institutionally very similar to Sweden, e.g. Norway and Denmark, could

be   included   to   increase   the   sample   size   without   introducing  issues   with

comparability. Also, this study only covers the time period 2009-2014 which could

potentially be insufficient to fully capture the relationship between CSP and CFP.

This is a limitation set by the GES Risk Rating data used in this study. Therefore,

it is important that future research considers the limitations set by different

databases in the empirical approach.

    Finally, although this study indicates that industry risk to some degree affects

the relationship between CSP and CFP, our recommendation for further research

                                  40
is to continue the analysis on risky industries. This could be done by examining

the different risk sources on a more detailed level to provide further insights on

industry-specific mechanisms and their implications on the CSP-CFP link. For

example, future studies may investigate whether firms operating in industries that

are highly exposed to supply chain risk, gain more financially from adopting

practices  aimed  to  address  supply  chain  issues,  than  do  firms  operating in

industries that do not experience the same exposure. Thus, further research may

provide more concrete evidence on which CSR activities that will provide the

most value for firms based on which industry it belongs to and the risk dynamics

of that industry.

                                  41
                         546-351-34 161
                    Firms




                         3276-2106-204966

                      Observations





                                                                            42
                   Sample selection

                Table 1:





                        Sample selection processFirms covered by Thomson Reuters Datastream with all firm and year observationsFirms not covered by GES Risk Rating + adjustments to balance panel dataFinal adjustments for missing values for variables used in baseline regressionsFinal sampleThis table describes the sample selection process. The financial data for our financial performance and control variables are retrievedfrom Thomson Reuters Datastream. The CSR data for our corporate social performance variables are collected from the GES RiskRating database. Firstly, firms that are not overlapping between the financial dataset and the CSR dataset are excluded from thesample. Secondly, firms that are not observed during the whole sample period, 2009-2014 for the CSR data and the financial dataused for the control variables; and 2010-2015 for the financial data used for the financial performance measures, are dropped toachieve a balanced panel data. Lastly, firms that have missing values for any variables used in the baseline regressions are alsodropped.

8 Tables
                               Table 2:  Variable definitions

Key variables         Definition
Dependent variables
Tobin’s Q              [Market Capitalization + Total Liabilities]/[Total Assets]
Return on Assets       EBT/Average Total Assets, where average total assets are calculated
(ROA)               as the average of ingoing and outgoing balance
Explanatory variables
CSP                [0.5 x ENV + 0.5 x SOC]
ENV                 Environmental Performance proxy retrieved from GES Risk Ratinga

                                                                                                 b
SOC                Social Performance proxy retrieved from GES Risk Rating
Control variables
Size                    Natural logarithm of firm total assets
Risk                  Long-Term Debt/Total Assets
Growth                 [Revenues t  – Revenues (t-1)]/Revenues (t-1)
Adv                 Intangible Assets/Revenues

This table includes definitions of the main variables used in our baseline regressions.  a b See  section 4.3
for a more comprehensive definition.

                                        43
          ER       ER    ESR ESR ESR          SR      ESR
       Low-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-risk            Low-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-risk Low-risk Low-risk        Low-risk
    Risk-type                 ER, SR &ER, SR &ER, SR &                  ER, SR &



    %            0.62        1.86  1.24          1.24                          100
        4.970.621.241.24   0.626.831.24           2.48  0.62   2.488.700.624.97  0.620.62  4.35



       8  1  2  2  1  1  11 2  3    2    4    1  2  4  14 1  8    1  1    7
                                                                       161
    Firms.






                                                                                      classifies industries considered risky in terms of

                                                                        SR










    IndustryIT ServicesIndependent Power Producers & Energy TradersIndustrial ConglomeratesInternet Software & ServicesLeisure Equipment & ProductsLife Sciences Tools & ServicesMachineryMediaMetals & MiningOil, Gas & Consumable FuelsPaper & Forest ProductsPersonal ProductsPharmaceuticalsProfessional ServicesReal Estate Management & DevelopmentSoftwareSpecialty RetailTextiles, Apparel & Luxury GoodsTobaccoTrading Companies & DistributorsTotal

                                                                                  44

     ERER  ER                   ESR    ER  SR  ESR       SR
    Risk-type Low-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-riskER, SR &Low-riskLow-riskLow-riskER, SR &Low-riskLow-riskLow-riskLow-risk



   %                                3.73
        1.240.623.114.353.110.622.485.592.48  0.62  2.48     2.480.626.211.241.86  2.480.62  1.242.483.11



       2  1  5  7  5  1  4  9  4    1    4    6  4  1  10 2  3    4  1    12 4  5
    Firms



                                                                                             classifies industries considered risky in terms of their exposure to both environmental and social issues.

Sample distribution across industries including risk-type categorization of each industry

                                                                       ESR





Table 3:




                                                                                 classifies industries considered risky in terms of their exposure to environmental issues.

                                                                           ER      are defined as industries that are not considered risky in regards to neither environmental or social issues.



    IndustryAerospace & DefenseAirlinesBiotechnologyBuilding ProductsCapital MarketsChemicalsCommercial BanksCommercial Services & SuppliesCommunications EquipmentComputers & PeripheralsConstruction & EngineeringDiversified Financial ServicesDiversified Telecommunication ServicesElectrical EquipmentElectronic Equipment, Instruments & ComponentsFood & Staples RetailingFood ProductsHealth Care Equipment & SuppliesHealth Care Providers & ServicesHealth Care TechnologyHotels, Restaurants & LeisureHousehold DurablesThis table describes the sample distribution across industries. The industry classification is based on the Global Industry Classification Standard by MSCIand S&P.their exposure to social issues.industries
                        Table 4:  Summary statistics

Variable     Obs    Mean     SD     Min     Max     p25    Median    p75
Q           966     1.78     1.45     0.54     9.81     1.02      1.32      1.94
ROA         966     0.06     0.13     -0.56     0.43     0.02      0.07      0.11
CSP         966    32.58    18.54      0      80.5      18      30.5      46
ENV        966    32.57    22.73      0       94      15       28       49
SOC         966    32.58    17.30      0       85      18       31       45
SIZE         966     8.40     2.19     3.60     15.67     6.75      8.13     10.14
RISK        966     0.16     0.16      0      0.72      0       0.13      0.27
GROWTH    966     0.06     0.25     -.55     1.36    -0.045     0.04      0.12
ADV         966     0.32     0.48      0      4.18     0.05      0.20      0.36
This table presents descriptive statistics including number of firm-year observations (Obs),
means, standard deviations, minimum values, maximum values and percentiles for the
main variables.  Q  is the Tobin’s Q, one of two CFP measures used in this study.  ROA  is
the return on assets and is used as a CFP measure together with Q.  CSP  is a proxy for
corporate social performance and is an equally-weighted score based on the environmental
(ENV) and social performance (SOC) scores from GES Risk Rating.  SIZE  is measured as
the natural logarithm of total assets.  RISK  is measured as long-term debt to total assets.
GROWTH  is measured as the annual revenue growth.  ADV  is measured as the intangible
assets to sales ratio.

                                  45
                                                      is

    (t-1)                            ROA

                                    ADV
   ADV                 1



       (t-1)
                                            is measured as the

                                        SIZE
                                      is the Tobin’s Q and
   GROWTH           1  0.0537Q


     (t-1)

    RISK               1  0.01350.0273



      (t-1)                                                 is measured as the annual revenue growth.

                                          is a proxy for corporate social performance and is an
    SIZE              1  0.3713***-0.04600.0028
                                      CSP
                                    GROWTH

        (t-1)

    SOC           1  0.5759***0.0627-0.1074***-0.0473

                                                                     46

        (t-1)

    ENV       1  0.7110***0.6122***0.2018***-0.1110***-0.1176***

Pearson's pairwise correlation analysis


        (t-1)

    CSP     1  0.9446***0.9023***0.6440***0.1529***-0.1181***-0.0942**
Table 6:



       t                                                 is measured as long-term debt to total assets.


    ROA 1  0.0974**0.0872**0.0941**0.1212***-0.0914**0.1098***-0.2008*** RISK






       t
    Q 1  0.1963***-0.0955**-0.0983**-0.0755*-0.2602***-0.2181***0.1477***-0.0227



                                                  (t-1)


                 t                      (t-1)     (t-1)
                        (t-1) (t-1) (t-1) (t-1)
           t
      Q ROACSPENVSOCSIZERISKGROWTHADVThis table depicts the Pearson’s pairwise correlation coefficients between the main variables used in the regressions.is the return on assets, which are used as measures of corporate financial performance.equally-weighted score based on the environmental (ENV) and social performance (SOC) scores from GES Risk Rating.natural logarithm of total assets.measured as the intangible assets to sales ratio. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05.
                  Table 7:  Baseline regression - Hypothesis H1
Dependent variables              Qt                      ROAt
Regression                   (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)
Explanatory variables
  CSP(t-1)               -0.00116                -0.000739
                          (0.00564)                 (0.000683)
  ENV(t-1)                        0.00162                 -0.00110**
                                      (0.00625)                   (0.000428)
  SOC(t-1)                        -0.00283                  0.000381
                                      (0.00452)                   (0.000671)
Control variables
  SIZE(t-1)                  -0.114      -0.118         -0.0500**     -0.0487**
                            (0.126)     (0.126)         (0.0241)      (0.0235)
  RISK(t-1)                 -0.594*     -0.607*         -0.0791       -0.0748
                            (0.307)     (0.311)         (0.0722)      (0.0724)
  GROWTH(t-1)            0.151      0.150          0.0321        0.0321
                            (0.100)     (0.0997)        (0.0238)      (0.0235)
  ADV(t-1)                 0.120       0.118         -0.0417**     -0.0410**
                            (0.244)     (0.244)         (0.0194)      (0.0187)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE        YES      YES          YES        YES
  Firm FE              YES      YES          YES        YES
  Firms                   161        161            161          161
  Observations             966        966            966          966
    2
  R                        0.361      0.362          0.462        0.465
This table shows the regression results for hypothesis H1  where a fixed effects model is
used  to  examine  the  relationship  between  corporate  social  performance  (CSP)  and
corporate financial performance (CFP). To measure corporate social performance, we use
ratings from the GES Risk Rating database. Two CFP measures are used:  Tobin’s Q  as
shown in regression (1) and (2) and the  return on assets (ROA)  as shown in regression
(3) and (4). The CSP-CFP link is examined on both an aggregated CSP level, shown in
regression (1) and (3), and a disaggregated CSP level where the two dimensions of CSP,
environmental (ENV) and social (SOC) performance, are examined as shown in regression
(2) and (4).   CSP  is an equally-weighted score based on ENV and SOC. In all our
regressions, we control for  SIZE  as measured by the natural logarithm of total assets;
RISK  as measured by long-term debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured by the
annual revenue growth and  ADV  as measured by the intangible assets to sales ratio. A
one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables is used. Robust standard errors
(clustered at the industry-level) are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                  47
                       Table 8:  Baseline regression - Hypothesis  H2a -H2c

Hypotheses                  Hypothesis H2a             Hypothesis  H2b            Hypothesis  H2c
Dependent variables          Qt        ROAt            Qt        ROAt           Qt       ROAt
Regression                   (5)          (6)              (7)         (8)             (9)        (10)
Explanatory variables
  CSP (t-1)*ESR                                                          0.00803   -0.00249
                                                                                     (0.0101)    (0.00200)
  ENV(t-1)*ER           -0.00837   0.000273
                          (0.00989)    (0.000586)
  SOC(t-1)*SR                                   0.000643    0.00208
                                                       (0.00830)    (0.00249)
  CSP (t-1)                                                                -0.00160  -0.000606
                                                                                   (0.00594)   (0.000680)
  ENV(t-1)               0.00350   -0.00117**       0.00163   -0.00108**
                          (0.00772)    (0.000511)        (0.00624)    (0.000439)
  SOC(t-1)               -0.00321    0.000393       -0.00292   0.0000867
                          (0.00460)    (0.000676)        (0.00481)    (0.000526)
Control variables
  SIZE(t-1)                 -0.113      -0.0488**          -0.119     -0.0514**         -0.120     -0.0483*
                           (0.129)      (0.0236)          (0.123)     (0.0242)         (0.129)     (0.0241)
  RISK(t-1)                -0.605*      -0.0748          -0.608*      -0.0772          -0.593*     -0.0794
                           (0.315)      (0.0723)          (0.312)     (0.0767)         (0.307)     (0.0720)
  GROWTH(t-1)            0.155       0.0319           0.151       0.0327          0.147      0.0332
                           (0.0995)     (0.0235)         (0.0996)     (0.0238)         (0.101)     (0.0241)
  ADV(t-1)                 0.118      -0.0410**          0.118      -0.0408**         0.118     -0.0413**
                           (0.245)      (0.0186)          (0.244)     (0.0186)         (0.245)     (0.0197)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE        YES       YES          YES       YES          YES      YES
  Firm FE              YES       YES          YES       YES          YES      YES
  Firms                   161         161            161        161            161        161
  Observations             966         966            966        966            966        966
  R2                      0.362       0.465           0.362       0.467           0.361       0.463

This table shows the regression results for hypotheses H2a-H 2c  where a fixed effects model is used to examine the relationship
between corporate social performance (CSP) and corporate financial performance (CFP) for industries that are risky in terms
of their exposure to environmental and social issues respectively.  ER  is an indicator variable for whether an industry  j  in
year  t-1  is considered risky in terms of its exposure to environmental issues.  SR  is an indicator variable for whether an
industry  j  in year  t-1  is considered risky in terms of its exposure to social issues.  ESR  is an indicator variable for whether
an industry  j  in year  t-1  is considered risky in terms of its exposure to both environmental and social issues. To measure
corporate social performance and the risk-level of an industry, we use ratings from the GES Risk Rating database. The risk-
level of an industry is based on a 7-point scale (C-A, where C indicates high risk and A indicates low risk). Industries that
have the rating C or C+ are defined as risky industries. Two CFP measures are used:  Tobin’s Q  as shown in regression (5),
(7) and (9) and the  return on assets (ROA)  as shown in regression (6), (8) and (10).  ENV  measures the environmental
performance and  SOC  measures the social performance of firms.  CSP  is an equally-weighted score based on ENV and SOC.
In all our regressions, we control for  SIZE  as measured by the natural logarithm of total assets;  RISK  as measured by long-
term debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured by the annual revenue growth and  ADV  as measured by the intangible
assets to sales ratio. A one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables is used. Robust standard errors (clustered
at the industry-level) are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                           48
        Table 9:  Variation within firms over time for CSR performance measures

       Firm-year observations that do not   Firm-year observations that vary in relation
        vary in relation to the directly        to the directly previous firm-year observation
       previous firm-year observation        indicating variation within firms over time
            N          % of sample           N              % of sample
CSP         158            16.36 %             808                83.64 %
ENV        278            28.78 %             688                71.22 %
SOC         276            28.57 %             690                71.43 %
This table presents results from a test which aims to assess the variation within firms over time for
the three CSR performance measures. Indicators were used to detect firm-year observations that did
not change value between two years, i.e. were constant across two years. This test is used as a reference
point to determine whether firm fixed effects are appropriate to include in our regressions or not.

                                       49
        Table 10:  Baseline regression without Firm FE – Hypothesis H1
Dependent variables               Qt                     ROAt
Regression                   (11)        (12)            (13)         (14)
Explanatory variables
  CSP(t-1)                 0.00268                 -0.000655
                            (0.00898)                  (0.000747)
  ENV(t-1)                         -0.00801                 -0.000276
                                       (0.00506)                   (0.000624)
  SOC(t-1)                          0.0129*                  -0.000392
                                       (0.00722)                   (0.000817)
Control variables
  SIZE(t-1)                  -0.0623     -0.0654         0.0197**     0.0197**
                             (0.104)     (0.106)         (0.00939)    (0.00949)
  RISK(t-1)                 -1.486**    -1.391**        -0.214***    -0.214***
                             (0.615)     (0.534)         (0.0791)      (0.0792)
  GROWTH(t-1)            0.751**     0.756**        0.0696**     0.0696**
                             (0.300)     (0.296)         (0.0288)      (0.0288)
  ADV(t-1)                  -0.229      -0.245          -0.0215      -0.0214
                             (0.311)     (0.311)         (0.0164)      (0.0163)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE         YES      YES          YES       YES
  Firm FE               NO      NO          NO       NO
  Firms                    161        161            161         161
  Observations              966        966            966         966
    2
  R                         0.528      0.391           0.534        0.391
This table shows the regression results for hypothesis H1  where a fixed effects model is
used  to  examine  the  relationship  between  corporate  social  performance  (CSP)  and
corporate financial performance (CFP). No firm fixed effects are used in these regressions
as the CSR performance scores show relatively low variation within firms over time. To
measure corporate social performance, we use ratings from the GES Risk Rating database.
Two CFP measures are used:  Tobin’s Q  as shown in regression (11) and (12) and the
return on assets (ROA)  as shown in regression (13) and (14). The CSP-CFP link is
examined on both an aggregated CSP level, shown in regression (11) and (13), and a
disaggregated CSP level where the two dimensions of CSP,  environmental (ENV)  and
social (SOC)  performance, are examined as shown in regression (12) and (14).  CSP  is an
equally-weighted score based on ENV and SOC. In all our regressions, we control for SIZE
as measured by the natural logarithm of total assets;  RISK  as measured by long-term
debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured by the annual revenue growth and  ADV  as
measured by the intangible assets to sales ratio. A one-year lag between CFP and the
independent variables is used. Robust standard errors (clustered at the industry-level) are
in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                  50
               Table 11:  Baseline regression without Firm FE – Hypothesis H2a -H2c

Hypotheses                 Hypothesis  H2a            Hypothesis H2b            Hypothesis  H2c
Dependent variables          Qt       ROAt           Qt       ROAt           Qt        ROAt
Regression                  (15)        (16)            (17)        (18)            (19)         (20)
Explanatory variables
  CSP (t-1)*ESR                                                        0.0222    0.000483
                                                                                  (0.0157)     (0.00195)
  ENV(t-1)*ER           0.0130    0.000181
                           (0.0150)    (0.00127)
  SOC(t-1)*SR                                 0.0410**   0.00194
                                                      (0.0159)    (0.00150)
  CSP (t-1)                                                             0.000841   -0.000695
                                                                                 (0.00952)    (0.000755)
  ENV(t-1)               -0.0123   -0.000336      -0.00855   -0.000302
                          (0.00886)   (0.000933)       (0.00560)   (0.000654)
  SOC(t-1)               0.0123*   -0.000400       0.00316   -0.000853
                          (0.00707)   (0.000798)       (0.00780)   (0.000819)
Control Variables
  SIZE(t-1)                -0.0754     0.0195*         -0.0548     0.0202**         -0.0651     0.0196**
                           (0.106)     (0.0102)         (0.105)     (0.00943)         (0.103)     (0.00945)
  RISK(t-1)                -1.386**    -0.214***        -1.278**    -0.209**         -1.428**     -0.213**
                           (0.520)     (0.0787)         (0.506)     (0.0775)         (0.605)      (0.0800)
  GROWTH(t-1)           0.725**    0.0691**        0.784***    0.0709**         0.751**     0.0696**
                           (0.296)     (0.0299)         (0.284)     (0.0281)         (0.297)      (0.0288)
  ADV(t-1)                 -0.242      -0.0213          -0.216      -0.0200          -0.233      -0.0216
                           (0.303)     (0.0165)         (0.297)     (0.0167)         (0.308)      (0.0164)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE        YES      YES          YES      YES          YES       YES
  Firm FE             NO      NO         NO       NO          NO       NO
  Firms                   161        161            161        161            161         161
  Observations             966        966            966        966            966         966
  R2                     0.538       0.391           0.558       0.397           0.532       0.391

This table shows the regression results for hypotheses H2a-H2c  where a fixed effects model is used to examine the
relationship between corporate social performance (CSP) and corporate financial performance (CFP) for industries
that are risky in terms of their exposure to environmental and social issues respectively. No firm fixed effects are
used in these regressions as the CSR performance scores show relatively low variation within firms over time.  ER  is
an indicator variable for whether an industry j  in year  t-1  is considered risky in terms of its exposure to environmental
issues.  SR  is an indicator variable for whether an industry  j  in year  t-1  is considered risky in terms of its exposure
to social issues.  ESR  is an indicator variable for whether an industry  j  in year  t-1  is considered risky in terms of its
exposure to both environmental and social issues. To measure corporate social performance and the risk-level of an
industry, we use ratings from the GES Risk Rating database. The risk-level of an industry is based on a 7-point
scale (C-A, where C indicates high risk and A indicates low risk). Industries that have the rating C or C+ are defined
as risky industries. Two CFP measures are used:  Tobin’s Q  as shown in regression (15), (17) and (19) and the  return
on assets (ROA) as shown in regression (16), (18) and (20). ENV  measures the environmental performance and SOC
measures the social performance of firms.  CSP  is an equally-weighted score based on ENV and SOC. In all our
regressions, we control for  SIZE  as measured by the natural logarithm of total assets;  RISK  as measured by long-
term debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured by the annual revenue growth and  ADV  as measured by the
intangible assets to sales ratio. A one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables is used. Robust standard
errors (clustered at the industry-level) are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                          51
                Table 12:  Robustness test – Regressions with different time-lags
Hypotheses                        Hypothesis H1                       Hypothesis H2b
Dependent variables                    Qt                               Qt
Lag                       No lag    1-year lag   2-year lag        No lag    1-year lag   2-year lag
Regression                  (21)        (22)        (23)           (24)        (25)        (26)
Explanatory variables
  SOC*SR                                            0.0396**  0.0410**   0.0434**
                                                                  (0.0163)    (0.0159)    (0.0173)
  ENV                  -0.00876    -0.00801    -0.00534       -0.00929    -0.00855    -0.00574
                           (0.00549)   (0.00506)   (0.00508)       (0.00586)   (0.00560)   (0.00588)
  SOC                 0.0139**   0.0129*    0.00962       0.00454    0.00316    -0.00101
                           (0.00669)   (0.00722)   (0.00724)       (0.00699)   (0.00780)   (0.00841)
Control variables
  SIZE                    -0.0551     -0.0654     -0.0622        -0.0449     -0.0548     -0.0495
                            (0.0971)     (0.106)     (0.100)        (0.0966)     (0.105)     (0.0988)
  RISK                   -0.750     -1.391**    -1.680***        -0.641     -1.278**    -1.625***
                            (0.641)     (0.534)     (0.523)         (0.631)     (0.506)     (0.515)
  GROWTH              0.493     0.756**     0.901**         0.520     0.784***    0.932**
                            (0.398)     (0.296)     (0.401)         (0.391)     (0.284)     (0.387)
  ADV                    -0.371      -0.245      -0.203         -0.344      -0.216      -0.173
                            (0.342)     (0.311)     (0.246)         (0.327)     (0.297)     (0.232)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE        YES      YES      YES         YES      YES      YES
  Firm FE              NO      NO       NO         NO      NO       NO
  Firms                    161        161        161           161        161        161
  Observations              966        966        805           966        966        805
    2
  R                         0.538      0.391       0.535          0.563      0.558       0.369
This table shows the regression results of our robustness test where different time-lags are used between
corporate financial performance (CFP) and the independent variables to see the implications on our results.
Only regression results for hypothesis H1  and H2b  are shown in this table as there were no major differences for
hypothesis H2a  and H2c .  The same applies to our regression results in which  return on assets (ROA)  is used to
measure corporate financial performance (CFP).  SR  is an indicator variable for whether an industry  j  in year
t-1  is considered risky in terms of its exposure to social issues.  Q  is defined as  Tobin’s Q  and measures CFP in
these regressions.   To measure corporate social performance and the risk-level of an industry, we use ratings
from the GES Risk Rating database. The risk-level of an industry is based on a 7-point scale (C-A, where C
indicates high risk and A indicates low risk). Industries that have the rating C or C+ are defined as risky
industries.  ENV  measures the environmental performance and  SOC  measures the social performance of firms.
In all our regressions, we control for  SIZE  as measured by the natural logarithm of total assets;  RISK  as
measured by long-term debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured by the annual revenue growth and  ADV
as measured by the intangible assets to sales ratio. Robust standard errors (clustered at the industry-level) are
in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                          52
        Table 13:  Robustness test – Regressions comparing ASSET4 and GES Risk Rating

                               GES Risk Rating                   ASSET4
Dependent variables          Qt        ROAt        Qt        ROAt           Qt        ROAt
Regression                  (27)        (28)        (29)        (30)            (31)        (32)
Explanatory variables
  CSP(t-1)                0.00268   -0.000655   -0.00982   -0.000601      0.00223   0.00193**
                          (0.00898)   (0.000747)   (0.00871)   (0.000786)      (0.00735)   (0.000848)
Control variables
  SIZE(t-1)                 -0.0623     0.0197**     -0.0633     -0.000691       -0.187**    -0.0227**
                            (0.104)     (0.00939)     (0.108)     (0.0106)        (0.0745)    (0.00983)
  RISK(t-1)                -1.486**    -0.214***     -0.867       -0.144         -0.150**    -0.0208**
                            (0.615)     (0.0791)     (0.832)      (0.107)         (0.0662)    (0.00796)
  GROWTH(t-1)           0.751**     0.0696**      0.417       0.0655         -1.045       -0.150
                            (0.300)     (0.0288)     (0.270)     (0.0481)         (0.813)     (0.0880)
  ADV(t-1)                 -0.229      -0.0215      -0.169      -0.0273          0.385       0.0454
                            (0.311)     (0.0164)     (0.230)     (0.0531)         (0.284)     (0.0316)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE        YES       YES       YES       YES         YES       YES
  Firm FE              NO       NO       NO       NO         NO       NO
  Firms                   161        161         41         41            41         41
  Observations             966        966        246        246            246         246
    2
  R                        0.528       0.534       0.943       0.792          0.942       0.816
This table shows the regression results of our robustness test where the two CSR rating frameworks – Thomson
Reuters ASSET4 and GES Risk Rating – are compared to see if our results are sensitive to the use of different
CSR rating frameworks. The sample size from the ASSET4 database only includes 41 firms. To make the results
more comparable, complementary regressions with the same sample size as ASSET4 are made with the corporate
social performance (CSP) proxy from GES Risk Rating shown  in (29) and (30). Two corporate financial
performance (CFP) measures are used:  Tobin’s Q  as shown in regression (27), (29) and (31) and the  return on
assets (ROA)  as shown in regression (28), (30) and (32). ENV  measures the environmental performance and  SOC
measures the social performance of firms.  CSP  is an equally-weighted score based on ENV and SOC for both
ASSET4 and GES Risk Rating. The original CSP measure from ASSET4 includes corporate governance in contrast
to GES Risk Rating in this study. To make the CSP measures from each CSR rating framework more comparable,
an equally-weighted CSP score was created based on the environmental and social performance scores from
ASSET4. In all our regressions, we control for  SIZE  as measured by the natural logarithm of total assets;  RISK
as measured by long-term debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured by the annual revenue growth and  ADV
as measured by the intangible assets to sales ratio. A one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables is
used. Robust standard errors (clustered at the industry-level) are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                            53
9 References

Albuquerque, R., Durnev, A. & Koskinen, Y. 2013, "Corporate Social
Responsibility and Firm Risk: Theory and Empirical Evidence", Boston
University Working Paper.

Aupperle, K.E., Archie, B., Carroll, A.B. & Hatfield, J.D. 1985, "An Empirical
Examination of the Relationship between Corporate Social Responsibility and
Profitability",  The Academy of Management Journal,  vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 446-
463.

Barnett, M.L. 2007, "Stakeholder Influence Capacity and the Variability of
Financial Returns To Corporate Social Responsibility",  Academy of
Management Review, 32(3), pp. 794-816.

Baron, D.P., Agus Harjoto, M. & Jo, H. 2011, "The Economics and Politics of
Corporate Social Performance",  Business and Politics,  vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1-48.

Borglund, T., Frostenson, M. & Windell, K. 2010,  Increasing responsibility
through transparency?, Government Offices of Sweden, Sweden.

Bowie, N. 1988, "The moral obligations of multinational corporations. In S.
Luper-Foy (Ed.), Boulder, CO: Westview Press., Problems of international
justice: pp. 97-113.

Brammer, S., Jackson, G. & Matten, D. 2012, "Corporate social responsibility
and institutional theory: New perspectives on private governance",  Socio-
Economic Review,  vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 3-28.

Campbell, D., Craven, B. & Shrives, P. 2003, "Voluntary social reporting in
three FTSE sectors a comment on perception and legitimacy",  Accounting,
Auditing & Accountability Journal,  vol. 16(4), pp. 558-581.

Carroll, A.B. 1991, "The pyramid of corporate social responsibility: Toward the
moral management of organizational stakeholders.",  Business Horizons,  vol. 34,
no.4, pp. 39-48.

Carroll, A.B. 1979, "A Three-Dimensional Conceptual Model of Corporate
Performance",  The Academy of Management Review,  vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 497-505.

Chapple, W., Cooke, A., Galt, V. & Paton, D. 2001, "The Determinants of
Voluntary Investment Decisions",  Managerial and Decision Economics,  vol. 22,
no. 8, pp. 453-463.

                                  54
Cruz, J.M. 2009, "The impact of corporate social responsibility in supply chain
management: Multicriteria decision-making approach",  Decision Support
Systems,  vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 224-236.

Dowell, G., Hart, S. & Yeung, B. 2000, "Do corporate global environmental
standards create or destroy market value?",  Management Science,  vol. 46, no.
8, pp. 1059-1074.

Drukker, D.M. 2003, "Testing for serial correlation in linear panel-data
models.",  Stata Journal,  vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 168-177.

Elsayed, K. & Paton, D. 2005, "The impact of environmental performance on
firm performance: Static and dynamic panel data evidence",  Structural Change
and Economic Dynamics,  vol. 16, no. 3 SPEC. ISS., pp. 395-412.

European Commission 2011,  A renewed EU strategy 2011-14 for Corporate
Social Responsibility, European Commission, Brussels.

Freeman, R.E. 1984, "Strategic management: A stakeholder approach",
s.1:Pitman, Boston.

Freeman, R.E. 1994, "The politics of stakeholder theory: Some future
directions",  Business Ethics Quarterly 4,  pp. 409-421.

Freeman, R.E. & Reed, D.L. 1983, "Stockholders and Stakeholders: A New
Perspective on Corporate Governance",  California management review,  vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 88-106.

Friedman, M. 1970, "The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its
Profit.",  The New York Times Magazine, vol. 13,  pp. 32-33.

Garcia-Castro, R., Ariño, M.A. & Canela, M.A. 2010, "Does social performance
really lead to financial performance? Accounting for endogeneity",  Journal of
Business Ethics,  vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 107-126.

Griffin, J.J. & Mahon, J.F. 1997, "The Corporate Social Performance
and Corporate Financial Performance Debate ",  Business & Society,  vol. 36,
No. 1.

Guenster, N., Bauer, R., Derwall, J. & Koedijk, K. 2011, "The Economic Value
of Corporate Eco-Efficiency",  European Financial Management,  vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 679-704.

                                  55
Hausmann, R., Tyson, L.D., Bekhouche, Y. & Zahidi, S. 2014,  The Global
Gender Gap Report 2014, World Economic Forum, Switzerland.

Hillman, A.J. & Keim, G.D. 2001, "Shareholder Value, Stakeholder
Management, and Social Issues: What's the Bottom Line?",  Strategic
Management Journal,  vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 125-139.

King, A.A. & Lenox, M.J. 2001, "Does it really pay to be green? An empirical
study of firm environmental and financial performance",  Journal of Industrial
Ecology,  vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 105-116.

Margolis, J.D., Elfenbein, H.A. & Walsh, J.P. 2007, "Does it Pay to be Good?
A Meta-analysis and Redirection of Research on the Relationship between
Corporate Social and Financial Performance",  Harvard University Working
Paper,  vol. 1001, pp. 48109-41234.

Matten, D. & Moon, J. 2008, ""Implicit" and "explicit" CSR: A conceptual
framework for a comparative understanding of corporate social responsibility",
Academy of Management Review,  vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 404-424.

McGuire, J.B., Sundgren, A. & Schneeweis, A. 1988, "Corporate Social
Responsibility and Firm Financial Performance",  The Academy of Management
Journal,  vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 854-872.

McWilliams, A. & Siegel, D. 2000, "Corporate social responsibility and financial
performance: Correlation or misspecification?",  Strategic Management Journal,
vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 603-609.

Mitchell, R.K., Agle, B.R. & Wood, D.J. 1997, "Toward a theory of stakeholder
identification and salience: Defining the principle of who and what really
counts",  Academy of Management Review,  vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 853-886.

Morgan, G., Campbell, J., Crouch, C., Pedersen, O.K. and Whitley, R. 2010,
"The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Institutional Analysis",  Jackson, G.
(2010) Actors and Institutions, Oxford, Oxford University Press,  pp. 3.

Moskowitz, M. 1972, "Choosing socially responsible stocks",  Business and
Society Review,  vol. 1, No.1, pp. 71-75.

Orlitzky, M., Schmidt, F.L. & Rynes, S.L. 2003, "Corporate social and financial
performance: A meta-analysis",  Organization Studies,  vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 403-
441.

                                  56
Pitura, M. 2010,  ESG Reporting in New and Old Europe, GES International,
Poland.

Roberts, R.W. 1992, "Determinants of corporate social responsibility disclosure:
An application of stakeholder theory",  Accounting, Organizations and Society,
vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 595-612.

Rothenberg, S., Hull, C.E. 2008, "Firm performance: the interactions of
corporate social performance with innovation and industry differentiation",
Strategic Management Journal,  vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 781-789.

Semenova, N. & Hassel, L.G. 2008, "Financial outcomes of environmental risk
and opportunity for US companies",  Sustainable Development,  vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 195-212.

Semenova, N., Hassel, L.G. & Nilsson, H. 2009, "The value relevance of
environmental and social performance: Evidence from Swedish SIX 300
companies",  Sustainable Investment and Corporate Governance Working
Papers, Sustainable Investment Research Platform.

Shane, P., Spicer, B. 1983, "Market response to environmental information
produced outside the firm",  The Accounting Review, Llll (1), January,  pp. 94-
111.

Suchman, M.C. 1995, "Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional
approaches",  Academy of Management Review, 20,  pp. 571-610.

Tamanini, J. 2014,  The Global Green Economy Index 2014, Dual Citizen LLC.

Tobin, J. 1969, "A General Equilibrium Approach To Monetary Theory",
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,  vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 15-29.

Ullman, A.A. 1985, "Data in Search of Theory: A Critical Examination of the
Relationship Among Social Performance, Social Disclosure, and Economic
Performance of U.S Firms.",  Academy of Management Review,  vol. 10(3), pp.
303-319.

Waddock, S.A. & Graves, S.B. 1997, "The corporate social performance-
financial performance link",  Strategic Management Journal,  vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
303-319.

Wicks, A.C., Gilbert, D.R. & Freeman, R.E. 1994, "A feminist reinterpretation
of the stakeholder concept",  Business Ethics Quarterly, 4(4),  pp. 475-497.

                                  57
Wooldridge, J.M. 2002,  Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
MIT Press., Cambridge, MA.

Wooldridge, J.M. 2009,  Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 4th
edition, South-Western Cengage Learning, USA, pp. 349-351.

                                  58
10 Appendix

            Table A1:  VIF-tests to detect severe multicollinearity

                        (1)                           (2)
         Variable     VIF    1/VIF    Variable     VIF    1/VIF
         CSP         3.53    0.2835    ENV        5.17    0.1934
         SIZE        4.52    0.2212    SOC        4.18    0.2390
          RISK        2.35    0.4253    SIZE        4.53    0.2210
         GROWTH   1.50    0.6675   RISK       2.37    0.4215
         ADV        1.63    0.6127   GROWTH   1.50    0.6675
                                    ADV       1.64    0.6109
           This table presents variance inflation factors (VIF) for the main
           independent variables used in our regressions. Test (1) show VIFs
          for  the  regression  model  that  includes  the  aggregated  CSR
          performance  score,  CSP.  Test  (2)  show  VIF  values  for  the
           regression model that includes the disaggregated CSR performance
           scores, environmental performance (ENV) and social performance
           (SOC). A general rule of thumb is that VIF values above 10 signal
            that there is a presence of severe multicollinearity.

                                  59
                                                                 th         th
    Table A2:  Robustness test – Winsorization to the 5  and 95  percentile

Dependent variables               Qt                      ROAt
Regression                   (33)        (34)            (35)          (36)
Explanatory variables
  CSP(t-1)                 0.00356                 -0.000182
                            (0.00711)                  (0.000634)
  ENV(t-1)                         -0.00501                  -0.000118
                                       (0.00394)                    (0.000455)
  SOC(t-1)                          0.0102                  -0.0000578
                                       (0.00608)                    (0.000552)
Control variables
  SIZE(t-1)                  -0.0356     -0.0377          0.0107*       0.0107*
                            (0.0758)    (0.0772)        (0.00611)     (0.00619)
  RISK(t-1)                 -1.283**    -1.215***        -0.169***     -0.169***
                             (0.507)     (0.441)         (0.0531)      (0.0532)
  GROWTH(t-1)           1.128***    1.121***        0.103***     0.103***
                             (0.330)     (0.327)         (0.0352)      (0.0352)
  ADV(t-1)                  -0.137      -0.148          -0.0134       -0.0134
                             (0.167)     (0.166)         (0.00923)     (0.00917)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE         YES      YES          YES        YES
  Firm FE              NO      NO          NO        NO
  Firms                    161        161            161          161
  Observations              966        966            966          966
    2
  R                         0.570      0.577           0.424        0.424
This table shows the regression results of our robustness test where ROA, Q and GROWTH
are winsorized to the 5th  and 95 th  percentile to see if our results are sensitive to winsorization
at different levels.  In our baseline models, we winsorize ROA, Q and GROWTH to the 1st
and 99 th  percentile. To measure corporate social performance, we use ratings from the GES
Risk Rating database. Two corporate financial performance (CFP) measures are used:
Tobin’s Q  as shown in regression (33) and (34) and the  return on assets (ROA)  as shown
in regression (35) and (36). The CSP-CFP link is examined on both an aggregated CSP
level, shown in regression (33) and (35), and a disaggregated CSP level where the two
dimensions of CSP,  environmental (ENV)  and  social (SOC)  performance, are examined as
shown in regression (34) and (36).  CSP  is an equally-weighted score based on ENV and
SOC. In all our regressions, we control for  SIZE  as measured by the natural logarithm of
total assets;  RISK  as measured by long-term debt to total assets;  GROWTH  as measured
by the annual revenue growth and ADV  as measured by the intangible assets to sales ratio.
A one-year lag between CFP and the independent variables is used. Robust standard errors
(clustered at the industry-level) are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                   60
              Table A3:  Robustness test – No winsorization
Dependent variables               Qt                     ROAt
Regression                  (37)       (38)            (39)         (40)
Explanatory variables
  CSP(t-1)                0.00214                -0.000981
                           (0.0102)                  (0.000803)
  ENV(t-1)                        -0.00771                 -0.000443
                                     (0.00585)                   (0.000694)
  SOC(t-1)                         0.0119                  -0.000549
                                     (0.00741)                   (0.000870)
Control variables
  SIZE(t-1)                 -0.0926     -0.0954         0.0234**     0.0234**
                            (0.125)     (0.127)         (0.0106)      (0.0107)
  RISK(t-1)                 -1.166      -1.077          -0.211**     -0.211**
                            (0.861)     (0.807)         (0.0800)      (0.0798)
  GROWTH(t-1)            0.0518     0.0523         -0.000963    -0.000965
                            (0.0580)    (0.0577)        (0.00337)     (0.00340)
  ADV(t-1)                 -0.258     -0.273          -0.0261      -0.0261
                            (0.350)     (0.348)         (0.0195)      (0.0193)
Regression details
  Industry-Year FE        YES      YES          YES       YES
  Firm FE              NO      NO          NO       NO
  Firms                    161       161            161         161
  Observations              966       966            966         966
    2
  R                        0.456      0.459           0.315        0.315
This table shows the regression results of our robustness test where no winsorization is
used. This robustness test is used to assess the sensitivity of our results to different
levels of winsorization. In our baseline models, we winsorize ROA, Q and GROWTH to
the 1st  and 99 th  percentile. To measure corporate social performance, we use ratings from
the GES Risk Rating database. Two corporate financial performance (CFP) measures
are used:  Tobin’s Q  as shown in regression (37) and (38) and the  return on assets (ROA)
as shown in regression (39) and (40). The CSP-CFP link is examined on both an
aggregated CSP level, shown in regression (37) and (39) and a disaggregated CSP level
where the two dimensions of CSP,  environmental (ENV)  and  social (SOC)  performance
are examined, shown in regression (38) and (40). CSP is an equally-weighted score based
on ENV and SOC. In all our regressions, we control for SIZE  as measured by the natural
logarithm  of  total  assets;  RISK  as  measured  by  long-term  debt  to  total  assets;
GROWTH  as measured by the annual revenue growth and  ADV  as measured by the
intangible assets to sales ratio. A one-year lag between CFP and the independent
variables  is  used.  Robust  standard  errors  (clustered  at  the  industry-level)  are  in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                 61