   Diversification benefits of investments in emerging
            markets  –  A Swedish perspective

                                                                                    †
                       Gustav Berg*            Pontus Zetterberg

            Stockholm School of Economics

                               Bachelor’s Thesis in Finance
                                      May 15,  2017

                                     Abstract

      This paper evaluates the possibilities for  Swedish investors to diversify their portfolios through
       investments in emerging market equities. Two different investor profiles are considered, where one
        seeks to minimize the risk in her portfolio and the other seeks to maximize her risk-adjusted return.
       We start off by analyzing the return characteristics of a Swedish stock index and an emerging
       markets index. A set of portfolios are then created based on, and evaluated with, the volatility
      estimated by  the  DCC MGARCH  model and the Conditional Value-at-Risk. Our findings suggest
       that the investor seeking to minimize her portfolio risk can enjoy diversification benefits from
       investments in emerging markets. Conversely, the investor seeking to maximize her risk-adjusted
      return cannot improve her base portfolio by investing in emerging markets.  This implies that
       investors should consider their ultimate purpose before investing in emerging market equities.

Keywords:  Emerging markets, diversification, risk, portfolio management

JEL Classification:  G11, F21, L25, G31

Tutor:  Irina Zviadadze

Acknowledgements:  We would like to thank Irina Zviadadze for her valuable input during
the writing of this thesis.

* 23271@student.hhs.se
†  23238@student.hhs.se
Table of  Contents

1. Introduction ……………………………………………………………….……….. 2
2. Literature Review ……………………………………………………….…………. 4
3. Data ………………………………………………………………………………... 6
          3.1. Currency Risk ……………………………………………………... 7
4. Theory and Methodology ………………………………………………………….. 8
          4.1. Hypotheses ………………………………………………………… 8
          4.2. Investor Profiles …………………………………………………… 9
           4.3. Portfolio Construction …………………………………………….. 11
           4.4. Return Characteristics …………………………………………….. 12
           4.5. Portfolio Evaluation ………………………………………………. 14
5. Results and Analysis ………………………………………………………………. 17
          5.1. Descriptive Statistics ……………………………………………… 17
           5.2. The Risk-Minimizing Investor ……………………………………. 20
           5.3. The Maximum Risk-Adjusted Return Investor …………………… 25
           5.4. Robustness Evaluation ………………………………...………….. 30
6. Discussion …………………………………………………………………………. 34
          6.1. Hypothesis Testing ………………………………………………... 34
           6.2. Comparison to the Theoretical Background ………………………. 35
         6.3. Implications and Limitations ……………………………………… 35
7. Conclusion …………………………………………………………………………. 37
 References ………………………………………………………………………….. 38
 Appendix ……………………………………………………………….…………... 42

                                     1
1. Introduction

Portfolio diversification is considered to be one of the most central and important pillars of
modern finance (Asness et al.,  2011). Portfolio management originates from the seemingly
simple framework of Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT) laid  out by Harry Markowitz in 1959
(Markowitz, 1959). He argues that rational investors will choose the portfolio that maximizes
their return for a given level of risk. MPT also states that investors  can reduce their exposure to
risk by holding a diversified portfolio. This means that investors hold a portfolio consisting of
several different assets in order to minimize its idiosyncratic risk. In this study, we examine the
diversification benefits Swedish investors can enjoy by allocating resources in emerging market
equities.
       During the 90’s, emerging market equities became an increasingly attractive asset class
for investors in developed countries. These equities showcased a relatively low correlation with
developed markets’ returns in combination with having the potential of offering high returns.
Thus, this new type of asset provided significant diversification benefits (Bekaert and Harvey,
1995).
        Today, the use of emerging markets equities as a diversification asset is more disputed,
and some argue that the benefits have evaporated. The main reason for this is that globalization
has led to increased integration between emerging and developed markets, which in turn has
increased the correlation between them. In fact, Garza-Gómez and Metghalchi (2006) found no
statistically significant diversification benefits from investing in emerging market equity
indices, mainly due to an increasing correlation with S&P 500. Christoffersen et al. (2012) also
noticed an increasing correlation between emerging and developed markets, but argue that the
emerging market equities still offer significant diversification benefits for investors in
developed countries.
       A central concept of portfolio management is the choice  of risk measurement. The
mean-variance framework laid out by Markowitz assumes that returns are normally distributed.
In this framework the portfolio variance is deemed to be the suitable measurement of risk.
However, Bekaert and Harvey (2002) highlights  the problematic nature of emerging markets
when it comes to risk assessment. They argue that emerging market equities exhibit non-
normality in returns, with  higher values to both skewness and kurtosis, which makes the
variance an inadequate technique of measuring portfolio risk.

                                     2
       Further, another common feature in emerging markets when it comes to risk assessment
is the existence of volatility clusters (Harvey, 1995). This means that volatility is  time-varying,
i.e. periods of high volatility are likely to  be followed by periods of high volatility and vice
versa. This necessitates alternative ways  of measuring risk that incorporates the time-variety of
variance to appropriately capture the risk in a portfolio optimization problem including
emerging market equities. A commonly used method to deal with this issue is to use extensions
of the GARCH (Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity) model.
       This study aims to add to the ongoing debate of whether emerging markets offer
diversification benefits by taking the perspective of a Swedish investor. These benefits might
be different from those of investors from other countries due to the differences in size and nature
between markets. Furthermore, the research devoted to the diversification benefits  from a
Swedish perspective is currently limited.
       To get a thorough understanding of the diversification benefits, the topic is analyzed
from the perspective of two different investor profiles. The first investor only seeks to minimize
her risk, while the  second investor  aims  to maximize her risk-adjusted return. Two hypotheses
are formulated in relation to the different investor profiles.  The first null hypothesis is that the
portfolios that include investments in the emerging markets index will have the same risk as the
base portfolio.  This is tested against the alternative that the portfolio risks will differ.  The
second null hypothesis is that the risk-adjusted return  in the portfolios that include  investments
in the emerging markets index will be the same as in the base portfolio. This hypothesis is tested
against the alternative that the risk-adjusted returns will differ from the base portfolios. To avoid
the pitfalls of commonly used risk measures when it comes to emerging market returns, we
adopt two alternative measures that are deemed more suitable to capture the economic reality
of the investment. The DCC MGARCH model is used to estimate volatility, and the Conditional
Value-at-Risk is used to specifically capture the downside risk. These risk-measures are applied
in the portfolio optimization problem and later on used to test the risk in the portfolios created.
       The results showed that both null hypotheses could be rejected, meaning that the
portfolios created had different risks and risk-adjusted returns than the base portfolio. More
specifically, the findings suggest that  Swedish investors can lower their portfolio risk, but that
they cannot increase their risk-adjusted return  by investing in emerging market  equities.

                                     3
2. Literature Review

Many studies have examined the possibilities for international portfolio diversification. Levy
and Sarnat (1970) provided early research about the diversification benefits one could enjoy by
investing internationally due to the relatively low correlation between different markets.
Focusing specifically on emerging markets, Harvey (1995) found that investments in these
could reduce portfolio volatility and increase expected returns. He also noted that these markets
showcased  higher predictability in returns than developed markets, and  highlighted the
inadequacy of using standard asset pricing models due to their assumption of complete market
integration.
       Bekaert et al. (1998) analyzed the characteristics of emerging market returns, and found
not only that the return distributions exhibit high values for skewness and kurtosis, but also that
these factors changed over time. The authors also note that this has implications for asset
allocation, which the mean-variance framework developed by  Markowitz is unable to take into
account. Ghysels et al. (2016) further investigated these implications for portfolio allocation.
Their findings suggest that investors can increase their returns by  allocating resources  to
emerging markets in order to capture the positive skewness these exhibit.
       A characteristic of emerging market returns that complicates the analysis is the
prevalence of  time-varying correlation, as shown by Christoffersen et al. (2012). When
evaluating the diversification benefits from investments in emerging markets, it is therefore
important to apply a model that  captures the effect of  dynamic correlation. Another feature of
the correlation that they noted was that it not only changed over time, but that there was a clear
trend of it increasing gradually. This is a well-documented aspect which also has been  noted  by
Gupta and Donleavy (2009) as well as Garza-Gómez and Metghalchi (2006). Studies by Longin
and Solnik (1995) amongst many others have also  shown  that the correlation increases  during
times of financial distress.
        A number of methods have been suggested to cope with the non-normality of emerging
market returns when measuring risk. Christoffersen et al. (2012) proposes tail dependence as a
measure of diversification benefits in addition to more conventional measures. Borokova (2011)
takes a similar approach and investigates tail dependence in South-East Asia during the
financial crisis of 2008-2010, where she finds that diversification benefits  from investments  in
emerging markets decrease heavily during periods of financial turmoil. Dimitrakopoulus et al.
(2009) instead try to quantify the risk in emerging markets by using and evaluating Value-at-
Risk (VaR) models.

                                     4
        Much research in the field of emerging markets finance and international diversification
has relied on the GARCH model  and its extensions to estimate time-varying variances and
covariances  between  markets.  Longin  and  Solnik  (1995)  use  a  multivariate  GARCH
(MGARCH) model with constant conditional correlations to model the correlations between
different markets. Engle (2002), however, introduces an extension of the MGARCH model that
captures dynamic conditional correlations (DCC).  A version of this  DCC MGARCH model is
used by Gupta and Donleavy (2009) to evaluate co-movements  between countries in order to
determine the diversification possibilities from investments in emerging markets.

                                     5
3. Data

The data in this study has been gathered from Thomson Reuters Datastream and the Swedish
National Debt Office  for the period 2004-2016. The time period has been selected in order to
capture cyclicality  in financial markets  and the correlation dynamics between the Swedish and
emerging market equities. By evaluating the years between 2004 and 2016, it is possible to
examine both the diversification benefits during more stable financial conditions as well as
under financial turmoil, such as the financial crisis in 2008 and the US credit rating crash in
2011. Given the changing correlation dynamics during financial downturns, it is important to
capture this effect since it might have an effect on the diversification benefits.
       The data consists of daily adjusted closing prices and contains 3196 observations for
the  OMX Stockholm 30 (OMXS30) and iShares MSCI Emerging Markets ETF (MSCI EEM).
Data has also been gathered for historical exchange rates for the given time period for the
Swedish Krona (SEK) to US Dollar (USD).
       The adjusted closing price corresponds to the closing price with adjustments for both
stock-splits and  dividends in order to better reflect the true performance of the instruments. The
reason for why index instruments are used in this study is because one could argue that a
diversification oriented investor prefers to invest in indices rather than individual securities.
The choice of index instruments  when studying international diversification  is also supported
by Errunza et al. (1999). The OMXS30 index consists of the 30 most traded stocks on the
Stockholm Stock Exchange, and is used as a proxy for the portfolio of Swedish investors. The
MSCI EEM is a well-diversified index consisting of holdings in more than 20 emerging
markets. An overview of the top ten largest holdings in the MSCI EEM is presented in Appendix
A.
       Data has also been collected for the two-year maturity Swedish Government Bond,
which is used as a proxy for the risk-free rate.  To match the daily returns of the data from the
indices, it is transformed into a daily rate. The transformation into daily compounding is under
the assumption that a  year consists of 250 trading days.

                                     6
3.1.  Currency  Risk
Benefits of international investment are generally reduced by institutional, political and
psychological factors. More important, however, is the existence of exchange-rate risk or
currency risk (Solnik, 1995). A Swedish investor that seeks to invest in the American stock
market or foreign assets is clearly subject to currency risk which arises from the change in price
of one currency in relation to the other. If not taken into consideration, investors that have assets
in foreign countries are subject to currency risk that might cause unpredictable profits and
losses. One way to remove the currency risk from an international investment is to hedge
foreign holdings. Although currency hedging lowers the exchange-rate risk for a portfolio, it
does not have the same rewards as an uncovered portfolio (Solnik, 1995). Thus, this study will
adjust the underlying data for the MSCI EEM with historical exchange rates for the SEK to
USD in order to capture the currency risk of unhedged portfolios.
        It is also worth noting that any emerging markets index itself will be exposed to currency
risk. This stems from the fact that the ETF consists of a number of holdings in countries with
different currencies. However, seeing as this paper takes a practical approach and examines the
diversification benefits one can enjoy from investing in an index rather than direct stock
investments in emerging markets, we do not emphasize the effect from this risk any further.

                                     7
4. Theory and Methodology

This chapter presents the theoretical concepts and the methodology used in this study. First, the
hypotheses are developed and formulated. The two investor profiles are then presented, which
is followed by a description of  the methods used in the construction of the portfolios. We then
give an overview of some necessary theoretical concepts, and present the methods used in
relation to them. Lastly, the  metrics  used to evaluate the portfolios are presented.

4.1.  Hypotheses
The purpose of this study is to examine the diversification benefits Swedish investor possibly
can draw from investing in emerging market equities. The primary motivation for holding a
diversified portfolio is to reduce risk (Solnik, 1995). A well diversified portfolio consists of
several different assets that allows for diversification of the idiosyncratic risk. Another
important concept is correlation, which is strongly associated with diversification. The less the
assets are correlated, the higher the diversification possibilities will be. Historically, emerging
markets have been an attractive diversification instrument due to their low correlation with
world market returns, which has been shown in a number of previous studies (Bekaert  and
Harvey, 2002;  Christoffersen  et al., 2012).  In order to test if there are diversification
possibilities  for Swedish investors, the first null  hypothesis is postulated in the following way:

H0;1: The risk in the portfolio that includes the emerging markets index  is the same as  the risk
                                       in the base portfolio.

This null hypothesis is tested  against the  alternative  hypothesis:

 H1: The risk in the portfolio that includes the emerging markets index will  be different from
                                   the risk in the base portfolio.

The  volatility estimated by the  DCC MGARCH  model  and the CVaR will be used as
measurements of risk. A further more detailed description of the risk quantifiers is presented in
section 4.5.  To further assess  the possible diversification benefits, the  direction  of the change
in  risk  is  also  analysed.  The existence of diversification benefits from a risk-minimizing
perspective will be defined as a reduction in  both  risk measures compared to the base
portfolio.  However, looking only at the reduction in the portfolio risk in isolation might be

                                     8
unsuitable since many diversification oriented investors are likely to  also  be interested  in their
risk-adjusted return.  Therefore, the second  null  hypothesis is postulated as:

H0;2: The risk-adjusted return in the portfolio that includes the emerging markets index will be
                    the same as  the risk-adjusted return in the base portfolio.

In turn,  this  null  hypothesis is  tested  against the following  alternative  hypothesis:

 H2: The risk-adjusted return in the portfolio that includes the emerging markets index will  be
                   different from  the risk-adjusted return in the base portfolio.

For both of these hypotheses, the base portfolio is defined as the OMXS30. The risk-adjusted
return is measured with an adjusted Sharpe  ratio which is further presented  in section 4.5.3.  In
order to further assess the diversification benefits,  the direction of the change in the risk-
adjusted return will also be  analysed.  From the perspective of the investor seeking to maximize
her risk-adjusted return, diversification benefits are defined as an improvement of the adjusted
Sharpe  ratio with regards to  both  risk measures in comparison to the base portfolio.

4.2.  Investor  Profiles
This section introduces the two investor profiles examined, which allows the study to cover a
broader spectrum of investment strategies. The portfolio optimization problem is under the
assumption that the portfolios must sum to 1,  which implies that no capital can be kept or
allocated to other assets. In the following subsections, an in-depth description of the investors
is presented.

4.2.1.  Minimizing the Portfolio Risk
The first investor profile seeks to minimize her portfolio risk. In this paper, this will be
equivalent to minimizing the volatility estimated by the DCC MGARCH model and the CVaR
in the portfolio. Thus, the optimal portfolio allocation for this investor can determined by
solving the following optimization problem:

                                     9
                                                               𝑻
                                        𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒  𝒘      𝒘

                                                                                            𝑻
                                    𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡  𝑡𝑜  𝒘 𝟏  =  1
                                    𝓌5  ≥  0

           𝑻
where  𝒘  =   𝓌8,...,𝓌;   i.e. a vector of the portfolio weights  𝓌5.     is the covariance matrix

                             1
of the  𝑛  portfolio assets.

4.2.2.  Maximizing the Risk-Adjusted Return
In order to find the optimal portfolio allocation for  the  investor  seeking to maximize her risk-
adjusted return, adjusted Sharpe  ratios will be used for the risk-measures covered in this study,
which is described in detail in section 4.5.3. By solving the following optimization problem,
investors can be ensured to find the optimal Sharpe-maximizing portfolio:

                                       1
                                   𝒘  =  𝑡𝒘,   𝑡  =   𝑻
                                               𝒘 𝝁 − 𝑟?

                                                               𝑻
                                        𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑧𝑒  𝒘      𝒘

                                𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡  𝑡𝑜   𝝁  −  𝑟?𝟏  𝒘  =  1,

                                                                 𝑻
                                           𝒘  ≥  0.
                                             𝓌5  ≥  0.

           𝑻
where  𝒘  =   𝓌8,...,𝓌;   i.e. a vector of the portfolio weights,  𝓌5.  𝝁  is a vector matrix of the
expected return and     is the covariance matrix of the portfolio assets.  𝑟?  corresponds to the
two-year   maturity   Swedish   Government   Bond   after   being   transformed   into   daily

                 2
compounding.

1
  Readers interested in the mathematical derivation for the optimization model are directed to Engels (2004).
2
  Readers should note that this is a convex reformulation of the more well-known optimization problem. Those
interested in the mathematical derivation and proof for the optimization model are directed to Cornuejols and
Tütüncü (2006).

                                     10
4.3.  Portfolio  Construction
This section gives a description of how the optimal portfolios have been constructed. The
portfolio optimization problems outlined in this study have been performed in Stata and
MATLAB. The hypotheses are tested by constructing a set  of portfolios without allowing for
short selling. The short  selling constraint is imposed in the portfolio optimization, as many
emerging markets have direct or indirect constraints on short sales (Gupta and Donleavy, 2009).
Furthermore, a study conducted  by Charoenrook and Daouk (2005) highlights the feasibility of
short  selling constraints in emerging markets.  They conclude that short  selling is only feasible
in twelve percent of the emerging markets, which can be compared to eighty six percent among
the  developed countries. The portfolios, in turn, consists of index instruments for equities and
emerging markets.  The selected instruments are:

   •   Swedish  Equity Index: OMXS30
   •   Emerging Markets Index: MSCI EEM

OMXS30 is used as a proxy for the base portfolio of a Swedish investor. The optimal portfolios,
in turn, are created by adding  investments in the  emerging markets index to the base portfolio.
These optimal portfolios are allowed to be rebalanced on a yearly basis, assuming no transaction
costs. Portfolio  rebalancing is an important aspect of portfolio optimization since changes of
conditions in financial markets or disclosure of more information might cause the portfolio
allocation from the previous year to become ineffective. Active equity investing has also
historically outperformed passive equity investing when it comes to the diversification
possibilities (Grossman, 1998). Moreover, a feature of this study is that we take a practical
approach and rebalance the portfolio based on historical data, meaning  that investors are not
able to perfectly predict the future returns of the assets. In other words, this means that we
compute the optimal portfolio for one year, and use the results from the optimization when we
construct the portfolio for the following year. For instance, the portfolio created for 2005 is
based on what in hindsight would have been the optimal portfolio for 2004. Given that our data
for the indices spans between 2004-2016, optimal portfolios are created for the years between
2005-2016.
      The optimal portfolios, in turn, are constructed for the two different investor profiles
covered in this study. In order to improve the robustness of our findings, two different scenarios
are examined. First we consider an unrestricted scenario where the investors are allowed to

                                     11
rebalance their portfolio freely without weight constraints. The second scenario, however,
imposes weight constraints such that the investor must keep a minimum weight of 50% in the
OMXS30. In total, four portfolios are created for each investor.
       The rationale behind adding the weight constraints is that one might argue that it is a
more realistic scenario due to the home-bias puzzle. Sharpe (1964) argues that an investor will
hold the market portfolio in a world with perfect markets.  The home-bias puzzle, in
contradiction, means that many investors are reluctant to invest a larger proportion of their
wealth into foreign markets even though the investment opportunity looks attractive from a
theoretical point of view (Berrill and Kearney, 2008). The main reason for this is that investors
in general are afraid of international exposure due to their unfamiliarity with the markets (Gupta
and Donleavy, 2009).
       The optimal portfolio allocations for the two investors are determined by creating  an
efficient frontier for each year between 2005-2016. For the risk-minimizing investor, the
optimal portfolio will be the portfolio that minimizes the risk on the frontier. For the investor
that seeks to maximize her risk-adjusted return, the optimal portfolio allocation will be
determined by the tangency portfolio.  The portfolios are then tested with the evaluation metrics
presented in section 4.5  to determine whether diversification benefits exist.

4.4.  Return  Characteristics
It is well-documented that  emerging markets exhibit non-normality in returns. This section
therefore presents an overview of some theoretical concepts and methods that relate to these
irregularities.

4.4.1.  Jarque-Bera  Test
The Jarque-Bera test is a commonly used method to test for normality in returns for a certain
asset. It is a goodness-of-fit test of whether sample data have the skewness and kurtosis
matching a normal distribution (McNeil et al., 2015). The Jarque-Bera test is based on sample
skewness and sample kurtosis.  The  mathematical formulation of the Jarque-Bera test for
normality is presented in Appendix  B.

4.4.2.  Serial  Correlation
An important aspect of time series is the concept of serial correlation, which means that the
returns in the present period is influenced  by the return from the previous period.  Many of the

                                     12
traditional asset allocation frameworks are based on an assumption of normality, as well as
independent and identically distributed returns, which can problematic when the returns are
serially correlated. If not taken into consideration, the presence of serial correlation might
distort the true risk characteristics of an asset class and underestimate the overall risk of the
portfolio.

4.4.2.1.  Ljung-Box  Test
In order to test for serial correlation in assets returns, a very popular formal numerical test is
the Ljung-Box test, also known as the Q-test (McNeil et al., 2015). Under the null hypothesis,
the statistic is derived as:

                                                I
                                                           H
                                                                     𝜌(𝑗)
                             𝑄AB  =  𝑛(𝑛 + 2)
                                                       𝑛  − 𝑗
                                                 JK8

The Ljung-Box test has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with  h  degrees of freedom.  If
the Q-statistic has a significance at a 95% confidence level (i.e. a p-value less than 0,05), it is
possible to conclude that there is sufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis of no serial
correlation. If  the  returns  are  serially  correlated, this contradicts the popular random-walk
hypothesis which states that it is very difficult to predict future period returns based on historical
data alone.  However, returns can sometimes exhibit serial correlation.  In a study conducted by
Harvey (1995), the author noticed  that serial correlation was a common characteristic of
emerging market returns.

4.4.3. The DCC MGARCH Model
In this study, we will use the Dynamic Conditional Correlation (DCC) model that was proposed
by Engle (2002). Historically, data has shown that the correlation between developed markets
and emerging markets tend to shift over time. Previous studies that has focused on the
correlation between developed markets and emerging markets have emphasized that the
correlation has increased during the recent years (Christoffersen et al., 2012).  More interesting,
the correlation is also said to be abnormally high  during times of financial distress (Bekaert and
Harvey, 2002). A commonly used method to estimate correlations over time is the moving
average, that uses a moving window over time. However, the main weakness of this method is
that it puts equal weight to  all the observations used in the moving average calculation (Gupta

                                     13
and Donleavy, 2009). An alternative way of incorporating time-varying correlations is the use
of  multivariate  GARCH  models. In the DCC MGARCH model proposed by Engle (2002), the
correlation  is time-varying and is able to capture the changes over time.
       Further, it allows for added flexibility since it separates the modeling of volatility
dynamics from correlation dynamics. Further, this extension of the MGARCH model has
frequently been used  in similar studies (Yang, 2005; Jithendranathan, 2005; Dunis and
Shannon, 2005). The mathematical formula for the DCC MGARCH model with two variables
is presented in Appendix  C.

4.5.  Portfolio  Evaluation
As mentioned in previous sections, the non-normality of emerging market returns has
implications for the measurement of risk. This section therefore presents the evaluation metrics
that have been chosen specifically to deal with these irregularities. Further, the portfolios are
also evaluated based on their skewness and kurtosis, due to their superiority when it comes to
capture tail-risk  (Harvey et al., 2010).

4.5.1.  DCC MGARCH-volatility
Emerging market equities tend to exhibit both non-normality and serial correlation in its returns.
As previously mentioned, the DCC MGARCH model suggested by Engle (2002) provides a
solution to this when estimating the volatility of assets returns. Consequently, this makes the
volatility estimated by the  DCC MGARCH  model  a more appropriate alternative  when
quantifying portfolio risk. This model was also used by Bouslama and Ben Ouda (2014) in their
estimation of risk in a non-normal framework. From here on, any mention of volatility in our
study will refer to the volatility estimated by the DCC MGARCH model.

4.5.2.  Conditional Value-at-Risk
Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) is a risk assessment technique that measures the probability
that a portfolio will incur large losses. CVaR is performed by measuring the likelihood that a
loss will exceed the value at risk  for a specific confidence level (Rockafellar and Uryasev,
2002). In  this study, it  is calculated with a confidence interval of 95 percent.
       In a framework based on non-normality, one could argue that  CVaR  is a more
appropriate method of measuring portfolio risk. Firstly, it captures the increased tail-risk caused
by the presence of leptokurtic distributions (Ergen, 2014). Secondly,  it  avoids the pitfalls of

                                     14
measures such as standard deviation by not punishing the desirable upward movements as hard
as it punishes the undesirable downside movements. Further, it is also considered to be a better
approximation of potential losses than its cousin Value-at-Risk (VaR) since it provides an
average expected loss rather than a wide range of potential losses that is difficult to  account for.
       Moreover, VaR might lead to an under-approximation of the risk as it ignores all the
returns that are worse than the given VaR level, and thus also the fat tails of the distribution of
the returns. Mathematically, the CVaR expression is derived as:

                                              UVWX
                               1
                               𝐶𝑉𝑎𝑅P  =               𝑥𝑓  𝑥  𝑑𝑥
                                 1 − 𝛼  YZ

Where 𝛼  is the specified confidence level, and 𝑓  𝑥   is the probability density function of getting
return  𝑥.

4.5.3.  Adjusted Sharpe  Ratio
The Sharpe  ratio is an important concept within asset allocation and is the most widely used
method for calculating risk-adjusted return of a portfolio. It measures the risk premium a
portfolio earns in relation to the undertaken risk, where the risk premium is equal to the portfolio
return less the risk-free rate  (Bodie et al., 2013). Further, a negative Sharpe ratio implies that
the risk-free asset yields a higher return than the portfolio which makes an investment in the
risk-free asset more appealing.  One major drawback with the Sharpe ratio is that it tends to  be
inaccurate and deceptive when applied to assets that exhibit  non-normality in returns. This is
due to the inadequacy of the standard deviation as a risk measure for these assets. In order to
give a more accurate analysis, this paper will therefore use adjusted  Sharpe ratios with either
the volatility estimated by the DCC MGARCH model or the CVaR as the measure of risk in
the  denominator. Thus, the adjusted  Sharpe ratio is defined as:

                                          𝑟[  − 𝑟?
                                                    𝑥[

where  𝑟[  is the portfolio return,  𝑟?  the risk-free rate and  𝑥[  is the applied risk-measure (i.e., the
volatility estimated by the DCC MGARCH model or CVaR). In our calculations, the risk-free
rate is based on the two-year Swedish Government Bond, transformed into daily compounding.
From here on, any mention of the volatility-Sharpe will refer to the adjusted Sharpe  ratio

                                     15
computed with the volatility from the DCC MGARCH model. Similarly, any mention of the
CVaR-Sharpe  refers to the adjusted Sharpe  ratio computed with CVaR in the denominator.

4.5.4.  Skewness
Skewness describes the asymmetry of a distribution. Although a normal distribution has a
skewness of zero, most  asset return  data have either a positive or negative skew  (Bodie et al.,
2013). In the former case, the right tail of the distribution is longer than the left tail, and the
distribution appears to lean to the left. This implies that there is a higher probability that extreme
outcomes will be positive rather than negative. The opposite holds for negative skewness.
Sample skewness is defined  in the following way  (McNeil et al.,  2015):

                                       8  ;          ]
                                        ;   5K8(𝑋5  − 𝑋)
                            𝑏  =
                                         8  ;           H ]/H
                                     (   ;   5K8 (𝑋5  − 𝑋) )

where  𝑛  is the sample size,  𝑋5  and  𝑋  is the portfolio return at time  𝑖  and mean return of the
portfolio respectively.

4.5.5.  Kurtosis
Kurtosis is a statistical measure that is commonly used to describe the distribution of data
around the mean, which is referred to as the volatility of volatility. However, it is a measure
that should be used to describe the shape of a distribution’s tails in relation to its  overall shape.
A normal distribution has a kurtosis coefficient of 3. When a distribution’s kurtosis coefficient
is greater than 3, the distribution is leptokurtic, and when it is less than 3, it is platykurtic. A
leptokurtic distribution is characterized  by fat tails, which indicates that the likelihood of
extreme outcomes is higher. Implicitly, an investor that seeks to minimize the portfolio risk will
favor a low value of kurtosis.  Sample kurtosis is defined  in the following way  (McNeil et al.,
2015):

                                       8  ;           `
                                        ;   5K8(𝑋5  − 𝑋)
                                𝑘  =  8  ;          H H
                                       (;   5K8 (𝑋5  − 𝑋) )

where  𝑛  is the sample size,  𝑋5  and  𝑋  is the portfolio return at time  𝑖  and mean return of the
portfolio respectively.

                                     16
5. Results and Analysis

This section discloses the results from the study. At first, the descriptive statistics are presented.
This is followed by a presentation of the results and analysis with respect to the  two  investor
profiles, as well as a robustness evaluation.

5.1.  Descriptive  Statistics
This section first presents the summary statistics of the study. This is followed by a presentation
of the results of the correlation between Swedish and emerging market equities.

5.1.1.  Summary  Statistics
Tables  1 and 2  display how the  return  characteristics have changed over the time period for
both equity indices. Considering OMXS30 at first, the average daily return has slightly
decreased over time, reaching the highest numbers during 2005 and 2009. For the MSCI EEM,
it is possible to spot a similar trend in the average daily return as for the OMXS30 index, where
it slightly lowers over the time period, reaching its highest numbers during 2005 and 2009. The
high returns in 2009 can  likely  be explained by the recovery  from  financial crisis in 2008.  By
considering the time span between 2004-2016 as a whole, it is possible to conclude that a higher
return comes with a higher risk. Table  2  also indicates  that the overall returns of emerging
market equities have historically been riskier than the returns  for the Swedish equities.
        Furthermore, the Jarque-Bera test rejects normality in returns for both indices for the
total period between 2004-2016. As shown in  Tables D1 and D2 in Appendix D,  the emerging
markets index exhibits higher values for both the skewness and kurtosis compared to the
OMXS30. The positive skewness indicates that investors can increase their likelihood of high
returns. However, the kurtosis indicates that the investor is exposed to a higher risk that extreme
events occur, which potentially could be undesirable. This implies that emerging market
equities are significantly more exposed to tail-risk.

                                     17
                                                                                                                                         e diversification asset in this paper.

   1
Table 1                                            Table 2

                                                           Table 1 gives an overview of the returns and risks in the base portfolio during the time period analyzed in this study.

                                                                                                                         Table 2 gives an overview of the MSCI EEM, which is the emerging markets index used as th

                                          18
        Moreover, the results from the Ljung-Box test are presented in Table 3. It provides
statistical evidence that both the OMXS30 and the MSCI EEM indices exhibit serial  correlation
in its returns with ten statistically significant lags. A plausible explanation as for why emerging
markets exhibit serial correlation is mainly due to the difficulty in pricing and the illiquidity of
these  markets  (Lesmond, 2005).

Table 3

Table  3  shows the results form the Ljung-Box and Jarque-Bera tests.

5.1.2.  Correlation
Figure 1 displays the  correlation between the returns for the OMXS30 and the MSCI EEM for
the time period. The correlation slightly decreases just before the financial crisis in 2008, where
it sharply increases and reaches a peak around 0,55. This result is in line with the notion that
correlation between developed markets and emerging markets increases during times of
financial turmoil. The increase in correlation during such events is also apparent in the case of
the US credit rating crash in August 2011, where the correlation rapidly  jumps  from 0,35 to
0,55. Conversely, from the beginning of 2012 the correlation between the two indices started
to slowly decrease. During the most recent years, however, the results show that the correlation
gradually increased again, reaching a number of approximately 0,50 at the end of 2016.
       The results support the theory that the correlation between emerging and developed
markets  has  increased  over time. However, this increase is marginal and could also be the
attributed to a temporary change. Still, the relatively low correlation indicates that there are
potential benefits to international diversification into emerging markets for a Swedish investor.

                                     19
                                        Figure 1

    Figure 1 shows the correlation between OMXS30 and MSCI EEM. The correlation is computed using the
                      variances and covariances from the DCC MGARCH model.

5.2.  The Risk-Minimizing Investor
This section presents the results for the investor seeking to minimize her portfolio risk with the
two approaches used in the study, which will be discussed in comparison to the base portfolio.
The DCC approach implies that the portfolio optimization problem is solved by minimizing the
volatility of the portfolio. The CVaR approach, in turn, solves the optimization problem by
solely focusing on minimizing the portfolio CVaR.   Recall that we in section 4.1 defined
diversification benefits for the risk-minimizing investor as a reduction in both risk-measures
used in the study.

5.2.1.  GMV Portfolio with the DCC Approach

5.2.1.1.  Unrestricted scenario
Table 6 illustrates the optimal portfolio between 2005-2016 for an investor that seeks to
minimize her portfolio risk with the DCC approach. Recall that the unrestricted scenario is
under the assumption  that  no weight constraints  are imposed. On average, 71,05% of the
portfolio weight is allocated to the OMXS30 and 28,95% to the MSCI EEM. This portfolio led
to a reduction in the average daily volatility from 1,2936% in the base portfolio to 1,2554%,
indicating a reduction of 2,950%.
        Moreover, interesting trends can be identified when considering the results on a year-
by-year basis as it appears that the reduction in  volatility has increased during the  later  years of

                                     20
the  time  period.  Hence,  the  results  show  some  indications  that  portfolio  has  become
increasingly efficient  at minimizing risk.
       Results suggesting greater reductions in risk came from CVaR, which was lowered  by
6,409%. However, when considering each year for itself, it is important to emphasize the fact
that although CVaR showed the greatest reduction in average risk, the CVaR increased in
comparison to the base portfolio during the financial crisis in 2008. This highlights a problem
in using emerging markets as a diversification instrument: when investors are in great need of
diversification, i.e. under times of financial distress, emerging markets appear unable to provide
them.
        Furthermore, the portfolio also led to small increases in skewness and kurtosis compared
to the base portfolio, indicating that investors will be subject to a higher tail-risk in this
portfolio. Nevetheless, the reduction in both the volatility as well as CVaR suggests that a risk-
minimizing investor can draw diversification benefits from investing in emerging market
equities.

5.2.1.2.  With weight constraints imposed
The weight constraints did not lead to any major differences in the results, as can be seen by
comparing Tables  4  and  5.  This portfolio is slightly more  tilted towards the OMXS30, but the
reductions in volatility and CVaR were 2,971% and 6,400% respectively, which is very similar
to the unrestricted scenario. The same holds for the skewness and kurtosis, which did not result
in any major changes. The negligible effect of the weight constraints is mainly due to the fact
that the optimal portfolios during the time period barely changes. This indicates that weight
constraints are of  little  importance in the case of minimizing the portfolio risk according to the
DCC approach.  Similar to the unrestricted scenario, the findings support the possibilities of
diversification benefits from investments in emerging markets.

                                     21
                                                                                                e DCC MGARCH model.

4
                                                     5
                                                                                                                      inimum Variance) portfolio created with the DCC approach when weight
Table
                                                  Table

                                                  adjusted Sharpe ratios for the GMV (Global Minimum Variance) portfolio created with the DCC approach. In this

                                                           case, GMV implies that the portfolio is optimized to minimize the volatility estimated by the DCC MGARCH model.

                                                           Table 4 shows the risk, return, and the
                                                                                                                                     constraints are imposed. In this case, GMV implies that the portfolio is optimized to minimize the volatility estimated by th

                                                                                                                            Table 5 shows the risk, return, and the adjusted Sharpe ratios for the GMV (Global M

                                          22
5.2.2. GMV Portfolio with the CVaR Approach

5.2.2.1.  Unrestricted  scenario
Table  6  presents the optimal portfolio between 2005-2016 for an investor that seeks to
minimize her portfolio risk with the CVaR approach, assuming  that  no weight constraints  are
imposed. As the table shows, this portfolio was  slightly more tilted towards the emerging
markets index than the portfolio constructed with the DCC approach, and placed an average
weight of 32,64% in the MSCI EEM.
       The average daily volatility was reduced from 1,2936% to 1,2818%, which corresponds
to a minor reduction of 0,913%. The CVaR is reduced to 2,9131% in the optimal portfolio from
3,0660% in the base portfolio, which corresponds to a reduction of 4,987%. By comparing the
results on a year-by-year basis, this approach suggests that the overall diversification benefits
have increased during the years after the financial crisis in 2008. Similar to the DCC approach,
it also indicates that the diversification benefits disappear during times of financial distress.
       The results also show that both the skewness and the kurtosis  increases  in comparison
to the base portfolio. This implies that the investors are slightly more prone to large deviations
from the mode, which is an unattractive characteristic for investors seeking to minimize the
portfolio risk.  However, since both the CVaR and the volatility are reduced, we argue that
diversification benefits from investing in emerging markets exist for a risk-minimizing investor
according to the CVaR approach in the unrestricted scenario.

5.2.2.2.  With weight  constraints imposed
Table  7  displays the results for the risk-minimizing investor according to the CVaR approach
when weight constraints are imposed. This portfolio places more weight on the OMXS30,
which in this case also resulted in greater risk reductions. More specifically, the reductions
amounted to 2,763% and 5,541% for the volatility and CVaR respectively. The greater risk
reductions compared to the DCC approach can be explained by the fact that this approach
overall has greater shifts in weight allocations between the years. When the constraints are
imposed, these shifts become less dramatic,  which turns out to be a better performing strategy.
Similar to the DCC approach, the weight constraints do not induce any major changes in the
skewness and kurtosis of the portfolio.

                                     23
                                                                                                          VaR approach when weight
                                                   he CVaR approach. In this case,

6

Table                                             Table 7

                                                       GMV implies that the portfolio is optimized to minimize the CVaR.

                                                                                                                              constraints are imposed. In this case, GMV implies that the portfolio is optimized to minimize the CVaR.

                                                                                                                         e 7 shows the risk, return, and the adjusted Sharpe ratios for the GMV (Global Minimum Variance) portfolio created with the C
                                                    Table 6 shows the risk, return, and the adjusted Sharpe ratios for the GMV (Global Minimum Variance) portfolio created with t
                                                                                                             Tabl

                                         24
5.3.  The Maximum Risk-Adjusted Return Investor
This section presents the results for the investor that aims to maximize the risk-adjusted return
of  her portfolio. The DCC approach implies that the portfolio optimization  problem is solved
by maximizing the risk-adjusted return by using the volatility as the risk measure in the adjusted
Sharpe  ratio equation. The CVaR approach solves the portfolio optimization problem by using
the CVaR as the measure of risk. Recall that we in section 4.1 defined diversification benefits
for the investor seeking to maximize her risk-adjusted return as an improvement in both
adjusted Sharpe  ratios used in the study.

5.3.1.  Maximum Risk-Adjusted Return with the DCC Approach

5.3.1.1.  Unrestricted scenario
Table  8  presents the optimal portfolio between 2005-2016 for an investor that seeks to
maximize her risk-adjusted return according to the DCC approach. The portfolio optimization
problem is under the assumption that no weight constraints are in place. Compared to the GMV
portfolios, this strategy places much more weight on the emerging markets index, with an
average weight of 43,86% in the MSCI EEM. The volatility-Sharpe of this portfolio is 0,0330
which can be compared to 0,0338 in the base  portfolio. This corresponds to a reduction of
2,479%. By considering the CVaR-Sharpe however, the ratio increases from 0,0165 to 0,0172,
which corresponds to an increase of 4,510%. Even though this portfolio had a higher average
CVaR-Sharpe, it is worth to  notice that it has been outperformed by the base portfolio during
the majority of the years after the financial crisis in 2008. It is also interesting to observe the
portfolio's overall performance during times of financial distress. For instance, it is evident that
the portfolio performs much  worse during financial turmoil  such as the financial crisis in 2008
and the US credit crash in 2011.
       Moreover, by looking at the skewness and the kurtosis, one could note that they worsen
in comparison to the base portfolio, and that the values are higher when compared to both GMV
portfolios. Recall that our definition  of  diversification benefits for this investor required unison
improvements for both ratios, and that the relative changes in adjusted Sharpe  ratios were
inconsistent.  Because of this,  the DCC approach suggest that investors seeking to maximize
their risk-adjusted return cannot enjoy diversification benefits from investing in emerging
market equities.

                                     25
5.3.1.2.  With weight constraints imposed
Table 9 presents the equivalent optimal portfolio when the weight constraints are imposed. This
portfolio is slightly more tilted towards the OMXS30, and places an average weight of 40,18%
in the MSCI EEM. When looking at the two adjusted Sharpe  ratios, one  can notice  interesting
results. Similar to the CVaR-Sharpe for the optimal portfolio in the unrestricted scenario, this
ratio improves in comparison to the base portfolio by 10,180%. When considering the volatility-
Sharpe, the ratio  also  improves when compared to the base portfolio, with an increase of
2,913%. This stands in contrast to the results suggested by the equivalent portfolio without
weight constraints. Further, both the skewness and the kurtosis decrease marginally when the
weight constraints are imposed.
       To summarize, the DCC approach  with weight constraints  indicates that diversification
benefits exist for an investor that aims to maximize her risk-adjusted return.

                                     26
                                                                                                                  roach when weight constraints were

                                                          adjusted return with the DCC approach.-
                                                  risk

                                                                                                                                adjusted retun with the DCC app-
                                              maximizes the

8                                                         9

Table                                                    Table

                                                                                                                       added to the optimization problem.

                                                         k, return, and the adjusted Sharpe ratios for the portfolio that

                                                      Table 8 shows the ris

                                                                                                                           Table 9 shows the risk, returns and adjusted Sharpe ratios for the portfolio that maximizes the risk

                                        27
5.3.2.  Maximum Risk-Adjusted Return with the CVaR Approach

5.3.2.1.  Unrestricted scenario
Table 10  discloses the optimal portfolio between 2005-2016 for an investor that seeks to
maximize her risk-adjusted return according to the CVaR approach under the assumption that
no weight constraints are imposed. This portfolio places a slightly lower weight on the emerging
markets index than the portfolio created with the DCC approach, with an average weight of
35,48% allocated to the MSCI EEM. The volatility-Sharpe of the optimal portfolio is 0,0251,
which in comparison to  the base portfolio, corresponds to a substantial decrease of 25,799%.
The CVaR-Sharpe has an average value of 0,0144, which is a  reduction of 12,357% compared
to the base portfolio. The results are likely due to the extreme weight shifts between the two
indices over time, which indicates that the investment strategy fails to capture the performance
of previous periods. Similar to the portfolios presented previously, one can notice that the
portfolio performs worse during times of financial distress. By looking at both adjusted  Sharpe
ratios in comparison to the base  portfolio, it is also possible to observe that it has been
performing  even  worse during  the  later years in the time period. Interesting to note is also the
dramatic increase in the skewness and the kurtosis of the portfolio. This  is due to substantial
weight shifts of the portfolio,  which during multiple years is fully allocated in the MSCI EEM.
       Conclusively, the CVaR approach suggests that there are no diversification benefits
from  investing in emerging markets equities  for an investor that  seeks to maximize her risk-
adjusted return.

                                     28
                                                                                                                                     ts are

                                                      adjusted return with the CVaR approach.-

                                                                                                                             adjusted return with the CVaR approach when weight constrain-

0                                                11

                                               Table
Table 1

                                                                                                                     added in the optimization problem.

                                                    Table 10 shows the risk, returns and adjusted Sharpe ratios for the portfolio that maximizes the risk

                                                                                                                        Table 11 shows the risk, return, and the adjusted Sharpe ratios for the portfolio that maximized the risk

                                       29
5.3.2.2. With weight constraints  imposed
Table 11  presents the results for the equivalent portfolio when weight constraints are in place.
As can be expected, the portfolio allocates less weight in the emerging markets index, with an
average weight of 24,18% in the MSCI EEM.  Analogously, both the adjusted  Sharpe ratios
improve compared to the unrestricted scenario, but the results still show a dramatic reduction
compared to the base portfolio. Namely, the CVaR-Sharpe is reduced from 0,0165 to 0,0149
and the volatility-Sharpe decreases from 0,0338 to 0,0255. This corresponds to reductions of
9,508% and 24,455%, respectively. Moreover, the skewness and kurtosis are  much lower than
for the equivalent portfolio in the unrestricted scenario, but are still higher than  in  the base
portfolio.
       Similarly, the CVaR approach suggests that no benefits can be drawn from investing in
emerging market equities for an investor that  aims to maximize her risk-adjusted return. While
the weight constraints lead to some improvements in the adjusted Sharpe ratios, this effect is
negligible given how large the reductions are compared to the base portfolio.

5.4.  Robustness  Evaluation
In this section,  an  attempt  is made  to evaluate the robustness of the results in two steps.
By  analyzing  different risk measures, investor profiles and scenarios  it is possible to  evaluate
the robustness of our findings  to some extent.  At first, a comparison of  the results from the
different portfolios is made.  This is followed by a discussion of our findings in the light of the
results  from similar previous research.

5.4.1. Comparison between Evaluation Metrics
This section will start with a discussion of the  findings for the risk-minimizing investor.  Recall
that we in section 4.1 defined diversification benefits for the risk-minimizing investor as a
reduction of both the volatility and the CVaR.  It is therefore of interest to look at the  direction
and magnitude of the change of these measures in our risk-minimizing portfolios compared to
the base portfolio.
       As Table  12  shows, it is  possible to conclude that both  risk measures show consistent
reductions in risk, both when the DCC and the CVaR approaches are used. These results also
hold when weight constraints are imposed in the optimization problem. More specifically, in
the case of the DCC approach, both the volatility and CVaR indicates that the weight constraints
only have a minor impact on the risk of the portfolio. In the case of the CVaR approach however,

                                     30
the results suggest that investors can substantially reduce their portfolio risk when the weight
constraints are added. In short, the coherence in the results suggests that the results are robust,
and that diversification benefits exist for investors seeking to minimize their portfolio risk.
        However, the robustness of the results for the investor seeking to maximize her risk-
adjusted return are not as clear cut. Recall that we in section 4.1 defined diversification benefits
for this investor as an improvement in both adjusted Sharpe ratios. With the DCC approach, the
findings are mixed as to whether the portfolios improve the risk-adjusted return. The portfolio
in the unrestricted scenario showed a reduction in the volatility-Sharpe, but an improvement in
the CVaR-Sharpe. With the CVaR  approach, both adjusted Sharpe ratios show a reduction
compared to the base portfolio. These results also hold when the weight constraints are imposed.
Thus, the findings suggest that no diversification benefits exists for this investor profile.
However, the robustness of these results can be disputed due to the mixed evidence.
       To further analyze the robustness of the  findings, it is also important to look at the
magnitudes of  the results from the two risk measures. For the risk-minimizing investor, it is
evident that the CVaR is more optimistic when it comes to the relative improvement  in
comparison to  the base portfolio. For every portfolio, with and without weight constraints, the
gain with CVaR is higher than with the volatility as the risk measure.  This highlights the
problematic nature of risk measurement in a portfolio optimization problem consisting of
emerging market equities.  One can also notice that  relative changes across the different
portfolios for both risk measures are coherent, averaging around 2,4% for the volatility and
5,8% for CVaR. This indicates that the findings are robust. In contrast, the results for the
investor seeking to  maximize her risk-adjusted return  are much less coherent. The relative
changes in the volatility-Sharpe ranges wildly between the different portfolios, from a reduction
of 25,8% to an increase of 2,9%. Similarly, the CVaR-Sharpe ranges from a reduction of 12,4%
to an increase of 10,2%.  This puts to question the robustness of the findings for this investor
profile.

                                     31
12

Table

                                                        ion metrics for the portfolios created in comparison to the base portfolio.

                                                 shows the relative changes in the evaluat

                                                  Table 12

                        32
5.4.2.  Comparison to  Previous  Literature
To further analyze the robustness of our findings, the results from this study will be compared
to similar previous research. It should be noted however, that the results of diversification
benefits will be affected by the methodology used. Differences in investment strategies and
time periods, amongst many other factors, will have an impact on the results. Still, a
comparison  allows for further  evaluation of  the robustness of  the findings.
       Ergen (2014) analyzed  the diversification benefits of investments in emerging markets
by looking at the tail dependence between country pairs, and then analyzes these using VaR
and CVaR. He finds that in the 99,9th quantile, the average diversification benefits amount to
4,479% and 13,081% for asymptotically dependent and independent pairs respectively. These
results can be compared to  the  the reduction in CVaR in the GMV-portfolios  in this  study.
Ignoring weight constraints, reductions in CVaR  ranged  from 5% to 6,4% in  the  risk-
minimizing portfolios. The similarity in the risk reduction in this study compared to Ergen
(2014)  provides more robustness to our findings on  the  diversification benefits.
      Gupta and Donleavy (2009) used an asymmetric DCC GARCH  model to find
correlation matrices, that consequently were used in their optimization problem. For their
minimum-variance  portfolio, they lowered their standard deviation from 13,99% to 13,09%
which corresponds to a reduction of 6,88%. These results can be compared to  the  reductions  of
the volatility in  the risk minimizing  portfolios  in this study, which ranged between 2,971% and
0,913%. However, it should be noted that this study not only adopts the DCC MGARCH model
in the optimization problem, but also  in the portfolio evaluation.  The results in this study will
therefore not be  entirely comparable to theirs.
       Gupta and Donleavy (2009) also found significant improvements in their Sharpe ratios,
increasing their average annual Sharpe from 0,19 in the base portfolio to 0,33 in the minimum-
variance  portfolio,  corresponding  to  a  74,47%  increase.  This  paper  found  no  similar
improvements in the adjusted Sharpe ratios. Instead, a majority of the cases indicated large
reductions in the risk-adjusted returns. As in section 5.4.1, this  leads us to question the
robustness of our findings for the investors seeking to maximize their risk-adjusted return.
However, it is likely that part of the difference in  the  results  in this study  compared  to  Gupta
and Donleavy’s (2009)  is  related to different investment strategies, time periods analyzed and
calculation methods used.

                                     33
6. Discussion

The  purpose  of  this  thesis  was  to  investigate  whether  emerging  markets  could  offer
diversification benefits to Swedish investors. In this section,  an attempt is made to answer the
hypotheses. This is followed by a discussion of the findings in light  of the theoretical
background as well as  a comparison  to previous research.  Further,  the implications and the
limitations of this study  are discussed.

6.1.  Hypothesis  Testing
By creating several different portfolios for different investor profiles, investment strategies and
assumptions, the results of this study become multifaceted and are thus likely to give a true
picture of the economic reality. These results will now be discussed in the light of the
hypothesis presented in section 4.1. Recall that the first  null  hypothesis was that the optimal
portfolios  with the the emerging markets index  included would  have  the same  risk  as  the base
portfolio.  The results in  section 5  showed that this null hypothesis can be rejected.  More
specifically, the portfolios created clearly had lower risk than the base portfolio, indicating that
there are diversification benefits for this  investor profile. Further,  we  argued that these results
are robust.
       The second  null  hypothesis was that the  risk-adjusted returns  would  for the portfolios
with the emerging markets index included  would be the same as  in  the  base portfolio.  The
results in section 5 showed that this null hypothesis can be rejected.  By  analyzing the findings,
it was also apparent that  the risk-adjusted returns of the  optimal  portfolios  on average  were
lower  than in the base portfolio. This indicates that the second  investor profile cannot enjoy
diversification benefits  from  investing in emerging market equities.  However, the robustness
of these findings can be questioned. For example,  when  considering the investor that aims to
maximize her risk-adjusted return we could argue that an investor will enjoy diversification
benefits from investing in emerging market equities with the CVaR approach, but not with the
DCC approach. Further, using the DCC approach we could conclude that an investor would
benefit from investing in emerging markets if weight constraints were  imposed.  Despite this,
we argue that there are no diversification benefits  seeing as  the majority of the portfolios
showed  large  reductions in the risk-adjusted returns.

                                     34
6.2.  Comparison to the  Theoretical  Background
Seeing as the main results of this study was compared to previous research in section 5.4.2, this
section will instead only focus on comparing the results  to the theoretical background.
       The study showed that both indices  exhibited similar characteristics as what has been
noted in previous research.  We found evidence of skewness and kurtosis in both indices, but
the results were much stronger for the MSCI EEM than for OMXS30. These findings are
clearly in line with what Bekaert and Harvey (1997), amongst many others, have found.
        When comparing the  correlation found in this paper to  the findings  in  similar studies,
one can notice some interesting results. Gupta and Donleavy (2009) investigated the correlation
between the Australian market and a number of emerging markets by using an asymmetric
DCC MGARCH model. The correlations, based on data from 1988 to 2005, ranged from 0,066
for Chile to 0,308 for Brazil, which is lower than what was found in this paper. One reason for
could be that this study uses an emerging markets ETF consisting of holdings in  multiple
emerging markets, whereas Gupta and Donleavy used separate emerging market country
indices. When looking at the holdings in the MSCI EEM it becomes evident that a large portion
of the weight is distributed in countries such as Korea and Brazil, which Gupta and Donleavy
also found had a relatively high correlation with the Australian market. Another plausible
explanation stems from the fact that the Australian and Swedish economies naturally will have
different correlations with emerging markets.

6.3. Implications and Limitations
The findings in this paper clearly has implications for  Swedish investors’  asset allocation
decisions.  While investments in emerging markets offer diversification benefits in  terms  of
lowered risk,  this also comes with a reduction in the risk-adjusted return.  Therefore, when
deciding  whether  to  invest  in  emerging  markets  or  not,  investors  need  to  put  great
considerations as to what their ultimate goal is.
       This thesis has been subject to a number of limitations that one should be aware of.
First, this study completely ignores transaction costs in the portfolio optimization problem.
This might not reflect the real world conditions appropriately  as  emerging markets are
considered to be relatively illiquid (Lesmond, 2005). Illiquid markets, in turn, tends to be
strongly associated with high transaction costs compared to the developed markets. Therefore,
it might be unrealistic to ignore the effect of transaction costs in the portfolio optimization
problem.

                                     35
       Another limitation of  this study is that it assumes that short  selling constraints are in
place. However, in a study by De Roon et al. (2001), the authors find that any diversification
benefits disappear when investors face short  selling constraints. If this study had  considered  a
scenario with relaxed short  selling constraints, the results might therefore have indicated
greater diversification benefits. Yet, the assumption of short  selling constraints is imposed in
many of the previous studies conducted on similar topics (Ho et  al.,  2008; Moreno et al.,  2005;
Cain and Zumbruegg,  2010; Nawrocki,  1992; Rockafellar and Uryasev,  2000; Martin,  1955;
Bouslama  and  Ben-Ouda,  2014).
        One should also be aware of the limitation this study has been subject to with regards
to the investment  strategies  tested. The strategies used in this thesis do not necessarily give an
ultimate answer as to whether emerging markets offer diversification benefits or not. However,
the strategies  used  were chosen based on what was deemed appropriate for normal  investors.
It is possible that more sophisticated investment strategies would  show  greater diversification
benefits than what this study  suggests.

                                     36
7. Conclusion

This thesis examines if there are potential diversification benefits from investing in emerging
market equities for a Swedish investor. Previous research has found mixed evidence of
diversification benefits in emerging markets, and many argue that the increased correlation
between emerging and developed markets implies that the benefits have disappeared. In this
study, optimal portfolios are created for two investor profiles  -  one that seeks to minimize the
portfolio risk, and one that seeks to maximize her  risk-adjusted return. The portfolio
optimization problem is solved by using two risk measures, the volatility estimated by the DCC
MGARCH model and CVaR, to deal with the problematic nature of  non-normality in the
returns of emerging market equities.
       The study finds  that Swedish investors will be able to lower their portfolio risk by
investing in emerging markets. The paper also  suggests  that Swedish investors are unable to
increase their  risk-adjusted return by investing in emerging market equities, although  the
robustness of these findings can be questioned.  The implications of these results are that
investors should consider their ultimate goal and be cautious with the investment and their
investment strategy. An interesting finding was that CVaR consistently indicated  better results
in the form of lower risk  and higher risk-adjusted return  than the volatility estimated by the
DCC MGARCH model. This highlights a key problem in risk management in asset allocation
-  there is no all-encompassing way of measuring risk, and different methods  might yield
different results.
       To further clarify the implications of this study, future research could add  comparisons
with   other   commonly   used   diversification   assets.   When   looked   at   in   isolation,   the
diversification benefits from one investment are hard to assess. By including  multiple assets,
one would get a more thorough view on the benefits of investing in emerging markets. Future
research could also test other investment strategies that complement those used in this paper.
For instance, it would be interesting to examine a passive investment strategy. Another possible
method would be to take the perspective of an investor that invests in individual emerging
market country indices rather than the MSCI EEM. Given the discussion about short  selling
constraints and transaction costs above, future research could also continue to study the effects
of international diversification from a Swedish perspective, but test a broader set of market
frictions.

                                     37
References

Asness,  C.S.,  Isrealov,  R.  &  Liew,  J.M.  (2011).  International  diversification  works
(eventually).  Financial Analysts Journal  67, 24-38.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. (1995). Time-varying  world market integration.  Journal of Finance
50, 403-444.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. (1997). Emerging equity market volatility.  Journal of Financial
Economics  43, 29-77.

Bekaert, G., Erb, C., Harvey, C. & Viskanta, T. (1998). Distributional characteristics of
emerging market returns and asset allocation.  The Journal of Portfolio Management  24, 102-
116.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. (2002). Research in emerging markets finance: looking to the future.
Emerging Markets Review  3, 429-448.

Berrill, J., Kearney, C,  2008, International diversification and the home bias puzzle: The role
of multinational companies, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.

Bodie, Z., Kane, A. & Marcus, A.J, 2013, Essentials of investments, (McGraw-Hill Education,
Ninth Edition, New York, NY).

Borokova, S. (2011). Risk management with tail copulas for emerging market portfolios.
International Journal of Economics and Finance Studies  3, 219-2283

Bouslama, O., Ben Ouda, O. (2014). International portfolio diversification benefits: The
relevance of  emerging markets.  International Journal of Economics and Finance  6, 200-215.

Cain, B., Zurbruegg, R. (2010). Can switching between risk measures lead to better portfolio
optimization?  Journal of Asset Management  10, 358–369.

Charoenrook,   A.,   Daouk,   H,   2005,   Market-wide   short-selling   restrictions,   Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, TN.

                                     38
Christoffersen, P., Errunza, V., Jacobs, K. & Langlois, H. (2012). Is the potential for
international diversification disappearing? A dynamic copula approach.  The Review of
Financial Studies  25, 3711-3751.

Cornuejols, G., Tütüncü, R, 2006, Optimization methods in finance, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA.

De Roon, F.A., Nijman, T.E. & Werker, B.J.M. (2001). Testing for mean-variance spanning
with short sales constraints and transaction costs: The case of emerging markets.  The Journal
of Finance  56, 721-742.

Dimitrakopoulos, D.N., Kavussanos, M.G. & Spyrou, S.I. (2009). Value at risk models for
volatile emerging market equity portfolios.  The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance
50, 515-526.

Dunis, C.L., Shannon, G. (2005). Emerging markets of South-East Asia and Central Asia: Do
they still offer a diversification benefit?  Journal of Asset Management  6, 168-190.

Engle, R. (2002). Dynamic conditional correlation: A simple class of multivariate generalized
autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models.  Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics  20, 339-350.

Engles,  M.,  2004,  Portfolio  optimization:  Beyond  Markowitz,  Leiden  University,  the
Netherlands.

Ergen, I. (2014).  Tail dependence and diversification benefits in emerging market stocks: An
extreme value theory approach.  Applied Economics  46, 2215-2227.

Errunza, V., Hogan, K. & Hung, M-W. (1999). Can the gains from international diversification
be achieved without trading abroad?  The Journal of  Finance 54, 2075-2107.

Garza-Gómez, X. Metghalchi, M. (2006). Emerging Equity Markets: To invest or not to invest?
Journal of Applied Business Research  22,  57-68.

                                     39
Ghysels, E., Plazzi, A. & Valkanov, R. (2016). Why invest in emerging markets? The role of
conditional return asymmetry.  The Journal of Finance  71, 2145-2192.

Grossman, S., 1998, Mastering finance: The complete finance companion. Is passive investing
optimal? F.T. Pitman (editor), FT mastering  series, 283-287, London.

Gupta, R., Donleavy, G.D. (2009). Benefits of diversifying investments into emerging markets
with time-varying correlations: An Australian perspective.  Journal of Multinational Financial
Management  19, 160-177.

Harvey, C.R. (1995). Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets.  Review of Financial
Studies  8, 773-816.

Harvey, C.R., Liechty, J.C., Liechty, M.W. & Müller, P. (2010). Portfolio selection with higher
moments,  Quantitative Finance  10, 469-485.

Ho, L.C.,  Cadle, J. & Theobald, M. (2008). Portfolio selection in an expected shortfall
framework during the recent ‘credit crunch’ period. Journal of Asset Management 9, 121–137.

Jithendranathan, T. (2005). What causes correlations of equity returns to change over  time? A
study of the US and the Russian Equity Markets.  Investment Management and Financial
Innovations  2, 69-79.

Lesmond, D. A. (2005). Liquidity of emerging markets.  Journal of Financial Economics  77,
411-452.

Levy, H., Sarnat, M. (1970). International diversification of investment portfolios.  The
American Economic Review  60, 668-675.

Longin, F., Solnik, B. (1995). Is the correlation in international equity returns constant: 1960-
1990?  Journal of International Money and Finance  14, 3-26.

Markowitz,  H. (1959). Portfolio selection: Efficient diversification of investments. New York:
John Wiley.

                                     40
Martin, A.D. (1955). Mathematical programming of portfolio selections. Management Science
1, 152–166.

McNeil, A., Rudiger F. & Embrechts, P, 2015, Quantitative  Risk Management (Princeton
University Press. Revised Edition, Princeton,  NJ).

Moreno, D., Marco, P. & Olmeda, I. (2005). Risk forecasting models and optimal portfolio
selection.  Applied Economics  37, 1267–1281.

Nawrocki, D. (1992). The characteristics of portfolios selected by n-degree lower partial
moment.  International Review of Financial Analysis  1, 195–209.

Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S. (2000). Optimization of conditional value-at-risk.  Journal of
Risk  2, 21–41.

Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S.  (2002). Conditional value-at-risk for general loss distributions.
Journal of Banking & Finance  26, 1443-1471.

Sharpe, W. (1964).  Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under the condition
of risk.  Journal of Finance  19, 425–442.

Solnik, B.  (1995). Why not diversify internationally rather than domestically?  Financial
Analysts Journal  51, 89-94.

Yang, S.Y. (2005). A DCC analysis of international stock market correlations: The role of
Japan on the Four Asian Tigers.  Applied Financial Economic Letters  1, 89-93.

                                     41
Appendix A

Appendix A gives an overview of the top ten holdings in the  iShares MSCI Emerging Markets ETF  as of May
11th 2017.

                                     42
Appendix B

The Jarque-Bera test for normality is presented in the following way:

           𝐇𝟎:  normal distribution, where skewness is zero and excess kurtosis is zero.

against the alternative hypothesis:
                                     𝐇𝟏:  non-normal distribution.

The Jarque-Bera test statistic is:
                                             H        H
                                           (𝑘])    (𝑘`)
                            𝐽𝐵  =  𝑛(      +       )
                                    6      24
where

                                     ;          ]
                                        5K8 (𝑥5  −  𝑥)
                             𝑘]  =         ]
                                                                  𝑛𝑠
and

                                     ;          `
                                        5K8 (𝑥5  −  𝑥)
                           𝑘`  =        `      − 3
                                                                 𝑛𝑠

                                     43
Appendix C

Mathematically, the DCC MGARCH model proposed by Engle (2002) with two variables,  𝑟8
and  𝑟H, with zero mean can be written as:

                                            𝐸iY8(𝜀8,i𝜀H,i)
                          𝜌8H,i  =                          =  𝐸iY8(𝜀8,i𝜀H,i)
                                       H          H
                                       𝐸iY8  𝜀8,i  𝐸iY8(𝜀H,i)

                    H
where  ℎ5,i  =  𝐸iY8  𝜀8,i  and  𝑟5,i  =    ℎ5,i𝜀5,i  for i=1,2, where  𝜀5,i  is a standardized disturbance
that has a mean of zero and a variance of one.

Using the GARCH(1,1) specification, the covariance between the two variables can be
formulated as:
                   𝑞8H,i  =  𝜌8H  +  𝛼  𝜀8,iY8𝜀H,iY8  −  𝜌8H   +  𝛽(𝑞8H,iY8  −  𝜌8H)

where the unconditional expectation of the cross-product is  𝜌8H, while for the variances:

                                                                                              𝑞8H,i
                    𝜌8H  =  1, the  correlation  estimator  is:  𝜌8H,i             .
                                                                                            𝑞88,i𝑞HH,i

The model is mean-reverting if 𝛼  + 𝛽  <  1. The matrix version of this model can be written as:
                         𝑄i  =  𝑆  1 − 𝛼  − 𝛽  + 𝛼  𝜀iY8𝜀iY8  𝛽𝑄iY8,

where  𝑆  is the unconditional correlation matrix of the disturbance terms and  𝑄i  =  𝑞8,H,i  .

                                     44
     Appendix D

Table D1                                                      Table D2

 Table D1 shows the skewness and kurtosis
                                                                      Table D2 shows the skewness and kurtosis
 of the base portfolio, the OMXS30.
                                                                          of the diversification asset, the MSCI EEM.

                                                              Table D4
 Table D3

   Table D3 shows the skewness and kurtosis of the                      Table D4 shows the skewness and kurtosis of portfolio from
   minimum-variance portfolio created with the DCC                    Table D3, but this time with weight constraints included  in
   approach                                                          the optimization problem.

Table D5                                                 Table D6

 Table D5 shows the skewness and kurtosis of the                        Table D6 shows the skewness and kurtosis of portfolio from
 minimum-variance portfolio created with the CVaR                     Table D5, but this time with weight constraints included in
 approach.                                                            the optimization problem.

                                           45
 Table D7                                                  Table D8

Table D7 shows the skewness and kurtosis of the portfolio that          Table D8 shows the skewness and kurtosis of portfolio from
maximizes the risk-adjusted return using the DCC approach.             Table D7, but this time with weight constraints included in the
                                                                      optimization problem.

                                             46
Appendix E

  Figure E1

   Figure E1 illustrates the return distribution for OMXS30.

  Figure E2

   Figure E2 illustrates the return distribution for MSCI EEM.

                                     47