            Dressing the Bride Phenomenon  -
 Earnings management  on  the Swedish IPO market

                                           ^                      _
                         Joar Jansson  ,  Ludwig Enström
                            Bachelor’s Thesis
                    Stockholm School of Economics
                        Department of Finance

                             May 15, 2017

                               Abstract

By studying  abnormal changes in  accruals for  Failed  and  Successful IPOs, we show that
earnings management  prior IPOs  exists on the Swedish IPO market.  Defining  Failed IPOs  as
firms announcing they will go public but never proceed with an IPO, we introduce a difference-
in-difference approach  using  Successful  IPOs as the control group.  Studying  the differential
effect, we add an alternative way of investigating the Dressing the Bride Phenomenon to current
research. We argue that this  approach provides a way of separating abnormal changes in
accruals relating to earnings management from abnormal changes  relating to IPO firms
operating in  an  abnormal environment.  Finally, we argue that our results might be driven by
Failed and Successful firms having different incentives to manage earnings prior an IPO, which
is in conflict with the assumptions this paper rests on.

Keywords:  Initial public offerings, earnings management,  accruals, failed IPOs

JEL classification:  G14, G32, M41

Acknowledgement:  We thank Farzad Saidi,  Assistant Professor in Finance at  Stockholm
School of Economics,  for supporting as tutor with valuable input to our research

                                                                                                       ^
Contact:  For questions or  comments  related to this paper, do not hesitate to contact  23229@student.hhs.se  or

                             _
23224@student.hhs.se
Table of contents

1. Introduction…………………………………………………………………………. ……...1

2. Empirical strategy and data…………….……………………………………………………6

       2.1 Institutional background……………………………………………………...........6

          2.2 Developing a model to measure earnings management……………………...........7

        2.3 Hypothesis development…………………...……………………………….........10

     2.4 Identification strategy…………………………………………………………….12

      2.5 Empirical implementation………………………...……………………………...14

      2.6 Data description……………………………....…………………………………..19

3. Results……………………………………………………………………………………...22

        3.1 Results from estimation the change in Non-discretionary  accruals…………........22

        3.2  Results from estimating deviation from change in Non-discretionary  accruals….23

         3.3 Results from the difference-in-difference to test our null hypothesis……………25

       3.4 Results from robustness tests…………………………………………………….26

4. Conclusions………………………………………………………………………………...28

References……………………………….……………………………………………………29

5. Figures……………………………….……………………………………………………..32

6. Tables…………………………….………………………………………………………...36
1. Introduction

Among others Wang (1997) points out that shareholders’ objective is to extract as much value
out the firm’s shares as possible during an IPO. When going public Iqbal, Espenlaub and Strong
(2009) argue that shares are priced based on the firm’s financial statements since there is no
market price for unlisted firms. As follows, managers maximizing firm value will have obvious
incentives to influence the firm’s financial statements and exercise accounting manipulations.
This anomaly is called  earnings  management.  When earnings management is practised  prior
initial public offerings  in order to receive the highest possible  valuation  of  firms, we call this
the  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon.  Our paper investigates the existence of this phenomenon
and finds evidence of  firms dressing the bride.

We investigate the existence of the  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon  based on a comparison
between two groups;  Failed  and  Successful IPOs.  The  Failed  group consists of firms, having
announced that they will go public but  later on  withdrew their announcement and never went
public.  Successful  firms, on the other hand, fulfilled their IPO announcements and became
listed.

We argue that  Failed  and  Successful  firms have the same incentives to dress the bride  prior the
IPO. Based on shareholders’ incentives  though, we assume that  Successful  firms maintain the
earnings management after the IPO while  Failed  firms reverse the earnings management after
the withdrawal of the IPO announcement  since this is no longer a value creating activity.
Accordingly,  we suggest that only if  Failed IPOs  have a negative change compared to
Successful IPOs, when going from prior to post the  issue  / withdrawal, we can argue that firms
dress the bride.

We estimate changes in abnormal accruals, i.e. accruals affected by the management, as a proxy
for  earnings management  to increase earnings. For estimation of abnormal  accruals,  we use the
Modified Jones model  which according to Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1995),  is the  accrual
based model for detecting earnings management providing the highest explanatory power. We
add firm and industry-year fixed  effects to the model to  correct for firm and industry-year
specifics which  otherwise  might affect  the result due to omitted variables.

                                     1
We find that the change in abnormal  accruals is negative for the year prior to the IPO, as well
as for the IPO year. Using the absolute approach of measuring earnings management, proposed
by Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1995) this indicates that firms  do not dress the bride. We
suggest that using an absolute approach, i.e. arguing that a positive change in abnormal accruals
implies earnings management, might cause errors due to the Modified Jones model not
providing estimations accurate enough for this. We illustrate this by showing that in our dataset
the Modified Jones provides a change in abnormal  accruals that is clearly negative for a normal
year. Thus,  we suggest  that a relative approach should be used, comparing  Failed  and
Successful  IPOs when going from prior to post the  issue  / withdrawal.  Using the relative
approach, we see a  pattern  indicating that firms dress the bride  (Figure 5.3).

We then  run a difference-in-difference test based on the abnormal change in  accruals. We
conclude that there is a significant difference in change in abnormal accruals between the Failed
and Successful IPOs when going from prior the announcement to post the withdrawal. We argue
that this difference could only appear if both groups dressed the bride.

As  the  next step, we show that our results are unlikely to  be driven by outliers through a
winsorized robustness test. We also show that our results are robust to which period is used as
estimation period for normal  accruals.

In sum, we find robust evidences of firms dressing the bride. Later, we question our assumptions
by pointing out that our results might being driven by  Failed  and  Successful  firms not having
the same incentives to dress the bride. We also point out that accounting data  can  change
dramatically  in relation to the IPO, due to changes in firm structure. Thus, we discuss that our
results might being driven by errors  in the use of accounting data.

In previous research,  Friedlan (1994) concludes that  US  firms tend to be a part of earnings
management before a successful initial public offer by affecting the firm’s  accruals to increase
earnings  in their interim reports.  Friedlan suggest that these  abnormal  changes in  accruals
should be seen as  discretionary  accruals, i.e.  accruals affected by the managers.

Moreover,  Aharony,  Lee and Wong (2000)  find evidence of  earnings management before
Successful  IPOs  along  Chinese  firms  using  annual  financial  data  from  the  IPO  year.
Additionally, Chen  and Yuan (2004) show that there is a relationship between requirement for

                                     2
a certain level of earnings to satisfy the return on equity demanded by investors prior an IPO
and earnings management. Darrough and Rangan (2005)  also  find  evidence of firms practicing
earnings management  prior  IPOs  and in addition to discretionary  accruals, firms stretch their
accounting methods of R&D to manipulate R&D costs to increase earnings.

Separately from authors providing evidence of firms managing earnings prior to  Successful
IPOs, Teoh et al. (1998b), Yoon and Miller (2002b) and  Iqbal, Espenlaub and Strong  (2009)
show evidences of firms dressing  the bride even when firms do not proceed with the IPO, i.e.
Failed IPOs.

Authors of previous research provide results of both  Failed  and  Successful  IPOs  dressing the
bride. Though,  Miloud (2014) claims  that  the causality between  closing in on the IPO and
increased earnings management  is  vague.  Miloud further explains that the  abnormal change in
reported figures might only reflects the normal operating activities, financing and investment
decisions related to growing firms.  Friedlan (1994) show that firms with the objective to  go
public are often  fast  growing  firms with volatile financial. This creates a risk of  accruals being
considered as abnormal for a “regular” company are  in fact  normal  for a  fast  growing  firm.

Except from Friedlan (1994) and Darrough  and Rangan (2005), both using US interim reports
to measure earnings management, previous studies have been estimating earnings management
prior an IPO using the annual report of the IPO year, i.e. after the IPO. Teoh et al (1998a) and
Miloud (2014) argue  that the annual report of the IPO year is used due to incomplete data in
the prospectus financial statement and interim reports not being available for  years’  prior the
IPO.  This paper  identifies  this approach  as a risk of capturing other factors affecting earnings
management post the issue date. Roosenboom et al  (2003)  finds evidence that earnings
management in the first year as a public company is  related to  (1)  support high stock prices
after IPO during the lock-up period for managers and (2) pressure to meet earnings forecasts
issued at the  time  of the IPO.  Von Eije et al. (2003)  find that 17 out of 25 CEOs at Dutch IPOs
increase their focus on increasing earnings after the IPO.

As the reader will be aware of, this  paper rests  on the assumption that  Successful IPOs  will
maintain the same level of earnings management post the IPO.  The findings made by
Roosenboom et al  (2003) highlight that the differential effect between  Failed  and  Successful
IPOs might be due to Successful increasing earnings management when already listed. Though,

                                     3
we show that  our results are unlikely to be driven by  earnings management related to the  short-
termism of the stock market after the IPO. We suggest that this finding adds value to research
through confirming that previous findings of firms dressing the bride are unlikely to be  driven
by earnings management practised after the IPO.

We suggest that this paper will contribute  to previous research by providing a way of
investigating the Dressing the Bride Phenomenon separated from earnings management related
to operating activities in IPO firms.  We suggest that the contribution  emerge  from investigating
the differential  effect between  two groups in the same relative period to the IPO.  As Miloud
(2014) argues, normal activities in  rapid growing IPO firms can be captured as abnormal
numbers by the Modified Jones model, which our relative approach corrects for.

Moreover, previous research has  been using  the  issue date as the effective date of measuring
earnings management  prior IPOs.  This paper  adds  announcement date  as a new  way of timing
the measurement  of earnings management  prior the IPO.  We introduce announcement dates
since  we  believe  that  investors  valuate  firms  based  on  the  information  available  at
announcement rather than the issue date.  We argue that at issue date investors have already
made up their minds regarding the value of the firm.

                                     4
Figure 1.1  Timing of measuring earnings management

                      5
2. Empirical strategy and data

We begin our analysis by first describing the  institutional background  of the Swedish IPO
market and earnings  management  prior an IPO. We then stepwise develop  the model we use in
this paper to measure earnings management. Subsequently, we develop our hypothesis and
identification strategy. Finally, we proceed with the empirical implementation and define the
data in use to test the hypothesis.

2.1  Institutional background
According to Davidson (2015), Sweden is  the start-up capital of Europe  and  many firms seek
to raise capital from an  IPO. According to Carnegie Investment Bank  (2016), Sweden has had
an astonishing IPO cycle in recent years and a very solid aftermarket performance have created
a strong demand among investors to participate in IPOs. Furthermore, Sweden is acknowledged
as the third less corrupt country in  the  world according  to the Corruption Perceptions Index, by
Transparency International (2015).  Nevertheless,  as any IPO market,  the  Swedish IPO market
suffer from asymmetric information, and time to time bad fishes are found  in the water.
Petersson (2014)  points out  the leading search company  Eniro  as a recent example of public
firms exercising doubtful accounting methods.  Thus, Swedish IPO market have an interesting
mix of being perceived as a non-corrupt  market,  but yet,  the  lemons problem in equity market
and firms taking advantage asymmetric  information  raises a curious question: do Swedish firm
dress the bride prior an IPO?

Dressing the bride  is in conflict with accounting standards  and it would lose its purpose if it
was obvious to market participants that the picture of the company is manipulated. Thus,
managers maximizing firm value through  earnings management is not visible at a first glance
in the financial statements. If such, how can we measure earnings management? During the two
last decades, researchers have developed techniques to determine if a firm are participating in
earnings management. These techniques themselves are mainly focusing on two divergent ways
of earning management:

    (i)      Managing operational activates in a dishonest way  –  Real earnings management
    (ii)     Managing  accruals in a dishonest way–  Accrual  based earnings management

                                     6
Among the methods created to detect earnings management, researchers have been focusing on
detecting  accrual  based earnings management rather than  real earnings management  (Figure
5.1). Real earnings management would demand deep insights  in firm's operations since it can
be accomplished by manipulating operational activities such as heavy price discounts or
suddenly cut R&D and advertising to boost earnings in single period. For accrual based earnings
management it is possible to detect earnings management using public financial  statements.

2.2 Developing a model to measure earnings management
Models for measuring  accrual  based earnings management all have the same approach of
measuring earnings management by investigating  Discretionary  accruals,  i.e.  accruals caused
by managers. Thus, research has found that  Discretionary  accruals  (Total  Accruals  –  Non-
discretionary  accruals) are the central  figure for  measuring  earnings management which all
methods builds their foundation on. Different measuring methods only differ in their  way of
measuring these  Discretionary  accruals  since there are different opinions on how to  derive
them.

When measuring the level of  earnings management,  the starting point is always  total  accruals
or more specifically; the change in total  accruals.

                ∆𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'  =  ∆𝐶𝐴%,'  −  ∆𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ%,'  −   ∆𝐶𝐿%,'  −  ∆𝐷𝐶𝐿%,'   −  𝐷𝐸𝑃%,'
                                                                                              (2.1)
Where:
∆𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Change in Total  Accruals in year t for firm  i
∆𝐶𝐴%,'         =  Change in Current Assets  in year t for firm i
∆𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ%,'      =  Change  in Cash in year  t for firm i
∆𝐶𝐿%,'         =   Change  in Current Liabilities in year  t for firm i
∆𝐷𝐶𝐿%,'       =   Change  in Debt in Current Liabilities in  year t for firm i
𝐷𝐸𝑃%,'         =   Depreciation in  year t  for firm i

Also, all  accrual  based models for detecting earnings management argues that  Total  accruals
consists of  Non-discretionary  accruals, i.e. normal  accruals not affected by the management
and  Discretionary  accruals, i.e. abnormal  accruals created by the management:

                                     7
                                    𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'  =  𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'  +  𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶',%
                                                                                                  (2.2)
Where,
𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Non-discretionary  accruals  in year t for firm i
𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'        =  Discretionary  accruals in year t firm i

Healy (1985) provides the first model for detecting earnings management through measuring
Discretionary  accruals.  The key assumption states that  Discretionary  accruals  vary in the short
run but in the long run  Discretionary  accruals  will be zero, i.e.  earnings should equal a firm’s
cash flow  in the long run. That is, during a firm’s lifetime  total  accruals  =  Non-discretionary
accruals. Thus, Discretionary accruals equal the residual between total accruals at a given point
of time and the average  total  accruals:

                                              4
                                                              %56 𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'
                                     𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'  =
                                                                             𝑇,  𝑖
                                                                                              (2.3)
Where,
𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Non-discretionary  accruals  in year t for firm i
𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'         =  Total  accruals  in year t for firm i
𝑇'             =  Total number of years for firm i

DeAngelo (1986) moves beyond the Healy model by assuming that the  Non-discretionary
accruals  for a specific year equals the  total  accruals  from the previous year.

                                         𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'  =  𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%86,'
                                                                                              (2.4)
Where,
𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'         =  Non-discretionary  accruals  in year t for firm i
𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%86,'         =  Total  accruals  in year t-1 for firm i

Jones (1991) found a problem with the Healey and DeAngelo models since they did not put
accruals in relation to company conditions. Jones (1991) argue that it is natural for  accruals to
change if the company conditions  change. Thus,  Discretionary  accruals  still equal  the

                                     8
difference between total  accruals and  Non-discretionary  accruals  (see  Equation  2.2.), but the
way  of estimating  Non-discretionary  accruals  includes company characteristics.  First,  Jones
(1991)  calculates  total  accruals using  Equation  2.1.  Second,  Jones  defines  Non-discretionary
accruals as the predicted change in total accruals based on the below given relationship between
revenue, PPE and lagged total assets:

                          ∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'            1           ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%,'        𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
                            =  𝛼6       + 𝛼;        + 𝛼>
                             𝑇𝐴%86,'           𝑇𝐴%86,'        𝑇𝐴%86,'        𝑇𝐴%86,'
                                                                                              (2.5)
Where,
∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Change in  Non-discretionary  accruals in year t for firm i
∆𝑅𝑒𝑣%,'          =   Change  in Revenue in year t for  firm i
𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'            =   Gross Property, Plant and Equipment in  year t for firm i
𝑇𝐴%86,'           =   Total assets in year  t-1 for firm i

This model is well  acknowledged  as the first exhausting model measure earnings management
for a specific firm.  Property Plant Equipment  and  change in  revenue  are both scaled by lagged
assets to make earnings management comparable between firms. Change in revenue is included
since total  accruals include  receivables,  which creates a natural relationship between revenue
and change in  total  accruals. The  PPE  variable is reflecting the depreciation, which affects the
change in  total  accruals  (Equation 2.1). Thus, the normal level of  accruals  should be adjusted
for the  PPE  level, since higher  PPE  value likely leads to higher depreciation causing lower
accruals, and vice versa. The inversed lagged assets are included in the model  as Jones (1991)
argues that it is natural that  accruals change  as the company grows.

Jones (1991) serve as the foundation to measure earnings management but in 1995 Dechow,
Sloan & Sweeney found that the Jones Model would provide a more accurate measurement of
earnings management if the change in  revenues  was subtracted by the change in  receivables.
The  authors explain this by using  revenues  for estimating  Non-discretionary  accruals  is only
reasonable if  receivables, which can be manipulated by the  management, are excluded. By
proceeding with the modification of the  Jones model, Dechow, Sloan & Sweeney (1995)
created the Modified Jones model. In their paper the authors show evidence of the Modified
Jones model providing the highest explanatory power of earnings management:

                                     9
                  ∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'           1           ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%,'  −  ∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'        𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
                        =  𝛼6       + 𝛼;                 + 𝛼>
                      𝑇𝐴%86,'           𝑇𝐴%86,'               𝑇𝐴%86,'               𝑇𝐴%86,'
                                                                                              (2.6)
Where,
∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Change in  Non-discretionary  accruals in year t for firm  i
∆𝑅𝑒𝑣%,'          =  Change  in Revenue  in year t for firm i
∆𝑅𝑒𝑐%,'          =  Change in  Receivables  in year t for firm i
𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'           =  Gross  Property, Plant and Equipment in year  t for firm i
𝑇𝐴%86,'           =   Total assets in year  t-1 for firm i

Recent research about earnings management prior an IPO have almost exclusively been using
the Modified Jones model since it has the highest explanatory power when predicting earnings
management. Consequently, we proceed with the Modified Jones model to investigate  the
Dressing the Bride Phenomenon.

2.3 Hypothesis development
Our basic premise, based on findings from previous research of earnings management prior
Successful  and  Failed IPOs, is  that firms only do earnings management to dress the bride for
the IPO if we can conclude a certain pattern:

    (1)  Incentives to dress the bride  should not differ between failed and successful IPOs
       prior the announcement of the IPO

We suggest that all companies announcing IPOs aim to go public, and thus the incentives to
prepare for the IPO should not differ between the Failed and Successful IPOs when announcing
the IPO.

    (2)  If  firms  did earnings management to dress for the IPO, Failed IPOs would reverse
       earnings  management  related to the IPO  immediately after the  IPO-withdrawal

We suggest that shareholders of  Failed IPOs  have no incentives to keep  managing  earnings
after the IPO-withdrawal  since they create no value from short term earnings manipulations, as
the  firms’  shares  are no longer  for sale. Based on  operating  managers acting in the interest of

                                     10
their shareholder, they  will reverse  the earnings management  immediately after the withdrawal
of the IPO.

    (3)  Successful IPOs should maintain earnings management related to the IPO  at least
        until the first annual report after the issue date

Teoh  et al.  (1998a)  argues that  Successful  firms will maintain earnings management for at least
several months after the IPO since there otherwise might be a lawsuit against them. In addition,
Beck-Friis and Greijer (2010)  finds that managers in Sweden receiving shares in the IPO  are
on average not able to sell their shares within 291 days, which creates incentives for maintaining
earnings management for a period after the IPO.  Teoh  et al.  (1998a) further argues that even if
no lawsuit occurs the firm will get a bad reputation if investors and stakeholders find out that
firm manipulated the accounting data. Since bad reputation and lawsuits are hurtful to firms,
there are obvious incentives  for shareholders to  maintain the earnings management related to
the IPO until the firm is no longer considered as recently listed by stakeholders. We assume
that firms will be considered as recently listed for at least  until the first annual report  after the
issue.  Assuming that managers act in the interest of the shareholder, we thus assume that
Successful  firms will maintain the earnings management related to the IPO  until after the first
annual report on the exchange.

Based upon this setup, our  hypothesis  has  arisen:

Hypothesis:  If firms practice earnings management to dress the bride, then any such efforts
should immediately be reversed after a Failed but not after a Successful IPO

Only when Failed IPOs withdraw earnings management and Successful IPOs keep the earnings
management it is reasonable to argue that this indicates that firms might exercise earnings
management prior an IPO and we can argue for  the  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon.

We will show that our hypothesis  holds very well across  Swedish firms and that  Failed  firms
exhibits different post treatment effects by reason of failure. By using Swedish data, this paper
has  access to public accounting data for both listed and private firms, where studies in US of
the same phenomena would suffer from having data issues due to restricted availability of
accounting data for private companies.

                                     11
2.4  Identification strategy
Our identification strategy exploits the prevalence of  the  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon  and
in order to empirically test for this phenomenon we proceed with the difference-in-difference
framework.  Our treatment group consist of  Failed IPOs  and  the control group consists of
Successful IPOs and serve as a counterfactual for what would have happened if the Failed IPO
would have gone through.  This paper wants to distinguishing earnings management prior an
IPO from  normal operating activities, financing and investing decisions of firms proceeding
with an IPO which affects the estimation of discretionary  accruals.  Thus, the most important
factor for testing our hypothesis and  the  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon  is the differential
effect between  Failed  and  Successful IPOs,  i.e. our relative approach.

To test our hypothesis, we estimate the following difference-in-difference regression,  including
firm and industry-year fixed effects:

            ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                     =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  × 𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿'  + 𝜆%N  + 𝜀'%H/J
              𝑇𝐴%86
                                                                                              (2.7)
Where:
𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J            =  Dummy variable for time relative to issue / withdrawal that is equal to

.                           1 when observation is post issue / withdrawal and 0 if observation is
.                          prior announcement
𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  × 𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  = The  Post  dummy multiplied by dummy for  Failed, i.e. equals 1 for

.                      Failed  announcement post withdrawal and 0 otherwise
𝛿'                   =  Firm fixed effects
𝜆%N                  = Industry-Year fixed  effects
𝜀'%H/J               =  Error  term

Gamma reflects the change in earnings management  for  Successful  and  Failed IPOs  i.e. effect
of total  the  IPO group going from  𝑡W86  to  𝑡X/Y,  i.e. from the annual report prior to the
announcement to the annuals report after the issue / withdrawal. Beta is the DID parameter and
thus captures the differential effect for  Failed IPOs. Along these lines, our  Hypothesis  implies
that beta should  be negative.

                                     12
Firm fixed effects are included in the model to take into account contrasting firm-specific
characteristics such as  larger companies  might have  more  complex  balance sheets.  Dechow et
al.   (2007)   show   that   larger   and   more   complex   balance   sheets   facilitate   accounting
manipulations.  Firms might also differ in level of expertise to practice earnings management or
the resources needed to hire  e.g. an investment bank to prepare for an IPO. Firms proceeding
with an IPO on smaller exchanges  could be  more reluctant to use an investment bank to dress
the bride since the costs might exceed the benefits.

The firms fixed effects also captures the fact that firms also differ in the  use of accounting
standards;  IFRS versus  Swedish  GAAP (which could be further divided into principals of  K2,
K3 or K4).  According to Swedish GAAP,  this will affect  changes in  accruals.  Furthermore,
Filbeck and Krueger (2005) show that  firms  operates  in different industries which by nature are
different with respect to  accruals.

The regression also includes industry-year fixed effects to encounter for the different
characteristics of  accruals between industry-years, assuming the industry being time-invariant.
Including industry-year fixed effects is relevant for our study since  (1)  Petersen and Strongin
(1996) finds that industries  have different cyclical patterns and (2)  Maloud (2014) finds that
accruals change corresponding to firms’ growth. Thus, we have incentives to believe that
accruals will differ between industry-years.

A  potential concern in our regression is that there is  a risk of announcement and withdrawal
dates being set inaccurate since these have been estimated. Being estimated incorrectly could
affect the results.  (see section  2.6 for an exhaustive definition of announcement and withdrawal
dates).

An additional matter of  potential concern in our regression is that when firms go public, a
holding company is often designed to be the firm which shares are traded and consolidated
accounts is created. When this has been the case, there is often an extreme change in capital
structure. Neutralizing this would demand pro-forma adjustments with access to internal
accounting data and  this  has not been accessible. To mitigate this problem, this paper uses the
announcing  company’s  financial  statements  even  if  this  company  now  is  part  of  the
consolidated accounts as a subsidiary with internal relationships. Likewise, if Failed IPOs have

                                     13
failed due to an M&A transaction this have a similar issue. This might cause biasness in our
results.

The reader should also be aware of  that  the same fiscal year is used to collect accounting data
for a firm that announces an IPO in  January  as for a firm that announces an IPO in  December.
We capture more recent accounting data prior to an announcement for some firms while we fail
to  capture as  recent accounting data as possible for  other firms  which might cause biasness in
our results.

2.5  Empirical implementation
To test our hypothesis, we proceed with  on main test and three  robustness  tests  following the
same step-by-step structure:

 Step 1.       An estimation window is created for every IPO announcement  to  estimate the
       expected normal change in Non-discretionary accruals explained by the Modified Jones
       model.

 Step 2.      After approximating the normal change in  total  accruals, i.e. change in  Non-
       discretionary  accruals, we calculate the deviation from normal change in any specific
        firm-year. The deviation from the normal change in total  accruals should be interpreted
       as the change in total  accruals affected by managers.  Hence, the discretionary change is
        the residuals from the best fitting line.

 Step 3.       An event window is created for both successful  IPOs and failed  IPOs to capture
        two observations per firm, (1) the annual report prior to the announcement and (2) the
        annual report for the issue  /  withdrawal year to investigate the post-treatment effect of
        failed IPOs.
                By running a difference-in-difference regression using dummy variables to test
       the null hypothesis that (i)  Failed  IPOs  will not withdraw the earnings management
       related to the IPO immediately after the withdrawal of the IPO  and (ii)  Successful IPOs
        will not maintain earnings management related to the IPO at least until the first annual
        report after the issue date, we investigate  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon.

                                     14
Step 1 Estimating the  expected  normal  change in Non-discretionary  accruals
The first step in the Modified Jones  model is to estimate the change in  Non-discretionary
accruals  (Equation  2.6). In this paper, the change in total  accruals is assumed to be on a normal
level until one year prior the announcement of the IPO, that is our estimation window  (this
assumption is later going to be challenged in  section  3.4  Results from robustness test).  The
assumption is based firms starting  to dress their financial statements  no earlier than  one year
before they announce that they are going to proceed with an IPO.  We  suggest that firms know
that investors use the year prior to the announcement for valuation and thus firms have
incentives to start managing earnings during that year. Before that, we assume that firms do not
have incentives to manipulate earnings to maximize firm value related to the IPO.

First, we  calculate  ∆𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'  for each firm and year using  Equation  2.1. Second, we  predict  the
change  in  total  accruals  using the  robust  Modified Jones Model  with standards errors clustered
on firm level. In accordance with the Modified Jones model we  define the predicted change in
total  accruals,  as the  change  in  Non-discretionary  accruals:

       ∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'           1           ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%'  −  ∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'         𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
                 =  𝛼6        + 𝛼;                    + 𝛼>        + 𝛿'  + 𝜆%N  + 𝜀'%
           𝑇𝐴%86,'           𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'
                                                                                                  (2.8)

                                     15
Where,
∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'      = Change in  Non-discretionary  accruals  in year t for firm i
∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%,'         =  Change in  Revenues in year t  for firm i
∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'         =  Change in  Receivables  in year t for firm i
𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'          =  Gross  Property, Plant and Equipment  in year t for firms i
𝑇𝐴%86,'          =  Total assets in year  t-1 for firm i
𝛿'             =  Firm  fixed  effects
𝜆%N            =  Industry-Year  fixed effects
𝜀'%            =  Error term

∆Z[W\\],^
         represents the normal change in total  accruals and is scaled by  lagged  total assets  to
  4W]_`,^
encounter for the size of each company to be able to do cross-firm analysis and reduce
heteroscedasticity. This applies to all other regression variables as well.

Step 2  Estimating  the  deviation from change in Non-discretionary  accruals
In the previous  step,  we approximate the  change in  Non-discretionary  accruals  and  based on
Equitation 2.2 we derive the change in Discretionary accruals (∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'), through calculating
the residual between the change in  Non-discretionary  accruals  and observed change in total
accruals for any given firm-year.  That is,  Discretionary  accruals  is the  residuals from the best
fitting line  in estimated in  Step 1:

  ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'      𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'            1            ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%,'  −  ∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'         𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
           =           − (𝛼6       + 𝛼;                    + 𝛼>       + 𝛿'  + 𝜆%N  + 𝜀'%)
    𝑇𝐴%86,'        𝑇𝐴%86, 𝑖          𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'
                                                                                                  (2.9)
Where,
∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Change in  Discretionary  accruals in year t for firm i
∆𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'       =  Change in  Total  Accruals  in year t for firm i
∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%,'        =  Change in  Revenues in  year t for firm i
∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'        =  Change in  Receivables  in year t for firm i
𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'          =   Gross Property, Plant and Equipment  in year t for firm i
𝑇𝐴%86         =  Total assets in year  t-1 for firm i
𝛿'            =  Firm  fixed effects

                                     16
𝜆%N            =  Industry-Year  fixed effects
𝜀'%            =  Error term

As pointed out in  Step 1  all variables are scaled by lagged total assets and consequently the
discretionary accruals (∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%) equals a percentage change of lagged total assets. The change
in discretionary  accruals (∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%)  should be interpreted as proxy for earnings management
and ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%  represent the change in earnings management, a positive sign of ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%  indicates
that earnings being  adjusted  upwards and vice versa.

Step 3 Running a difference-in-difference regression to test our null hypothesis
From step 2 we concluded that the deviation from the normal in total accruals equals the change
in earnings management. The outcome from equation 2.9 is now used to test our null hypothesis
by running a difference-in-difference test for  Failed IPOs  and the total IPO announcing group
between pre-announcement and post-Issue/withdrawal. The control group of  Successful IPOs
is used as a  proxy for what change in earnings management we would expect in absence of
failure and the treatment  group  of  Failed IPOs  is used as the proxy for what change in earnings
management we would expect at failure. The actual level of earnings management is not our
main concern, we are interested in the  differential  effect between  Failed  and  Successful  IPOs
to test our  hypothesis and explore  Dressing the Bride Phenomenon.

We only use  two data points in our difference-in-difference test,  the fiscal year prior  the
announcement (𝑡W86) and the same fiscal year as the withdrawal/issue year (𝑡X/Y). The fiscal
years  𝑡W86  and  𝑡X/Y  due to the fact that we are interested in the pattern of (1)  Incentives to dress
the bride should not differ between  failed and successful IPOs prior the announcement of the
IPO,  (2)  If firms did earnings management to dress for the IPO, Failed IPOs would reverse
earnings management related to the IPO immediately after the IPO-withdrawal  and  (3)
Successful IPOs should maintain earnings management related to the IPO at least until the first
annual report after the issue date.

The difference-in-difference test is conducted by introducing  a dummy variable for  Failed
IPOs.  We also introduce  the  dummy variable  POST, which in  turn represents the time relative
to the IPO and equals 0 if the observation is before the announcement and 1 if the announcement
is post the issue / withdrawal. Together, the FAILED × POST variable captures the differential

                                     17
effect for  Failed IPOs  when going from prior the announcement to post the withdrawal.
Changes  in  earnings  management  for  a  Successful  IPO,  when  going  from  prior  the
announcement to post the issue,  serve as a counterfactual for what would have happened if the
Failed IPO  had gone through.  That is,  Successful  firms serve as a control group, for which
change in  Discretionary  accruals  (when going from prior the announcement to post the issue)
is captured by the variable  POST. Thus, to test our hypothesis, we finally proceed with the
following regression specification:

            ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                     =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  × 𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿'  + 𝜆%N  + 𝜀'%H/J
              𝑇𝐴%86
                                                                                        (2.10)

Where:
𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J             =  Dummy variable for time relative to the  issue  /  withdrawal

𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  × 𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J   = The Post dummy multiplied by dummy for Failed announcement

𝛿'                    =  Firm fixed effect
𝜆%N                   =  Industry-Year fixed effect
𝜀'%H/J                =  Error term

To test the robustness of this test we  move  on with three  additional  tests.  First, we winsorize

                       th          th
our dataset in the 5  and 95  percentiles for  Failed  and  Successful  IPOs  separately in order to
control for outliers. Second, we change the estimation window for estimating Non-discretionary
accruals.  We change the estimation window  to control for our results not being driven by an
incorrect  assumption  that firms  start  to dress their financial statements  no earlier than  one year
before  the IPO announcement.  Third, we run  above regression  substituting  industry-year fixed
effects for year fixed effects, as we identify a risk of having too few observations to be able to
use industry-year fixed effects without risk of errors.

                                     18
2.6  Data description
The dataset consists of firms  having announced that they will proceed with an IPO on any  of
Sweden’s  three largest stock exchanges;  Aktietorget, First North  or  Nasdaq  Stockholm. The
selection of Swedish  exchanges  is based on:

    •   High availability of accounting data for both private and public companies in Sweden
    •   High transparency in the market (making it possible to find failed announcements)

Since the availability of financial data and  the electronic archive of firm and newspaper
publications  have increased in recent years, we use a dataset  of announcements between  the
years  2007-2016. That is, as recent period as possible.

Collection of IPO announcements
IPO announcements have been manually collected using either one of (1)  memorandum
published by the firm stating that the firm will go public (2) press release  by the firm stating
that the firm will go public or (3) any article  by financial journals, financial websites and
financial newspapers stating that a specific firm will go public within 12 months  (see  Figure
5.2). Announcements made by the firm itself through either press releases, financial reports or
memorandum have been assumed to be more reliable than newspaper articles. Thus, newspaper
articles have  only been used when the firm when  memorandum  or press release  have not been
available or found.

The announcement date has been set equal to the date the memorandum, press release or article
was published. If the firm has made multiple press releases or  memorandum  publications the
date  of  the first release has been used. If no  memorandum or press release  have been  available,
the article that first announced that a firm will make an IPO has been used as announcement
date.

Collection of issue and withdrawal dates
In case of a  Successful  IPO  the issue date has been set equal to the date of the first trading day
of the share. This information has been received using the official website for each of the
exchanges.  (see  Figure 5.3)

                                     19
For Failed IPOs, the withdrawal date has been set equal to (1) the date of an active withdrawal,
e.g. a withdrawal announcement or announcing that  the  firm has been sold  in a M&A
transaction  (2) the date of an inactive withdrawal, i.e. the date  when  the firm should have gone
public but never did. The withdrawal date has been set equal to the inactive withdrawal date
only when no active withdrawal has been available or found.

Collecting accounting data
Accounting data was collected using the Retriever database which contains annual reports for
private and public Swedish firms. Retriever database is a primary source for authentic annual
reports from firms themselves. Available accounting data from annual reports has been
collected manually for the fiscal years 2000 – 2016 for both Failed and Successful IPOs. Annual
reports in Sweden needs to be submitted either in  Swedish GAAP or IFRS depending on firm
size and if the firm is listed on a regulated or unregulated exchange.

Raw data
Our raw data consists of 459 IPO announcements  (Table 6.1). Of the total number of
announcements 60 firms are missing accounting data, and are thus excluded from the dataset.
The  remaining  399  announcements,  split  up  between  43  Failed  and  356  Successful
announcements  (Table 6.2), act as a gross dataset for our  tests. For each test, we make changes
to the gross dataset to fit  into  the framework of the test.

We estimate normal change in  accruals based on accounting data two years prior to the
announcement, i.e. based on normal years. When estimating normal change in total accruals we
thus collapse our dataset to only include firms with at least one observation earlier than one
year prior to the IPO.

Going forward, we run our difference-in-difference regression comparing two observations for
each firm; one prior  to the announcement and one post the  issue  / Withdrawal. We thus reduce
our gross dataset to only include firms with observations prior the announcement as well as
after the  issue  / Withdrawal.

In addition, we show that firms fail  to proceed with  IPOs due to different reasons  (Table 6.3).
The main reason being  M&A transaction, i.e. firm  was sold off the market. Furthermore, we
identify a group of firms deciding to not fulfil their IPO announcements in favour of staying

                                     20
private,  Unfulfilled IPO. At last, we show that a group of companies failed due to not achieving
requirements demanded by the exchange they applied for,  Not qualified for listing. That is,
these firms did not choose to withdraw their announcements themselves. Hence, we  argue that
this group  of firms have incentives  to keep managing  earnings even after the withdrawal to
prepare for going public in the future. As we assume  Failed IPOs  lose incentives to manage
earnings related to the IPO after the withdrawal, we exclude firms Not qualified for listing from
our dataset  to mitigate the risk of errors when running our difference-in-difference test. As a
consequence, we use a final dataset of 20  Failed  and 247  Successful  announcements in our
difference-difference  test (Table 6.4).

                                     21
3. Results

Following the  Empirical implementation  in  section  2.5, we show results for the three steps in
our analysis  followed by robustness tests of our results. First,  we show that our estimation of
Non-discretionary  accruals  is reasonable comparing  to Jones (1991). Second, we  proceed with
considering  changes in abnormal  accruals indicating that  firms dress the bride. Third, we find
a significant difference between  Failed  and  Successful  IPOs from which we conclude that with
95% significance  firms dress the bride. Finally,  we show that  our results are robust to changes
in  estimation of  Non-discretionary  accruals  and that our results are unlikely to be driven by
outliers.

3.1  Results from estimating the change in Non-discretionary  accruals
By estimating the change in  Non-discretionary  accruals  using the Modified Jones regression
(Equation 2.6)  we conclude that all coefficients are significant at the 95% level  which we show
in  Table 5.5. We further show  that  the relationships between change in  Non-discretionary
accruals  and the explaining variables  in our dataset  are consistent with the relationships
presented by Jones (1991) and Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1995).

The R-squared value  of 0.558 states that the  change in  Non-discretionary  accruals  explain
about 56% of the change in  total  accruals  which is significantly higher than the 25 %
explanatory power presented by Jones (1991) and Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1995).

Since our regression  firms fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects  this  explains some of
the  difference  in explanatory power. Excluding fixed effects provides a R-squared of 42%,
shown in Table 6.6. As 42% is still significantly higher than 25%, we suggest that the Modified
Jones regression better predicts the  accruals using our data  compared to the data used by
Dechow, Sloan and Sweeney (1995).  Since  discretionary  accruals are defined as the residuals
from the best fitting line, another way of  interpreting  our higher R-squared is that firms in our
dataset do not manage earnings in the same extent as the firms in the dataset  used by  Dechow,
Sloan and Sweeney  (1995).

Subsequently, we insert the  estimated change in  Non-discretionary  accruals,  shown in  Table
5.5  to estimate the change in  Discretionary  accruals  for each firm and year,  according to
Equation 2.9.  We show  Equation 2.9  updated with the input from  Table 5.5,  in  Equation 3.1.

                                     22
                ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'    𝑇𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'               1                ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%,'  −  ∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'               𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
                   =        − 306.4        + 0.776                   − 0.0324
                  𝑇𝐴%86,'      𝑇𝐴%86,'            𝑇𝐴%86,'                     𝑇𝐴%86,'                      𝑇𝐴%86,'
                                                                                                            (3.1)

        3.2  Results from estimating deviation from change in Non-discretionary  accruals
        We show that there is a differential effect between  Successful and  Failed  firms when going
         from prior the announcement to post the  issue  / withdrawal. This indicates that firms might
         dress the bride.

               Figure 3.1: Average change in discretionary  accruals, years relative to IPO

                  Average change in Discretionary accruals, years relative to the IPO
             0


                  .1

                             Average, Normal year

                  .2


                  .3

Average cahnge in Discretionary accruals
                                Years prior announcement         Event window           Years post issue / withdrawal
                  .4
                 4        3       2       1        0       1       2       3        4
                                         Years relative to issue / withdrawal

                                  SUCCESSFUL           FAILED

            Above graph shows the development of average change in Discretionary  accruals for our dataset used in our Difference-in-
            Difference test (Table 6.4). Negative values on the X-axis (left of event window) illustrates number of years prior to
            announcement. Positive numbers on the x-axis (right of event window) show number of years post the issue / withdrawal. The
            area on named Event window is the area reaching from the year prior to the announcement to the issue / withdrawal year, i.e.
            the period used for our difference-in-difference test.  The line illustrating Average for a normal year is the average change in
           discretionary  accruals in a normal year, i.e. for observations earlier than 1 year prior to the announcement.

                                            23
In  Figure 3.1,  we show that a normal year  (two year prior announcement and earlier)  has a
negative change in  Discretionary  accruals. This is in conflict with the intuition behind  accrual
based models, where earnings have to equal cash flows over a longer period. That is,
discretionary  accruals should equal 0 in the long run.  By displaying a negative change in
Discretionary accruals in a normal year, we show evidence of the Modified Jones model’s lack
of predictability. Consistent with our findings, Yoon and Miller (2002b) and Yoon et al. (2006),
show evidence of the Modified Jones model being  inaccurate in predicting  Discretionary
accruals  for Asian firms. Our study mitigates this problem  related to errors in absolute
measurements  through adapting a relative  approach, studying the differential effect between
Successful  and  Failed  IPO.

We show that Successful have significantly higher change in Discretionary accruals than Failed
IPOs  two years prior the announcement. In the year prior the issue / withdrawal,  Failed  IPOs
have higher change in discretionary  accruals than  Successful IPOs.  Through showing that our
two groups follow different patterns prior the IPO we  question our assumption of incentives to
dress the bride being equal for  Failed  and  Successful  IPOs. As a consequence, we argue that
there is a risk of our results being driven by  Successful  and  Failed  firms having different
incentives to dress the bride.

In  Table 6.8  we show that our dataset includes outliers, which  might affect the interpretation of
Figure 3.1.  Furthermore, the upward sloping curve for Successful firm between the year prior
the announcement to the issue year indicates that Successful increase earnings management
during the first  year on  the exchange. According to evidence provided by  Roosenboom et al
(2003) this occur since managers need to  (1) support high stock prices after IPO during the
lock-up period and (2) pressure to meet earnings forecasts issued at the time of the IPO.  Thus,
this highlights the risk of capturing a differential effect between  Failed  and  Successful  IPOs
only driven by an increase in earnings management from  Successful  IPOs  practicing earnings
management after the issue date.

                                     24
3.3 Results  from the difference-in-difference regression to test our null hypothesis

            ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                     =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  × 𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿'  + 𝜆%N  + 𝜀'%H/J
              𝑇𝐴%86

 Table 3.1 Difference-in-difference test, including Firm and Industry-Year fixed effects

  VARIABLES                                        DACC

  POST                                                         -0.0733
                                                                           (0.335)
  FAILED × POST                                           -0.468**
                                                                           (0.226)

  Observations                                                     534
  Number of Company                                             267
  R-squared                                                      0.293
  Firm Fixed Effects                                             YES
  Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                          YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

The FAILED × POST variable captures the differential effect for Failed IPOs when going from
prior the announcement to post the withdrawal.  Changes in earnings management for a
Successful IPO, when going from prior the announcement to post the issue,  serve as a
counterfactual for what would have happened if the  Failed IPO  had gone through. This effect
is captured by the POST variable.

Running the DID regression to test our null hypothesis with firm and industry-year fixed effects
we show a negative differential effect between our treatment group,  Failed  IPOs, and our
control group,  Successful  IPOs. The differential effect is significant at the 95 % level, and thus
we reject the null hypothesis.

                                     25
We show that the explanatory variables explain about 29% of the change discretionary accruals,
which could be considered as low. As we proceed with a difference-in-difference test, though,
the crucial part is to analyse causality, rather than prediction.

We  argue that the differential effect of  -46.8%  of total lagged assets,  indicate that the results
might be driven by the outliers shown in  Table 6.8. This will further be investigated in a
winsorized  robustness test in  section  3.4.

In  Section 3.2  we identified the risk of capturing a differential effect between  Failed  and
Successful  IPOs  only driven by an increase in earnings management from  Successful  IPOs
practicing earnings management after the issue date. When including Firm and Industry-Year
fixed effects, though, we provide evidence of that the risk of our differential effect arising due
to  Successful  firms manage earnings post the issue date was likely to be caused by unobserved
variables inside firms and industry-years, e.g. differences in accounting standards.  We provide
these evidences through showing that the POST variable, capturing the change in Discretionary
accruals  for  Successful firms when going from prior the announcement to post the issue, cannot
be significantly separated from 0.

To conclude, we find evidence of firms dressing the bride which is consistent with the theory
of managers maximizing firm value. Still, our evidence indicates that further analysis must be
undertaken since the results might be driven by outliers.

3.4  Results from robustness tests
Results from winsorized DID  -  test, using firm and industry-year fixed effects
As previously indicated we  find  evidence  in  Figure 5.4  of our dataset including outliers. Going
one step further, we show evidence of our results not being driven by these outliers. We provide

                                                                                                            th           th
this evidence through concluding that, even when winsorizing the dataset in the 5  and 95
percentiles for  Successful  and  Failed  firms separately, there is a negative differential effect
between the groups. We show that the differential effect when winsorizing is significant at the
95 % level, and thus we argue that the null hypothesis should be rejected.

Studying  the differential effect  in  Table 6.12, captured by the FAILED  ×  POST  variable, we
show a coefficient of  -0.274 after winsorizing. This is sufficiently lower than  -0.468 but still

                                     26
significant, and we suggest that such differential effect might be more realistic even if we claim
that the results still might suffer from errors. These errors might arise from our dataset including
influential points far from the median.

Results from changing the estimation window of Non-discretionary  accruals to 2006-2015
We have previously pointed out that the estimation of change in non-discretionary  rests on the
assumption that  accruals will be on a normal level until 2 years prior the announcement. We
identify this assumption as a potential error if not correct.  We show that our assumption is not
a concern in the analysis. We show  in  Table 6.13  that the null hypotheses still  is  rejected at the
95 % level when changing the estimation window to include all observations for firms going
public or failing prior to 2014  and post 2005. Thus, we argue that our difference-in-difference
approach is robust to errors in estimation of non-discretionary  accruals.

Results from difference-in-Difference test, using firm and year fixed effects
In  Table 6.10  we show that our dataset  used in the difference-in-difference test have very few
observations per industry year. Thus, there is a risk of using industry-year fixed effects which
might lead to incorrect results. We suggest that including industry-year fixed effect in our model
did not lead to incorrect results, as we show a significant differential effect between  Failed  and
Successful IPOs  when substituting the industry-year fixed effects for year fixed effects  (Table
6.11).

                                     27
4.  Conclusions

In this paper, we study if firms manage earnings  to  maximize  firm value before going public.
We provide evidence of firms increase earnings through  accrual  manipulation before making
IPO announcements. We show that our findings hold for  Failed  as well as for  Successful
announcements.

By providing evidence of a differential effect between  Failed  and  Successful IPOs  we suggest
that firms dress their financial statements prior an IPO.  Our findings are consistent with
previous research  by Friedlan (1994),  providing evidence of firms  maximizing firm value by
managing earning  before going public.  Our paper  goes  beyond previous research by providing
a way of analysing  accruals related to the IPO in isolation of  accruals caused by  operating
activities  of IPO firms.  We also introduce IPO announcements as a vital  part in investigating
earnings management  related to IPOs.

We show  that there is a risk of our results being driven by  Successful  and  Failed  firms having
different incentives to dress the bride,  which is in conflict with our assumptions.  Thus, we see
a demand for future research in investigating how incentives to manipulate earnings differ
between firms  and if earnings management could be a reason for failure.

                                     28
References
Aharony,  J., Lee, C., Wong T. J., 2000. Financial Packaging of IPO Firms in China.
Journal of Accounting Research 38, 103-126

Beck-Friis, L., Geijer, H., 2010.  IPO Share Lockups  –  Unlock Day Effect An empirical
study on Nordic data. Bachelor Thesis in Finance, Stockholm School of Economics.

Chen, K., Yuan, H., 2004. Earnings Management and Capital Resource Allocation:
Evidence from China's Accounting-­‐  Based Regulation of Rights Issues. The Accounting
Review 79, 645-665.

Darrough, M., Rangan, S., 2004. Do Insiders Manipulate Earnings When They  Sell Their
Shares in an Initial Public Offering? Journal of Accounting Research 43, 1-33.

DeAngelo, L., 1986. Accounting Numbers as Market Valuation Substitutes: A Study of
Management Buyouts of Public Stockholders. The Accounting Review 61, 400-420.

Dechow, P., Sloan, R., Sweeney, A., 1995. Detecting Earnings Management. The
Accounting Review 70, 193-225.

Dechow et al, 2007,  Predicting Material Accounting Manipulations,  The Haas School of
Business. University of California, Berkeley

Filbeck,  G.,  Krueger, T., 2005. An Analysis of Working Capital Management Results
Across Industries,  American Journal of Business 20, 11-20.

Friedlan J., 1994. Accounting Choices of Issuers of Initial Public Offerings. Contemporary
Accounting Research 11, 1-31

Healy, P., 1985. The effect of bonus schemes on accounting decisions. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 7, 85-107.

                                     29
Iqbal,  A. Espenlaub, S., Strong, N., 2009. Earnings management around UK open offers.
The European Journal of Finance 15, 29-51

Jones, J., 1991. Earnings Management During Import Relief Investigations. Journal of
Accounting Research 29, 193-228.

Miloud, T., 2014. Earnings Management And Initial Public Offerings: An Empirical
Analysis. The Journal of applied Business Research 30, 117-131.

Petersen, B., Strongin, S., 1996.  Why Are Some Industries More Cyclical Than Others?
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics  14, 189-198.

Teoh, S., Welch, I., & Wong, T. J. 1998a.  Earnings management and the long-run market
performance of initial public offerings.  Journal of Finance, 53, 1935-1974.

Teoh, S.,  Welch  I., and Wong,  T.J.,  1998b, Earnings management and the
underperformance of seasoned equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 50, 63–
99.

Von Eije  H., de Witte  M.,  van der Zwaan, A., 2003,  IPO-related organizational change
and long-term performance: Considerations of Dutch corporate officers,  Managerial
Finance, 29 (11/12)

Wang C., 1997. Incentives, CEO Compensation, and Shareholder Wealth in a Dynamic
Agency Model. Journal of Economic Theory 76,72-105

Yoon, S. Miller, G., 2002b, Cash from operations and earnings management in Korea. The
International Journal of Accounting 37, 395-412.

Yoon, s., Miller, G., Jiraporn, P., 2006. Earnings Management Vehicles for Korean Firms.
Journal of International Financial Management & Accounting17, 85-109.

                                     30
Online references

Carnegie Investment Bank, 2016. The Swedish IPO market and takeaways for a kickstart
of the Danish small cap IPO market
Access:  http://axcelfuture.dk/admin/resources/takeways-for-kickstarting-danish-small-cap-
ipos20160429vf.pdf  (2017-05-13)

Davidson, L., 2015.  How Sweden became the startup capital of Europe
Access:http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/1168
9464/How-Sweden-became-the-  startup-capital-of-Europe.html  (2017-05-14)

Petersson, J., 2014.  Eniro i bokföringsskandal.
Access:  http://www.dn.se/ekonomi/eniro-­‐i-­‐bokforingsskandal/  (2017-­‐05-­‐14)

Transparency International, 2015. Corruption Perceptions  Index 2015.
Access:  http://www.transparency.org/cpi2015  (2017-05-14)

                                     31
5.  Figures

Figure 5.1:  Accruals  earnings management  and real earnings management

                                     32
Figure 5.2:  IPO announcements per fiscal year
The graph shows number of announcements  per fiscal year and the dataset displayed in the
graph is the data used for the difference-in-difference analysis. That is, 20 Failed and 247
Successful announcements. Our period includes the financial crisis in 2007-2008, causing the
number of announcements being low around that year. According to Carnegie Investment Bank
(2015), it has been an IPO boom in Sweden  in recent years, explaining the high bars in 2014
and 2015. Since we  hand  collected the data for this paper in March / April 2017, we have not
been able to  access  annual reports for all companies announcing their IPOs in 2016. Thus, the
number of announcements made in 2016 used in this  paper  is very low.

                    Announcements per fiscal year

       80


       60


       40


       20


       0
            2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016

                             SUCCESSFUL           FAILED

                                     33
Figure 5.3:  IPO issues / withdrawals  per fiscal year
The graph shows number of  announcements per fiscal year and the dataset displayed in the
graph is the data used for the difference-in-difference analysis. That is, 20 withdrawal and 247
IPOs. Comparing this graph to  Figure 5.1  we conclude that the number of issues / withdrawals
is high in the same year as the number of announcement is high. This implies that the time
between announcing the IPO to completing / failing it is on average significantly shorten than
a  year.  Otherwise,  we  suggest  there  would  be  a  difference  in  when  the  numbers  of
announcements versus  issues  / withdrawals were high.

                   Issues / Withdrawals per fiscal year

       80


       60


       40


       20


       0
            2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016

                             SUCCESSFUL           FAILED

                                     34
Figure 5.4:  Observations  of Discretionary  accruals  used for Difference-in-Difference test
In below histogram, we show that the dataset  of  Discretionary  accruals  (DACC)  used for
running the Difference-in-Difference test includes outliers that might affect the result.

           1


              .8


              .6

          Density

              .4


              .2


           0
                 -10                  -5                  0                   5
                                DACC

                                     35
6.  Tables

Table 6.1: Raw data, number of firms with IPO announcements between 2007-2016
Our raw data consists of 459 announcements  between 2007-2016, of which 399 are included in
our analysis. We exclude 7 announcements since they were made by firms listed abroad,  not in
the scope of this paper.  We exclude another 53 firms since there was no accounting data
available for these firms, e.g. shelf companies not having any financial data prior the
announcement of the IPO.

                          OBSERVATION        Freq.

                      Foreign  company            7
                              Include          399
                               No  data           53

                                Total          459

Table 6.2: Gross dataset, split between Failed and Successful announcements
Of the total 399 announcements in our gross dataset, 43 announcements failed and 356
succeeded.

             OBSERVATI                Status
             ON              Failed   Successful       Total

               Include           43         356         399

                 Total           43         356         399

                                     36
Table 6.3: Failed IPOs, split by reason for failure
We identify three main reasons for failing an IPO. M&A transaction, meaning that the firm was
sold off  the market..  Not qualified for listing,  meaning that the firm failed due to not reaching
the minimum requirements demanded by the exchange they applied for. The requirements can
be either financial,  e.g. a minimum asset value, or non-financial, e.g. a minimum number of
shareholders.  Unfulfilled IPO  means that the firm decided to stay private instead of fulfilling
its IPO announcement. We identify two ways of deciding to stay private. Either the firm actively
announce   that   it   withdraws   the   IPO   announcement   or   it   can   passively   withdraw   it
announcement through never applying for getting listed.

                            FAIL_CAT        Freq.

                     M&A  transaction           11
           Not  qualified  for  listing            5
                     Unfulfilled  IPO            9

                                Total           25

Table 6.4: Dataset for difference-in-difference test
We proceed our difference-in-difference analysis with the below dataset, only including firms
with accounting data the year prior to the announcement as was as for the issue / withdrawal
year.

                  Status         Freq.

                   Failed            20
              Successful           247

                    Total           267

                                     37
Table 6.5: Modified Jones prediction  change  in non-discretionary  accruals  –normal years
Below table shows the results from running the regression presented in  section  3.1

       ∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'           1           ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%'  −  ∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'         𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
                 =  𝛼6        + 𝛼;                     + 𝛼>        + 𝛿'  + 𝜆%,N  + 𝜀',%
          𝑇𝐴%86,'           𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'

We run  the  regression to estimate the normal change in total  accruals, i.e. change in non-
discretionary accruals. We estimate the normal change in accruals using data for two years prior
to the IPO announcement and earlier.  We use data until two years prior the announcement since
we believe that firms have not started to prepare for going public by that time. Thus, these years
can be considered as normal years in sense of not firms not having specific incentives to manage
earnings. We use annual reports  from 2006 and forward.  We do not take into account if the
announcement failed or succeeded, since we assume no difference between the groups in a
normal year.  We run the regression with firm and industry-year fixed effect to correct for
omitted variables inside of each firm and industry-year that could otherwise affect our result.

  VARIABLES                                        scaled_TACC

  Inverse Lagged Assets                                             -306.4***
                                                                         (102.5)
  Scaled Delta Rev  –  Delta Rec                                     0.776**
                                                                         (0.346)
  Scaled PPE                                                     -0.0324***
                                                                      (0.0101)

  Observations                                                    1,066
  Number of Company                                           270
  R-squared                                                   0.561
  Firm Fixed effects                                           YES
  Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                       YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,  * p<0.1

                                     38
Table 6.6: Modified Jones regression without fixed effects

We estimate the normal change in  accruals using data for two years prior to the IPO

announcement and earlier, for each firm having available data. We use data until two years

prior the announcement since we believe that firms have not started to prepare for going public

by that time. Thus, these years can be considered as normal years in sense of not firms not

having specific incentives to manage earnings. We use annual report from 2006 and forward.

We do not take into account if the announcement failed or succeeded, since we assume no

difference between the groups in a normal year

    VARIABLES                                      scaled_TACC

     Inverse Lagged Assets                                         -236.0***
                                                                       (9.034)

    Scaled Delta Rev  –  Delta Rec                                0.562***

                                                                     (0.0273)
     Scaled PPE                                                 -0.0262***

                                                                   (0.00159)

    Observations                                                 1,106
    R-squared                                                0.421

                                Standard errors in parentheses

                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.

                                     39
Table 6.7: Industry-years for dataset used for estimating change in normal  accruals
We have used  Fama French 12 industries  as a base in categorizing firms into industries. Since
we have rather low number of observations we have merged industries where suitable. We use
the industry categorisation to include industry-year fixed effect in our model. To be  able to use
industry-year fixed effect in a desirable way each industry year should include multiple
observations. We show that our dataset includes only a 5 industry-years with less than 3
observations. Thus, we argue that industry-year fixed effects can  be used in an accurate way
when estimating change in discretionary  accruals (Table 6.5).

                                                        Datayearfiscal
                  Industry    2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014   Total

                   Biotech       9     11     13     11     13      8      8      6           79
              Construction       4      4      6      5      6      7      7      7      1     47
             Entertainment       2      4      4      5      5      8      8      6      3     45
     Finance  &  Real  estate      15     18     22     23     25     26     23     14      4    170
                Healthcare      30     39     45     48     43     45     41     25      4    320
        IT  &  Communication      25     24     27     23     19     21     22     14      7    182
             Manufacturing      22     29     32     31     33     37     34     26     12    256
Natural  resources  &  Energy       3      7      6      5      5      4      4      4      2     40
          Public  Utilities       2      5      7      5      5      5      5      5      1     40
                    Retail       8     10     13     10     17     14     13      8      4     97
                  Services       9     10     11     11     13     13     11     10      6     94

                     Total     129    161    186    177    184    188    176    125     44   1,370

                                     40
Table 6.8:  Descriptive statistics of DACC for each year relative to the IPO
In below graph we show descriptive statistics for our dataset displayed in  Table 6.4.  The table
shows year prior to announcements until year 0. From year zero the table shows number of
years after the IPO.

  Relative_time      variable        mean        p50       max        min

  -4            SUCCESS_DACC     -.373195  -.0644799   4.951636  -22.43668
                 FAILED_DACC    -.2325694  -.0298654   .2174753  -1.914967

  -3            SUCCESS_DACC    -.3113995   -.042064   4.638914     -7.868
                 FAILED_DACC    -.2200893  -.0269947   1.779501  -5.232044

  -2            SUCCESS_DACC    -.0550036  -.0566993   7.015117  -3.139331
                 FAILED_DACC    -.3261729  -.0736447   .1857269  -2.152845

  -1            SUCCESS_DACC    -.2555749  -.1176699   3.257169  -10.68071
                 FAILED_DACC    -.1934824  -.0422215   .2689932  -1.336435

  0             SUCCESS_DACC    -.0976321  -.0377192   3.345107  -6.019137
                 FAILED_DACC    -.2964807  -.1185473   .4316762  -2.499061

  1             SUCCESS_DACC    -.1629929  -.1071327   2.394645  -3.330465
                 FAILED_DACC     -.055578  -.0161791   .5861475  -.9101442

  2             SUCCESS_DACC    -.0590682  -.0275191   1.269866  -1.738551
                 FAILED_DACC    -.2486011  -.1267076   .1111541   -.837705

  3             SUCCESS_DACC    -.0905618  -.0706685   2.220982  -1.851377
                 FAILED_DACC    -.0253668  -.0174324   .6883457  -.7115304

  4             SUCCESS_DACC    -.0939348  -.0723309   1.095311  -1.790504
                 FAILED_DACC    -.2401489   -.149785   .1918457  -1.007735

  Total         SUCCESS_DACC    -.1728505  -.0704888   7.015117  -22.43668
                 FAILED_DACC    -.2151837  -.0642536   1.779501  -5.232044

                                     41
Table 6.9: Difference-in-Difference test, using firm and industry-year fixed effects
We run a robust regression, clustering standard errors on firm level to investigate the differential
effect in change in discretionary  accruals between our treatment group  Failed  IPOs and our
control group  Successful IPOs.

                  ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                             =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  ×  𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿𝑖  + 𝜆𝑡𝑗  + 𝜀'%H/J
                      𝑇𝐴𝑡−1

We run the regression using the dataset specified in Table 6.4 and the estimation of normal
accruals specified in Table 6.5. We include Firm and  Industry-Year fixed effects to correct for
unobservable factors within Firm and Industry-Years  that might affect our result  (see  section
2.4).  Industry-Year fixed effect are based on  Fama French 12 industries, in order to correct for
our low number of observations.  To run the DID  test,  we use two observations for each firm;
one before the IPO announcement and one after the  issue  / withdrawal. The observation’s time
relative to the IPO, i.e. before announcement or after  issue  / withdrawal, is captured by the
dummy variable  POST. The dummy variable  FAILED, captures whether the observation is a
Failed  announcement.  Thus, the FAILED  × POST variable captures the differential effect
between our treatment group and our control group when going from prior the announcement
to  post the  issue  / withdrawal.

    VARIABLES                                     DACC

    POST                                                     -0.0733
                                                                         (0.335)
    FAILED × POST                                        -0.468**
                                                                         (0.226)

     Observations                                                 534
    Number of Company                                         267
    R-squared                                                  0.293
    Firm Fixed Effects                                         YES
     Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                      YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                     42
We show a negative differential effect, significant at the 95 % level between our treatment
group and our control group. The change in discretionary  accruals, i.e. the explained variable,
is expressed in  percentages  of  lagged total asset. This implies that the differential effect of  -
0.468 equals  -46.8 % of lagged total assets.  As we run a DID test the coefficient for the POST
variable is not of importance in to investigate the differential effect, but we claim that  a positive
value of this coefficient indicates a risk of our results being driven by earnings management
practised by Successful firm after the issue date.

Table 6.10: Industry-years for dataset used for Difference-in-Difference test
We have used  Fama French 12 industries  as a base in categorizing firms into industries. Since
we have rather low number of observations we have merged industries where suitable. We use
the industry categorisation to include industry-year fixed effect in Difference-in-Difference test
(Table 6.7). To be able to use industry-year fixed effect in a desirable way each industry-year
should include multiple observations. As we show in below table, we have multiple years with
below 3 observation per industry-year which might create errors when including industry-year
fixed effects in our test.

                                              Datayearfiscal
 Industry    2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015    2016   Total

        2       3      4      1      6      7      3      4     15     23     13      1     80
        3                         1      1                  1      6      5           14
        4                   3      5      3      3      3      2      2      2      1     24
        5                         3      2      6      2      4      7      4           28
        6       4      9      6      5     10      4      4     12     16      9      3     82
        7             4      5      3      2            2      4      6      5      1     32
        8             1      1      2      2      1      1            4      5      1     18
        9             2      2      5      5      3      4      7      8      4           40
       10             3      8      8     11     12     15     27     36     18          138
       11       1      2      1      2      1      5      6     11     21     10           60
       12       1      1      3      2      1      1      1      2      3      3           18

    Total       9     26     30     42     45     38     42     85    132     78      7    534

                                     43
Table 6.11: Difference-in-Difference test, using firm and year fixed effects
We run a robust regression, clustering standard errors on firm level to investigate the differential
effect in change in discretionary  accruals between our treatment group  Failed  IPOs and our
control group  Successful IPOs.

                  ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                              =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  ×  𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿𝑖  + 𝜆𝑡  + 𝜀'%H/J
                      𝑇𝐴𝑡−1

We run  the regression using the dataset specified in Table 6.4 and the estimation of normal
accruals specified in Table 6.5. We include Firm and Year fixed effects to correct for
unobservable factors within Firm and Years that might affect our result. The regression is run
using two observations for each firm; one before the IPO announcement and one after the issue
/ withdrawal. The observation’s time relative to the IPO, i.e. before announcement or after IPO
/ withdrawal, is captured by the dummy variable POST. The dummy variable FAILED, captures
whether the observation is a  Failed  announcement or not. Thus, the  FAILED  × POST  variable
captures the differential  effect  between our treatment group and our control group  when going
from prior the announcement to post  the  issue  / withdrawal. We show a negative differential
effect, significant at the 95 % level. The change in discretionary  accruals, i.e. the explained
variable, is expressed as percentage of lagged total asset. This implies that the differential effect
of  -0.331 equals  -33.1 % of lagged total assets.  As we run a DID test the coefficient for the
POST variable is not of importance in to investigate the differential effect, but we claim that a
positive value of this coefficient indicates a risk of our results being driven by earnings
management practised by  Successful  firms  after the issue date.

          VARIABLES                          DACC

           POST                                    0.0205
                                                                (0.226)
           FAILED × POST                          -0.331**
                                                                (0.146)

            Observations                                   534
            Number of Company                           267
            R-squared                                   0.077
           Firm Fixed Effects                           YES
           Year Fixed Effects                           YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                     44
Table 6.12: Winsorized DID  test, using firm and industry-year fixed effects
We run a robust regression, clustering standard errors on firm level to investigate the differential
effect in change in discretionary  accruals between our treatment group  Failed  IPOs and our
control group  Successful  IPOs.

                  ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                             =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  ×  𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿𝑖  + 𝜆𝑡𝑗  + 𝜀'%H/J
                      𝑇𝐴𝑡−1

We run the regression using the dataset specified in Table 6.4 and the estimation of normal
accruals specified in Table 6.5.  We include Firm and  Industry-Year fixed effects to correct for
unobservable factors within Firm and Industry-Years that might affect our result  (see  section
2.4). Indsutry-Year fixed effect are based on Fama French 12 industries.  In order to correct for

                                                                          th         th
possible outliers (Figure 5.4), we winsorize our dataset in the 5  and 95  percentiles, for Failed
and  Successful  firms separately  (separately to  adjust for differences in number of observation
between the groups).  To run the DID test we use two observations for each firm; one before
the IPO announcement and one after the issue  / withdrawal. The observation’s time relative to
the IPO, i.e. before announcement or after issue / withdrawal, is captured by the dummy variable
POST.  The  dummy  variable  FAILED,  captures  whether  the  observation  is  a  Failed
announcement. Thus, the FAILED  × POST variable captures the differential effect between
our treatment group and our control group when going from prior the announcement to post the
issue  / withdrawal.

  VARIABLES                                      DACC

   POST                                                        -0.135
                                                                          (0.189)
   FAILED × POST                                          -0.274**
                                                                          (0.136)

   Observations                                                    534
   Number of Company                                           267
   R-squared                                                    0.304
   Firm Fixed Effects                                           YES
   Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                        YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                     45
We show a negative differential effect, significant at the 95 % level between our treatment
group and our control group. The change in discretionary  accruals, i.e. the explained variable,
is expressed in termed of share of lagged total asset. This implies  that the differential effect of
-0.274 equals  -27.4 % of lagged total assets.  As we run a DID test the coefficient for the
POST variable is not of importance in to investigate the differential effect, but we claim that a
positive value of this coefficient  indicates a risk of our results being driven by earnings
management practised by  Successful  firms  after the issue date.

Table 6.13: Estimation of  Non-discretionary  accruals  using issue  / withdrawal  2006-2015
Below table shows the results from running the  regression presented in  section  3.4
       ∆𝑁𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶%,'           1           ∆𝑅𝐸𝑉%'  −  ∆𝑅𝐸𝐶%,'         𝑃𝑃𝐸%,'
                 =  𝛼6        + 𝛼;                    + 𝛼>        + 𝛿'  + 𝜆%N  + 𝜀',%
          𝑇𝐴%86,'           𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'                𝑇𝐴%86,'

We run below regression to estimate the normal change in total  accruals, i.e. change in non-
discretionary  accruals. We use an estimation window of all years available for firms going
public or withdraw their announcements earlier than 2015. We do so based on the intuition
behind the abnormal change in  accruals should equal zero in the long run. Only including firms
withdrawing their announcements or going public before 2015, we have at least  two annual
reports after the issue / withdrawal for each firm. Only including these observations, we mitigate
the risk of only capturing the increase in  accruals prior the IPO and not the reversal.  By doing
so, this approach provides a new way estimating earnings management for a normal period. We
run the regression with firm and industry-year fixed effect to correct  for omitted variables in
each firm and industry-year that could otherwise affect our result.

    VARIABLES                                     scaled_TACC

      Inverse Lagged Assets                                          -329.8
                                                                       (321.6)
     Scaled Delta Rev  –  Delta Rec                                0.525**
                                                                       (0.235)
     Scaled PPE                                                -0.0447***
                                                                  (0.00193)

     Observations                                                1,809
     Number of Company                                      255
     R-squared                                               0.408
     Firm Fixed effects                                       YES
     Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                   YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                              *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                     46
Table 6.14: DID  test with estimation period  2006-2015, using firm and  industry-  year fixed
effects
We run a robust regression, clustering standard errors on firm level to investigate the differential
effect in change in discretionary  accruals between our treatment group  Failed  IPOs and our
control group  Successful IPOs.
                  ∆𝐷𝐴𝐶𝐶'%
                             =  𝛽𝐹𝐴𝐼𝐿𝐸𝐷  ×  𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  + 𝛾𝑃𝑂𝑆𝑇%H/J  +  𝛿𝑖  + 𝜆𝑡  + 𝜀'%H/J
                      𝑇𝐴𝑡−1
We run the regression using the dataset specified in Table 6.4 and the estimation of normal
accruals specified in Table 6.11. We include Firm and  Indsutry-Year fixed effects to correct for
unobservable factors within Firm and  Indsutry-Years that might affect our result.   The
regression is run using two observations for each firm; one before the IPO announcement and
one after  the issue  / withdrawal. The observation’s time relative to the IPO, i.e.  before
announcement or after issue  / withdrawal, is captured by the dummy variable  POST. The
dummy variable  FAILED, captures whether the observation is a  Failed  announcement. Thus,
the  FAILED  × POST  variable captures the differential between our treatment group and our
control group effect when going from prior the announcement to post the IPO / withdrawal. We
show a negative differential effect, significant at the 95 % level. The change in discretionary
accruals, i.e. the explained variable, is expressed in termed of share of lagged total asset. This
implies that the differential effect of  -0.401 equals  -40.1 % of lagged total assets.  As we run a
DID test the coefficient for the POST variable is not of importance in to investigate the
differential effect, but we claim that a positive value of this coefficient indicates a risk of our
results being driven by earnings management practised by  Successful  firms  after the issue date.

      VARIABLES                                DACC

        POST                                               -0.00877
                                                                      (0.303)
       FAILED × POST                                  -0.402**
                                                                      (0.182)

        Observations                                           534
        Number of Company                                   267
        R-squared                                            0.254
        Firm Fixed Effects                                    YES
        Industry-Year Fixed Effects                                YES
                            Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                     47