 Did the  Covered Bond Issuance Act  decrease the  required  yield
                                                                       *
          of bonds issued to finance mortgage lending?

                                                    †                                    ‡
             Alejandro Herdin Hallmen         Jonas Wahl Sjöman

                            Bachelor Thesis in Finance
                         Stockholm School of Economics
                               May 2017

                                   Abstract

This paper examines the impact of the Covered Bond Issuance Act in Sweden. We
argue that covered bonds exhibit  a lower required yield  than conventional mortgage
bonds, which  can  reduce  the financing  cost  of mortgage lending for banks. Using data
on current yields for a sample of mortgage and covered bonds, we employ a difference-
in-differences methodology to test the impact of the new legislation at five different
dates where a drop in yields could be observed. We find a  statistically significant
decrease of 2-3 basis points at the date  when  covered bonds were first issued to the
market. This suggests that the new regulatory framework contributed to a reduction
in the mortgage lending financing cost for Swedish banks.

Keywords:  Covered  bond, Covered Bond  Issuance Act,  Financing cost, Mortgage
bond, Mortgage  lending

Tutor:  Farzad Saidi

*
 We thank  Farzad Saidi for his feedback and suggestions.
†
 23417@student.hhs.se
‡
 23235@student.hhs.se
Contents

1.    Introduction .......................................................................................................... 1

2.    Previous literature ................................................................................................ 5

3.    Background  .......................................................................................................... 7

   3.1.    Covered bond market in Sweden ................................................................... 8

   3.2.    Covered bond legislation in Sweden .............................................................. 9

4.    Data and methodology  ....................................................................................... 11

   4.1.    Theoretical framework................................................................................. 11

   4.2.    Hypothesis development .............................................................................. 13

   4.3.    Empirical strategy ....................................................................................... 14

   4.4.    Empirical implementation ........................................................................... 18

   4.5.    Data description .......................................................................................... 21

5.    Results ................................................................................................................ 27

   5.1.     Regressions .................................................................................................. 27

   5.2.    Robustness checks ....................................................................................... 30

6.    Conclusion .......................................................................................................... 32

   6.1.    Further research .......................................................................................... 33

7.    References ........................................................................................................... 35

8.    Appendix ............................................................................................................ 37
1   Introduction

In this paper, we study the effect of the Covered Bond Issuance Act on the yields of

bonds issued  by banks  to finance mortgage lending  in Sweden. In doing so, we evaluate

if the introduction of covered bond legislation led to  a decrease in the mortgage

financing cost for the Swedish banks.

      The Covered Bond Issuance Act (CBIA) was issued in December 2003 and came

into force in July 2004. The introduction of separate covered bond  (CB)  legislation

was common among European countries at the time and Sweden did the same in order

to prevent a competitive disadvantage for the Swedish banks (Sandström et al., 2013).

Before  2004, Swedish banks financed a large part of their mortgage lending operations

                                                                              st
using mortgage-backed securities  (MBSs). Starting on the 1  of July 2004, Swedish

banks could apply to the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority  (SFS)  for a license

to issue covered bonds. One of the conditions being that previously issued bonds with

the same financing purposes for the  banks  were converted to covered bonds by 2008

(SFS 2003:1223). Nowadays, covered bonds have substituted  MBSs  as the main source

of mortgage financing for Swedish banks. Furthermore, Sweden  has  developed one  of

the largest covered bond markets in Europe with over EUR 220 billion outstanding in

2015 (ECBC, 2016).  For investors,  covered  bonds  can be considered an alternative to

government backed securities as  they  have historically carried the highest ratings

(Packer et al., 2007).

       Covered bonds are similar to mortgage-  and asset-backed securities, but they

differ in certain key features. First, they are regulated by law whereas mortgage bonds

are only regulated by  a contract  between  the  issuer and  the  investor. Second, covered

bonds  are collateralized by a cover pool. This cover pool is normally made up of

mortgage assets. It is common for the assets in the cover pool to exceed the principal

amount in value, this is known as overcollateralization (Rosen, 2008). Investors have

a priority claim on the assets within the pool in case of bankruptcy. Third, the assets

                                     1
serving as collateral are not static, i.e. they are substituted to maintain the cover pool

in accordance with the regulation. Fourth, the assets that make up the cover pool are

reported in the issuer’s balance sheet (Sandström et al., 2013).  This is not the case of

MBSs, where the assets are pooled into a special purpose vehicle and thus transferred

to a separate legal entity with a different balance sheet (Rosen, 2008).

      Due  to their distinctive attributes, covered bonds present several advantages

over  conventional mortgage bonds  for the issuing entities, investors, and the capital

markets. As discussed by Sandström et al.  (2013)  from Sweden’s Central Bank, these

advantages include: (1) a greater incentive for banks to conduct better credit risk

evaluations as to the quality of the assets in the cover pool, for these appear in their

balance sheets. (2) Less credit risk to investors compared to  MBSs  due to their priority

claim on the assets within the cover pool. (3) An improvement in liquidity due to

standardization and regulation, which eases trade domestically and internationally.

Theoretically,   these   features   should   decrease   the   required   yield   by   investors,

translating to lower financing costs for the issuing banks’ lending operations.

      Our hypothesis is that bonds issued by Swedish banks with the purpose of

financing mortgage lending  exhibit a  decrease in  yields  after the implementation of the

CBIA.   Our   empirical   strategy   is   to   employ   a   difference-in-differences   (DID)

methodology to estimate the effect of the covered bond legislation. The DID serves to

estimate whether there was a change in the differences between the treatment and

control group before and after the treatment  date. In doing so, it produces an estimate

of the law’s effect on  yields.  The  treatment group consists of mortgage bonds and

covered bonds issued by  six  Swedish banks. We use a Swedish sovereign bond as the

control group  to estimate the  counterfactual and identify  a  causal effect. Swedish

sovereign bonds serve as an appropriate control group in this study as they  are  not

affected by  the CBIA.

       There are  three  key  considerations in our empirical study.  First, it  is important

to properly identify the specific dates  where  an effect of the CBIA could be observed

                                     2
on  yields.  That  is,  the  date  when  the  market  incorporated  the  new  regulatory

framework into the pricing of these bonds.  This effect is not necessarily restricted to

the date when investors held the new covered bonds. The decrease in  required yields

could already be exhibited in  MBSs  at the prospect of conversion to covered bonds.

For this reason, we argue that  the  effect of the new policy could be observed  in

accordance  to  the  date of issuance or enforcement  of the CBIA.  Also, it could be

observed  in relation to the banks’ application for a license to issue covered bonds, the

granting of  said  license by the  SFS,  or  at  the date  of first issue. Due to this uncertainty,

we test  our hypothesis  at  those five dates. For the date of issuance and enforcement,

we test active mortgage bonds four months prior and after the two dates. For the dates

of application, approval, and first issue, we use an equivalent  time period  but only test

bonds announced as subject to conversion.  Second, the dates of application, approval,

and first issue vary by bank. To obtain estimates for an average effect at these dates,

we average the control group by day with respect to each bank’s  specific  date.  The

third  key consideration is to properly reflect investors’ required yields  in our outcome

variable, for which there are various appropriate yield measures. We choose to conduct

the analysis using current  yield.  Current yield is useful as it commonly reflects the

coupon rate at which  new covered bonds are  issued, i.e. the refinancing cost  of

mortgage lending  for the issuing  entities.

       For the law  issue  and enforcement date, our empirical results  do  not  produce

statistically  significant  estimates of the legislation effect.  Therefore, we cannot confirm

our hypothesis  at  these dates.  It  is  worth noting that we include bond and month fixed

effects in these regressions. These serve to control for differences between bonds such

as issuer, amount outstanding, and maturity  as well as  potential  time series trends

during the period of  the  analysis. We also include two control variables for relative age

and liquidity.

       Similarly, regressing on the application  date  returns non-significant results when

including fixed effects and control variables. On the other hand,  the  approval date

                                     3
returns a significant  estimate of the treatment effect  showing an increase in yields.

This is an unexpected result,  not in line with our  theoretical framework or the previous

literature.  We argue, however, that this effect could be driven by a shock  unrelated to

the CBIA during the  approval date  time period of  analysis. Finally, the date of first

issue returns significant results at the 1%  level which sustain the inclusion of fixed

effects and control variables. Specifically, our estimate is that the  CBIA  led  to a

decrease in  yields  of 2-3  basis  points.  These  results  show  that the effect of the CBIA

could be observed on the date that covered bonds were first issued  to  the market.  We

then conduct a  robustness  check  by regressing on ten placebo dates.  These regressions

produce statistically significant estimates on 3 out of  10 dates.  We consider two of

these estimates to challenge our  results, while the third one presents an expected level

of uncertainty in the model.   Additionally, we argue  that  the placebo estimates  are

less  comparable to our results  at  the first issue date  than those  at  the date of approval.

Therefore, we confirm our hypothesis at the date of first issue.

       In summary, the results in our paper indicate  that  the Covered Bond Issuance

Act had  a  statistically  significant  effect  on  the yields  of bonds issued with the purpose

of financing mortgage lending  of  -2  to  -3  basis  points.  For that reason,  the CBIA

contributed to a  decrease  in  the financing cost of mortgage lending for the issuing

entities.  Our findings  are in line with  Nord and Fagerström’s (2006)  results  regarding

the  law issue, enforcement, application, and approval date. However, our conclusion

differs since we find an effect of the CBIA at the date of first issue.  This is mainly due

to the fact that banks had not yet issued covered bonds at the time of their analysis

and therefore,  first issue  dates had not been tested.

       The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss previous

literature. Section 3 provides background information on the covered bond market in

Sweden. In  Section 4 we describe our data and methodology. Section 5 presents  our

results and Section 6 concludes.

                                     4
2   Previous literature

Previous academic research on the topic of covered  bonds exists, but it is not as

extensive as one would expect given the size and importance of  CB  markets, especially

in European countries. The literature can be divided into three branches. The first

develops a better understanding of covered bonds and examines their use compared to

mortgage-backed securities. The second discusses covered bond spreads mainly in

relation to their credit risk. The third branch focuses on asset pricing models for this

asset class. Our paper fits between the first and second,  as we analyze the impact of

policy implementation causing  a switch from  MBSs  to  CBs.

       Rosen (2008) defines covered bonds and provides a useful comparison of their

structure in relation to  MBSs. Additionally, he discusses who benefits from the use of

CBs  and argues that “there is a trade-off between the increase in lending and the

deposit insurance fund”. This being dependent on whether banks are issuing covered

bonds to replace insured or uninsured deposits, the latter causing the increase in risk

for the  Federal  Insurance Deposit Fund. While  this  research  is specific to  the financial

system in the US,  Rosen’s logic provides a good understanding of the implications

related to using covered bonds. Lucas et al. (2008) also provide  a  practical overview

of covered bonds as a source mortgage funding. Specifically, their discussion of covered

bonds versus mortgage-backed securities in case of bankruptcy is valuable to us. Carbó-

Valverde et al. (2011) examine whether  CBs  are a substitute for  MBSs, doing so by

analyzing the reasons for which banks issue  CBs  or  MBSs  in countries where both

types of bonds are utilized versus countries where only one type of security  is used.

They conclude that  CBs  and  MBSs  are used by banks for different purposes, for

example,  CBs  are associated with liquidity needs whereas  MBSs  are used as a risk-

management tool. Our paper does not focus on interchangeability of  CBs  and  MBSs

in Sweden, but their research can help us to understand how investors might view

issuers  and the impact of this on their required yield. Finally, their paper finds that

                                     5
banks issuing  MBSs  as opposed to  CBs  in years leading  up to the crisis were  more

likely to be bailed out.  This accommodates our hypothesis that  CBs  exhibit lower

required yields  due to a lower  risk for the investor.

       Regarding   academic   research   on   spreads   between   covered   bonds   and

government bonds, Avesani et al. (2007) asses the credit risk of  CBs  in Germany and

Spain, two of Europe’s largest markets  by looking at asset swap spreads. Their results

show  that in both countries, asset swap spreads have tightened, indicating a perceived

increase in the credit quality of these bonds. They argue that  this  could be attributed

to  a  “greater transparency in the evaluation of the credit quality of banks’ portfolios”

thanks to the development of the CB market. Our paper does not make use of the

asset swap spread, but their research can provide insights as to how the market

perceives and evaluates  CBs.  Likewise, but  using  average yield  spreads, Prokopczuk et

al. (2013) focus on the German market and investigate how credit risk is priced in

covered bonds. They conclude that the spread  between  CBs  and government bonds is

not only attributable to a liquidity premium but also to differences in credit rating. In

fact, their findings suggest that higher credit ratings of bonds can lead to decreases in

spreads  relative to the Bund of up to  -2 basis points.  In addition, they find a positive

relationship  between  lower  liquidity  and  higher  spreads.  While  we  do  not  test

differences in credit ratings in our model,  as there is no variation  among  the ratings

that are available  for our dataset, their methodology is helpful to  us  regarding the use

of control variables.

       Previous academic literature on covered bonds in Sweden is limited and the few

research papers that we have encountered are in the form of three Master Theses and

one Bachelor Thesis. Our paper relates closely  to that of Nord and Fagerström (2006),

which seeks to determine the benefits of covered bonds to investors,  whether  these

benefits are created  by expropriating  other bondholders, and the impact of covered

bond reform on mortgage bond pricing until the time  of their  Thesis  publication. There

are three  essential differences from our paper. First, our scope is narrower as it seeks

                                     6
to determine the impact on  required yields. Second, their study was conducted eleven

years ago, at which point only three institutions had applied for licenses to issue

covered bonds in Sweden  and  no  CBs  had been issued. Their analysis therefore uses 3

bonds (one per institution) to determine the impact on spreads from the prospect of

conversion. We use data from 6  Swedish  banks and 42  bonds.  Third, they employ an

event   study   methodology   complemented   by   a   panel   regression   to   evaluate

announcement effects and  the  longer-term impact. We believe that announcement

effects would not be reflective of a persistent decrease in banks’ financing  cost and

thus  do not conduct an event study.  Additionally, our panel regression is in the form

of a DID analysis where we separately regress on each event date. Our contribution is

therefore to examine the impact of CB policy implementation in Sweden by analyzing

its effect  at  five  relevant  dates.  As previously mentioned, our  findings  are in line with

those of  Nord and Fagerström in showing that the impact  of the CBIA was not

reflected   before   the   conversions   actually   took   place.   However,   our   conclusions

ultimately differ as  we find an effect of the CBIA at the date of first issue, confirming

our  hypothesis  that  the  new  legislation  had  an  impact  on  required  yields  and

consequently  financing cost.  Finally, we use a publication by Sweden’s Central Bank’s

Sandström et al. (2013) which provides a valuable overview of Sweden’s covered bond

market, its actors, and links to the financial system at large. This paper is an important

reference document for us. Our  understanding of  covered bonds  in Sweden is largely

based on the information provided by its authors.

3   Background

In this section, we provide background information on the covered bond market in

Sweden as well as an overview of the main features of the Covered Bond Issuance Act

of 2003.

                                     7
3.1    Covered bond market in Sweden

Sweden has one  of  the largest covered bond markets in Europe with over EUR 220

billion outstanding in 2015 according to  the European Covered Bond Fact Book (2016).

This figure represents a CAGR of approximately 16% over the last decade. The covered

bond market is of great significance to the financial stability of Sweden (Sandström et

al., 2013). This is not only due to the sheer size of the market, which exceeds

government debt by circa EUR 80 billion (Swedish National Debt Office, 2017), but

also because covered bonds comprise a large part of the Swedish banks’  liquidity

buffers. This means that the financial system is greatly dependent on the ability to

trade these bonds in the capital markets.

                                       1
       There are eight institutions  that have been granted approval to issue covered

bonds by the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority (ASCB, 2017). In addition,

                                 2
there are five market makers  which facilitate issues of covered bonds for the issuing

entities and maintain the secondary markets. Total issuance in 2015 exceeded EUR 60

billion. The Swedish banks carry out issues both in Swedish kronor, Euro, and other

currencies. Over 25% of total  covered bonds outstanding are denominated in foreign

currency,  with the  majority being denominated in Euro (ECBC, 2016).

       It is also important to understand the functioning of the covered bond market

and the interrelationship between its participants. There are two markets and three

participants that require special focus. The two markets are referred to as the primary

and secondary market and the three participants are issuers, investors, and market

makers. Issuers carry out bond issues on the primary market through market makers,

most of which are benchmark bond issues. Rather than selling new bonds directly to

investors, issuers usually repurchase outstanding bonds approaching maturity and offer

current bondholders the possibility to exchange these bonds  for similar ones with longer

1
 Nordea Hypotek, Landshypotek, Länsförsäkringar, SBAB,  SEB, Skandiabanken, Stadshypotek, and
Swedbank Hypotek.
2
 Danske Bank, Nordea, SEB, Svenska Handelsbanken,  and Swedbank.

                                     8
maturities at current yield. The purpose of this mechanism is to avoid  the risk  of

refinancing  their  debt. Additionally, banks can conduct on-tap issues, which involve

issuing more bonds under the same issuance conditions at the current market yield

level (Sandström et al., 2013). The secondary market is where bonds that already have

been issued are traded. This market allows issuers to observe the price level of their

previously issued bonds, and in doing so, to determine the  implied interest rates

investors would demand of new offerings. For investors, the secondary market serves

two main functions. First, it provides liquidity as bondholders can sell their securities

for cash, which is made possible by market makers. Second,  it provides a source of

information as to the fair value of active bonds (Fabozzi  and  Jones, 2006).

       The four largest players in the  Swedish  covered bond market are Stadshypotek,

SEB, Swedbank Hypotek, and Nordea Hypotek, which hold more than 80% of the

market share (SEB, 2014). Unfortunately, cover pool data dating further than ten

years in the past is not available on the banks’ websites, but we estimate that market

share by bank has not drastically changed. In terms of investors, the majority are

foreign investors, Swedish banks, and other Swedish financial institutions. These top

three investors have accounted for around 75% of the Swedish covered  bond holdings

during the last fifteen years (Sandström et al., 2013). Their shares have not been

constant  however,  as  Swedish  banks  increased  their  holdings  during  the  period

preceding the financial crisis by approximately 10% while foreign investors dropped

them by the same amount  (Figure 1). In terms of credit ratings, covered bonds in

Sweden have historically carried the highest credit ratings  for all issuers.

3.2    Covered bond legislation in Sweden

Covered bonds in Sweden are governed by the Covered Bond Issuance  Act (CBIA)

                                                          th
(SFS 2003:1223). This act was issued on the 18  of December 2003  and came into

                  st
force on  the 1  of July 2004. The purpose of the regulation was to introduce covered

                                     9
bonds to the Swedish market by converting other outstanding mortgage bonds to  CBs

by 2008.

       The CBIA contains  an extensive amount of terms and requirements. With the

purpose of providing an overview of some of its most relevant specifications, we provide

a summary of the CBIA’s main sections as discussed by  the European Covered Bond

Fact Book (2016). First, any bank or credit institution can issue covered bonds in

Sweden if they have been granted a CB license by the Swedish Financial Supervisory

Authority. To be granted a license, issuers must provide a financial stability plan and

convert  their outstanding mortgage bonds to covered bonds, among other criteria.

Eligible assets for the cover pool include mortgages as well as public sector assets. An

important distinction regarding  the  cover pool  of CBs  versus common  MBSs, is that

its assets  are  removed and replaced if  they fail to meet  regulatory  requirements. For

this reason, the cover pool is known as dynamic. Third, valuation shall be conducted

to market value and the maximum loan-to-value ratios are of 75% for residential

property, 70% for  agricultural, and 60% for commercial. Fourth, the cover pool must

be overcollateralized and the issuer must provide information about this pool on a

quarterly basis. Fifth, in case of  issuer  bankruptcy, investors have a claim on the cover

pool and the issuer. Should the cover pool not suffice, CB investors have a similar

claim to other credit investors on the remainder of the issuer’s asset value (Sandström

et al., 2013).

      As previously mentioned, the CBIA came into force in July 2004. However,

conversions and issuance of covered bonds did not happen immediately. The first

application was filed in May 2005 by Nordea Hypotek and the first issue was carried

out by SBAB in May  2006. All other banks had issued covered bonds by 2008 except

Skandiabanken, which conducted its first issue in September 2013.  For  this  reason,  our

dataset excludes Skandiabanken, as they had no bonds subject to conversion during

the time of our analysis.  In Table  1, we provide  further  information  on  license

application, approval, and first issue dates.

                                     10
4   Data and methodology

In this section we describe the theoretical framework on which we base our analysis.

We   then   develop   our   hypothesis   and   explain   our   empirical   strategy   and

implementation. Finally, we describe  the  data.

4.1    Theoretical framework

As  highlighted in previous sections, covered bonds have several distinctive features

that make them less risky than mortgage-backed securities. To further understand this

proposition, it is useful to break down the risk components of fixed income securities.

In general, all bonds are subject to interest-rate risk, where the  “price of a  fixed income

security  moves in the opposite direction of the change in interest rates”  (Dattatreya

and  Fabozzi, 2006). However, we argue that the difference in risk between  CBs  and

MBSs  is mainly  due  to  liquidity  risk  and credit risk.

       Dattatreya and  Fabozzi  (2006)  define liquidity risk as “the risk that an investor

will have to sell a bond below its true value where the true value is indicated by a

recent transaction.” The CB market is a very liquid one due to its structure and

volume.  In terms of  structure, issues in the primary market are mostly composed of

benchmark bonds and thus  very  standardized. In addition, the secondary market

provides a source of information for investors  to value their bonds  and an  opportunity

to sell them  for cash. In terms  of the market’s size, it is one  of  the largest in Europe;

its outstanding volume exceeds that of Swedish government bonds by approximately

EUR 80 billion (Swedish National Debt Office, 2017). Additionally, covered bonds are

“treated favorably under regulatory frameworks such as Basel III and Solvency II”

(Prokopczuk et al., 2013). This  is  a contributing factor to the liquidity of  CBs  as it

arguably increases their  demand  by  banks, asset managers, and other large financial

institutions  since these investors  are able to hold more  CBs  in their books. While the

                                     11
MBS market was also large in size and very liquid, the standardization and regulation

contribute to a higher  market  liquidity of covered bonds.

       Credit risk can also be an important portion of the spread  between covered and

government bonds. This type of risk is composed of default risk, credit spread risk,

and downgrade risk (Dattatreya  and  Fabozzi, 2006). Default risk is the risk that the

issuer will become insolvent and unable to pay its obligation. Credit spread risk is the

risk that the market increases the spread it demands from a specific fixed income

security. Downgrade risk involves the risk of the security being downgraded by a credit

rating agency, which would decrease its price.  MBSs  have historically carried very high

ratings, and so have their issuers.  This has been the case because their probability of

default has been very low. However, default risk also includes the magnitude of the

losses to an investor in case of bankruptcy. This is where  CBs  present an advantage

over  MBSs,  for  the investor has a claim on both the issuer and the assets in the cover

pool. This cover pool is not accessible to other investors, such as senior unsecured

creditors, until the covered bond investors have been paid  (Lucas et al., 2008). In

addition, the assets in the cover pool appear  on  the issuer’s balance sheet, providing

an incentive to carry higher quality assets in  said  pool. Finally, the cover pool is

monitored  by  a  financial  authority  (e.g.  SFS)  which  ensures  a  certain  level  of

overcollateralization and the removal of assets not meeting the quality criteria.

       Another type of risk that is worth considering is timing risk. Timing risk applies

to  all  bonds that carry a call provision, that is, the possibility for the issuer to terminate

the issue before the bond matures. All mortgage-backed securities carry this risk, which

in their context, is known as prepayment risk. Prepayment risk includes contraction

risk and extension risk (Dattatreya  and  Fabozzi, 2006). The former is the risk that

borrowers will prepay their loan when interest rates are low and the latter is the risk

that borrowers will postpone mortgage payments in a high-interest rate environment.

In practice,  MBSs  can forgo a potential increase in value in a low-interest environment

and delay a decrease in value when facing high interest rates. For the same reasons,

                                     12
the  relationship  between  mortgage-backed  securities  and  interest  rates  results  in

unpredictable cash flows, which can complicate their valuation (Becketti, 1989).  This

risk is priced in  the MBS  and reflected in  its  yield. Conversely, covered bonds’ coupons

and payment schedules are set in advance, so they do not carry prepayment risk

(Prokopczuk et al., 2013).

       Other  types  of  risks  may  include  maturity,  inflation,  and  currency  risk.

Concerning maturity risk, there should not be a difference between  a  MBS  and  a CB.

Inflation risk is similar for all bonds that do not have a floating coupon rate. In our

analysis,  we  only  use  fixed  rate  bonds  which  means  that  this  risk  is  the  same

throughout our sample. Finally, currency risk would apply to bonds issued in other

currencies, whose payments would have uncertain SEK  cash flows. Our analysis  only

includes bonds denominated in Swedish Kronor to factor out this risk.

       In summary, we argue that covered bonds  are safer  than mortgage backed

securities. In fact, some claim that spreads on covered bonds have generally been

smaller than those of mortgage-backed securities (Bernanke, 2009). The former Fed

Chairman also argues that this remained true throughout the financial crisis, which

could be attributed to the legislation governing covered bonds in European countries,

i.e. the CBIA in Sweden.

4.2    Hypothesis development

In general, covered bonds are regarded as  less risky  than mortgage-backed securities.

We argue that this can be mainly attributed to lower liquidity risk and credit risk due

to the regulatory framework that governs covered bonds. For this reason, the required

yield exhibited by investors should  theoretically  be lower for  CBs  than for  MBSs.

      It is important to note, however, that when the Covered Bond Issuance Act

was introduced in late 2003 and enforced in mid 2004, covered bonds were not being

traded. In fact, applications by banks for covered bond issuing licenses did not start

                                     13
until 2005 and the first issue of a CB in Sweden did not happen until May 2006.

Nevertheless, we argue that  there is a possibility that a  decrease  in  required yields

could already be visible on  MBSs  as investors would incorporate the prospect of

conversion into the pricing of securities that would be subject to such a conversion.

Therefore, our hypothesis is the following:

Hypothesis.  Bonds issued by Swedish banks with the purpose of financing mortgage

lending exhibit a decrease in  yields  after the implementation of the CBIA.

      Regarding the specific dates when this effect would occur, we argue that a

decrease in  required yield  could be observable  at  five different dates. The first two are

the date of issuance and enforcement of  the  CBIA.  Already at this point, investors

could price  MBSs  incorporating the new regulatory information. Similarly, the effect

could be visible around the dates of application for a  covered bond issuing  license  to

the  Swedish Financial  Supervisory  Authority,  the approval date of said application,  or

the date of first issue. That said, we would not expect a negative effect on  yields  to

accumulate over several dates, as the same regulatory framework would not be priced

repeatedly.

      We  will show that our  hypothesis holds for the date of first issue, i.e.  when

conversion had actually taken place.  At the same  time, it is  not  true  regarding  the

other four dates.

4.3     Empirical strategy

To test our hypothesis that the implementation of the CBIA led to a decrease  in the

yields of covered  and  mortgage bonds, we use  a  difference-in-differences approach. Our

treatment group are the mortgage  bonds  and covered bonds  that would be affected by

the new legislation. The control group is a government bond issued by the Swedish

government that traded throughout the entire period of our analysis.

                                     14
       The model specification of our study is the following:

yit  =  β1Treatmenti  +  β2Postt  +  β3Treatmenti  ×  Postt  +  β4Xit  +  δi  +  ηt  +  ϵit  ,    (1)

where  yit  stands for the observed current yield of bond  i  at  day  t.  Treatmenti  indicates

if the observed current yield is in the treatment group of covered and mortgage bonds

by assuming the value 1, and 0 if it is in the control group, i.e. the government bond.

Treatmenti  varies by bond.  Postt  is a dummy variable indicating if the  observed current

yield is in the post-treatment window by taking on the value 1, and 0 if it is  in the

pre-treatment window. This variable  varies by time.  Xit  represents bond-level control

variables, specifically the relative age of the bond and a proxy for its liquidity.  It is

worth mentioning  that our liquidity proxy controls for idiosyncratic liquidity risk,

whereas  differences in systematic liquidity risk, i.e. a more liquid covered bond market,

could still have an impact on current yields  in our model.  These control variables vary

by bond and time.  δi  and  ηt  denote bond and month fixed effects, respectively.  Robust

standard errors  are clustered  at  the bond-month level.

       We regress current yields for mortgage/covered bonds and  the  government bond

four months before and  after the treatment date  (160 trading days). The model

captures the effect of the treatment through  β3,  providing  the  direction and size of the

change in current yield of mortgage and covered bonds.  We refer to  β3  as  the DID

estimator.  An important aspect of our analysis involves the selection of treatment

dates. As previously discussed, we argue that the effect of the policy implementation

could be exhibited  at  five different dates. For this reason, we estimate  β3  in  five

different regressions. The dates that we select for our analysis are the following:

       Law  issue  date (December 18, 2003):  The first date where an effect of the policy

could be observed is when the  CBIA  was issued. The reason an effect on  yields  could

be seen around this date is that investors would expect that major banks and housing

credit institutions would apply for this authorization and hence convert all their

                                     15
mortgage bonds to covered bonds by 2008. Additionally, this represents a certainty

that the new regulatory framework would  take place  in six-months time. Under these

assumptions, investors would price this information into mortgage-backed securities

trading during that time. Consequently,  MBSs  could have already exhibited a decrease

in  yields  from this date.

      Law  enforcement date (July 1, 2004):  This is the date when the  CBIA  came

into force in  the  Swedish market, i.e. banks could apply for covered bond issuing

licenses from this day on. Similar to the law issuance date, the reaction by  investors

to the new legislation could have been priced at this point in time, as it represents the

first day under a new regulatory framework.  In addition, investors could be expecting

issuing institutions to start applying for licenses immediately.

                                                  3
       Application date (varies by bank ):  This date refers to the day a bank sent an

application to issue  CBs  to the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority. The new

legislation and its requirements to grant a license were available to investors. With

this  information,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  a  sophisticated  investor  could

determine if the SFS would approve the application of each bank, causing an effect on

required yield. These dates are identified by press releases  which  specify that  the banks

have sent an application and name  the  outstanding bonds subject to conversion.

       Approval date (varies by bank):  This refers to the day a bank was granted a

license by the SFS. From this point in time, investors knew which banks were going

to carry out conversions of  MBSs  to  CBs  and specifically the bonds that were going to

be converted. Once again, this represents a potential date where an effect  could be

exhibited.

       First issue date (varies by bank):  The last date for which we carry out our

analysis is the first date that covered bonds were issued by banks to the Swedish

market. We choose this date as it represents the  first  time when investors were holding

3
  See Table 1 for specific dates.

                                     16
a different  security. Since we argue that  CBs  are  fundamentally a safer  security  than

MBSs, a decrease in  investors’ required yields  could be exhibited at this date.

       Another important specification of our model is the inclusion of fixed effects

and control variables. Fixed effects are included at the bond-  and month-level. Bond-

level fixed effects serve to capture time-invariant characteristics  of bonds such as issuer,

maturity, maturity date, coupon rate, payment schedule, credit rating, and total

amount issued. Additionally, time fixed effects are included at the month-level, where

month represents a  specific month within a year, i.e. April 2005. We use month-level

rather than year-level fixed effects because our regressions span an eight-month period,

so in order to capture  time series trends  we need to disaggregate years into months.

Regarding control variables, we employ two different ones in our regressions. First, we

use a variable that represents relative age, where we calculate the ratio of a bond’s

                                      4
time to maturity to its maturity.  Second, we construct a liquidity proxy multiplying

                                                     5
the relative age times the total amount issued.  This serves as a proxy for liquidity as

bonds that are relatively older (closer to maturity) and with lower outstanding amount

exhibit  lower liquidity. We borrow this reasoning and the two control variables from

Prokopczuk et al.’s (2013) research on covered bond credit risk in the German market.

However, we do not have time series data on outstanding amount so we use total

amount issued instead.

      We use the Swedish government bond number 1045 issued in the year 2000 with

maturity in 2011 as our control group. This bond covers our time series of data entirely

and thus serves as a consistent control group for all the treatment dates on which we

run a regression. In addition, it has a fixed coupon rate of 4% paid annually and is

therefore similar in type to our treatment group.  This bond also carries triple A rating

by Moody’s.  The government bond is an adequate control group as it  is  not  a subject

of  the Covered Bond Issuance Act.

4
  Relative Ageit =  Time to Maturityit  /  Maturityi, where Time to Maturityit  =  Maturity Datei  –  Datet
5
  Liquidity Proxyit  =  Relative Ageit × Total Amount Issuedi

                                     17
       Finally, our DID methodology relies on the parallel trend assumption.  That is,

the current yields for the mortgage/covered bonds and the government bond would

follow the same path in the absence of the CBIA’s  introduction. In Figures 3 and 4 we

show that the parallel trend  assumption  holds for most of our treatment dates.

However, there may be cause for concern regarding the  approval date. In such a

scenario, we argue that our  time-varying control variables for relative  age  and liquidity

can serve to better meet the parallel trend assumption.  We provide further discussion

as to the potential source bias of this matter in  the  empirical implementation and

results sections.

4.4    Empirical implementation

We implement our difference-in-differences methodology to  the  dataset in order to

determine the effect of the CBIA through the DID estimators. These serve to estimate

the differences in  yields  between the mortgage-backed securities/covered bonds  and

the government bond before and  after  the treatment dates; revealing whether the

policy implementation had an increasing, decreasing, or no effect at all.

       First, we analyze the effect of the CBIA at the law  issue  and law enforcement

dates.  For each of these two dates, we run a total of  six  regressions. Our baseline

regression (1) is run without fixed effects or control variables. This serves to obtain an

initial DID estimator on the sample. We then proceed to test whether the DID

estimator withstands the inclusion of fixed effects. For our second regression (2), we

control   for   bond-level   fixed   effects.   This   serves   to   account   for   time-invariant

characteristics within bonds that may affect the estimation of the effect. For example,

differences  in maturity, fundamental differences between issuers such as their cover

pool, amount outstanding, or investor pool.  When including bond fixed effects, we no

longer estimate the  Treatmenti  variable.  We then include (3) month-level fixed effects

to control for  aggregate time series trends  that may affect the bond market in Sweden

                                     18
and its issuers. In our fourth regression (4) we include a control variable for  the  relative

age of the bond. This regression also includes bond and month  fixed effects.  Then,  we

include a liquidity proxy as a control variable (5) to examine the model when factoring

out differences in liquidity between bonds.  This regression includes bond and month

fixed effects as well.  Finally, we run a regression including all fixed effects and control

variables (6) to see if the DID estimator is significant under all conditions.  We cluster

robust  standard errors  at the bond-month level on all regressions.

       Second, we analyze the effect of the CBIA at the application, approval, and

first issue dates.  As previously mentioned, the application, approval, and  first issue

dates vary by bank.  To obtain estimates  for the average effects at each of these dates,

we average the control group by day before and after  each  treatment date. That is, we

take an average of government bond’s yield  for each of the 160 days in the analysis

window  for each date.  For example, we  compute  an arithmetic average of the observed

current yields of the government bond at day  -20 of the application time period for

each bank, which becomes the current yield observation for the control group at day

-20.  After averaging the control group for each bank, we run  five  different regressions

for  each  treatment  date. The first regression (1) is our baseline regression which is run

without the inclusion of fixed effects or control variables. Our second regression (2)

includes bond  fixed  effects  to account for differences between bonds as well as issuers.

This is particularly important in  these  regressions as banks applied at different dates.

The third regression (3) includes the control variable for relative age  to  control for

variation  between bonds  at different points in their lifetime, as  well as bond  fixed

effects. The  fourth regression (4)  that we run includes bond  fixed effects  and our

liquidity proxy.  Finally, regression (5) includes bond fixed effects and both control

variables.  We do not include month  fixed effects in the regressions  on the application,

approval, and first issue dates. The reason being that we eliminate month-level time-

invariant characteristics when averaging the control group across different points in

time, relative to the treatment date of each bank.  As we do not  include month fixed

                                     19
effects, we estimate the  Postt  variable on all regressions.  In addition, we only include

bonds that were mentioned in press releases by banks  and other news sources  as subject

to  conversion. In these regressions,  robust  standard errors  are also clustered at the

bond-month level.

       The time period for all of our regressions comprises a total of 160 trading days,

equivalent to eight months.  In other words, we  conduct our regressions on the  four

months prior to the treatment date and the four months that follow. This time period

is long enough to appreciate a persistent effect of the CBIA and short enough to

accommodate the use of daily observations and prevent excessive overlap between

dates.

      For validity, our identification strategy rests on the parallel trend assumption

(PTA).  In Figures 3 and 4 we see that the PTA holds well for the law issue,  law

enforcement,  application, and first issue dates.  Conversely, there is a negative shock of

0.1 percentage points exhibited by the treatment group in the pre-treatment period of

the approval date (Figure 4) at day  -40. This shock could then lead to a biased and

positive estimate of the treatment effect. As  mentioned before, we attempt to mitigate

this source of bias through the introduction of time-varying control variables for

relative age and liquidity of the bonds. Regarding the law enforcement date, we see a

positive shock in the treatment group in the post-treatment period. There is  a  sudden

increase  of 0.1 percentage points in current yields at approximately day 50 (Figure 3).

While the PTA still holds well in the pre-treatment period for this date, the shock is

seemingly unrelated to  the  treatment date and therefore could also lead to a biased

and positive estimate of the treatment effect.  In this case, control variables can  also

help to smooth this shock in the model.  Nevertheless, we take this into account as a

potential source of bias when developing our conclusions.

       There are  three  main limitations of our empirical implementation that must  be

considered. The first involves the averaging of the control  group  for the application,

approval, and first issue dates. Averaging daily yields of the government bond across

                                     20
time could introduce bias in our analysis by  reducing or amplifying  the effect on  yields

of the treatment group, thus affecting our DID estimator.  However, this method allows

us to study the aggregate  effect on these bank-specific dates.  The second limitation

comes with overlaps across dates. For example, two months of  the post-treatment

period of the law issuance date overlap with the pre-treatment period of the law

enforcement date. This could bias the DID estimator by corrupting the  yields  during

the  treatment period, but we consider that the amount of overlap is not sufficient to

hide a significant effect completely. Additionally, it is more conservative to test a larger

amount of dates where the effect could take place at the expense of some overlap

between them.  Third, we  know  which  bonds were subject to conversion from the  first

issue date onwards  from press releases by the banks and other sources. But  there is

lack of clarity as to the exact date of conversion of each individual bond.  This

somewhat weakens the study  of  the first issue date.

       Besides the  three  limitations that are specific to our study, the difference-in-

differences methodology presents some shortcomings in general. For example, Bertrand

et al. (2004) find that the DID  approach can severely understate standard errors. In

fact, through the generation of placebo laws on female-wages in the US, they conclude

that the DID methodology results in significant coefficients at the 5% level for 45% of

the placebo laws. We control  for this by (1) generating placebo laws and observing

their effect and (2) clustering  robust  standard errors at the bond-month level. This

procedure is furthered specified in the  robustness section after the results.

4.5    Data description

Our  purpose  is to  determine  whether the Covered Bond Issuance Act had an effect on

required yields  of mortgage and covered bonds. To this end,  we collect data on daily

current yields for  mortgage and covered  bonds  issued in Sweden that traded within

the  period  of  January  1,  2002  to  December  31,  2008  from  Thomson  Reuters

Datastream.  We also collect data for the same time period on current yields for the

                                     21
government bond that represents our control group. The  time period  selected  allows

us to conduct our analysis for all the dates where  we consider  an effect of the policy

implementation could have been observed.

      To build our sample, we impose a series of restrictions. First, we choose

mortgage-bonds issued by the 6 Swedish banks that applied for a covered bond issuing

license  before 2008. Second, we select bonds that mature after the date of enforcement

of the CBIA. Third, we only use bonds with fixed coupon rates to avoid to differences

in inflation risk within the sample. Fourth, we use bonds denominated in Swedish

Krona to avoid differences in currency risk.

       Given   these   restrictions,   our   dataset   consists   of   42   bonds   issued   by   6

institutions. In our dataset, we include information about the bonds’ daily current

yield, issuing bank, time to maturity, total amount issued in billion SEK, maturity

date, and maturity in years. We also include an additional bond issued by the Swedish

Government that traded throughout the entire period of our analysis, this serves as

our control group in the difference-in-differences analysis. This  bond meets all our

criteria that is not specific to mortgage bonds.  Table 2  in the appendix provides

detailed  information  on  the bonds included in our dataset.

       We impose two further restrictions when conducting the regressions  in our

analysis. First, we exclude bonds for which there are less than 100 daily observations

in our pre-  and post-treatment period. The entire period consists of 80 days prior to

the treatment date and 80 days after, for a total of 160 trading days (8 months).

Excluding bonds with less than 100 observations ensures that the regression is run on

bonds for which there is at least one month of daily yields before and after the

treatment date. This means that for our analysis of the law issuance and enforcement

date, we use  18  bonds and  19  bonds respectively. For our analysis of the application,

approval, and first issue date, we impose a second restriction. In this case, we only use

mortgage bonds declared as subject to conversion in press releases by the issuing banks

and other news sources  (labeled in Table 2). The reasoning being that if banks specify

                                     22
the bonds that would be converted, only these would exhibit an effect of the CB

regulation  in advance.  Applying the restriction on observations per period to  this part

of the analysis as well, further reduces the sample to  16  bonds for the application date,

25  for the approval date, and  28  for the first issue date. This is shown in Table 3.

Outcome variable

In   order   to   determine   whether   investors’   required   yields   decreased   with   the

introduction of CBIA, we face a choice of  yield measures on which to run our DID

regressions.  These include conventional yield measures such as yield-to-maturity and

current yield  as well as others like the asset swap spread. Ultimately, we choose to use

current yield in our analysis.  Nevertheless, it is important to understand the benefits

and limitations of each measure to be aware of how they might bias our conclusion.

       Among the  conventional yield measures, the two most common ones are yield-

to-maturity (YTM) and current yield (CY). Yield-to-maturity is the more complete

measure as it reflects the return of a bond if held to maturity. It takes into account a

bond’s coupon rate and payment schedule, its market price, and time to maturity.

Required yields  of  mortgage  and covered bonds  could  be  accurately  measured in terms

of  YTM.  However,  doing  so  would  require  adjusting  the  measure  for  different

maturities of bonds to avoid differences in YTM purely based on this. There are various

ways of achieving this. For example, the US Treasury reports Constant Maturity Rates

(CMTs) by “interpolating yields from the daily yield curve.” Others simply exclude

bonds with a remaining life of less  than six months to maturity, this helps to eliminate

effects caused by the assumption that most bonds mature at par (Prokopczuk et al.,

2013).

       Current yield is the simplest yield measure as it expresses the ratio  of  the bond’s

coupon to its current market price. This ratio can be slightly modified to adjust for

factors such as accrued interest and income tax rate. In Exhibit 1, we show how current

                                     23
yields provided by Datastream are calculated. Current yield considers the coupon rate

as the unique source of  return for a bondholder, potential capital gains or losses  as well

as  interest income from reinvestment are ignored (Fabozzi, 2006). In this sense, one

could argue that current yield is a short-term measure of a bond’s returns, as it reflects

the returns  an investor would realize if the bond was held for one year. Additionally,

current yield does not completely take care of differences in maturity that may distort

yield spreads, but it is a more stable measure than YTM.  This can be illustrated by

the relationship between YTM and CY depending on whether a bond trades at a

                                                                                       6
premium, at par, or at a discount, as CY is less sensitive to price changes.  Finally,

current yield is particularly advantageous to our analysis as issuers commonly offer

investors to exchange their maturing bonds for ones with a longer maturity at current

yield  (Sandström et al., 2013). In this sense, CY could be regarded as a more accurate

measure of refinancing cost.

       Others have used a less conventional approach in measuring covered bond  yields

and  spreads. For example, Avesani et al. (2007) use an asset swap spread. This allows

them to eliminate fixed interest rate risk.  Furthermore, they argue that using this

measure provides some advantages in terms of “liquidity and homogeneity.” We refrain

from using this measure due to the  added complexity of constructing  an appropriate

asset swap spread  for our study.

       In summary, we choose current yield as a measure for  investors’ required yield

in our analysis. While there are advantages and shortcomings of using this measure,

we believe it can accurately portray the effect of the CBIA. In fact, an effect of the

policy on  bond yields  should be reflected in disregard of the measure that is employed.

It is also important to note that current yields in our sample  are  winsorized  by month

         th          th
at the 1  and 99  percentile  to avoid our results being driven by outliers.

6
 A bond trading at a discount exhibits  Coupon Rate < CY < YTM; at a premium Coupon Rate >
CY > YTM; and at par Coupon Rate = CY = YTM.

                                     24
Summary statistics

In Table  4, we present summary statistics for the average current yields in our sample.

The table is divided into six panels which correspond to the samples used in the main

regressions of our paper, with the exception of Panel F, which presents summary

statistics over the total sample. Panels A through E consist of time periods comprising

160 trading days (80 days prior and after the treatment date). Data on current yields

for the mortgage/covered bonds (treatment group) and the government bond (control

group)   is   reported   in   percentage   points   and   collected   from   Thomson   Reuters

Datastream.

       Panel  A  shows  average  current  yields  for  the  mortgage  bonds  and  the

government bond during the time period of the CBIA issue. We see a positive spread

of 0.22% (22 basis  points (bp)) between the treatment and control group during this

period, which is to be expected. At the same time, the treatment group exhibited a

lower minimum yield during this period, showing that some  MBSs  do trade below the

government bond. However,  this does not necessarily reflect an effect of the CBIA on

mortgage bond yields. Similarly, Panel  B shows a positive spread of 24  bp for the

CBIA enforcement date sample. Again, we see a lower minimum for the mortgage

bonds, a greater range in the yields,  and also a  larger  standard deviation. We use 2,720

and 2,807 observations  from  the treatment group in Panel A and B respectively; and

160 from the control group in both panels. Therefore, the regressions are run on 2,880

and 2,967 observations per treatment date. It is also  noteworthy  that Panel A has an

average number of observations per bond within its time window of 160, meaning that

all the bonds used for the regressions have daily yields for all the days  in the regression

window. Conversely, Panel B has a small number of missing observations resulting in

a mean of 156 per bond. In total, Panel A consists of 18 bonds and Panel B of 19.

       Panel C shows the average yields for the application time period,  i.e.,  the date

when banks applied to the SFS for a  covered bond issuing license. In this case, we see

narrower spreads between the treatment and  control group, which amount to 2  bp.

                                     25
This is a considerable change  when compared to previous panels. While this does not

mean that the effect of the CBIA can be isolated to the application date, a decreasing

trend in yields of mortgage bonds versus the government bond is visible. Panel D

shows that the spread increases further during the approval time period, that is, when

banks were granted a license by the SFS. Additionally, the dispersion is greater in this

sample, reflected in a higher standard deviation of 73 bp.  Regarding the first issue

date, Panel E shows the largest negative spreads between the two groups, where

mortgage/covered bonds traded 38  bp below the  government bond on average. Once

again, standard deviation  increases for this sample to 81  bp, indicating a greater

dispersion of yields. As previously described, the dates of application, approval, and

first issue vary by bank. For this reason, we average the government bond by day with

respect to each bank’s dates, obtaining an average for the control group by day before

and after each treatment date.  The regressions are run on 2,560, 3,861, and 4,270

observations for the application, approval, and first  issue date respectively.  All bonds

in Panel C have observations for each  day  in the time period while those in Panel D

have 154 and the ones in Panel E have 152  on average.  Panel C consists of 16  bonds,

Panel D  of  25, and Panel E  of  28.

       Panel F presents  the average current yield for the mortgage/covered bonds and

the government bond from January 1, 2002 to  December 31, 2008. The total sample

contains   daily   current   yields   for   43   bonds.   Remarkably,   we   see   that   the

mortgage/covered bonds traded slightly below the governments over this time period,

at a spread of  -4 bp.  This can also be seen in Figure 2, where we plot the two types of

bonds throughout the whole time period. Overall,  the summary statistics for Panels A

through E  show  a decreasing trend in mortgage/covered bond  yields  over the complete

time period. This could be associated  with  the introduction of the covered bond

regulatory framework or other market  trends. We now  turn to  the regressions to

specifically test the impact of the law.

                                     26
5   Results

In  this section, we test our hypothesis that the introduction of the CBIA led to a

decrease  in  the required yield of mortgage and  covered bonds.  First, we run  regressions

for the law issue  and enforcement dates. We then test  banks’  application, approval,

and  first issue dates. We focus our attention on the coefficient β3. This coefficient is

referred to as the DID estimator since it estimates the change in  yield  between the

treatment  and  control  group.  We  also  examine  whether  our  model  sustains  the

inclusion of fixed effects and control variables.  Finally, we discuss the  robustness checks

conducted.

5.1    Regressions

Law issue and enforcement dates

Table  5  shows the results for the six  regressions on the law issue  date.  The baseline

regression (1) yields a non-significant DID estimator of 6 bp. Including bond fixed

effects does not change the estimator and neither does adding month fixed effects (2

and  3), but under these conditions the DID estimator is significant.  Interestingly,

indicating an increase in yields.  Controlling for the relative age of the bonds lowers the

estimator to 4 bp (4). The coefficient on the relative age variable is negative, meaning

that bonds closer to maturity exhibit higher  yields. Possibly because maturing bonds

trade at lower volumes, which could imply lower liquidity. Additionally, the liquidity

proxy control variable further lowers the estimator to  -1 bp and makes it non-

significant (5). The coefficient on the liquidity proxy is positive  and  significant at the

1% level, in this case, meaning that more liquidity is associated with higher  yields.

This is not in line with Prokopczuk et al.’s (2013) conclusions, where higher liquidity

as measured by the proxy is associated with lower yields. In our case, this difference

might come from the total amount issued for each bond, where bonds with lower total

                                     27
amounts issued  do not necessarily exhibit lower liquidity, i.e.  do not exhibit  higher

liquidity risk. Regressing on both control variables decreases the DID estimator further

to  -3 bp (6), but it remains non-significant. In summary, the model sustains the

inclusion of fixed effects, but including control variables decreases the DID estimator

and its significance.  For this reason, we cannot conclude that the CBIA had an impact

on  yields  at this date.

       Table  6  shows the regression results for the law enforcement date. The baseline

regression’s  DID estimator is 8 bp and non-significant (1). Including bond fixed effects

lowers it to 3 bp (2), while month fixed effects have no further impact on the estimator

(3) but they do make it significant at the 5% level.  This could be due to the  presence

of  time series trends in the bond market  at this time period of analysis. Specifically,

we see a positive shock of 10 bp during the post-treatment period, which might be the

driver of a DID estimator indicating an increase in yields.  Controlling for relative  age

shows no effect on the estimator as the control variable’s coefficient is not significant

(4).  However, regressing on the liquidity proxy instead of relative age lowers the

estimator to 1 bp  and  removes  its  significance  (5).  The  liquidity proxy’s coefficient is

positive and significant.  In this scenario, we see that controlling for liquidity may

contribute  to  smooth  the  shock  in  the  post-treatment  period  (Figure  3),  hence

eliminating effects driven by  this shock.  Regression number (6) shows that the DID

estimator is non-significant under the inclusion of fixed effects and both control

variables.  The  pattern is similar to  that of  the law issue  date, where including fixed

effects and control variables diminishes the  observed impact of the CBIA on  current

yields. For this reason, we conclude that the legislation had no impact  at  this date.

Banks’ application, approval,  and  first issue  dates

Table  7  shows the regression results for the application date.  The baseline  regression

yields a statistically non-significant estimator of  -2 bp (1). Including bond fixed effects

                                     28
does not change the DID estimator (2). On the  other hand, introducing the control

variable for relative  age  makes it significant at the 5% level, indicating a decrease in

yields of  -3  bp (3). This is not the case when controlling for liquidity, which reduces

the estimator to 1 bp and removes its significance (4). Likewise, including both control

variables returns a  non-significant estimator of 0.4  bp  (5). It is noteworthy that  the

coefficient on the relative age variable is negative and significant, similar to previous

regressions, suggesting that bonds further from maturity exhibit lower  yields.  In this

model, the liquidity proxy is  also  significant and  negative. This contrasts with the

previous regressions and implies that higher liquidity is associated with lower  yields,

as Prokopczuk et al. (2013) find in their study.  To sum up, the model shows no

statistical significance  when including control variables, therefore we conclude that the

application  date exhibits no impact from the CBIA on bond yields.

       Table  8  shows  the  regression  results  for  the  approval  date.  The  baseline

regression returns a non-significant DID estimator of  -7 bp (1). Including fixed  effects

and controlling for relative age increases the DID estimator to 0.6 bp  and 0.5 bp

respectively,  but it remains non-significant (2  and  3).  On the other hand, including the

liquidity proxy variable in the regression (4) returns a significant DID estimator of 2

bp at the 5% level. This estimate further increases to 3 bp  (at the 1% level)  when

including both variables (5).  These estimates indicate an increase in yields at the date

of approval.  However, Figure 4 shows that there is a negative shock on yields in the

pre-treatment period of 10 bp. Such a decrease before the treatment date could lead

to a positive DID estimator that is biased by the shock, therefore not truly reflecting

an effect of the legislation. This is  similar  to  what  we  see in our estimates. Additionally,

the inclusion of control variables does not  appear  to mitigate  this  violation of the

parallel trend assumption. Due to this uncertainty, we cannot conclude that the CBIA

had an effect on the date of approval.

       Table  9  shows the regression results for the first issue date.  The baseline

regression yields a non-significant DID estimator of  -7 bp (1).  Including  bond fixed

                                     29
effects (2) returns a significant DID estimator at the 1% level  of  -2 bp, hence showing

a decrease in yields. This estimate sustains the inclusion of  the relative age control

variable  and  decreases  further  to  -4  bp  (3).  When  controlling  for  liquidity,  the

estimator increases to  -2 bp (4).  Regressing  with both control variables returns an

estimate of  -3 bp (5).  In these regressions, relative age and liquidity proxy are  both

negative and significant  on their own but not together, indicating that differences in

relative age  have explanatory value. However, they do not influence the DID estimator

to a great extent, meaning that the treatment effect is not driven by these differences.

Overall,   these   estimates   show   that   covered   bonds   exhibit   lower   yields   than

conventional mortgage bonds. Additionally, they  indicate that the effect of the CBIA

can  be detected at the date of first issue.  It is also  worth nothing  that mortgage and

covered  bonds  exhibit negative spreads relative to the government bond throughout

this time period of analysis (Figure 4). This means that they  were  already trading

below the government bond at the date of first issue, which further increased the

spread by driving yields to a lower level.

      In summary, we can confirm our hypothesis that the covered bond legislation

in Sweden led to a decrease in  the yields of bonds issued with the purpose of financing

mortgage lending, at the date of first issue.  We now turn to our robustness checks  to

further evaluate our results.

Robustness  checks

To increase the validity of our estimates, we apply two robustness checks. First, we

cluster robust standard errors at the bond-month level. Second, we generate ten

placebo dates to examine the identification power of our difference-in-differences

methodology.

       In order to prevent overestimating the significance of our DID estimators, we

cluster our standard errors. Intuitively, we would cluster the standard errors at the

                                     30
bond level. However, in all our regressions we have fewer than 30 bonds and in  three

cases fewer than 20. This represents few clusters and may result in two issues,

overfitting and over-rejection (Cameron  and  Miller, 2015). To solve this problem, we

cluster at the bond-month level. Month refers to a generic month as opposed to a date

month,  e.g. January rather than January 2005.  This  solution contributes to more

conservative estimates.

       To further improve robustness, we regress on ten placebo dates. We generate

two placebo dates per year for the years 2003 to 2007, for a total of ten. The regressions

on these dates include bond and month fixed effects  as well as controls for relative age

and liquidity proxy.  The results are shown in Table  10.  Out of the ten placebo dates,

three return significant DID estimators. These coefficients are  -1 bp,  6 bp, and 4 bp at

the  10%,  1%,  and  1%  significance  level  respectively.  These  results  question  the

identification power of our DID methodology, as it returns significant effects on dates

that are unrelated to the CBIA. However, we argue that the first coefficient does not

question the validity of our first issue estimates indicating a decrease in yields. This is

because  it  is  the  only  negative  significant  coefficient  generated  by  the  placebo

regressions, meaning that 1 out 10 placebos (10%) are generating significant estimates

at the 10% level, which is to be expected. Regarding the other two coefficients, we

consider that they can provide a further interpretation of the results at the date of

approval.  Our reasoning is that the estimates of the effect at the approval date are

very similar in sign, magnitude, and significance to those generated at the placebo

dates. This could serve to further discredit the validity of the approval date estimates,

where an increase in yields was potentially driven by  a  shock  during the pre-treatment

period, rather than an effect of the CBIA.

       To  summarize, our model indicates a decrease in  yields  of 2-3  bp  at the 1%

significance level  under the new regulatory framework  and consequently a decrease in

the  mortgage financing cost  for the issuing banks.  It identifies this effect  at  the date

that covered  bonds  were first issued by the  banks.  In terms of economic significance,

                                     31
a  back-of-the-envelope  calculation  (excluding  transactions  costs)  indicates  that  a

decrease of 2 bp in current yields would  roughly  correspond to a decrease of 2% in

mortgage financing cost for a bank issuing mortgage bonds at a 1% coupon rate, which

is not unrealistic in a low interest environment.  We also  find unexpected results at the

date of approval, which are not in line with our hypothesis and lack a clear theoretical

explanation. We argue that these results  could  be driven by a shock in the  pre-

treatment period rather  than  a true effect of the CBIA. Our robustness checks are in

line with this reasoning, as placebo dates generate very similar estimates to those

produced at the date of approval. For that reason, we conclude that an effect of the

CBIA can only be attributed to the date of first issue.  Lastly, our  findings  contrast

with previous literature, which had found no effect of the CBIA. Previous research,

however, had not been conducted  on  the date of first issue by Swedish banks.

6   Conclusion

In this thesis, we analyze the potential impact that the introduction of the Covered

Bond Issuance Act had on  yields  of mortgage and covered bonds.  We identify a

statistically significant decrease in  yields  of 2-3  bp  at the date when covered bonds

were first issued to the Swedish market, implying that an impact of the CBIA can be

recognized at this date.

      Previous literature and the nature of covered bonds would lead us to deem  them

safer than conventional mortgage bonds such as  MBSs. For example, Carbó-Valverde

et al. (2011) find that banks issuing  MBSs  prior to the crisis were more  likely to be

bailed out than banks issuing covered bonds, suggesting that financing through covered

bonds could be safer. Moreover, as described by  Sandström et al. (2013), the features

of the Swedish covered bond legislation, including conservative rules on loan-to-value

ratio and  the  types of assets that can be included in the cover pool, should imply that

covered bonds are safer than mortgage bonds.  Our results are in line with this literature

                                     32
and  we hope  they  can  provide evidence that covered bonds exhibit lower required

yields   than   conventional   mortgage   bonds.   Conversely,   our   findings   do   not

accommodate Nord and Fagerström’s (2006)  conclusions that the CBIA had no effect.

This is due to the fact that banks had not yet issued covered bonds at the time of

their analysis and therefore, first issue  dates  had not been tested.

       In summary, we confirm our hypothesis that the CBIA had  an effect on the

required yield  of bonds issued with the purpose of mortgage financing. In doing so,  our

empirical results  suggest  that the  new regulatory framework regarding covered bonds

in Sweden served to decrease the financing cost of mortgage lending for Swedish banks.

6.1    Further research

Looking ahead, an interesting research path would be to test other aspects  and

implications of the law. One example would be to examine if the CBIA  led to  a change

in the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of assets in the cover pool  backing mortgage bonds

and covered bonds. According to the CBIA, covered bonds must be guaranteed by a

specific cover pool. The law further specifies the maximum LTV ratio of the assets

that comprise  this  cover pool.  This  implies  that the cover pools of covered bonds are

dynamic,  where  assets deteriorating in quality  must be  replaced by higher quality ones

that meet the regulation’s requirements. This contrasts  with  cover pools of  MBSs,

which are usually static. Hence, to deepen the understanding of why we experience a

decrease in required yield when investors hold covered bonds instead of  MBSs, it would

be interesting to analyze if we can also see a change in LTV ratios. We would expect

to see a decrease, as the maximum value of LTV is now regulated by the law and a

decrease would  reflect  that covered bonds are  safer,  in line with what we find in this

paper. It would be suitable to employ a similar  empirical  strategy to the one used in

this paper, i.e. a difference-in-differences  methodology. To do this,  we  would need data

on cover pool assets’ loan-to-value ratio, for both  MBSs  and covered bonds. If it

                                     33
adheres to the parallel trend assumption, a possible control group could be an  asset-

backed security  backed by credit card loans or automobile loans,  for which  data on

LTV ratios can be found. We would then regress ratio values before and after the

CBIA and estimate the treatment effect.

      From a more general standpoint, further research could also be conducted

regarding the timing and speed at which new legislation is priced by investors in the

capital markets. This would be relevant for stocks as well as fixed income securities

and help to understand how long it takes for new regulation to  have an effect.

                                     34
7   References

Association of Swedish Covered Bond Issuers (ASCB). 2017.  Association of Swedish
   Covered   Bond   Issuers.   [Online].   [Accessed   March   1   2017].   Available   from:
   http://www.ascb.se.

Avesani, R.G., Garcia Pascual, A., and Ribakova, E., 2007. The Use of Mortgage
   Covered  Bonds.  International Monetary Fund  Working Paper  No. 07/20.

Becketti, S., 1989. The Prepayment Risk of Mortgage-backed Securities.  Economic
   Review  -  Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City  74(2), pp. 43-57.

Bernanke, B.S., 2009. The Future of Mortgage Finance in the United States. B.E.
   Journal of  Economic  Analysis & Policy  9(3), pp. 1-9.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan 2004. How Much  Should We Trust
   Differences-in-Differences  Estimates?  Quarterly Journal of Economics  119, pp. 249-
   275.

Cameron, A.C. and Miller, D.L., 2015. A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust
   Inference.  Journal  of Human Resources  50(2), pp. 317-372.

Carbó-Valverde, S., Rosen, R.J., and Rodríguez-Fernandez, F., 2011. Are Covered
   Bonds  a  Substitute  for  Mortgage-backed  Securities?  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of
   Chicago  Working Paper No. 2011-14.

Covered Bonds (Issuance) Act 2003.  (SFS 2003:1223). Sweden: Swedish Financial
   Supervisory Authority (SFS).

Dattatreya, R.F. and Fabozzi, F.J. 2006. Risks Associated with Investing in Fixed
   Income Securities. In: Fabozzi, F.J. ed.  The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities.
   New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 21-29.

European Covered Bond Council (ECBC). 2016.  European Covered Bond Fact Book.
                 th
   [Online]. 11  edition. Brussels: European Mortgage Federation  –  European Covered
   Bond     Council.     [Accessed     May     2     2017].     Available     from:
  http://ecbc.hypo.org/Content/default.asp?PageID=501.

Fabozzi, F.J. 2006. Bond Pricing, Yield Measures, and Total Return. In:  Fabozzi, F.J.
   ed.  The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities.  New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 73-105.

                                     35
Fabozzi, F.J. and Jones F.J. 2006. The Primary and Secondary Bond Markets. In:
   Fabozzi, F.J. ed.  The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities.  New York: McGraw-
   Hill, pp. 31-52.

Fagerström, E. and Nord, J. 2006.  Uncovering covered bonds: The impact of a reform
   on the Swedish  mortgage  bond market. M.Sc. thesis, Stockholm School of Economics.

Lucas, D.J., Fabozzi, J., Goodman, L.S., Montanari, A., and Peter, A., 2008. Covered
  Bonds: A  New  Source of U.S. Mortgage Loan Funding?  Journal of Structured
   Finance  14(3), pp. 44-48.

Packer, F., Stever, R.  and Upper, C., 2007. The covered bond market.  BIS Quarterly
   Review,  pp.  43-55.

Prokopczuk, M., Siewert, B.J., and Vonhoff, V., 2013. Credit risk in covered bonds.
   Journal of Empirical Finance  21, pp. 102-120.

Rosen, R., 2008. What are covered bonds?  Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,  Chicago
   Fed Letter  No. 257.

Sandström, M., Forsman, D., Von Rosen, J.,  and Fager Wettergren, J., 2013.  The
   Swedish covered bond market and links to financial stability.  Sveriges Riksbank
   Economic Review  2, pp. 1-28.

SEB.  2014. The Swedish covered bond market. [Online]. Sweden: SEB. [Accessed April
   15 2017]. Available from: http://www.ascb.se/market-information/.

Swedish National Debt Office. 2017.  Swedish National Debt Office.  [Online]. [Accessed
   March 1 2017]. Available from: https://www.riksgalden.se.

                                     36
8   Appendix

Figure 1
Swedish covered bond investors.
Share of total covered bonds outstanding  held  by investor type in Sweden from 2008 to 2013. Source:
Statistics  Sweden (SCB) as found in Sandström et al. (2013).

                     40


                     30


                     20
                   Share (%)

                     10


                     0

                    2006           2008           2010           2012           2014
                                                        Year

                                 Swedish Banks             Other Swedish Fin. Institutions
                                 Foreign Investors            Swedish Insurance Companies
                                      Public Sector

Figure 2
Mortgage and covered bond yields vs the government bond.
This figure shows the average  current yields for the mortgage/covered bonds and the government
bond in our sample between January 1, 2002 and December 31, 2008.  The mortgage  and covered
bonds are labeled as the treatment group and the government bond is labeled as the control group.
Data on current yields is collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream.

                         6.0


                         5.5


                         5.0

                  Current Yield (%)
                         4.5


                         4.0
                       01jul2002      01jan2004      01jul2005      01jan2007      01jul2008
                                                     Date

                                             Treatment           Control

                                     37
Figure 3
Law issue  and enforcement dates.
These two graphs plot the current yields for the mortgage bonds and the government bond  at  the dates
of issue  and enforcement of the CBIA. The mortgage bonds are labeled as the treatment group and the
government bond is labeled as  the control group. The date of  issue  is December 18, 2003 and the date
of enforcement is July 1, 2004.  Data on current yields is collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream.

                                                     Law Issue Date
                         5.5


                         5.0

                    Current Yield (%)


                         4.5
                     -100            -50             0             50             100
                                             Days Before/after Treatment Date

                                             Treatment           Control

                                               Law Enforcement Date
                         5.5


                         5.0

                    Current Yield (%)


                         4.5
                     -100            -50             0             50             100
                                             Days Before/after Treatment Date

                                             Treatment           Control

                                     38
Figure 4
Application, approval, and first issue dates.
These three graphs  plot the current yields for the mortgage/covered bonds  and the government bond
at  the application, approval, and  first issue dates  of the banks.  Application date refers to the date when
a bank submits  an application to the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority (SFS) for a covered bond
issuing license. Approval date refers to the date when a bank  is  granted a license by the SFS. First issue
date is the date when  a bank starts  to issue covered bonds.  The mortgage bonds/covered bonds are
labeled as the treatment group and the government bond is labeled as the control group. The dates are
specific to each bank,  these  graphs plot  the average current yield in the time period before and after
each date.  Data  on current yields is collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream.

                                                     Application Date
                         5.0


                         4.5

                    Current Yield (%)


                         4.0
                     -100            -50             0             50             100
                                             Days Before/after Treatment Date

                                             Treatment           Control

                                                    Approval Date
                         5.0


                         4.5

                    Current Yield (%)


                         4.0
                     -100            -50             0             50             100
                                             Days Before/after Treatment Date

                                             Treatment           Control

                                     39
Figure 4  (continued)

                                                          First Issue Date
                         5.0


                         4.5

                    Current Yield (%)


                         4.0
                     -100            -50             0             50             100
                                             Days Before/after Treatment Date

                                             Treatment           Control

                                     40
Table 1
Bank-specific dates.
This table provides the dates of application, approval, and first issue for each bank in our sample.
Application date refers to the date when a bank submits  an application to the Swedish Financial
Supervisory Authority (SFS) for a covered bond issuing license. Approval date refers to the date when
a bank  is  granted a license by the SFS. First issue date is the date when  a bank starts  to issue covered
bonds.   The information is obtained from news websites, banks’  press releases, and banks’  websites,
where “n/a” stands for not available.  These sources are shown below the table.

 Bank                      Application Date        Approval Date        First Issue Date
 Stadshypotek              September 14, 2005       March 13, 2006       September 15, 2006
 Swedbank Hypotek                n/a            September 14, 2007       April 21, 2008
 Nordea Hypotek                  n/a            December 12, 2005        June 30, 2006
 SEB                      February 9, 2006       August 29, 2006        March 23,  2007
 Landshypotek                    n/a            November 8, 2006       August 15, 2007
 SBAB                    October 13, 2005        March 31, 2006         May 23, 2006

Sources:

Euroinvestor. 2005.  Nordea Hypotek får tillstånd att emittera säkerställda obligationer.  [Press release]. [Accessed  March 9 2017].
    Available from:  https://goo.gl/hyT6wH.

Landshypotek. 2007.  Landshypotek börjar emittera säkerställda obligationer.  [Press release]. [Accessed March 9 2017]. Available
    from:  https://goo.gl/hFGZrQ.

My News Desk. 2006.  SEB BoLån lämnar in tillståndsansökan för att ge ut säkerställda obligationer.  [Press release]. [Accessed
    March 9 2017]. Available from:  https://goo.gl/6ySGik.

News Cision. 2007. Stadshypotek påbörjar utgivning av säkerställda obligationer. [Press release]. [Accessed March 9 2017]. Available
    from:  https://goo.gl/OrpJM8.

Nordea  Hypotek.  2006.  Grundprospekt  avseende  program  för  kontinuerlig  utgivning  av  säkerställda  obligationer  och  icke
    säkerställda obligationer.  [Press release]. [Accessed March 9 2017]. Available from:  https://goo.gl/G3rTaJ.

Nyhetsbyrån Direkt. 2005. Stadshypotek vill ge ut säkerställda obligationer.  Dagens Industri.  [Online]. September 14 2005.
[Accessed March 9 2017]. Available from:  https://goo.gl/fbd3oD.

SBAB. 2006.  Grundprospekt avseende obligationslåneprogram för kontinuerligt utgivning av säkerställda obligationslån.  [Online].
    [Accessed March 9 2017]. Available from:  https://goo.gl/RhLzDu.

SEB. 2007.  SEB BoLån konverterar till säkerställda obligationer.  [Press release]. [Accessed March 9  2017]. Available from:
     https://goo.gl/xZj4vI.

Stadshypotek. 2005.  Grundproskpekt: Program för utgivande av säkerställda  bostadsobligationer.  [Press release]. [Accessed March
    9 2017]. Available from:  https://goo.gl/CjS3Ea.

Swedbank Hypotek. 2008.  Den 21 april ändras villkoren för obligationslån 166, 168, 173, 174, 175, 176 och 177.  [Press release].
    [Accessed March  9 2017]. Available from:  https://goo.gl/8gQ985.

                                     41
Table 2
Bond information.
This table provides background information on the 43 bonds in our dataset. Converted stands for whether the bond was announced as subject to conversion to
a covered bond. Total amount issued is measured at maturity for matured bonds and  as of April, 2017 for active bonds. Credit ratings are provided by Moody’s
and collected from Bloomberg, where “n/a” stands for not available. The rest of the information is collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream, news websites,
banks’  press releases, and banks’  websites.

                                   Issuer Dataset         Bonds Per        Bond Dataset                                                                                                                                                Amount Issued         Maturity
        Issuer                                                                    Bond Name                     Bond ISIN      Coupon Type     Converted                                 Credit Rating
                            Number           Issuer         Number                                                                                                           (BSEK)           (yrs.)
                                                     1              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2004 6% 21/06/17 1579            SE0001384843       Fixed         Yes           77.0          13         Aaa
                                                     2              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2005 6% 18/06/14 1575            SE0001384801       Fixed         Yes           82.0          9         Aaa
                                                     3              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2005 6% 15/06/11 1571            SE0001384769       Fixed         Yes           52.0          6         Aaa
                                                     4              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2005 6% 21/03/12 1572            SE0001384777       Fixed         Yes           55.0          7         Aaa
                                                     5              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2005 6% 19/12/12 1573            SE0001384785       Fixed         Yes           66.0          7         Aaa
                                                     6              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2005 6% 18/09/13 1574            SE0001384793       Fixed         Yes           81.0          8         Aaa
                                                     7              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2005 6% 18/03/15 1576            SE0001384819       Fixed         Yes           85.0          10         Aaa
                                                     8              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2004 6% 16/12/15 1577            SE0001384827       Fixed         Yes           73.0          11         Aaa
      Stadshypotek            1           16
                                                     9               STADSHYPOTEK S1562 3 1/2% 15/09/04             SE0000545642       Fixed         No           2.0           5         n/a
                                                    10                STADSHYPOTEK S1563 6% 15/06/05              SE0000622508       Fixed         No           10.0          5         n/a
                                                    11               STADSHYPOTEK S1564 6% 15/03/06              SE0000707150       Fixed         No           10.0          6         n/a
                                                    12              STADSHYPOTEK S1565 6% 20/12/06 S1565            SE0000790412       Fixed         No           10.0          5         Aaa
                                                    13              STADSHYPOTEK S1566 6% 19/09/07 S1566            SE0000894917       Fixed         No           24.0          5         Aaa
                                                    14              STADSHYPOTEK S1567 6% 18/06/08 S1567            SE0001011016       Fixed         No           40.0          5         Aaa
                                                    15              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2003 6% 18/03/09 1568            SE0001078064       Fixed         No           37.0          6         Aaa
                                                    16              STADSHYPOTEK AB 2003 6% 16/12/09 1569            SE0001182866       Fixed         No           63.0          6         Aaa
                                                    17            SWEDBANK HYPOTEK AB 1997 6% 20/04/09 168          SE0000454803       Fixed         Yes           68.0          12         Aaa
                                                    18           SWEDBANK HYPOTEK AB 2005 3 1/2% 16/06/10 174          SE0001426164       Fixed         Yes           86.0          5         Aaa
    Swedbank Hypotek          2           5           19             SWEDBANK HYPOTEK AB 2006 4% 15/06/11 175           SE0001720582       Fixed         Yes           40.0           5         Aaa
                                                    20           SWEDBANK HYPOTEK AB 2006 4 1/4% 20/06/12 176          SE0001956194       Fixed         Yes           67.0          5         Aaa
                                                    21           SWEDBANK HYPOTEK AB 2008 4 3/4% 19/06/13 177          SE0002373696       Fixed         Yes           65.0          5         Aaa
                                                    22             NORDEA HYPOTEK 2005 3 1/4% 17/06/20 5521           SE0001542341       Fixed         Yes           64.0          15         Aaa
                                                    23              NORDEA HYPOTEK 2005 3% 17/06/09 5522            SE0001571985       Fixed         Yes           55.0          4         Aaa
                                                    24             NORDEA HYPOTEK 2006 3 3/4% 15/06/11 5523           SE0001720392       Fixed         Yes           46.0          5         Aaa
     Nordea Hypotek           3           7            25             NORDEA HYPOTEK 2007 4 1/4% 19/06/13 5525           SE0002331975       Fixed         Yes           63.0           6          Aaa
                                                    26             NORDEA HYPOTEK 2004 3 1/4% 16/06/10 5519           SE0001426438       Fixed         Yes           59.0          6         Aaa
                                                    27             NORDEA HYPOTEK 2005 3 1/4% 17/06/15 5520           SE0001542333       Fixed         Yes           63.0          10         Aaa
                                                    28              NORDEA HYPOTEK 2006 4% 20/06/12 5524            SE0001957341       Fixed         Yes           52.0          6         Aaa
                                                        29             S-E-BANKEN BOLAN S559 5 1/4% 13/06/07 S0559           SE0000858383        Fixed         Yes           24.0           6          Aaa
                                                         30             S-E-BANKEN BOLAN S560 4 3/4% 18/06/08 S0560           SE0001033192        Fixed         Yes            26.0           5          Aaa
                                                    31            S E BANKEN BOLAN AB 2004 4 1/4% 16/06/09 562          SE0001162009       Fixed         Yes           30.0          5         Aaa
         SEB              4           6
                                                        32               S-E-BANKEN BOLAN S557 5 1/4% 16/06/04             SE0000513608        Fixed          No            1.0           5          n/a
                                                         33                S-E-BANKEN BOLAN S558 6% 15/06/05              SE0000642001        Fixed          No            7.0           5          n/a
                                                         34               S-E-BANKEN BOLAN S561 4 1/4% 21/06/06             SE0001071572        Fixed         Yes            10.0           3          n/a
                                                    35             LANDSHYPOTEK 2002 5 1/4% 19/09/07 L5033           SE0000888752       Fixed         Yes           2.0           5          n/a
     Landshypotek           5           2
                                                     36             LANDSHYPOTEK BANK 2003 5% 18/03/09 5035           SE0001127937       Fixed         Yes           2.0           6          n/a
                                                     37                 SBAB 1998 5 1/2% 17/12/08 S118               SE0000489122       Fixed         Yes           6.0           10         n/a
                                                     38                  SBAB 2004 4% 01/11/07 S121                SE0001282211       Fixed         Yes           0.2           3          n/a
                                                     39              SBAB BANK PUBL AB 2005 4% 01/06/10 122            SE0001402009       Fixed         Yes           8.0           5          n/a
        SBAB             6           6
                                                     40              SBAB BANK PUBL AB 2005 4% 13/04/11 123            SE0001627662       Fixed         Yes           3.0           6          n/a
                                                    41                  SBAB S119 5 1/2% 15/03/06                SE0000514291       Fixed         No           2.0           7          n/a
                                                    42                   SBAB S120 5% 15/06/05                 SE0000968703       Fixed         No           9.0           5         n/a
   Swedish Government          7           1          43                SWEDEN 2000 5 1/4% 15/03/11 1045              SE0000722852       Fixed         No           102.0          11         Aaa

                                                         42
Table 3
Bonds included  in the regressions for each date.
This table shows the bonds that we utilize in  the  regressions for each treatment date  after we impose
our restrictions. For all regressions, we exclude bonds with less than 100 observations in the 160-day
time period. For the application, approval, and first issue dates, we impose an additional restriction by
excluding bonds that  were  not announced as subject to conversion.  The top row shows the five dates
included in our analysis.  “Law”  stands for the Covered Bond Issuance Act. The  bottom row shows the
total amount of bonds per  date.

     Law  Issue       Law  Enforcement      Application         Approval         First Issue
        9                 9                 1                1                1
        10                10                2                2                2
        11                11                3                3                3
        12                12                4                4                4
        13                13                5                5                5
        14                14                6                6                6
        15                15                7                7                7
        17                16                8                8                8
        29                17                29               17               17
        30                29                30               18               18
        32                30                31               19               19
        33                31                34               20               20
        34                33                37               22               21
        35                34                38               26               22
        37                35                39               27               23
        41                37                43               29               24
        42                41                                30               26
        43                42                                31               27
                          43                                35               29
                                                               36               30
                                                               37               31
                                                               38               35
                                                               39               36
                                                               40               37
                                                               43               38
                                                                                 39
                                                                                 40
                                                                                 43
        18                19                16               25               28

                                     43
Table 4
Summary statistics.
This table shows summary statistics for the current yields of the mortgage/covered bonds and the
government bond in our sample. The statistics for the current yields are reported in percentage points.
These  include the mean, standard deviation, minimum, median, and maximum. They are based on daily
yields for the bonds and winsorized at the 1th and 99th percentile on a monthly basis. N is the number
of daily observations. The mean observations per bond within  a time period and the total number of
bonds is also shown. Panels A through E present statistics for our five regression samples. Each time
period consists of 160 days, 80 in the pre-treatment period and 80 in the post-treatment period. Bonds
with less than 100 observations in the time period are excluded from Panels A through E. Bonds that
were not announced  as subject to conversion are excluded from Panels C through E. Application,
approval, and first issue dates vary by bank, so the control group is averaged by day relative to each
bank’s date. Application is the date when  a  bank applies  for  a  covered bond issuing license to the
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority (SFS). Approval is the date  when  license is granted by the
SFS. First issue is  the date  when covered bonds are first issued to the market.  “Law”  stands for the
Covered Bond Issuance Act. Data  on current yields  is collected from Thomson Reuters Datastream.

 Time Period             Mean   Std. Dev.   Min.   Median    Max.     N     Mean Obs.  per Bond   No. Bonds
 Panel A:  Law  issue
 Mortgage bonds            5.21      0.60      3.48     5.31      5.80     2,720            160            17
 Government bond          4.99      0.08      4.81     5.01      5.13     160             160            1

 Panel B:  Law  enforcement
 Mortgage bonds            5.18      0.62      3.48     5.30      5.87     2,807            156            18
 Government bond          4.94      0.05      4.81     4.95      5.03     160             160            1

 Panel C: Application
 Mortgage bonds            4.73      0.47      3.75     4.96      5.33     2,400            160            15
 Government bond          4.71      0.06      4.64     4.69      4.81     160             160            1

 Panel D: Approval
 Mortgage bonds            4.63      0.73      3.16     4.97      5.91     3,701            154            24
 Government bond          4.87      0.04      4.80     4.87      4.95     160             160            1

  Panel E: First issue
 Mortgage / Covered bonds    4.58      0.81      3.06     4.69      5.97     4,110            152            27
 Government bond          4.96      0.03      4.90     4.96      5.01     160             160            1

 Panel F: Total sample
 Mortgage / Covered bonds    4.94      0.82      3.06     5.23      5.97    40,876            973            42
 Government bond          4.98      0.17      4.59     4.98      5.42     1,827           1,827            1

                                     44
Table 5
Regressions on the law  issue  date.
All regressions are run at the bond-day level  it. Current yield is measured daily for all bonds.  Treatmenti
is a dummy variable that denotes whether the bond is part of the control group,  i.e. mortgage or covered
bond.  Post  Issuet is a dummy variable that denotes whether the yield was observed after the law issuance
date, which corresponds to December 18, 2003. The treatment period consists of 160 (80 before and 80
after the treatment date) trading days and bonds that do not have at least 100 observations in the time
period are excluded from the regression. The control variables are measured at time  t  where  Relative
Ageit  is equal to bond  i’s  time to maturity divided by its maturity and  Liquidity  Proxyit  is a bond  i’s
relative age times its total amount issued at maturity. Bond fixed effects are included  for all regressions
except  the first one  (1), month fixed effects are included for all regressions except  the first two  (1  and
2). Robust standard errors are clustered at the bond-month level  and reported in  parentheses. Three
asterisks denote significance  at the 1% level, two at the 5% level, and one at the 10% level.

 Variable                                           Current Yield
 Regression                      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
 Treatment  ×  Post Issue         0.060      0.060*     0.060***     0.035*      -0.014      -0.033
                                (0.103)     (0.031)     (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.020)     (0.022)
 Treatment                  0.189**
                                  (0.076)
 Post Issue                    -0.116***   -0.116***
                                 (0.031)     (0.031)

 Relative Age                                                  -0.603***              -0.519***
                                                                   (0.201)                (0.194)
 Liquidity Proxy                                                     0.026***    0.025***
                                                                              (0.004)     (0.004)

 Bond FE                    No       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
 Month FE                   No        No       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes

 N                          2,880      2,880      2,880      2,880      2,880      2,880

                                     45
Table 6
Regressions on the law enforcement date.
All regressions are run at the bond-day level  it. Current yield is measured daily for all bonds.  Treatmenti
is a dummy variable that denotes whether the bond is part of the control group,  i.e. mortgage or covered
bond.  Post  Enforcementt  is a dummy variable that denotes whether the yield was observed after the
law issuance date, which corresponds to July 1, 2004. The treatment period consists of 160 (80 before
and 80 after the treatment date) trading days and bonds that do not have at least 100 observations in
the time period are excluded from the regression. The control variables are measured at time  t  where
Relative Ageit  is equal to bond  i’s  time to maturity divided by its maturity and  Liquidity  Proxyit  is a
bond  i’s relative age times its total amount issued at maturity. Bond fixed effects are included for all
regressions except  the first one  (1),  month fixed effects are included for all regressions except  the first
two  (1  and  2). Robust standard errors are clustered at the bond-month level  and reported in parentheses.
Three asterisks denote significance at the 1% level, two at the 5% level, and one  at the 10% level.

 Variable                                            Current Yield
 Regression                        (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
 Treatment  ×  Post Enforcement    0.080     0.033    0.034**    0.034**     0.013       0.013
                                  (0.109)    (0.030)    (0.015)    (0.016)     (0.017)      (0.018)
 Treatment                    0.192**
                                       (0.082)
 Post  Enforcement                -0.022     -0.022
                                     (0.029)    (0.029)

 Relative Age                                                -0.012                  0.003
                                                                 (0.127)                (0.129)
 Liquidity Proxy                                                    0.008**     0.008***
                                                                            (0.003)      (0.003)

 Bond FE                      No      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes
 Month FE                     No      No      Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes

 N                            2,967     2,967     2,967      2,967      2,967       2,967

                                     46
Table 7
Regressions on the application date.
All regressions are run at the bond-day level  it. Current yield is measured daily for all bonds.  Treatmenti
is a dummy variable that denotes whether the  bond is part of the control group,  i.e. mortgage or covered
bond.  Post Applicationt  is a dummy variable that denotes whether the yield was observed after the
application date, i.e. the date a bank sends an application for a covered bond issuing license to  the
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority. Application dates vary by bank so the control group is
averaged by day relative to each bank’s  date. The treatment period consists of 160 (80 before and 80
after the treatment date) trading days and bonds that do not have at least 100 observations in the time
period are excluded from the regression. Bonds that were not announced (by banks) as subject to
conversion are excluded. The control variables are measured at time  t  where  Relative Ageit  is  equal to
bond  i’s time to maturity divided by its maturity and  Liquidity Proxyit  is a bond  i’s relative age times
its total amount issued at maturity. Bond fixed effects are included for all regressions except  the first
one  (1). Robust standard errors are clustered at the bond-month level  and reported in parentheses.
Three asterisks denote significance at the 1% level, two at the 5% level, and one at the 10% level.

 Variable                                             Current Yield
 Regression                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
 Treatment  ×  Post Application       -0.018       -0.018      -0.030**       0.011        0.004
                                     (0.084)      (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.007)       (0.008)
 Treatment                        0.030
                                        (0.059)
 Post Application                  0.097***     0.097***     0.084***     0.020**       0.018*
                                     (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.009)

 Relative Age                                              -0.337***                 -0.164***
                                                               (0.093)                  (0.062)
 Liquidity Proxy                                                      -0.019***     -0.018***
                                                                            (0.002)       (0.002)

 Bond FE                        No        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

 N                              2,560       2,560       2,560       2,560        2,560

                                     47
Table 8
Regressions on the approval date.
All regressions are run at the bond-day level  it.  Current yield is measured daily for all bonds.  Treatmenti
is a dummy variable that denotes whether the bond is part of the control group,  i.e. mortgage or covered
bond.  Post Approvalt  is a dummy variable that denotes whether the yield was observed after the
approval  date, i.e. the date a bank is granted a license by the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority.
Approval dates vary by bank so the control group is averaged by day relative  to each bank’s  date. The
treatment period consists of 160 (80 before and 80 after the treatment date) trading days and bonds
that do not have at least 100 observations in the time period are excluded from the regression. Bonds
that were not announced (by  banks) as subject to conversion are excluded. The control variables are
measured at time  t  where  Relative Ageit  is equal to bond  i’s time to maturity divided by its maturity
and  Liquidity Proxyit  is a bond  i’s relative age times its total amount issued at  maturity. Bond fixed
effects are included for all regressions except  the first one  (1). Robust standard errors are clustered at
the bond-month level  and reported in parentheses. Three asterisks denote significance at the 1% level,
two at the 5% level, and one at the 10% level.

 Variable                                             Current Yield
 Regression                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
 Treatment  ×  Post Approval         -0.071       0.006       0.005       0.021**      0.032***
                                     (0.103)      (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.011)
 Treatment                        -0.199***
                                             -0.072
 Post Approval                    0.073***    0.073***     0.071***     0.026**      0.028**
                                     (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.012)       (0.012)

 Relative Age                                              -0.039                  0.286***
                                                               (0.097)                  (0.095)
 Liquidity Proxy                                                      -0.011***     -0.014***
                                                                           (0.003)       (0.003)

 Bond FE                        No        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

 N                              3,861       3,861       3,861       3,861        3,861

                                     48
Table 9
Regressions on the first issue date.
All regressions are run at the bond-day level  it.  Current yield is measured daily for all bonds.  Treatmenti
is a dummy variable that denotes whether the bond is part of the control group,  i.e. mortgage or covered
bond.  Post First Issuet  is a dummy variable that denotes whether the yield was observed after the first
issue date, i.e. the date a bank starts to issue covered bonds. First issue dates vary by bank so the
control group is averaged  by day relative to each bank’s  date. The treatment period consists of 160 (80
before and 80 after the treatment date) trading days and bonds that do not have at least 100
observations in the time period are excluded from the regression. Bonds that were not announced (by
banks) as subject to conversion are excluded. The control variables are measured at time  t  where
Relative Ageit  is equal to bond  i’s time to maturity divided by its maturity and  Liquidity Proxyit  is a
bond  i’s relative age times its total amount issued at maturity. Bond fixed effects are included for all
regressions except  the first one  (1). Robust  standard errors are clustered at the bond-month level  and
reported in parentheses. Three asterisks denote significance at the 1% level, two at the 5% level, and
one at the 10% level.

 Variable                                             Current Yield
 Regression                          (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
 Treatment  ×  Post First Issue        -0.066     -0.024***    -0.036***     -0.018***     -0.034***
                                     (0.110)      (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.007)
 Treatment                        -0.342***
                                       (0.081)
 Post First Issue                   0.047***    0.047***     0.029***     0.027***     0.026***
                                     (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.007)       (0.007)

 Relative Age                                              -0.448***                  -0.415***
                                                              (0.069)                   (0.071)
 Liquidity Proxy                                                       -0.005***       -0.001
                                                                            (0.002)       (0.002)

 Bond FE                        No        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

 N                              4,270       4,270       4,270        4,270        4,270

                                     49
Table 10
Regressions on placebo dates.
All regressions are run at the bond-day level  it.  Current yield is measured daily for all bonds.  Placebok  is a dummy variable that denotes whether the bond is
part of the control group, i.e. mortgage or covered bond. Two placebos per year are generated for all years from 2003 to 2007.  Postt  is a dummy variable that
denotes whether the yield was observed after  the placebo date. The treatment period consists of 160 (80 before and 80 after the treatment date) trading days
and bonds that do not have at least 100 observations in the time period are excluded from the regression. The control variables are measured at  time  t  where
Relative Ageit  is equal to bond  i’s time to maturity divided by its maturity and  Liquidity Proxyit  is a bond  i’s relative age times its total amount issued at
maturity. One regression  is  run per placebo date, which includes bond and month fixed effects as well as both control variables.  The number of observations
per regression varies as the restrictions applied to the dataset lead to variation in the sample size for each regression.  Robust standard errors are clustered at
the bond-month level  and reported in parentheses. Three asterisks denote significance at the 1% level, two at the 5% level, and one at the 10% level.

 Variable                                                                    Current Yield
 Regression on Placebo Date  (k)       (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)          (10)
 Placebo  k  ×  Post                 -0.014      0.037      -0.023      -0.009       0.002        0.006       0.005     -0.010*     0.060***     0.036***
                                    (0.019)     (0.023)     (0.026)     (0.012)      (0.004)       (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.016)       (0.008)

 Relative Age                    -0.826***    0.001     -0.373**    -0.733***    0.412***      0.456***      0.174     -0.231**     1.433***      1.257***
                                    (0.167)     (0.168)     (0.173)     (0.150)      (0.070)       (0.078)      (0.108)     (0.098)      (0.167)       (0.135)
 Liquidity Proxy                   0.012***    -0.004    0.021***    0.027***    -0.006***     -0.007***     -0.001      0.001      -0.006***     -0.006***
                                    (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)

 Bond FE                       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
 Month FE                      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes

 N                              2,240      2,240      2,880      2,880       4,480        4,480       4,846      4,878       4,922        4,800

                                                         50
Exhibit 1
Current yield formula.
This exhibit provides the formula used to calculate the current yields that are provided by Thomson
Reuters  Datastream.

                      g  ×  N  ×(1-tg)
Current yield=                    ,                                                              (2)
                P × E - A × (1-tg) + Q

where:

      g  =  Coupon

      N  =  Nominal value

        tg  =  Income tax rate / 100

      P  =  Gross price

      E  =  Expense rate factor

      A  =  Accrued interest

      Q  =  Amount to be paid, partly paid stock

                                     51