       Revealing the life above the ceiling
            A  study of the glass cliff in Sweden

                                                                                 *
             Beata Enwall                   Bruno Wisniewski
                                Bachelor Thesis in Finance
                           Stockholm School of Economics

                                                        th
                               May 14  2018

                                    Abstract
We study the correlation between company performance and the selection of gender in  236
CEOs  appointments  in Sweden over the years 2005-2016.  We  seek  to investigate whether the
“glass cliff”  is prevalent in Sweden, a phenomenon which states that female  leaders  are
appointed to  leadership  positions  associated with  higher risk of failure  to a larger extent than
men. We find that companies appointing female CEOs have performed  better on average prior
to the appointment than those that appoint male CEOs when using cumulative abnormal returns
as a measure of performance. However, when  controlling for general financial downturn or
using  change in  return on assets as a measure of performance, we find tendencies supporting
the  glass cliff  in CEO positions.  No  significant evidence for the  glass cliff  is found for female
CEOs in Swedish firms but  we cannot exclude that the  glass cliff  exists for  other leadership
positions.  Whether the preconditions of previous employments differ between sexes needs to
be examined in  forthcoming  research.

JEL classification codes:  G14, G34, J71

Keywords:  Gender equality,  CEO appointments,  company performance

Acknowledgements:  We would like to express our sincerest gratitude toward our supervisor
Marieke Bos for her  outstanding  support and genuine interest in the development of our thesis.
We would also like to thank Per-Olov Edlund for his invaluable guidance.

*
 Beata Enwall: 23631@student.hhs.se, Bruno Wisniewski: 23653@student.hhs.se
1  Introduction

       “So the metaphor of the glass cliff really is to evoke this idea of women being
      very high up. So they’re very senior — boards of FTSE 100 companies, boards
       of Fortune 500 companies, senior leadership roles in Parliament, for example.
        But their positions are precarious, because they’re happening in difficult times.
        So the idea is to evoke this idea of women teetering on the edge, and that their
        fall, or their failure, might be imminent.”
        (Michelle Ryan, 2018 as cited in Dubner, 2018)

The  “glass ceiling”  is a common metaphor that has been used for over thirty years to describe
the invisible blocking barriers that prevent women from reaching the highest corporate
positions (Barreto, Ryan & Schmitt, 2009). In recent years, more women have gradually started
to break through the  glass ceiling  and find themselves in leading positions of corporations
(Ryan & Haslam, 2005). However, it is found that women  who  break through the glass ceiling
often  face additional difficulties once they reach the top of organisations (Bruckmüller &
Branscombe, 2010). In their article published in 2005, Michelle Ryan and Alexander Haslam
(2005) introduce a new phenomenon called the “glass cliff” as a response to an article published
in The Times in 2003 in which Judge (2003) argues that female company board members have
a negative impact on company performance. What Ryan and Haslam (2005) find in their study
is an opposite causality:  In general  financial downturn, female board members seem to be
appointed to companies with a recent history of stock return decline to a larger extent than male
board members. “The glass cliff refers to the phenomenon whereby women are overrepresented
in leadership roles associated with high  uncertainty  and an increased  risk  of failure” (Ryan,
Haslam, Hersby, Kulich & Atkins, 2007, p. 266). In other words, female CEOs are not the
cause of poor company performance but rather, companies with bad performance prefer to
appoint female CEOs. The underlying reason  for this preference  is  multiply determined,
meaning there is not a single reason for why it appears. There are both social psychological
and social structural factors contributing to the phenomenon (Ryan et al., 2007). Previous
research  on  the  prevalence  of  the  glass  cliff  present  various  underlying  mechanisms
contributing to  the phenomenon. Examples of  these mechanisms are the stereotypical
perceptions of differing traits of female and male leaders, the signalling value of appointing a
female CEO and also the unequal access to  information and job vacancies between sexes

                                        2
(Bruckmüller, Ryan, Rink & Haslam, 2014). Evidently, more gender equal corporations do not
necessarily mean changes in attitudes and gender stereotypical prejudices.
       Our objective is to examine whether the  glass  cliff  is prevalent in Sweden. Is there a
negative correlation between appointments of female CEOs in Sweden and the related stocks’
performances preceding the appointment?  The prevalence of the glass cliff is important to
examine as an absence of the investigation might create a perception that women drive poor
company results and  are  hence less fitted for the corporate world. This perception can in turn
contribute to the societal structures that create unequal labour markets.  To the best of our
knowledge,  no research of the prevalence of the  glass cliff  in the Swedish corporate
environment has been carried out. Previous empirical studies on the  glass cliff  conducted in
the UK and the US using stock-based measures of performance present conflicting results
(Haslam & Ryan, 2005;  Haslam, Ryan, Kulich, Trojanowski & Atkins, 2009; Adams, Gupta
& Leeth, 2009). Therefore, applying a stock-based measure once again, this time  in Sweden,
would allow for comparable results.  Furthermore, to our knowledge, only Adams et  al. (2009)
have studied the prevalence of the  glass cliff  in appointments of CEOs. People who have
reached to the top of the operational part of an organisation are prone to share common
characteristics regarding personal drive, competence and political know-how.  The CEO is a
company’s public representative and can therefore reflect the company’s general attitudes and
beliefs (Adams et al., 2009). Just as appointing a CEO from outside the firm can be a way for
a company to signal change, a change of  gender  could also fulfil this purpose.  Thus, an
explanation for why women are appointed in difficult times may be the signalling value it
represents. When a company faces a crisis, a change in leadership could be a way of indicating
that the board understands that drastic change is needed  and, in those cases,  going from a male
CEO to a female one could be sufficient (Bruckmüller & Branscombe, 2010).  Additionally,
previous  experimental studies show that attitudes supporting the prevalence of the  glass cliff
are  extensive  (Ashby,  Ryan  &  Haslam,  2007;  Brown,  Diekman  &  Schneider,  2011;
Bruckmüller & Branscombe, 2010;  Rink, Ryan & Stoker, 2013; Haslam & Ryan, 2008).
Therefore, a study based in Sweden, a country often described as being at the forefront of
gender equality (Barbieri  et al., 2017; World Economic Forum, 2017; The Economist, 2018),
could further deepen the understanding of how the  glass cliff  phenomenon and stereotypical
perceptions and attitudes are related.
       As previous empirical studies on the  prevalence of the  glass cliff  were made in the US
and the UK (Ryan & Haslam, 2005; Adams, Gupta & Leeth, 2009; Haslam, Ryan, Kulich,
Trojanowski & Atkins, 2009), comparing these countries’ gender equality to that of Sweden

                                        3
can provide a foundation for our  hypothesis regarding the prevalence of the  glass cliff  in
Sweden. In 1980, Hofstede presents four dimensions used to describe national culture. These
dimensions include;  power distance, uncertainty avoidance, individualism  –  collectivism and
masculinity. Particularly interesting for this research is the last dimension, the masculinity, and
how it might affect the labour market in Sweden. A masculine society is one in which the
dominant values are stereotypically masculine. Hofstede (1980) finds the US and the UK to be,
of his definition, masculine countries and Sweden to be a feminine country. Even though
investigated a long time ago, Hofstede’s (1980) theory is still relevant in understanding national
differences considering that Sweden is placed fifth in the World Economic Forum’s “Global
Gender Gap Index” in 2017 and that  the  UK and the US are placed on the 15th and 49th place
respectively. The Global Gender Gap Index (World Economic Forum, 2017) and Hofstede’s
(1980) theory take every part of the society  into account when determining gender equality.
This general focus creates an important foundation for our  analysis but  is not always consistent
with  gender equality in the corporate environment, which is the  focus  of our research.
       Since 1970, the number of  women in the Swedish labour market has increased
massively, mainly in part-time employment. The  share of women working full-time has

                                                         st
increased   from   the  beginning   of   the  21   century   (SCB,   2016).   Also,   the  Swedish
Discrimination Act enforces  companies to become more gender equal through, for instance,
requiring employers to make equality strategies every third year for how to encourage gender
equality within the company (Numhauser-Henning, 2015).
       Today, Sweden is often described as the best country to work  in as a woman. The high
female labour force participation and large share of female parliament politicians put Sweden
in the top of many labour market gender equality indices (The Economist, 2018; Barbieri et al.,
2009). Being the third most equal country  when it comes to women in managerial positions
(39.2%)  and forth in female company board members  (37.7%)  in The Economist’s (2018)
“glass  ceiling index”, the same gender equality has not yet reached the CEO positions in
Swedish listed companies. In 2017, there were 17 female CEOs in listed companies in Sweden,
making up only 6% of all CEOs on the stock market (Lundeteg, Nord, Hemberg, Ajmal &
Dahlgren, 2017). This inequality is also to be observed on a company board level, as only 6.3%
of all board  directors of Swedish stock-listed companies are women (SCB, 2017).  In other
words, it appears like the higher up in organisational hierarchy, the less women  found.
Furthermore, the Swedish labour market remains highly segregated in terms of gender, with
women working mostly in the public sector, 85% of all publicly employed, and men
dominating the private sector, 85% (Numhauser-Henning, 2015). This skewness demonstrates

                                        4
that a gender equal society does not necessarily imply equality in every aspect of it. Although
the gender equality and masculinity dimension in a society can reveal the underlying beliefs
and perseverance of stereotypes, it is apparent that the  glass cliff  phenomenon is  too complex
to be explained solely by a nation’s general perceptions regarding gender equality.
       One example of reasons for the  glass cliff  is historical leadership roles, affecting
perceived stereotypes of what a leader should be like. As leadership  has primarily been male,
leadership  roles  will  continue to be associated  with  stereotypical  male traits  such  as
competitiveness or self-confidence (Bruckmüller & Branscombe, 2010). This phenomenon is
referred to as “think manager – think male” bias and is first described by Schein in 1973. Schein
(1973 & 1975) proves that both men  and women in the US associate managerial success with
men to a greater extent than with women.  Conversely, in a time of crisis, the stereotypical
presumption of what a suitable leader looks like is prone to differ. Studies made by Ashby,
Ryan and Haslam (2007) show that the previously mentioned bias emerges in successful
companies but not in unsuccessful ones. For the unsuccessful companies, stereotypically
perceived female attributes  such as  intuition  and  awareness  of the feelings of others  are often
desired,  resulting in a “think crisis  –  think female” bias  (Bruckmüller & Branscombe, 2010).
     Another explanation for choosing women as leaders in precarious situations might be
sexism and in-group favouritism. As many board members and decision  makers are men, it is
possible that these men protect other in-group members from risky positions, leaving the  glass
cliff  positions to women. Structural barriers prevent women to enter the already formed groups
and networks of men. Not only does this leave women with a feeling of alienation, but it also
inhibits them to access the same information as men (Bruckmüller, Ryan, Rink & Haslam,
2014).  Also, as positions associated with crisis or turn-around are more likely to fail, people
taking on such roles limit their opportunities for future CEO roles (Fitzsimmons & Callan,
2016). For occupational minorities, such as women, accepting an offer from a poorly
performing company might be done out of fear that no other options will come  up in the future
(Cook & Glass, 2014).
       We commence our study of the  glass cliff  by plotting Graph  1,  presenting the
development of the  previous  financial performance for  companies that have appointed a CEO.
It is possible to see differences between  companies appointing male  and  female CEOs  in the
graph and the findings capture our attention and encourage us to investigate  further. With the
graph in mind,  the knowledge of the inequality in Swedish CEO positions and  the gender-
segregated labour market  as well as  previous research demonstrating existing biases for
stereotypically female traits in precarious leadership positions, our hypothesis is that there is

                                        5
evidence of the glass cliff in Sweden. Thus, there is a negative correlation between the selection
of CEO gender and past company stock performance.
        The causal relationship implied by our research focus is that the dependent variable is
the  gender of the appointed CEO and the company performance is the independent  variable,
tested for having an impact on the selection of gender of the CEO.  An idealised experiment to
identify this causal effect would  in theory  contain two identical groups of people, one
containing men and the other women. In such an experiment, it would be possible to unbiasedly
identify preconditioned differences between male and female CEOs.  In practice, such an
experiment  is not feasible. Instead, we construct our study as follows.
       To be able to investigate our research focus, we use a  logistic regression,  determining
the probability of choosing a female CEO given the company performance preceding the
appointment. If the  glass cliff  exists in the corporate environment in Sweden,  companies with
past stock price  decline would  be more likely to appoint female CEOs than male. The dataset
we use in our analysis consists of 236 CEO successions in Swedish listed companies from the
beginning of 2005 to the end of 2016, where female CEOs constitute 25 of the observed
successions. To  capture company  performance,  we use the cumulative abnormal return, CAR,
for each stock, computed using the daily abnormal returns as defined by the “market model”
(MacKinlay, 1997; Bodie, Kane & Marcus, 2014) and done by Adams, Gupta and Leeth
(2009). Data concerning the background information and the experience of the appointed CEOs
is added to the analysis and matched with stock prices stretching 250 trading days back from
the day of appointment. The appointment date in this study is defined as the day on which it
was publicly announced that the CEO was appointed to the position. Moreover, to be able to
use the same measure of performance, only publicly traded Swedish companies are  included
in the study. That is,  all Swedish based publicly tradable companies during the period of interest
are included in the sample, regardless of size and Swedish stock exchange.
       When analysing the descriptive statistics, it is found that women and men in general
share similar characteristics in terms of experience, age and  education. Both women and men
are predominantly found within smaller companies, although the share of women is greater
within the small segment. Another noticeable finding is that the share of women is about twice
as  large  as the share of men  in both the financial and healthcare sectors but only half of that of
men in the industrials sector.
       We find that company performance, or cumulative abnormal return, is positively
correlated with the female CEO successions.  This means that between 2005 and 2016, the
overall probability of being appointed to a CEO position in a poorly performing company was

                                        6
higher for men than women. This finding implies that our hypothesis regarding the prevalence
of the  glass cliff  for female CEOs  in Sweden is not confirmed when using CAR as the baseline
independent variable.  On the other hand, when performing a robustness test on our regression
using another measure of company performance, change in return on assets, we find tendencies
for the occurrence of the glass cliff in Sweden. In other words, when using an accounting-based
measure of performance, ROA, it is more likely that a woman is appointed as a CEO to a poorly
performing company.  Although not significant, these findings imply that there  is a difference
in results depending on which measure of company performance that is used. Without going
any further into the underlying reasons for the  deviating results,  stock-based measures of
performance are based on investors’ perception of company prospects  and that accounting-
based measures capture the  past  performance of the company.  Moreover, when controlling for
CEO appointments made after a general financial downturn, we also find tendencies supporting
the glass cliff.  Just as with the  other performance measures, this  result  is  not significant.
Important to take into consideration are the limitations imposed by our small sample. The
scarcity of observations could be an underlying reason for the insignificance in our results and
create inaccuracy in variable variance and  estimation.
       Our findings using  the  baseline  stock-based  measure of performance, CAR, are in line
with those of Adams, Gupta and Leeth (2009) but contrary to Haslam, Ryan, Kulich,
Trojanowski and Atkins (2009).  Furthermore, our findings  using  change in  return on assets as
a measure of company performance are, to our knowledge, contrary to all archival research
investigating the  glass cliff.  When controlling for general financial downturn, our results  show
tendencies that  conform  to  those found by Ryan and Haslam (2005).
       We contribute to research within Swedish gender equality in the labour market. Women
are underrepresented in Swedish leadership positions, however, when investigating the  glass
cliff, we cannot find evidence that female CEOs start out in a more disadvantaged position than
men. Instead, our main findings suggest the opposite. Although, we note that our research does
not further examine the previous employments of the observed CEO appointments. It is
possible that the preconditions of previous employments  differ  between sexes.
       Our work also speaks to archival research that provides conflicting evidence of the glass
cliff. Haslam, Ryan, Kulich, Trojanowski and Atkins (2009) find evidence for the  glass cliff  in
the UK using stock-based measures, while Adams, Gupta and Leeth (2009) do not find
evidence using the same measure in the US.  Adams et al. (2009) study CEO appointments for
firms in the S&P 500, the S&P mid-cap 400 and the S&P small-cap 600 in the US between the
years 1992 and 2004, using three estimates of the cumulative daily return. That is  cumulative

                                        7
raw return, cumulative market-adjusted return and cumulative risk adjusted return. The results
show no evidence for the  glass cliff  in either study.  Moreover, Haslam et al. (2009) study the
tendency for women to be selected for and to be found in UK company boards, which is the
presence of women on company boards rather than appointments thereof. The period studied
spans between 2001 and 2005 and includes both  a stock-based measure, “Tobin’s Q”, and  two
accounting-based measures, return on equity  and return on assets. The result reveals no
relationship using the accounting-based measures and a negative relationship between the
presence of women on company boards and the stock-based measure  (Haslam et al., 2009).
Lastly,  Ryan and Haslam (2005) investigate the share price performance before and after
appointments of female board members for firms in the FTSE 100 in 2003 using  monthly
company return. No significant difference in  stock-based  performance between genders
existed. On the other hand,  Ryan  and Haslam (2005) find that  in a time of overall stock market
decline, firms that appointed women had experienced poor performance the months preceding
the appointment.  Both of these findings are in line with the obtained results of our study.
       There are two main reasons for why our findings deviate from those of  Haslam, Ryan,
Kulich, Trojanowski and Atkins (2009). Firstly, Haslam et al. (2009) focus on the tendency for
women to be selected for and  found in  company boards whereas we examine appointments of
CEOs. Secondly, different measures for stock performance are used. Haslam et al. (2009) use
“Tobin’s Q” as their  stock-based  measure  and we use the cumulative abnormal return, which
takes the market return into consideration.  In both these mentioned examples, we use the same
area of focus as Adams et al. (2009), appointments of CEOs and a similar measure of company
performance, which could also be a reason for why our results conform  to  those of Adams et
al. (2009).
      We  also  contribute to research in a broader sense.  To begin with, we document and
compute the company performance preceding the appointment of CEOs in 236 Swedish
companies in the years 2005-2016. Our results provide insight for the general research on CEO
appointments, when they occur and why. Secondly, we find tendencies of the glass cliff in CEO
positions when using an accounting-based measure of performance. In that aspect, our research
further contributes to the discussion of the difference between financial-based and accounting-
based company performance measures, disclosing how subjective and objective measures may
generate deviating results.
       The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the setting of the
study, the data and the operationalisation of the study. In Section 3 we state the results. In

                                        8
Section 4 we discuss the underlying mechanisms contributing to  our result. In Section 5, we
conclude our research.

2  Measuring the correlation between company performance and CEO
gender

2.1  Context and setting
The Swedish labour market
        In his study, Hofstede (1980)  states  that Sweden is the country, out of all studied, with
the least masculine beliefs and values. It is explained that in feminine societies, such as Sweden
and Norway, humanisation take form of feminisation as a way of generating more interpersonal
relationships and thereby moving away from inter-individual competition (Hofstede, 1980).
The fact that the Swedish society is described as feminine suggests that the attitude toward
female leaders would be more welcoming compared to more masculine countries such as  the
US and the UK.  Hofstede’s (1980) classification of Sweden as a feminine society is still
accurate today with a labour market described as being informal and often having a flat
organisational structure (Göteborgs stad, 2017). As mentioned in the Introduction, the number

                                                                                                      st
of women with full-time employment has increased from the beginning of the 21  century. In
2015, 83.7% of Swedish women were employed and the corresponding share of men was
88.7%. However, the gender distribution within professions is not equal, only four of the largest
professions were gender equal in 2014 (SCB, 2016).
       Currently, one of the most important subjects regarding labour market equality in
Sweden is the balance between family life and the professional life. Particularly in focus is a
more gender equal parental leave (Numhauser-Henning, 2015). In 1974, Sweden was the first
nation in the world to make paid parental leave available to fathers. Since then, policies have
been continuously reformed throughout time to improve gender equality in the Swedish society
(Duvander & Johansson, 2015). However, out of the total parental leave days and benefits
offered to parents in 2015, women accounted for 74% of redeemed days and men  only for the
remaining 26%. Even tough Sweden promotes equal parental leave, the reality remains
severely unequal (SCB, 2016). How this affects women's following career opportunities is
analysed by Statistics Sweden, SCB, in  a report in  2007. The report states that women taking
longer parental leaves have half the chance to be promoted compared to women that take
shorter parental leaves.  The reasons for this inequality are explained as the signalling value the

                                        9
leaving sends out to the employer as well as the attitude of the mother (SCB, 2007).  As a vast
majority of mothers take out parental leave, one way for women to stand out and signal
professional commitment is by shortening or concentrating the leave  (Albrecht, Skogman
Thoursie &  Vroman, 2015).
       Furthermore, in their article, Cabeza, Barger Johnson and Tyner (2011) discuss parental
leave and the effect it has on the  glass ceiling. They state that women often are exposed to and
must  deal with stereotypical  preconceptions when becoming  mothers. Stereotypes regarding
domestic roles are reinforced by parallel stereotypes that presume a lack of responsibilities on
the domestic side from men. The inequality of taking out parental leaves, with its implied
stereotypical preconceptions, in combination with  the effect parental leave  has  on women’s
chances to be promoted could contribute to the prevailing inequality in CEO positions in
Sweden.

Identification  intuition
What we attempt to study is the correlation between past company performance and the
selection of the gender of a newly appointed CEO. Plotting a simple correlation between

                                                                                           1
company performance and gender would likely be afflicted by  omitted variable bias.  Instead,
an ideal experiment to identify this relationship would  include two identical groups with the
one difference being that one contains men and the other  women.  The groups would contain
all candidates that were considered in the recruitment process  for the CEO role.  The fact that
the groups are identical would remove differences in characteristics and experience.  In such an
experiment, it would be possible to unbiasedly identify  preconditioned  differences between
male and female CEOs.
        In our  empirical setting,  we add dummy variables to hold for differences regarding, for
instance,  age,  education and experience between CEOs. Even though these variables do not
take employer preferences and personal relationships between employer and employee into
consideration, they assist in limiting differences in characteristics and allow us to approximate
the ideal experiment.
       Another  possible  sampling strategy is to compare CEO appointments for companies in
which both a male and a female CEO have been appointed. This to hold for differences in
company characteristics.  Since  very few appointments of female CEOs have been carried out

1
  It is probable that other characteristics have great impact on the selection of CEO such as education, experience
and personal fit

                                        10
during the period of interest, 2005-2016, choosing this strategy would further limit our sample.
Analysing a longer period of interest would also not be ideal as  companies’  characteristics are
likely to change over a longer time. Rather, we include dummy variables holding for
differences in company characteristics such as the size of the company and the industry in
which it is active.
      An alternative research focus could be on the prevalence of the  glass cliff  in
appointments of company board members, which probably would allow for a larger sample as
more board members than CEOs exist. However, to be able to further approximate our ideal
experiment, a focus on CEO appointments implies that the observations are  similar in
characteristics compared to board members whose goals and intentions may not converge
(Adams, Gupta & Leeth, 2009). Additionally, research suggests  that CEOs often are replaced
following financial misrepresentation as a way of re-establishing investor relations, an act often
called scapegoating (Gangloff, Connelly & Shook, 2016). This reason for dismissal also
implies that a fair share of CEOs must have been appointed to take over these precarious
positions. Therefore, using CEO appointments to investigate the  glass cliff  could potentially
be beneficial in our study in the sense that we know that many CEOs are appointed when
companies have performed poorly.

2.2  Data
The primary dataset containing background information about the CEO, appointment  date and
company names and size has generously been provided by Linnea Åkerling from her and

                                                                                       2
Hansson’s (2017) paper on investors’ reactions to appointments of female CEOs. The dataset
contains  709  unique CEO  successions where observations that potentially could bias  our
analysis are excluded. See Table  1  for the reasons for removals and the development of the
sample. Where needed, we gathered more background information about the CEOs using
Retriever’s database for news articles and company press releases.
      Other primary data are daily stock closing prices, adjusted for  dividends to match the
index, gathered from Thomson Reuters Eikon. To be able to determine the development of
stock prices, we collected data from 250 days preceding the date of appointment. Companies’
market capitalisation, which determines the size of a company, is also retrieved from Thomson
Reuters Eikon. The market index used to receive market returns is the SIX Return Index,

2
  Hansson and Åkerling (2017) have received the data of the CEO successions from Modular Holdings AB
(previously SIS  Ägarservice AB) and the background information has been collected from Retriever, Thomson
One Analytics and companies’ press releases

                                        11
adjusted for dividends, collected through downloading the  Fama-French factors from the
Swedish House of Finance’s webpage.

2.3  Implementation of empirical strategy
To apply our empirical strategy, we need to set some restrictions to our sample. Firstly, the
CEO successions included must occur within the defined  time frame, from the beginning of
2005 to the end of 2016, and have been announced after the firm’s stock market introduction,
the initial public offering, for it to be possible to make the desired analysis using stock data.
Secondly, interim CEOs, founders and CEO  appointments  made at the same time as releasing
of other firm essential information such as mergers, are excluded as such events may affect the
market expectations of those companies, which in turn can affect the company stock price.

                                                                                                                 3
Thirdly, companies based in or primary listed in another country than Sweden are removed.
After excluding observations, 236 unique observations remain where 25 of these are female.
       To examine whether there is a negative correlation between appointments of female
CEOs in Sweden and the related stocks’ performances preceding the appointment, it is needed
to define the causal link between gender and firm performance. What we seek to examine is
whether companies performing poorly are more likely to appoint  a female CEO  than a male
one. The measure used to capture financial health is the cumulative abnormal return. This
causality implies that the dependent variable is the gender of the appointed CEO and the
cumulative abnormal return is the baseline independent variable,  tested for having an impact
on the selection of gender of the CEO. Further investigation  of the prevalence of the glass cliff
is executed using multiple regressions. If we were to perform an OLS regression using a binary
dependent variable, it  would be  conducted through a linear probability model. However,

                                                                           4
implementing this model entails some problems for our sample.  Therefore, a logistic
multivariate regression is performed, a linear regression presenting results in terms of  odds

        5
ratios.
       The dependent variable we are using in  regression model 1  is the gender of the
CEO  (𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟().  As all appointments of CEOs, to our knowledge, are definable as either male

3
 We are aware that restricting our sample in this way may create sample selection bias. Though we consider it to
be necessary to be able to implement our empirical approach
4
  For instance, the OLS model has no boundaries and can therefore predict probabilities larger than 1 and smaller
than 0. We tested to regress our sample using a linear probability model. As many of our coefficients were close
to 0 or outside the defined range, it is difficult to interpret the results
5
 In our case  the odds ratios show  the probability of choosing a female CEO over the probability of choosing a
male CEO

                                        12
or female, the dependent variable is binary and included as a dummy variable in our regression.
The binary variable takes on value 1 if the appointed CEO is a woman and 0 for a man.
       The baseline independent variable used in our regression is the cumulative abnormal
return  for the last day of the event window  (𝐶𝐴𝑅(),  which  is the daily abnormal stock return
for each company, cumulated over the period of interest.

                                               /
                                   𝐶𝐴𝑅((-./)  =  1  𝐴𝑅(,-
                                                     -3-.
Where the abnormal return  (𝐴𝑅(,-)  is defined as the actual stock return less the normal return
(Bodie, Kane & Marcus, 2014).
                                         𝐴𝑅(,-  =  𝑅(,-  −  𝐸(𝑅(,- )
The actual stock return  (𝑅(,-)  is defined as the change of the stock price from one day to the
next.
                                                 (𝑃(,-  −  𝑃(,-78)
                                        𝑅(,-  =
                                                           𝑃(,-78
Even if our analysis is not an event study as defined by MacKinlay (1997), which is to measure
how a specific event affects the value of firms, we construct the cumulative abnormal return
using an estimation and an event window, as proposed by MacKinlay (1997). Following the
study made by Adams, Gupta & Lee (2009) and as suggested by MacKinlay (1997) and Bodie
et al. (2014), the normal return  𝐸(𝑅(,- )  is calculated using the “market model” which assumes
that stock returns are linearly related to fluctuations in the market index. By using this measure,
which includes company specific betas, we adjust for the diverse risk profiles of the included
companies.  Using this assumption, it is possible to compute the normal return.
                                  𝐸(𝑅(,-)  =  𝛼(  +  𝛽( 𝑅<=  +  𝜀(
The company individual alpha  (𝛼()  and beta  (𝛽( ) used to compute the normal return  are
calculated using an estimation window of 129 days stretching from day -250 to day -121, where
day 0 is the day of the  appointment  of the CEO. Thus,  the  120 days up  to  the appointment date
are used as the event window and are the days on which the cumulative abnormal returns are

                                        13
based.  Bodie et al. (2014) comment that it is necessary that the estimation and event window
be  separated so that the estimates are not affected by the abnormal return in the event period.
        On a purely practical level, the calculation of the alpha and the beta is carried out using
a function in  Excel, which  calculates the linear relationship between the stock’s actual return
and the index market return, where alpha is the intercept and beta is the slope of the line. This
approach hence assumes that the stock return has a linear correlation to the market return, as
done in the market model  (Bodie, Kane & Marcus  2014). The alpha and the beta are then used
to calculate the abnormal return for each day of the event window, which is from day  -120
(𝑡8)  to day 0  (𝑇). By summing up these abnormal returns for each individual succession, we
receive  the cumulative abnormal return.
        The main regression,  including gender as the dependent variable and CAR as the
independent variable,  is  thus defined as:
                                𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟(  =  𝛼  + 𝛽8𝐶𝐴𝑅(  +  𝜀(
       In our extended regressions, several control variables are added holding constant for
external factors that might have an impact on the effect of the regression, in other words the
error  term (𝜀( ). Holding for differences between industries, we categorised the industries to
which the companies included in our sample belong. We  identify  12 industries, as defined by
Modular Holdings AB, which at a later stage are categorised into four industries, as several
industries include  very few or  no women. The industry variable  (𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦() used in our
regression includes the categories finance, services and goods, industrials and healthcare.
Another categorical variable  included  in the regression is the size of  companies (𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒().  The
size is based on the  companies’  market capitalisation  on  the day of  the  CEO appointment  and
is categorised into three size  ranges, small, mid and large, as it turns out that this gives greater
explanation value to our regression than adding market cap as a continuous variable. See Table
6  for the classification of firm size.  Furthermore,  we include variables  that hold for differences
between CEOs. To begin with, the age of the CEO  at the time of appointment  is included as a
discrete  variable  (𝑎𝑔𝑒(). An independent variable controlling for differences in education is
also  included  (ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑑()  and takes  on value 1 if the appointed CEO has a university degree or
higher and 0 otherwise. Additionally, binary variables holding for the type of recruitment,
inside or outside recruitment  (𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑐(), previous CEO experience  (𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣. 𝐶𝐸𝑂( )  and
previous industry experience  (𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑠(), are included to hold for  experience  differences
between CEOs often valued in the selection process. These  experiences  are described by Lee
and James (2007) as important factors to consider when examining the success of a CEO

                                        14
appointment. The binary variables assume value 1 if the appointed CEO possesses those
experiences and 0 otherwise.  Since the data used for the logistic multivariate regressions is

                                                               6
cross-sectional, we are not able  to  control for  fixed effects.  In the regression models, only the
CAR for the last day of the event window for each CEO observation is used.  Instead, to hold
for differences between years,  a variable for time is created  (𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟(). The variable is included
in the regressions as  dummy variables, one  for each calendar year.  After including  all of the
control variables, our extended regression is as follows:
 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟(  =  𝛼  +  𝛽8𝐶𝐴𝑅(  + 𝛽M𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒(  +  𝛽N𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦(  +  𝛽O𝑎𝑔𝑒(  +  𝛽Pℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑑(  +  𝛽Q𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑐(
                 +  𝛽R𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣. 𝐶𝐸𝑂(  +  𝛽S𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑠(  +  𝛽T𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟(  +  𝜀(

2.4  Summary Statistics
Descriptive statistics provide the reader with relevant information  about the background of the
CEOs  included  in this study. The data is presented by gender to show how the background
information  affects the decision-making process in the recruitment of a male and female CEO
respectively.
       The section is initiated by disclosing descriptive statistics of the control variables. Table
3  shows  that the share of female CEOs with a higher educational degree is larger than for the
male sample. In our female sample, 96% have a university degree or have finalised higher
studies, compared to roughly 90% of the male CEOs. The difference is not particularly large,
although noticeable and shows that education is an important factor in the selection of both
female and male CEOs and possibly slightly more important for women than for men. An equal
share of  women and men have industry experience. The large shares of 88% and 87% for
women and men respectively show that industry experience is important in the consideration
of appointing a new CEO. On the other hand, for inside recruitment, meaning that the CEO is
recruited internally within the company, the share is about  44% for both sexes, which indicates
that company specific knowledge is less important than industry experience  in recruitment
processes. Additionally, less women have held CEO positions prior to the current one. In
comparison to men, 40% of the female CEOs have held a similar position in the past, whilst
the corresponding share for men is 57%. Finally, in  Table 4,  we can see that  the appointed
women have an average age of 48 years, which is  close to the male average age of 47 years.
The descriptive statistics disclosed up until now show that  education and industry  experience

6
 Fixed effects are only applicable to panel data, which is data on several entities, in which each entity is observed
for two or more time periods

                                        15
are  important factors  for both sexes and that  CEOs appointed in Sweden are of about the same
age.
        Further control variables that are used in the logistic multiple variate regressions, are
company industry and size. In  Table 5  we  can observe that almost 50% of the female CEOs
run  companies within finance or healthcare, which is the double fraction  of  the male CEOs,
where approximately 25% run a company within one of those two sectors. The share of female
CEOs running an industrial company is half of the male fraction. The largest  share of CEOs,
of both sexes, is found within the services and goods sector. This skewness probably exist as
the services and goods sector is consolidated of a large number of sub sectors defined by
Modular Holdings AB.
       In terms of company size, roughly three out of four women run a company that is
classified as small cap. See Table 6 for size segmentation.  Only 8% of female CEOs run a mid-
cap  company and 16% run a large company, whilst  roughly  50% of the male CEOs run a
company within  mid  or  large  cap. The final independent variable examined within this section
is the cumulative abnormal return. In Table  4  it is possible to observe that the CAR is positive
on average for female CEOs and negative on average for male CEOs on the day of appointment.

3 Results

3.1  Graphical evidence
We continue by showing the  development  of the cumulative abnormal return from day  -120 to
day 0 in  Graph  1.  The graph presents the daily average CAR per gender (U𝐶𝐴𝑅UUUUUVWXYWZ(- ,/)).
                                                                                                   .
                                       ]
                                   1
                             U𝐶𝐴𝑅UUUUUVWXYWZ(- ,/)  =    1 𝐶𝐴𝑅((- ,/)
                                                 .                     .
                                                 𝑁
                                                     (38
We observe that the CAR  for female CEOs  fluctuates to a greater degree than the CAR  for
male CEOs  which  gradually decreases in a stable rate. It is important to stress that the female
sample is only 11.8% of the size of the male sample, implying that every change in observations
or added observation may have a large impact on CAR. Furthermore, both the  average daily
CAR for  male and female  CEOs  are  mainly negative during the event window, with the CAR
for females  experiencing a greater decline before it increases again  preceding  the  appointment
day (day 0). Thus, the CAR  of  female CEOs is on average positive, 0.042%,  and higher than
the  CAR  of  male CEOs,  -3.673%,  on the  appointment  day. It is important to stress that the
graph is only performed for illustrative purposes and the variations in the financial performance

                                        16
prior the  appointment  date do not statistically assess the probability of appointing a female
CEO. Therefore, the multivariate logistic regression is  performed.
       The difference between the means  of the CAR for day 0  is tested using a two-sample t
test and is not significant  (p  =  0.6656).

3.2  Main results
This section covers  our regression results. Multiple regression models are run, based on
regression  model  1, until a final  regression  model is presented consisting of all variables. See
Table  7 and 8  for the regression results.
       To  test the research question defined in the introduction, a logistic regression is used.
The answer to  the question mainly relies on the value of the odds ratio of the CAR variable.
An odds ratio above 1  indicates that the probability of appointing a female CEO is  higher  than
for a male  CEO  given an increase in CAR.
       The regression  model 1 hence consists of gender as the dependent variable and CAR as
the independent variable. Subsequently  other categorical groups of variables are added to
determine how the model’s explanatory strength is improved, meaning whether the other
variables may help to reduce the omitted variable bias. The categorical groups of variables are
added one at a time, allowing us to see each group’s effect on the regression, meaning how the
odd ratios change when additional  variables  are added. The extended model contains all
categorical variables, excluding the dummy variables that are omitted due to multicollinearity
and  the year variables that are omitted due to perfect failure prediction or multicollinearity.
       When running  regression model 1, it is possible to observe that CAR has an odds ratio
above 1.  The odds ratio  is not significant  though  and  the regression  only manages to perform

              2              7                                                                       2
a  ”pseudo-R ” of 0.0012. The regression model  6, experiences an increase of  pseudo-R  to
0.1673. We observe  that  in regression model 6,  the firm size  small  has a high predicting power
with an odds ratio of about 13.2  and a significance level of 0.002, meaning that it is more
probable that a woman is appointed to a small company compared to a mid-sized company.
Furthermore, the other variable  included for company size, large,  has an odds ratio of about
1.3, meaning that there is not much higher probability that a large company appoints a woman
than a mid-sized company. Unlike small, large is not significant. In addition, compared to the
omitted  industry variable,  services and goods, it is more likely that a company within the
financial sector appoints a female CEO than that to a services and goods company. The finance

7                 2
 The “pseudo-R ” is an estimated goodness-of-fit measure for logistic regressions

                                        17
category has an odds ratio of 11.2  and a significance level of 0.013. Education has a positive
odds ratio,  meaning that it has a positive correlation with appointments of female CEOs. Age
does not really provide any predicting power  as the odds ratio is close to 1. The similarity in
probabilities in age is probably due to the fact that both male and female CEOs in this data set
are of  about  the same age. Furthermore, the binary variables for previous CEO  roles  and
industry experience  both present odds ratios below 1, meaning that it is less probable for a
female CEO to possess this type of experience compared to a  male CEO. We can also observe
that it is more likely that a company recruits a female CEO from within the company.  Lastly,
observing CAR  in regression model 6, the independent variable  is  still  larger than 1,  with an
odds ratio of 1.17. This implies that an increase in CAR slightly increases  the  probability of
recruiting a female CEO. As observed in both regression model 1 and model 6, there is a
positive correlation between  CEO appointments of women  and  previous  financial company
performance. As the empirics contradict the hypothesis of this study, it is not possible to reject
the null-hypothesis, meaning that we cannot conclude a negative correlation.

3.3  Robustness Test
Robustness tests of our study are conducted to establish how accurate and stable the regression
models are. The objective of the tests is to determine how large the change in the coefficients
of the independent variables is when the model is altered by either adding, removing or
changing variables. Small changes in the coefficients indicate structural validity of the
regression model  1.
      To begin with, we observe the changes in CAR when adding other independent
variables. In regression model 1, CAR has an odds ratio of 1.25. This ratio  fluctuates in the
ranges of 1.13  to 1.25 throughout the construction of the extended regression, where we see a
final CAR odds ratio of 1.17.  In other words, the change in CAR is modest.  The company size
small increases however largely from around 4.5 to almost 14 in odds ratio when adding the
sectors, making it a lot more predicting compared to the  mid-size  in this combination. The
regression model 6 features an odds  ratio for small of roughly 13.17 and finance of 11.25,
indicating a relatively stable progression after adding the categorical industry variables
throughout the construction of the model.  The large fluctuations in variable coefficients could
indicate that our  regression  model has flaws  and that independent variables are correlated.
       Additionally, another  robustness test  is performed using  change in  return on assets as
an alternative performance measure, allowing us to look for structural validity and to use an

                                        18
objective performance measure. The new performance measure used, ROA, is an accounting-
based measure that explains the profitability of a company in relation to its total assets. The
measure gives investors an understanding of how well a company transforms invested capital,
total assets, into profit. Given that the measure takes both debt and equity financing into
account, it provides investors with an indication of the company’s performance regardless of
its capital structure. The variable used in this robustness check is defined as the  percentage
change in ROA between 250 trading days before the appointment to the day of the appointment
(𝑑𝑅𝑂𝐴().  Unlike the CAR variable which is based on time series data,  the ROA variable  is
simply the  change  between two reported accounting values.  This allows us to see the
development of the return on assets and  keeps the variable in relative terms to the company
and sector, as ROA may differ significantly across various industries. The underlying data to
construct this variable is only available for 23 women (two missing) and 201 men (ten missing).
The  loss  of observations is not ideal given our already small sample.  On the other hand, as the
amount of omitted observations is low, the results should still be able to provide explanatory
value. Thus, regression model 7 is built on the same foundation as regression model 6, meaning
that it contains size, industry, experience and year variables, only with CAR being replaced by
change in ROA.
𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟(  =  𝛼  + 𝛽8𝑑𝑅𝑂𝐴(  + 𝛽M𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒(  +  𝛽N𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦(  +  𝛽O𝑎𝑔𝑒(  +  𝛽Pℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑑(  + 𝛽Q𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑐(
                +  𝛽R𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣. 𝐶𝐸𝑂(  +  𝛽S𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑠(  +  𝛽T𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟(  +  𝜀(
        The regression results differ from the original regression yet  feature certain similarities.
Most coefficients remain  similar, although the variables with prominent odds ratios, small,
finance and year 2005,  drop somewhat, whilst other slightly increase. In terms of the
performance variable, the difference becomes more noticeable. The odds ratio of  the ROA
variable is around 0.98, implying that it is less probable that a woman would be appointed as a
CEO given a positive increase in ROA.  In other words, in this case, we find a negative
correlation between the performance of the company and the appointment of a female CEO.
The coefficient of the accounting variable is not statistically significant (p  = 0.744), but still
allows us to make interpretations.  In terms of testing the robustness  of  the  logistic regression,
it is difficult to interpret the structural validity. The changes are not large in terms of absolute
values, neither for the performance variable nor for the other control variables. However, the
interpretation of the results and the outcome of this study change  drastically given the minor
change in terms of absolute values.

                                        19
3.4  Other Results: Interaction Variable
Ryan and Haslam (2005) observe a correlation between the overall stock market performance
and the appointment of female leaders. In their study, they  conclude  that “...women are
particularly likely to be placed in positions of leadership in circumstances of general financial
downturn and downturn in company performance” (Ryan & Haslam, 2005, p.7), meaning that
when the stock market performs badly, it is more likely that a female CEO is appointed rather
than a male one.  To test this, we calculate the average market return for each CEO for the 120
days prior  to  the  appointment  date and create a dummy variable that assumes 1 if the stock
market has been negative on average (below 0) during the observed period. This variable allows
us to take general financial performance as a controlling factor into consideration when running
the regression. An interaction variable is created by  multiplying  the CAR variable with the
market return dummy variable  ((𝑅𝑚𝑛𝑒𝑔 ∗  𝐶𝐴𝑅)( ). The new  regression model  hence only
features the cumulative abnormal returns of CEOs that were appointed prior  to  a general
financial downturn.
   𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟(  =  𝛼  +  𝛽8(𝑅𝑚𝑛𝑒𝑔  ∗ 𝐶𝐴𝑅)(  + 𝛽M𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒(  + 𝛽N𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦(  +  𝛽O𝑎𝑔𝑒(  +  𝛽Pℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑑(
                   + 𝛽Q𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑐(  +  𝛽R𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑣. 𝐶𝐸𝑂(  + 𝛽S𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑠(  +  𝛽T𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟(  +  𝜀(
       The new  regression  model has  an insignificant  odds ratio slightly  below  1  indicating
that  women are  less  likely to be appointed to CEO roles  in times of financial downturn  given
an increase in CAR  and thus shows  tendencies for the glass cliff.

3.5  Regression Prediction
Classification Matrix
In order to understand of how well the regression  models perform in terms of predicting the
gender of the CEO given the incorporated variables in the regressions, the classification rate of
regression model 6 is determined.  When using the standard cut-off rate, which is 0.5, we get
8.00%  in  sensitivity rate, meaning two  out of 25 women  are  correctly classified as  women.
Given the  highly  skewed data sample in terms of gender ratio, we calculate the cut-off rate for
the classification, meaning that every observation that has a prediction rate above of cut-off
rate is classified as a female.  Our objective is hence to determine a cut-off  point that allows us
to optimise classification by maximising both sensitivity and specificity rates (Hosmer &
Lemeshow, 2000). By using the Youden Index to determine the optimal cut-off rate of 12.91%,
we get an  overall classification rate of 73.73%. The sensitivity rate is  76.00%, meaning that 19
women are correctly classified. The specificity rate for this model is 73.46%, meaning that 155

                                        20
men were correctly classified.  See Table 11 for results regarding the Classification Matrix.
Given the small sample of women, every additional correctly classified woman increases the
sensitivity rate by 4.00%, whilst the specificity rate only increases by 0.47% for each additional
correct classification of  a man.
       The AUC, the area under the Receiver Operating  Characteristic curve, is also helpful
in determining the accuracy of how the models separate between the two genders. Here we
focus  on how the distinction between genders is improved from regression model 1 to 6.  In
Table 12 we can observe that the  regression  model  1  has an area of 0.5416, meaning that the
model poorly distinguishes between the two genders and that the model does not discriminate
between genders. Hosmer and Lemeshow (2000)  claim  that an AUC of 0.5 does  not
discriminate between genders, 0.7  to 0.8 provides  acceptable discrimination, 0.8 to 0.9 is
considered excellent and an AUC over 0.9 provides outstanding discrimination. Regression
model 6 manages to deliver an AUC score of 0.7943, which is  higher than  regression  model  1
and  is  almost to be  considered excellent discrimination. This  result  shows that the additional
variables, and not only company performance, play an important role in determining the sex of
the appointed CEO.

Variance Inflation Factor
A Variance Inflation Factor, VIF, test  is conducted to determine the multicollinearity of the

                                                                        8
regression model 6 to further determine how stable the model is.  Multicollinearity can be
determined either with Pearson’s Correlation  Matrix  or a VIF test. Since our data is not solely
continuous, Pearson’s Correlation  Matrix  is therefore not considered a suitable measure, thus
only the VIF test is performed (Coolidge, 2000). Acceptable maximum VIF levels have been
widely speculated by different scholars with some insisting ten as a recommended level  (Hair,
Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1995; Kennedy, 1992; Marquardt, 1970), whilst other arguing for
a more conservative level of five (Rogerson, 2001).
       When performing the VIF test, presented in Table 13, we observe three very high VIF
values. Age has a VIF  value of 19.51, which is very high in this context implying that
movements in the other independent variables explain up to 94.87% of age and that the age
variable might be considered redundant. This could be due to the fact that most CEOs are about
the same age  regardless of gender. Continuing, we notice that higher education has a VIF of

8
  Multicollinearity implies a high degree of linear correlation between an independent variable and another. This
may allow small changes in data to cause large changes in the predicted  coefficients and likewise inflate the
standard errors of the coefficients

                                        21
10.56. This  VIF  is also considered high  according to  the levels presented by the different
scholars.  Most CEOs in the data are highly educated, 96.00% of the female CEOs and 90.52%
of the male CEOs, indicating low variation.  As with age, this implies that the variable is
redundant. Industry insider has a high VIF value of  8.92. The same logic is to be applied here
as 88.00% of female CEOs and 86.73% of the male CEOs have industry experience. The
remaining variables have VIF values ranging from 1.09 to 3.98, which is considered acceptable
even on a more conservative level. We also observe that the VIFs are higher for variables where
a larger share  of the sample  possesses that trait or has similar values. Overall, the regression
model  6 has an acceptable VIF of 4.05. Some variables may be considered  redundant but  are
included as they are considered to pose economic significance.

4  Results review and mechanisms

4.1  Commentary  of results
Company performance
When conducting the robustness test on our regression using return on assets  or controlling for
general financial downturn, we find conflicting results to what is found when using CAR as
the main independent variable. None  of the  odds ratios  of the  previously mentioned  variables
are significant nor do they present particularly large differences in probabilities between
genders. The odds ratio of the variables for CAR, ROA and CAR in general financial downturn
are  1.17,  0.98  and 0.98  respectively,  implying  that the probability of selecting a female CEO
is around 50% in  all  three  cases. In other words, neither of the variables present particularly
strong cases for their findings, that is a positive or a negative correlation between gender and
company performance.

Implications of sample sizes
Observing the line chart in Graph 1  displaying the average cumulative abnormal returns over
time before the appointments of women and men respectively, we notice that the line for
women is fluctuating more than that of men. This difference  is also found by Ryan and Haslam
in 2005 and they consequently suggest that the volatility is caused by real differences between
the  companies that select women and those that select men. However, also impacting the
deviating volatility between genders could be the difference in sample sizes. As the female
sample is about one tenth of the male one, it is possible that the average female CAR is more

                                        22
volatile due to the few attainable observations of female CEOs.  This  bias  is called sample size
neglect  or representativeness bias  and occurs when inferring too much from a small sample
and ignoring the difference in variances  that depends  on sample size  (Bodie, Kane & Marcus,
2014).  The difference in volatility is confirmed  when  observing the standard deviations of  the

                                              9
average  CAR  for each day  in Table 4.
       For  us, our  small sample size imposes  further implications for  the inference of our
results. The estimators  are  less precisely computed  than they would have been if we had used
a larger sample. Also, small samples can lead to larger critical values. Both of these factors
make it difficult to obtain  significant results  (Wooldridge, 2016). In other words,  the fact that
our sample is  small could  explain  why a multitude of our results are insignificant. More
importantly though,  the small sample  impose  implications  in drawing accurate conclusions for
the population. We  are able to observe tendencies but cannot extrapolate  them. In addition,  it
is possible that the estimated odds ratios are inaccurate as a result of the small sample. In their
article, Nemes, Johansson, Genell and Steinbeck (2009) show that  odds ratios in  logistic
regressions based on small samples are overestimated and  shift away  from one.  We therefore
need to be careful  when  drawing conclusions from the results  and  not put too much emphasis
on the size of the odds ratios in our regression models.

Women and the Fama-French theory
A clear majority of women, 76.0%, work within the small company segment, in comparison to
50.7% of the male CEOs. According to the “Fama-French Three Factor Model”, companies
with smaller market capitalization have greater alphas.  Greater returns hence indicate  a
premium on small companies (Bodie, Kane & Marcus, 2014). Given that  a larger share of
women work  within this segment, it is possible that the higher average CARs  could be
explained by the presented theory. Hence, the inequality that reigns between the sexes in this
case, could theoretically be the explanatory factor for the surpassing preceding financial
performance among companies  that later appoint female CEOs. In other words,  the inequality
in the distribution of genders in the size segments  could actually counterwork  the  glass cliff  in
normal financial times.

9
  Even though the difference between genders is not large in absolute terms, put in perspective to the CAR they
are more important

                                        23
Effect of year
We document that few women are appointed during the early years of the selected time  frame
and that the number of appointed women gradually increases. When observing our obtained
results, we note that the probability of appointing a female CEO in 2008 or 2015 is higher than
for a male CEO candidate compared to the omitted years. This is especially true for 2015 where
we find an odds ratio of 3.83. The higher  odds ratio  in 2015 is  probably  due to the  relatively
large number of seven  women appointed that year, compared to the lower numbers in the other
years. The reason for the large number of women appointed that year is difficult to determine
and could be a coincidence.  A possible explanation could be that there were intense debates in
media about gender equality and enforcing gender quotas in company boards as a way of

                                                                          10
reducing the high inequalities between the genders in Sweden in 2014.  The underlying reason
for the large interest in 2014 could be the fact that the Swedish General Election was held that
year. Since there were discussions held on enforcing legal or monetary punishments towards
companies that do not  fulfil  those possible quotas, it is likely that several companies hence
chose a female CEO in 2015 to strive  for  greater gender equality at executive and board levels.

4.2  Difference in measures and mechanisms
Understanding  conflicting results
In our study, we document conflicting results when using different measures of company
performance.  Two  possible explanations for this disparity are identified. The correlation
between accounting-based and stock-based performance measures has been greatly debated,
arguing for a long-term correlation (Easton, Harris & Ohlson, 1992) and against it (Gentry &
Shen, 2010).
       Firstly, in their report,  Easton, Harris and Ohlson  (1992) present the phenomenon of
accounting-based measures and stock-based measures correlating over long-term periods. This
in turn implies that there might be short term deviations between  measures. Based on that
theory, it is possible that  our  conflicting results are due to a too narrow time frame for both
measures and that uniform results can be obtained using longer time  frame.  Nonetheless, a
longer period could also be unfavourable as some firms may switch CEOs multiple times
during that  period, making it hard to isolate the preceding performance relating to the correct
appointment.

10
  This is to be seen by the large number of media articles published about gender quotas in 2014 and by the
surge in popularity of the search term “könskvotering” (gender quota) in Google Trends, where we can observe
a peak in that year

                                        24
       Secondly, another explanation for the inconsistent results using the two performance
measures could be that  the accounting and stock-based measures are fundamentally different
in what part of an organisation that they reflect. According to the semi-strong efficient market
hypothesis, on which the theory of event studies is based, stock prices should reflect all  public
market and company specific information  (Bodie, Kane & Marcus, 2014). Also, stock-based
measures reflect shareholders’ and investors’ perception of a company’s future cash flows and
its possibility to achieve business plans and expectations. Accounting-based measures on the
other hand only provide an objective perspective of the company’s actual performance up to
the accounting date. Gentry and Shen (2010) argue that it is difficult to see a strong correlation
between the two different measures as accounting-based measures are based on historical
performance, whilst stock-based are based on future expectations. Therefore, a difference in
the outcome of those different measures is hence expected.

Presence of mechanisms
Whether  the results are linked to any mechanisms contributing to the glass cliff is difficult to
determine. For instance, taking the signalling theory into consideration, women would be
appointed to CEO positions when companies need to signal change. Our deviating study results
may  therefore  reflect how managers handle and act differently depending on accounting or
stock-based performances  or  depending  on the health of the financial market.  Linking this to
the theory of signalling change by appointing a woman, it  would indicate that decreasing
accounting-based measures of performance  and a general financial downturn  would be more
alarming to managers or company boards than declining stock prices  solely in the own
company. Moreover, the same is true for the “think crisis  –  think female” theory. If existing,
our findings would imply that managers see decreasing return on assets  or a general market
decline  as a more important “crisis” than that of  a  decrease in the company’s  stock prices.
However, as we find no significant evidence for out hypothesis, we cannot conclude that  these
mechanisms are the  underlying  reason for our results.

Reasons for insignificance
The conflicting results found when performing a robustness test on our regression, possibly
imply  that our model has flaws.  On the other hand, seen from a societal perspective, it is
encouraging to conclude that our findings do not show any significant evidence  for the  glass
cliff  for female CEOs in Sweden. Hence, it is possible that the Swedish labour market is just
highly unequal in leadership positions, especially in CEO positions, and that underlying

                                        25
stereotypical perceptions contributing to the  glass cliff  are not present in Sweden. In other
words, the findings imply that once Swedish women seeking to become leaders have come past
the  glass ceiling, there is no significant evidence that their positions are more precarious  than
that of the male leaders.
       We find two possible explanations for why there is no significant evidence for the glass
cliff  for female CEOs in Sweden. To begin with, Sweden’s feminine values, which it possesses
according to Hofstede’s (1980) classification in the dimensions of the national culture, may be
an explanatory factor  to the lack of robust evidence for a  glass cliff  in Swedish CEO positions.
The classification indicates that Sweden has high distribution of feminine values among the
two genders, meaning that there is minimum difference of the emotional and social roles
between the genders. It is therefore possible that gender biases, especially the bias of preference
for stereotypically female traits in precarious leadership positions, are more limited in Swedish
society. In other words, people do not consider men and women to be noticeably different.  It
is also possible that sexism and in-group favouritism  exist  to a lower degree in Sweden
compared to nations classified  as masculine such as the UK.
       Second, the lack of significance might be caused by the limited sample size of female
CEOs, making it difficult to distinguish  statistically viable differences. It hence indicates that
the results of our study might be the way they are by coincidence  or that they are inaccurate.
To  determine whether the documented results are  correct, further studies with larger sample
sizes  would  have to be performed. With a larger sample size, the law of large numbers would
assure that the sample is reflecting the true population (Newbold, Carlson  & Thorne, 2013).
Our sample constitute a large part of the population as we merely have removed the
observations that would bias our sample.  Finding a larger sample without increasing the time
frame,  investigating more countries or including appointments such as of interim CEOs, would
thus  not be possible. However, going longer back in time to find a larger sample would
probably not be particularly rewarding as few women were appointed CEOs in the beginning
of our time frame. Including other countries would entail changing focus from being a study
on Sweden and finally including all observations regardless of when or why the appointment
was conducted could also affect the results of the regression as both the appointment rationale
and the stock price could deviate when appointing for example interim CEOs.

                                        26
5  Conclusion

We investigate the prevalence of  a  phenomenon called the  glass cliff  in Sweden by studying
the correlation between company performance of Swedish listed companies with appointments
of CEOs by primarily using cumulative abnormal return. Focusing on CEO appointments to
investigate the  glass cliff  allows us to include observations more similar than what would have
been possible focusing on board members in general.  Also, using a stock-based measure of
performance such as cumulative abnormal returns as our  primary measure of company
performance permits us to compare our results to those of archival research. Our work speaks
to archival research that provides  conflicting evidence of the  glass cliff  using stock-based
measures. We find no significant evidence for the  glass cliff  when using the stock-based
measure of performance. In other words, we find a positive correlation between cumulative
abnormal returns and appointments of female CEOs and not a negative one  as predicted in the
hypothesis.
       On the other hand, when  controlling for general financial downturn and when
conducting a robustness test on our regression replacing the cumulative abnormal returns with
change in  return on assets, opposite results to those found when using  the baseline  stock-based
measure appear.  Even if the  regressions  do not present  significant results, we find tendencies
that support the  glass cliff  in CEO positions. We provide a discussion on the reason for the
deviating results presenting suggestions that accounting based measures  of performance  or a
financial market decline  would be more threatening to managers or company boards than  a
decline in the own company  stock price.
       Our  findings  contradict  the study made by  Haslam, Ryan, Kulich, Trojanowski and
Atkins (2009)  but are in line with those of Adams, Gupta  and Leeth (2009)  and Ryan and
Haslam (2005).
      The inconsistencies in our results using different measures of company performance
suggest that there is no strong evidence for the prevalence of the  glass cliff  for female CEOs  in
Sweden, something that is further affirmed by the insignificance of the results. The contributing
factors to the inexistence of evidence might be the overall progressive stance on gender equality
that Sweden constitutes and the  small female sample available.
       Our study contributes to research within Swedish gender equality in the corporate
environment. Women are underrepresented in Swedish leadership positions, however, when
investigating the  glass cliff, we do not find significant evidence that female CEOs start out in
a more deprived position than men. Whether the previous positions held by the appointed CEOs

                                        27
differ in precariousness depending on the gender of the CEO needs to be investigated in future
research.

                                        28
References

Adams, S.  M., Gupta, A., & Leeth, J. D.  (2009). Are female executives over-represented in
precarious leadership positions?  British Journal of Management,  20(1), 1-12.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.2007.00549.x

Albrecht, J., Skogman Thoursie, P., & Vroman, S. (2015).  Parental leave and the glass
ceiling in Sweden. (Working Paper No. Working Paper 2015:4). Uppsala, Sweden:  Institute
for Evaluation of Labour Market and Education Policy. Retrieved from
https://www.ifau.se/globalassets/pdf/se/2015/wp-2015-04-Parental-leave-and-the-glass-
ceiling-in-Sweden.pdf

Ashby, J. S., Ryan, M. K., & Haslam, S. A. (2007). Legal work and the glass cliff: Evidence
that women are preferentially selected to lead problematic cases.  William & Mary Journal of
Women and the Law,  13(3), 775-775-793.

Barbieri, D., Franklin, P., Janeckova, H., Karu, M., Lelleri, R., Riobóo Lestón, I., . . .
Salanauskaitė, L. (2017).  Gender equality index 2017.  European Institute for Gender
Equality.  doi:10.2839/149031

Barreto, M. d. C., Ryan, M. K., & Schmitt, M.  T. (2009).  The glass ceiling in the 21st
century:  Understanding barriers to gender equality  (1st ed.).  Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

                                                                        th
Bodie, Z., Kane, A., & Marcus, A. J. (2014) Investments  (10  global ed.).  Maidenhead,
Berkshire: McGraw Hill Education.

Brown, E. R., Diekman, A. B., & Schneider, M. C. (2011). A change will do us good: Threats
diminish typical preferences for male leaders.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
31(7), 930-930-941.

Bruckmüller Susanne, & Branscombe, N. R. (2010). The glass cliff: When and why women
are selected as leaders in crisis contexts.  British Journal of Social Psychology,  49(3), 433-
451. doi:10.1348/014466609X466594

Bruckmüller, S., Ryan, M. K., Rink, F., & Haslam, A. S. (2014). Beyond the  glass ceiling:
The glass cliff and its lessons for organizational policy.  Social Issues and Policy Review,
8(1), 202-232. doi:10.1111/sipr.12006

Cabeza, M. F., Barger Johnson, J., & Tyner, L. (2011). The glass ceiling and maternity leave
as important contributors to the gender wage gap.  Southern Journal of Business and Ethics,  3,
73.

Cook, A., & Glass, C. (2014). Above the glass ceiling: When are women and racial/ethnic
minorities promoted to CEO?  Strategic Management Journal,  35(7), 1080-1089.
doi:10.1002/smj.2161

                                        29
Coolidge, F. L. (2000).  Statistics:  A gentle introduction.  London;  Thousand Oaks, California:
SAGE Publications.

Dubner, S. J. (2018).  After the glass ceiling, a glass cliff.  Retrieved from
http://freakonomics.com/podcast/glass-cliff/

Duvander, A., & Johansson, M. (2015).  Reforms in the Swedish parental leave system and
their effects on gender equality. (Working Paper No. 2015:2). Stockholm:  Swedish Social
Insurance Inspectorate. Retrieved from
https://www.inspsf.se/digitalAssets/5/5252_3wp_2015-
2_slutlayout_20150525_reforms_in_the_swedish_parental_leave_system.pdf

Easton, P. D., Harris, T. S., & Ohlson, J. A. (1992).  Aggregate accounting earnings can
explain most of security returns: The case of long return intervals
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-4101(92)90015-T

Fitzsimmons, T. W., & Callan, V. J. (2016).  Applying a capital perspective to explain
continued gender inequality in the C-suite  doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2015.11.003

Gangloff, K. A., Connelly, B. L., & Shook,  C. L. (2016). Of scapegoats and signals: Investor
reactions to CEO succession in the aftermath of wrongdoing.  Journal of Management,  42(6),
1614-1634. doi:10.1177/0149206313515521

Gentry, R. J., & Shen, W. (2010). The relationship between accounting and market measures
of firm financial performance: How strong is it?  Journal of Managerial Issues,  22(4), 514-
530. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/25822528

Göteborgs stad [City of Gothenburg].  (2017).  Om Sverige : Samhällsorientering på svenska
[About Sweden: Civic orientation in English]  (5th ed.). Gothenburg, Sweden: Göteborgs stad
: Länsstyrelsen Västra Götalands län [City of Gothenburg : County Administrative Board of
Västra Götaland]. Retrieved from
https://www.informationsverige.se/Svenska/Samhalle/Documents/OmSverige_SE_v6.pdf

Hair, J. J. F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1995).  Multivariate data
analysis With readings  (4th ed.).  Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Hansson, J., & Åkerling, L. (2017).  Do investors care about gender? A study on stock market
reactions to female CEO appointments in Scandinavia.  (Unpublished Bachelor). Department
of Accounting, Stockholm School of Economics.

Haslam, S. A., Ryan, M. K., Kulich, C., Trojanowski, G., & Atkins, C. (2009).  Investing with
prejudice: The relationship between women's presence on company boards and objective and
subjective measures of company performance.  British Journal of Management, 21(2), 484-
497. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.2009.00670.x

Haslam, S. A., & Ryan, M. K. (2008).  The road to the glass cliff: Differences in the perceived
suitability of men and women for leadership positions in succeeding and failing
organizations  doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2008.07.011

                                        30
Hofstede, G. (1980). Motivation, leadership, and organization: Do American theories apply
abroad?  Organizational Dynamics, 9(1), 42-63.

Hosmer, D. W., & Lemeshow, S. (2000).  Applied logistic regression  (2nd ed.).  New York,
New York: Wiley. doi:0471356328

Judge, E. (2003, 11/11). Women on board: Help or hindrance?  The Times  doi:2018-04-02
Retrieved from https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/women-on-board-help-or-hindrance-
2c6fnqf6fng

Kennedy, P. (1992).  A guide to econometrics (3rd ed.)  Blackwell Oxford.

Lee, P. M., & James, E. H. (2007). She'-e-os: Gender effects and investor reactions to the
announcements of top executive appointments.  Strategic Management Journal, 28(3), 227-
241. doi:10.1002/smj.575

Lundeteg, A., Nord, C., Hemberg, C., Ajmal, O., & Dahlgren, T. (2017).  Vd-kvinnor väljer
jämställdhet [Women CEOs choose gender equality].  Stockholm: Allbright.  Retrieved from
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5501a836e4b0472e6124f984/t/59b5b954a9db0927a10e
1b66/1505081782344/AllBrightrapporten_2017.pdf

MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). Event studies in economics and finance.  Journal of Economic
Literature, 35(1), 13-39. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2729691

Marquardt, D. W. (1970). Generalized inverses, ridge regression, biased linear estimation,
and nonlinear estimation.  Technometrics,  12(3), 591-612. doi:10.2307/1267205

Nemes, S., Miao Jonasson, J., Genell, A., & Steineck, G. (2009).  Bias in odds ratios by
logistic regression modeling and sample size  doi:10.1186/1471-2288-9-56

Newbold, P., Carlson, W. L., & Thorne, B. M. (2013).  Statistics for  business and economics
(8.  ed.).  Boston: Pearson Education.

Numhauser-Henning, A. (2015).  The policy ln gender equality in Sweden. (Study No. PE
510.011). Brussels: European Parliament. Retrieved from
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2015/510011/IPOL_STU(2015)51001
1_EN.pdf

Rink, F., Ryan, M. K., & Stoker, J. I. (2013). Social resources at a time of crisis: How gender
stereotypes inform gendered leader evaluations.  European Journal of Social  Psychology,
43(5), 381-392. doi:10.1002/ejsp.1954

Rogerson, P. (2001).  Statistical methods for geography. London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781849209953

Ryan, M. K., & Haslam, A. S. (2005).  The glass cliff: Evidence that women are Over-
Represented in precarious leadership positions.  British Journal of Management, 16(2), 81-90.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8551.2005.00433.x

                                        31
Ryan, M. K., Haslam, A. S., Hersby, M. D., Kulich, C., & Atkins, C. (2007). Opting out or
pushed off the edge? The glass cliff and the precariousness of women's leadership positions.
Social and Personality Psychology Compass,  1(1), 266-279. doi:10.1111/j.1751-
9004.2007.00007.x

SCB. (2007).  Föräldraledighet och arbetslivskarriär. en studie av mammors olika vägar i
arbetslivet [Parental leave and working life.  A study of  mothers‘ working life careers].
(Demographic Report No. 3). Örebro, Sweden: Statistiska centralbyrån [Statistics Sweden].
Retrieved from
https://www.scb.se/statistik/_publikationer/BE0701_2007A01_BR_BE51ST0703.pdf

SCB. (2016).  På tal om kvinnor och män, 2016 [Women and men in Sweden 2016].
(Publication No. X10BR1601). Örebro, Sweden: Statistiska centralbyrån [Statistics Sweden].
Retrieved from
https://www.scb.se/Statistik/_Publikationer/LE0201_2015B16_BR_X10BR1601.pdf

SCB. (2017).  Jämn fördelning av makt och inflytande  -  Styrelser och  ledning i börsföretag
2017 [Influence and power  -  boards and executive management in stock-listed companies
2017].  Retrieved from https://www.scb.se/sv_/Hitta-
statistik/Temaomraden/Jamstalldhet/Indikatorer/Jamn-fordelning-av-makt-och-
inflytande/Representation-i-naringslivet/Styrelser-och-ledning-i-borsforetag/

Schein, V. E. (1973). The relationship between sex role stereotypes and requisite
management characteristics.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 57(2), 95-100.
doi:10.1037/h0037128

Schein, V. E. (1975).  Relationships between sex role stereotypes and requisite management
characteristics among female managers.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 60(3), 340-344.
doi:10.1037/h0076637

The Economist.  (2018). Retrieved from
https://www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2018/02/daily-chart-10

Wooldridge, J. M. (2016). Introductory  econometrics:  A modern approach  (6  ed.).  Boston;
Boston: Cengage Learning; Cengage Learning.

World Economic Forum. (2017).  The global gender gap report 2017. ( No. 978-1-944835-
12-5). Cologny/Geneva, Switzerland: World Economic Forum. Retrieved from
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2017.pdf

                                        32
Appendix

Figures

Graph 1. Average CAR per Gender
The graph presents the  development  of the cumulative abnormal return per gender during the
period of the 120 days preceding the appointment date. The cumulative abnormal is return is
calculated as a daily average per gender

                                        33
Tables
 Table 1: Reasons for removals and development of sample
 The table presents the total count of CEO observations in the original data sample and the reasons
 for removal. The count of observations per reason for removal is also specified. The sum of the
 removed and  included  observations equals the count of observations in the original dataset
 Reasons for removal
                                                     N
 Original dataset                                                              709
 Before 2005                                                                 202
 Before stock market introduction                                                   88
 Founder                                                                    28
 Incorrectly gathered, only CEO for mother company                                   1
 Interim CEO                                                                 80
 Less than 250 days before stock market introduction                                   26
 Less than 100 days until end of time frame                                           5
 Less than 250 days from the start of time frame                                        1
 Maternity leave                                                                  1
 Not based in Sweden                                                           16
 CEO for short period of time                                                       1
 Part-time CEO                                                                     1
 Same time  as other company essential info                                           21
 Two types of stocks on the market                                                   2
 Total removed observations                                                   473
 Total observations used in sample                                               236

                                        34
Table 2: Definitions of variables
The table presents  variable  types and short descriptions  for the dependent, independent and interaction
variables used in all or some regression models presented in Tables 7, 8, 9 & 10. The type of the regression
is disclosed prior the first comma sign
Dependent
Variables
gender              dummy,  1 if the CEO is a female.

Independent Variables
CAR               continuous, cumulative abnormal return per CEO on  appointment  day based on the
                      120 preceding trading days
size                  dummy for each category,  1  if CEO works in a small, mid or large-sized company
industry             dummy for each category,  1  if CEO works in a finance, healthcare, industrials or
                     services & goods
age                 discrete, age in years for  the  CEO on  the  appointment  day
highed              dummy,  1 if CEO has university degree or higher
insiderec            dummy,  1 if CEO was recruited from within the company
induins              dummy,  1 if CEO has previous experience within the industry
dROA               continuous, percentage change in ROA based one the value closest to the appointment
                     day divided by ROA 250 trading days back
prev.CEO           dummy,  1 if CEO has previously been CEO

Interaction Variables
(Rmneg*CAR)        continuous, cumulative abnormal return per CEO on  appointment  day given that
                      average market return was negative during the 120 preceding days

Table  3: Gender distribution in  dummy variables
The table presents the distribution of the two sexes, as well as total, within the different dummy variables used in the
regressions. If an observation possesses the quality implied by the dummy variable, it assumes the value 1 and 0
otherwise. The count of observations and the shares are expressed in percentage per each category  are  disclosed in the
table
                                                     Gender
Variables                                Female            Male               Total
                                     N      (%)       N      (%)       N        (%)
Gender                                   25       10.6      211       89.4      236        100.0

University degree                          24       96.0       191       90.5       215         91.1
Industry experience                         22       88.0       183       86.7       205         86.9
Previous CEO experience                   10       40.0       121       57.3       131         55.5
Recruited from inside firm                   11       44.0        92       43.6       103         43.6

                                              35
Table  4: Descriptive statistics for continuous  and discrete  variables
The table presents the distribution of the two sexes, as well as total, within the different continuous variables
used in the regressions.  The age disclosed  is  the age of the CEO  at appointment date. Means and standard
deviations are disclosed in the table  and are calculated for the different sexes and total at a group level. Means
for CAR for the time period of day  -120 to 0  are  not included as the only the means as of day 0 are relevant
                                                Gender
Variables                      Female                 Male                  Total
                            Mean       SD        Mean       SD        Mean       SD
Age                               48      5.686            47      6.233            47      6.169
CAR  (Day 0)                   0.042%      0.406       -3.673%      0.406       -3.280%      0.405
CAR (Day  -120 to 0)                   -       0.373              -      0.330              -       0.335

Table  5: Gender distribution in categorical variables
The table presents the distribution of the two sexes, as well as total, within the different industries and
company sizes.  Company size  is classified  according  to  the different market capitalization ranges presented
in Table 6. The count of observations and the shares are expressed in percentage per each category  are
disclosed in the table
                                                 Gender
Variables                       Female               Male                   Total
                            N        (%)         N        (%)         N        (%)
Industry
Finance                          6         24.0           27         12.8           33         14.0
Healthcare                       6         24.0           29         13.7           35         14.8
Industrials                        3         12.0           56         26.5           59         25.0
Services & goods                10         40.0           99         46.9          109         46.2
Total                            25        100.0        211.0        100.0        236.0        100.0

Size
Small                          19         76.0          107         50.7          126         53.4
Mid                             2          8.0           51         24.2           53         22.5
Large                           4         16.0           53         25.1           57         24.2
Total                           25        100.0          211        100.0          236        100.0

                                              36
Table 6: Stock Market Segmentation
The table presents the ranges used for the stock market segmentation. The ranges are
based on market capitalization and expressed in  million Swedish Krona. The ranges are
originally based on the Nordic Nasdaq stock market segmentation.  assuming a 1 EUR
to 10 SEK exchange rate
Market Capitalization Ranges
                                      M SEK
Small                                                  Market Cap  ≤  1 500
Mid                                           1 500 < Market Cap  ≤ 10 000
Large                                                  Market  Cap > 10 000

Table 7: Regression Models
The table presents the variables included in the regression models and their corresponding
odds ratios. The p-value  for each variable  is  presented in parentheses below the odds
ratios. Furthermore.  (*)  symbols  are disclosed next to the odd ratios.  indicating if the
variables are significant at a certain significance level. Finally.  the total count of
                                                          2                                2
observations  used in the regression and the  pseudo-R are presented. The  pseudo-R is a
type of goodness-of-fit measure estimated for logistic regressions
                          Model 1            Model 2            Model 3
gender
CAR                     1.253              1.149              1.214
                             (0.658)              (0.763)              (0.729)
                                                               +                      **
small                                         4.487              13.990
                                                   (0.050)              (0.003)
large                                          1.913               2.059
                                                   (0.466)              (0.428)
                                                                                                    **
finance                                                          11.171
                                                                        (0.009)
healthcare                                                         1.872
                                                                        (0.290)
industrials                                                           0.733
                                                                        (0.673)
                                        **                      **                      **
constant                   0.119               0.040               0.011
                             (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)
Observations                236                236                236
          2
Pseudo  R                 0.001177           0.042085           0.113639
Exponentiated coefficients;  p-values in parentheses
Omitted variables are excluded
+          *           **
  p < 0.1.   p < 0.05.    p < 0.01

                                        37
Table 8: Regression Models
The   table   presents   the   variables   included   in   the   regression   models   and   their
corresponding odds ratios.  The p-value for each variable is presented in parentheses
below the  odds ratios. Furthermore.  (*)  symbols are disclosed next to the odd ratios.
indicating if the variables are significant at a certain significance level. Finally.  the total
                                                                       2
count of observations  used in the regression and the  pseudo-R  are presented. The
          2
pseudo-R is a type of goodness-of-fit measure estimated for logistic regressions
                         Model 4            Model 5            Model 6
gender
car                         1.226               1.129               1.169
                              (0.708)               (0.823)               (0.768)
                                        **                      **                      **
small                     14.065              11.893              13.174
                             (0.003)               (0.003)               (0.002)
large                       2.028               1.684               1.298
                              (0.436)               (0.571)               (0.793)
                                        *                      *                       **
finance                   10.752               9.144              11.247
                              (0.011)               (0.022)               (0.013)
healthcare                  1.777               1.840               2.078
                              (0.339)               (0.328)               (0.248)
industrials                  0.773               0.743               0.725
                              (0.721)               (0.676)               (0.651)
highed                     1.851               1.879               1.481
                              (0.547)               (0.543)               (0.693)
age                                         1.030               1.018
                                                     (0.382)               (0.618)
prev.CEO                                    0.533               0.534
                                                     (0.174)               (0.211)
induins                                        1.101               0.812
                                                     (0.899)               (0.794)
insiderec                                       1.053               1.199
                                                     (0.915)               (0.714)
y2005                                                        0.628
                                                                              (0.694)
y2008                                                        1.066
                                                                              (0.956)
y2014                                                        0.620
                                                                              (0.663)
                                                                                                  *
y2015                                                           3.828
                                                                              (0.025)
                                       **                      **                      *
Constant                  0.006               0.002               0.004
                              (0.000)               (0.001)               (0.013)
Observations                236                236                236
          2
Pseudo  R                 0.115946           0.130178           0.167285
Exponentiated coefficients;  p-values in parentheses
Omitted variables are excluded
+  p < 0.1. * p < 0.05. ** p < 0.01

                                        38
Table 9: Robustness Model
The table presents the variables included in the regression model and their corresponding
odds ratios.  The p-value for each variable is presented in parentheses below the odds
ratios. Furthermore.  (*)  symbols are disclosed  next to the odd ratios.  indicating if the
variables are significant at a certain significance level. Finally.  the total count of
                                                         2                                2
observations  used in the regression and the  pseudo-R are presented. The  pseudo-R is a
type of goodness-of-fit measure estimated for logistic regressions. Observations are fewer
here  than  in  the  original regression  due to missing values
                                                    Model 7  -  Robustness
gender
dROA                                           0.979
                                                                   (0.744)
                                                                                      **
small                                                 12.225
                                                                   (0.003)
large                                                     1.383
                                                                   (0.739)
                                                                                     *
finance                                                   8.069
                                                                   (0.027)
healthcare                                                1.761
                                                                   (0.381)
industrials                                                 0.510
                                                                   (0.411)
highed                                                 1.000
                                                                                     (.)
age                                                   1.020
                                                                   (0.624)
                                                                           +
prev.CEO                                             0.407
                                                                   (0.087)
induins                                                  0.896
                                                                   (0.891)
insiderec                                                 1.278
                                                                   (0.631)
y2005                                                 0.617
                                                                (0.681)
y2008                                                 1.236
                                                                   (0.846)
y2014                                                 0.888
                                                                (0.917)
y2015                                                 2.685
                                                                   (0.125)
                                                                                     *
Constant                                               0.008
                                                                   (0.022)
Observations                                            205
          2
Pseudo R                                           0.159264
Exponentiated coefficients;  p-values in parentheses
Omitted variables are excluded
+          *           **
 p < 0.1.   p < 0.05.    p < 0.01

                                        39
Table 10: Regression Models
The table presents the variables  included in the regression model and their corresponding
odds ratios. The p-value for each variable is presented in parentheses below the odds
ratios. Furthermore.  (*)  symbols are disclosed next to the odd ratios.  indicating if the
variables are significant at a certain significance level. Finally.  the total count of
                                                         2                                2
observations  used in the regression and the  pseudo-R are presented. The  pseudo-R is a
type of goodness-of-fit measure estimated for logistic regressions
                                                   Model 8
gender
Rmneg*car                                            0.984
                                                                   (0.982)
                                                                                      **
small                                                    13.250
                                                                   (0.002)
large                                                     1.312
                                                                   (0.786)
                                                                                      *
finance                                                 11.220
                                                                   (0.013)
healthcare                                                2.091
                                                                   (0.241)
industrials                                                 0.743
                                                                   (0.668)
highed                                                 1.461
                                                                   (0.712)
age                                                    1.019
                                                                   (0.607)
prev.CEO                                             0.531
                                                                   (0.209)
induins                                                0.824
                                                                (0.808)
insiderec                                               1.191
                                                                (0.726)
y2005                                                 0.656
                                                                     (0.707)
y2008                                                1.099
                                                                   (0.935)
y2014                                               0.615
                                                                   (0.657)
                                                                                     *
y2015                                                3.834
                                                                   (0.025)
                                                                                     *
Constant                                              0.004
                                                                   (0.012)
Observations                                            236
          2
Pseudo R                                           0.166823
Exponentiated coefficients;  p-values in parentheses
Omitted variables are excluded
+          *           **
 p < 0.1.   p < 0.05.    p < 0.01

                                       40
Table 11: Classification Matrix  for regression model 6
The table presents the classification matrix for the extended regression model.  model 6. The
cut-off rate used.  0.12907.  is determined using the Youden Index. The counts and rates for
the correctly and incorrectly classified observations are presented. Sensitivity tells the rate
of correctly classified female CEOs and specificity tells the rate of the correctly classified
male CEOs. Finally.  a total classification rate is presented which is based on the total count
of correctly classified women and men divided by the total number of observations

                                     True
     Classified              D                 ~D               Total
        +                  19                 56                 75
         -                    6                  155                 161
       Total                 25                 211                 236

Classified + if predicted Pr(D) >= .12907
True D defined as gender != 0
Sensitivity                                    Pr( + | D)             76.00%
Specificity                                   Pr(  -  | ~D)             73.46%
Positive predictive value                      Pr( D | +)            25.33%
Negative predictive value                       Pr(~ D | -)             96.27%
False + rate for true ~D                       Pr( + | ~D)            26.54%
False  -  rate for true D                             Pr(  -  | D)              24.00%
False + rate for classified +                    Pr(~ D | +)            74.67%
False  -  rate for classified  -                        Pr( D |  -)               3.73%
Correctly classified                                          73.73%

Table 12: Area Under Receiver  Operating Characteristic Curve
The table presents the AUCs.  Areas under  Receiver Operating Characteristic Curves.  for the
regression model 1 and 6.  Standard  errors and confidence intervals for a 95% significance
level for the AUC of each regression are  also presented.  Furthermore.  the table includes a t-
                                                                     2
test for difference between the two AUC areas and discloses chi  and p-values for that test

                          ROC                  Asymptotic Normal
                  Obs         Area        Std. Err.       [95% Conf. Interval]
Model 1         236         0.5416        0.0721        0.40029       0.68293
Model 6         236         0.7943        0.0397        0.71651       0.87212
Ho: area  (Model 1)  = area(Model 6)
chi2(1) =        9.64         Prob>chi2 =    0.0019

                                       41
Table 13: Variance Inflation Test
The table presents the Variance Inflation Test values and tolerance values for each variable
in  extended regression model.  model 6. Variance Inflation Test levels below 5 are
considered acceptable even by conservative means
Variable                      VIF               1/VIF
age                            19.51               0.051259
highed                         10.56               0.094737
induins                          8.92                 0.112147
small                           3.98                0.251021
prev.CEO                      2.54                0.393789
insiderec                        2.22                0.449577
large                           2.21                0.452473
industrials                       1.84                0.544804
finance                         1.63                0.611983
healthcare                       1.51                0.662607
y2015                         1.31                0.765316
y2014                         1.20                0.830137
y2008                         1.15                0.869889
y2005                         1.12                0.889082
car                             1.09                 0.920491
Mean VIF                       4.05

                                       42