Stockholm School of Economics
Department of Finance
Bachelor Thesis
Spring 2018

   Capital Structure and  Excess  Returns across
               Business Cycles

               ANTON ARNQUIST* & OSCAR JOHANSSON**
                              14 MAY 2018

                           ABSTRACT
 In this study, we analyze the leverage-return relationship in a sample of S&P 500 firms in the US between
 1969Q4 to 2015Q2 and distinctly examine how the relation changes between business cycles. Our
 empirical results suggest that an increase in leverage is positively related to expected excess return across
 business cycles, with a stronger effect in contractions. We attribute the strengthened effect on excess
 return observed in contractions to negative financial shocks associated to changing macroeconomic
 conditions which increases the risk associated with leverage. Additionally, we conduct an analysis on
 average excess returns based on leverage deciles. The relation is indistinguishable between all cycles and
 negative in periods of contraction and expansion alone. The finding is important as it suggests that
 leverage in isolation has insufficiently explanatory value to expected excess returns on a subsequent
 quarterly average basis.

SUPERVISOR:  Irina Zviadadze
KEYWORDS: Capital Structure, Leverage Ratio, Excess Return, Business Cycles
JEL CLASSIFICATION CODES: E3, G01, G11, G32

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: First and foremost, we would like to extend our sincere gratitude to our supervisor
Irina Zviadadze for her helpful input over the course of the project. Secondly, we thank Per-Olov Edlund
for providing insightful information and guidance on relevant econometric issues. All mistakes are our own.

 *23721@student.hhs.se
 **23618@student.hhs.se
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

Contents
1. INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................... 3
2.  LITERATURE REVIEW ............................................................................................................ 6
  2.1 LEVERAGE IN ASSET PRICING MODELS ............................................................................ 6

  2.2 EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE OF THE LEVERAGE-RETURN RELATIONSHIP................................. 6

  2.3 ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF LEVERAGE ........................................................................ 8

   2.4  Definitions of leverage .................................................................................................... 9

  2.5 BUSINESS CYCLES AND THE LEVERAGE-RETURN RELATIONSHIP .................................... 9

  2.6 CONTRIBUTION TO LITERATURE .................................................................................... 10

3. DATA AND VARIABLES......................................................................................................... 12
  3.1 DATA SELECTION ........................................................................................................... 12

  3.2 VARIABLE CONSTRUCTION ............................................................................................ 13

4. METHODOLOGY .................................................................................................................. 17
  4.1 MODEL DEFINITION AND DEVELOPMENT OF HYPOTHESES ........................................... 17

  4.2 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ............................................................................................... 20

5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS ............................................................................................................ 22
  5.1 REGRESSION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS – ALL CYCLES .................................................... 22

  5.4 DISCUSSION OF RESULTS – ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF LEVERAGE IN DIFFERENT

   BUSINESS CYCLES ................................................................................................................. 27

  5.5 ANALYSIS OF RETURNS IN DECILES ............................................................................... 29

6. CONCLUSION ....................................................................................................................... 32
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS – TABLES AND FIGURES ................................................................... 34
REGRESSION TABLES ............................................................................................................... 36
DECILE ANALYSIS TABLES ....................................................................................................... 39
REFERENCES............................................................................................................................ 41
APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................ 43

                                      2
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

1. INTRODUCTION

The relationship between leverage and equity returns  is  traditionally  thought of as positive since
the second proposition put forward by Modigliani and Miller  (1963).  New  asset pricing models
developed  after  this paper have  refined the methodology of explaining  excess  returns under the
assumption that  the second proposition  holds. However, empirical research is not entirely
consistent with theory,  and studies across the US, Europe and  Asia  presents evidence of both
positive and negative leverage-return relationships, depending on the research period, method and
other factors. More recent papers discuss the importance of business cycles and macroeconomic
conditions and its effect on distress  costs and tax benefits related to leverage which may help
explain the puzzling leverage-return relationship.
       Our study complements previous empirical research on US stocks, which have shown both
positive and negative relations,  by determining how the relation differs depending on the business
cycle. Using a uniquely defined sample of S&P 500 firms, ranging from 1969Q4 to 2015Q2  we
are able to provide novel insights of the leverage-return relationship over the course of seven
different periods of contraction and expansion respectively.  Using a predictive model, we regress
the dependent variable excess return in time t+1  on the independent variable firm leverage in time
t, controlling for average industry leverage, size, market-to-book, price-to-earnings and  net cash
positions for the entire sample and the six underlying industries. The same analysis is then
performed for periods of contraction and expansion separately.
       Our findings confirm a  positive  relationship  with  both individual firm  leverage as well as
average industry leverage  and  expected  excess  returns for  subsequent quarters  across all cycles,
contractions and expansions.  In addition, if a firm has a net cash position, an increase in leverage
decreases the risk premium associated with leverage. Weighing in all control variables, our results
suggest that  expected return  increase  with net cash positions  overall, and decrease  with market-to-
book ratio, price-to-earnings ratio and  size. One important finding from the regression analysis is
that  the  positive  impact  on expected excess returns  from an increase in leverage has a stronger
effect on  expected excess return  in periods  of contraction than for  expansions and  all cycles
combined. This finding holds true for the  total  sample and for each industry respectively. On
average, a firm will in periods of contraction  increase expected  excess  return  by  0.018% for a 1%
increase in leverage, which can be compared to  an increase 0.012% in periods of expansion and
0.013%  for  all cycles.  Thus, the general  positive  relation between leverage and excess return  is

                                      3
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

adamant, even controlling for different cycles.  In sum, our  results indicate that leverage is
associated with an increased risk premium, consistent with Modigliani and Miller’s (1963) second
proposition.
       The  larger effect on  expected return in periods of contraction  compared to the other cycles
is believed to  be a cause of shocks,  as reduction in corporate cash flow, difficulty  in raising capital
through financial intermediaries and  changes in  term-structure of interest rates,  affecting capital
structure dynamics.  Assuming  that the market is efficient, the increased default risk associated
with leverage should cause immediate price drops when a firm levers up  but increase the expected
return in the future as a consequence of  the  increased risk.  Moreover,  as  the leverage ratio is
exposed to changes in both equity as well as debt and therefore it is difficult to disentangle if
increasing debt is in fact driving the positive relation or if changes in equity is. Due to the limitation
of our regression-based study, it is possible that additional risk factors have been overlooked which
better explains expected returns in different macroeconomic cycles.
       In complement to the regression analysis, we assign quarterly firm observations into
deciles, representing portfolios based on leverage, in an ascending order.  If leverage would
dominantly  explain  the expected return premium, we expect that our leverage deciles  is  positively
related to average returns over the sample period. We create equal and value-weighted average
return measures  over all cycles, in periods of contractions and expansions, and calculate simple
means for leverage, size, market-to-book and price-to-earnings in a table to explore this in detail.
Our results indicate that the time-series averaged returns do not  definitively  relate positively to the
leverage of the deciles.  A clear example of this is that in periods of contraction, the average equal-
weighted excess return for the deciles are negatively related to leverage.  This is an important
finding that suggests that returns, on average, are affected by risk factors that may have been
overlooked in the study and that leverage is inversely related to some other, potentially omitted,
variables that better explain excess returns. There is also a possibility that our time-frame of
subsequent  quarterly  return is too short to capture the realized positive effect from the increased
expected return in periods of contraction. A further plausible explanation is based on the
conclusions by George and Hwang (2010). They suggest that  if firms make optimal capital
structure decisions, low levered firms  choose low leverage  because they already sustain high
systematic risk.  This explanation indicates that the leverage-return relationship in fact should be
negative.  Finally,  comparing the results of the decile analysis in periods of expansion with

                                      4
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

contraction,  our results indicate that the most highly levered firms, on average, generate  lower
returns in the subsequent quarters in periods of contraction, whereas the most highly levered firms
generate  high returns in periods of expansion.

                                      5
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

2. LITERATURE REVIEW

2.1 LEVERAGE IN ASSET PRICING MODELS
A firm’s capital structure  defines  the  sources of financing  on the balance sheet between its assets,
equity and liabilities. Leverage normally refers to the proportion of interest-bearing liabilities in
relation to equity, indicating  debt-holders capital contribution in relation to shareholders. Since
Modigliani and Miller’s work on capital structure (1958; 1963),  there is a general conception of a
theoretically  positive  leverage and return  relationship.  Modigliani and  Miller  suggest in their
second proposition that expected stock returns  increase  with financial leverage  as it raises the
expected return on equity (1963).  Following their finding,  Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and
Black (1972) developed the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) to describe the expected return
of stocks. In the model,  expected return  on  equity  increases  with beta,  a measure of systematic
risk,  which is positively related  to  leverage.  Researchers have later improved the model’s
explanatory value by empirical evaluations and tests and new risk factors in addition to beta have
been determined. Most famously, Fama and French developed the model by adding the risk factors
size and book-to-market in their three-factor-model (1993) and later profitability and investment
as well (2015).
2.2 EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE OF THE LEVERAGE-RETURN RELATIONSHIP
In an early study performed by Bhandari (1988), debt-to-equity ratios were found to be positively
correlated with stock returns in a cross-sectional study of American firms from 1948-1981,
supporting Modigliani and Miller’s second proposition.  Bhandari uses an amended Fama-Macbeth
model and  include  market  leverage ratio as a control for risk in addition  to size and systematic
risk. However, studies and research following Bhandari’s initial paper have been largely varying
in the conclusions on how leverage is related to returns, whether positively  or negatively.
       Penman, Richardson and Tuna  (2007) decompose Fama and French’s  book-to-market
variable  into a  financial  and an  operational  book-to-price component to better understand the
dynamics of how  the variable  absorbs  leverage, as claimed by Fama and French (1993). The
authors find evidence of a positive correlation between the operating component and stock returns,
consistent with risk and  excess  return explanations,  but the  financial  leverage-component's effect,
expressed in market value of net debt and equity,  is contradictory  and found negatively correlated.
Furthermore, the results are also in contradiction to how leverage is priced in common asset pricing

                                      6
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

models. In an additional investigation, including the four risk factors  market beta, size, book-to-
market and momentum, the authors find no explanation in these variables for their result.
Conclusively, it is found that  market  leverage explains differences in returns not captured by the
book-to-market factor as commonly stated in research. Even controlling for size, estimated beta,
industry identification, the volatility of stock returns and the risk in operating liabilities, the results
hold significant.
        In a follow-up study, George and Hwang (2010) aims to complement the study by Penman,
Richardson and Tuna  (2007).  The authors claim that distress costs depress asset payoff in low
states,  exposing firms with higher costs to more systematic risk. Further, with optimal capital
structure decisions, firms with higher distress costs will use less leverage than firms with low costs.
The authors  therefore  hypothesize that  low leverage firms  are naturally  exposed to greater
systematic risk than high leverage firms (given that financial distress costs are costly and that firms
make optimal capital structure decisions) and consequently are associated with higher return
premiums.  The authors anticipate a negative relation in the cross section of expected returns to
leverage and between expected returns and distress measures. Ultimately,  looking at  a sample of
firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ between 1965 and 2003,  they find evidence
supporting their hypothesis even controlling for returns adjusted for risk via the Fama-French
three-factor model.
       Cai and Zhang (2011) finds additional evidence of a negative relation between stock returns
and  quarterly changes  in  leverage in a study of  all US stocks available in CRSP and Compustat
between the years from 1975 to 2002.  The results are robust when controlling for  the  momentum
factor and firm characteristics as size, beta  and  book-to-market ratio and performance measures.
Hypothetically, the authors reason that increasing leverage should lead to higher default risk.
Given that this holds,  and that default risk is priced, stocks should react with immediate price drops
for an increase in leverage  but  be related to  higher returns in the future, as a consequence of the
additional  risk.  However, they did not find supportive evidence of this prediction when examining
portfolio returns on a one-year period after the price change.
       Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012)  create a predictive model to  investigate the relation
between debt-to-equity ratios and  expected  excess stock returns  in a sample constructed from the
companies listed on the London Stock Exchange from 1965 to 2008. They  find that  excess  returns

                                      7
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

decline with firm leverage but increase with average industry leverage. The magnitude of
leverage’s effect on  excess  returns changes with respect to the industry  too.
       In a different study,  D’Mello and Sivaprasad (2015)  study  the  largest companies listed on
the Indian stock exchange  by the construction of a one-year investment  strategy based on leverage
to predict the leverage-return relationship. They  find a general trend towards firms earning higher
cumulative average  excess  returns with increasing  leverage. They also examine  the relation more
in detail on an industry level and find statistically significant results of a positive relation between
leverage and  excess  returns for firms  within  the  industries  Basic Materials, Consumer  Goods,
Industrials, and Oil and Gas. On the contrary, firms in the industries Consumer  Services,
Healthcare,  Technology  and  Telecommunications  earn lower returns as leverage increases.
2.3 ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF LEVERAGE

Theoretically, higher leverage  increases a firm’s exposure to systematic risks and thus increases
expected return on equity  (Hu and Gong, 2018).  It is  however  apparent from the previous section
that  empirical evidence is not entirely consistent with this theory. Outside of Modigliani  and
Miller’s model, firms enjoy both the tax advantages stemming from leverage but are also burdened
by financial distress costs associated with the increasing default risk (Hu and Gong, 2018).
Theoretically, there is a tradeoff between these advantages and costs. Myers (1977) conceptually
capture and explain this tradeoff and theorize  about the risks of debt  overhang. Myers  claim that
in the presence of corporate taxes, the shareholders’ optimal strategy is to issue risky debt as
interest is tax-deductible  and may improve firm value. However, given a sufficiently large level of
debt, owners may be inclined to reject positive NPV investments, theoretically increasing firm
value, as the subsequent gains would be entirely or mostly absorbed by debt holders. In conclusion,
an over-levered firm does not benefit from the leverage advantages of tax deduction but rather
deters its performance and market value by dismissing profitable investments. The implication of
this is that in an efficient market, firms ought to lever up until they find an optimal capital structure.
       Cai and Zhang (2011)  uses the debt overhang theory to  explain the negative relation
between leverage and returns in their study. An increase in leverage ratio was  associated with a
lower real investment rate and capital expenditures over the next four quarters. The authors
continue by studying whether the negative relation can be explained by the market pricing of
default risk. However, a statistically significant negative relation is found even for financially
healthy firms.

                                      8
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

2.4  Definitions  of leverage
The findings and significance of the leverage-return relationship in previous literature has in part
been  dependent  on the definition of leverage. Studies suggesting  that stock returns increase with
market leverage includes Ho, Strange, and Piesse (2008) and Bhandari (1988), whereas others such
as  D’Mello and Sivaprasad (2015) and  Lee, Ng, and Swaminathan (2009)  find a positive
relationship for book value leverage. Conversely, other studies find evidence that stock returns
decrease with market leverage (Penman, Richardson, and Tuna (2007)) as well as for book
leverage (Dimitrov and Jain (2008),  Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012), Cai and Zhang (2011),
George and Hwang (2010)).
        In their first proposition,  Modigliani and Miller (1958) define leverage as the ratio of the
market value of bonds and preferred debt to the market value of all securities. However, Muradoglu
and Sivaprasad (2012) argue, following Schwartz (1959), that  defining leverage as the  ratio of  the
book value  of total debt to total capital is a better measure. They reason that  using  book values of
debt and equity enables a definition of capital structure that looks at the structure at the time funds
were raised to finance the assets. They also argue that their broader definition of leverage is
preferable as it factors in the variability in different forms of debt.  Cai and Zhang (2011) defines
leverage using book values of total debt and total equity because one problem with market value
of equity is its mechanical relation to stock prices. Opler and Titman (1994) further theorize that
by using book values instead of market values, potential problems that the market value of equity
may forecast future sales performance can be avoided.
2.5 BUSINESS CYCLES AND THE LEVERAGE-RETURN RELATIONSHIP
Hu and Gong (2018) nuances the leverage-return relationship further by postulating that there  are
two integral parts  to the analysis of the relation: relative leverage position and market conditions.
Omitting either of these two may lead to biased estimations. To emphasize the importance of
considering the relative leverage as well as the market condition, the inconsistent leverage-return
relationship between Bhandari (1988) and George and Hwang (2010) can be used as an example.
Both  papers study  the relationship in a sample based on US stocks but for different time periods.
Bhandari’s study is limited to periods of 1948 to 1979 when the US stock market primarily
experienced fast growth which could have fueled the positive relation excessively. In contrast,
George and Hwang  (2010)  studies stocks over the period of 1965 to 2003 which includes several
market downturns, potentially skewing the relationship towards the opposite.

                                      9
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

       According to Cook and Tang (2010), the capital structure decisions of firms is closely
related to the macroeconomic conditions as tax benefits and bankruptcy costs depend on the state
of the economy. Firms’ target leverage is determined by the trade-off theory between these benefits
and costs and as they are interrelated with macroeconomic conditions, variations in leverage is
affected by both. Hu and Gong (2018) explains  that in times of economic expansion capital is
abundant and investor’s risk appetite increase. Over-levered firms thrive in this climate because
they can take advantage of the low financing costs. In  a contraction, however, highly levered firms
may suffer from financial distress and face bankruptcy risks because of collateral constraints. For
under-levered firms, the authors claim that investment opportunities may be lost  even in an
economic expansion because of capital shortage while under-levered firms avoid financial distress
costs in a contraction. In order to understand this relationship, the authors categorize firms in over-
or under-levered depending on their leverage relative to the industry optimal or target leverage
ratio. The authors hypothesize  and finds evidence  that over-levered firms thus can be placed in a
“gain domain” when the market is in expansion and “loss domain” for contraction while the
opposite is true for under-levered firms. The two dimensions (over/under-levered) and market
conditions need to be simultaneously considered when examining the leverage-return relationship
in order to truly capture the economic effects of capital structure decision on stock returns.
       Halling, Yu and Zechner (2016) further review the capital structure decisions of firms.
Looking at the intertemporal capital structure decisions of firms in different business cycles for a
sample of 18 countries, the authors find strong evidence for active capital  management  and  see
that firms’ target leverage ratios are related to business cycles. Overall, target leverage ratios of
firms  show counter-cyclical dynamics.
2.6 CONTRIBUTION TO LITERATURE

To briefly recapitulate,  theoretical financial models suggest a positive relationship between
leverage and stock returns. However, the empirical findings on the leverage-return relationship has
been inconclusive in terms of effect  on  both firm and industry leverage, but also in  significance.
Depending on sample period, method, leverage definition and other factors, researchers has come
up with mixed findings  on the relationship.  Further research has suggested that capital structure
decisions are dependent on economic cycles, and some researchers point  to the fact that omitting
economic cycles  when looking at the leverage-return relationship  may lead to biased  estimations.
Given this background,  the question of how the leverage-return relationship  is  affected by

                                      10
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

economic cycles arises.  Despite extensive research on the leverage-return relationship,  many have
neglected the effect of business cycles in their studies.  Therefore, by  studying a uniquely defined
sample containing the S&P 500 constituents from 1969 to 2015  and by looking at the difference
in effect of the  seven  different  periods of expansion and contraction  over  the  sample period
respectively, we hope to answer the following  research  questions;
    1.   What is the leverage-return relationship  in the US  and  how does  it differ between
       industries?
    2.   How is the relationship affected by different business cycles?

                                      11
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

3. DATA AND VARIABLES

3.1 DATA SELECTION
The dataset  is  based  on  S&P 500’s constituents  from October 1969, to  September  2015,  collected
from Compustat  Daily Updates  –  Index Constituents.  We begin our study in 1969Q4 because it  is
the first year when there is data  available  for the  majority of the constituents and it is limited  to
2015Q3  as that was the last  period  available in Compustat. The data is collected on a calendar
quarter basis and  excludes 141 observations related to other fiscal quarters. The dataset forms  an
unbalanced panel data where we follow individual firms over time as a cross-sectional time-series.
In total,  1,489 companies  are  part of this index  for  at least  one quarter during  our sample period.
We collect fundamental data on a quarterly basis from Compustat Annual Updates Fundamentals.
In total, we  download  a dataset comprising  of  161,609 observations.  Because the S&P 500 index
constituent list is dynamic and subject to occasional change as firms are listed, grow, go bankrupt,
or are de-listed, not all individual companies provide data for every year covered in the dataset
which causes  the unbalance.
       Consistent with previous research  from  Fama and French (1993), Rajan and  Zingales
(1995) and Penman,  Richardson and Tuna  (2007),  we  exclude  data  from  firms in the financial
industry, e.g. banks, insurance and real estate companies,  based on SIC codes (6000-6799) as firms
in this industry  can  be highly levered  with less  exposure to  risk than an average firm.  This
exclusion  translates to a removal of 220 companies and  23,039  observations.  Moreover,  we
exclude  observations related to industry code 0 (Agriculture, Fishing & Forestry) because the
sample is negligible small for this industry (two firms). We further exclude  code 9 as it includes
large conglomerate holding companies  whose  business models cannot be defined  by  one industry
alone (six  firms). In total  1,261  companies  providing 137,505  observations  remain in the sample,
spread over a total of six defined industries: Basic Materials, Consumer Goods,  Industrials,
Transportation and Public Utilities,  Retail and Wholesale Trade,  and Services.  We present a more
detailed  view  of  which  sectors  are included in  each industry  definition  in the appendix,  Table A2.
       Next,  we only include  observations which has complete data for the relevant variables  in
the sample.  In  total,  we exclude  an additional 18,017 observations which did not fulfill these
conditions.  We  further  disqualify observations  with negative values of debt-to-equity and/or
market-to-book as our model will  be unable to explain the relation between returns  and

                                      12
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

extraordinary events  causing equity to  assume a  negative  value.  As a result,  we remove  3,064
observations because  they may skew the model’s economic relevance.
       Furthermore,  we complement  the data  with the 3-month T-bill rate which we collect  on a
monthly basis and divide  by four to represent a quarterly risk-free rate. In addition, the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) provides us with the quarterly dates to define economic
cycles of expansion and contraction in our sample’s time period (see  appendix,  Table A3).
       Finally,  because  we  conduct  a  predictive  regression  study  of  the  leverage-return
relationship, we need to adjust the position of excess returns in the dataset in order to regress
leverage at a certain time on the excess return in the next time period. Effectively, we lead the
excess return variable from time t+1  to time t  and as a consequence, the last quarter’s observations
are  dropped  (4,296).  In  total,  1,234  companies  remain  in  our  sample,  totaling  111,987
observations, ranging from 1969Q4 to 2015Q2.
3.2 VARIABLE CONSTRUCTION
We select variables  based on our hypothesis that they explain  excess  returns or has an effect on
the relation between  excess  returns and leverage.  First,  we create the variable  ER.  Following
Brown and  Warner (1980), a  stock’s  performance is considered  in  excess  relative to a  return
benchmark. Just as D’Mello and Sivaprasad (2015), we choose the risk-free rate as our  benchmark.

 (1)                                 !"#,%&'  =  "#,%&'  − "+,%&'

Thus, we create  !"#,%&'  where  "#,%&'  represents the  equity  return for a  stock,  i,  for the quarter
following the time when accounting data is released,  t+1, and  "+,%&'  is the risk-free rate for the
same  quarter.  The stock return,  "#,%&', is  calculated as the  percentage change in closing price
between two consecutive quarters. The risk-free rate is  given  on a quarterly basis as a fourth of the
twelve-month rate on a 3-month treasury T-bill.
       The main independent  variable  in our study  is the variable for debt-to-equity in firms  and
we name it  levrat_percent  which represents the  debt-to-equity  ratio expressed as a percentage.
Consistent with the arguments of  Cai and Zhang (2011)  and Opler and Titman (1994),  we measure
the leverage ratio for each stock based on book values of total debt and  book value of  total equity
to  avoid the problems discussed in  section  2.4.  Debt-to-equity ratios for each stock is computed
by dividing  the book value of debt  with  the  book value of equity  (Equation  2).

                                      13
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                             6778 .0,9- 7: 1710, ;51-/-<1 =-0/;5> ,;0=;,;1;-< (@-=1)
 (2)       ,-./01_3-/4-51#,%  =                                                          ∗ 100
                                     6778 .0,9- 7: 1710, -B9;1C (!B9;1C)

Plotting the development of the average level of leverage for our entire sample and  period reveals
that the ratio is, on average, increasing with time  (see  Figure  A1a  and  A1b  in the appendix).  The
trending development is problematic for the performance and fit of our linear regression. Thus, we
construct  ln_levrat  representing the natural logarithm of the debt-to-equity ratios in firms.

                            6778 .0,9- 7: 1710, ;51-/-<1 =-0/;5> ,;0=;,;1;-< (@-=1)
 (3)         ,5_,-./01#,%  =  ln  (                                                         ∗ 100)
                                     6778 .0,9- 7: 1710, -B9;1C (!B9;1C)

      Consistent with previous research from Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012), we control for
a number of factors which may help explain  excess  returns.  First,  we generate the  variable
size_absolute, representing the firms’ respective market values, calculated as closing quarter prices
multiplied with the number of shares for each company.  Similarly  to  the development of  debt-to-
equity ratios, firm value develops  in a trend  exponentially over time  (see appendix,  Figure  A2a
and  A2b).  By the same  reasoning as for  ln_levrat, we therefore  construct the variable  ln_size  by
taking the natural logarithm of  the firms’  market values.  Secondly,  we define market-to-book,  mb,
as the market value divided by the book value of equity. Thirdly price-to-earnings,  pe, is calculated
as the closing quarter price divided by the twelve-month moving  earnings per share. In addition,
we control for the cash position in each company as it is a sign of financial health and could affect
the market valuation of a firm.  Netcash  is a dummy variable which assumes the value 1 if total
debt subtracted by cash and cash equivalents  is negative (indicating a net cash position) and 0
otherwise.   We   further   combine   Netcash   with   ln_levrat   in   an   interaction   variable,
netcashxln_levrat, which allows  us to interpret whether a net cash position in a company and an
increase in leverage leads  to a different effect on returns than leverage or net cash  does
individually.  Inspired  by  Muradoglu  and  Sivaprasad  (2012),  we  also  create  the  variable
industrylevrat_percent  which is calculated as the mean of  firms’  leverage ratio in each  industry,  j,
in  each quarter,  t, by summing the leverage ratios of all the firms in the industry for the quarter
and dividing it with the number of firms,  n.  We include  the natural logarithm of  this variable,
ln_industrylevrat, in the regression  to analyze whether changes  in industry  leverage affects  excess
returns differently than changes in individual firms’ capital structures.

                                      14
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

 (4)                     ,5_;5I9<1/C,-./01J,%  =  ln  (;5I9<1/C,-./01_3-/4-51J,% )

                                           where

 (5)                                                     L
                                                            ∑ #M' ,-./01_3-/4-51#,%
                          ;5I9<1/C,-./01_3-/4-51J,%  =
                                                 5

We use the natural logarithm of the variable as there is a trend in  the underlying industry averages.
We further winsorize the  dependent variable,  ER,  and the independent variables  ln_levrat,  pe  and
mb,  at a 1 to 99% level. Although  winsorizing  creates  bias  in  the  data,  it is necessary  for us to do
as there are too many outliers to scrutinize individually and we need to mitigate  the effect  in order
to produce a meaningful analysis  on the  regression.
       In the second part of our analysis,  with the background of the predicted relationship
between expected excess return and leverage from the regression analysis, we aim to investigate
how different levels of leverage are associated to  average  returns for an  average  subsequent
quarter.  We also include average values for the different control variables in the analysis.  We sort
the observations into ten deciles for each quarter.  The deciles are arranged in an ascending order
where decile 1 contains observations in a quarter with the lowest levered firms and decile 10 the
highest.  To conduct the analysis, we create two new variables for excess returns which represent
the average excess return in time  t+1  for each decile across the full sample period on an equal and
value-weighted basis. In the former case, TAER is first calculated as a simple mean (non-weighted)
of  the  n  firms’  excess  returns,  !"#,%&', for each  subsequent  quarter,  t+1, per decile,  j.

                                                    Q
                                      1
 (6)                             NO!"J  =   ∗ P O!"J,%&'
                                        N
                                                      %M'
                                           where

 (7)                                               L
                                                     ∑ #M' !"#,%&'
                                       O!"J,%&'  =
                                           5

The value-weighted time-series average is calculated in an identical fashion but weighted with
respect on the market value relating to each firm observation in time  t+1. The variable
size_absolute  is transformed in time to reflect this and we create the variable  lead_size  for the
purpose of weighting (w).

                                      15
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                                    Q
                                      1
 (8)                          R_NO!"J  =   ∗ P R_O!"J,%&'
                                        N
                                                      %M'
                                      where

 (9)                                             L
                                                  ∑ #M' R  #,%&'  ∗  !"#,%&'
                                R_O!"J,%&'  =        L
                                                      ∑ #M' R#,%&'

Finally, we complement these  return-variables by averaging the control variables for firm size,
market-to-book and price-to-earnings ratios for the leverage deciles.  These are created using a
simple mean for each decile across the entire sample period  using the same method as presented
in  Equation  6 and 7.

                                      16
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

4. METHODOLOGY

4.1 MODEL DEFINITION AND DEVELOPMENT OF HYPOTHESES
We regress  excess  returns  on leverage  using  a predictive  model  defined  in  the regression equation
below,  controlling for six additional variables.

                                   Regression equation

       !"%&'  =  S'  ∗ ,5_,-./01%  + SU ∗ ,5_;5I9<1/C,-./01%  +  SV  ∗ ,5_<;W-%  +  SX  ∗ Y=%
              + SZ  ∗ 3-%  + S[ ∗ 5-140<ℎ% +  S]  ∗ 5-140<ℎ^,5_,-./01 %  +  _%

The regression is run on  an  unbalanced panel data  set, using  firm  fixed effects  to  reduce  bias from
time invariant omitted variables in the model that are probably correlated with the explanatory and
dependent variable.  The standard errors are clustered on individual companies.  A Hausman Test
(Wooldridge, 2012)  was run to test whether random or fixed effects was most suitable for our
model and confirmed the appropriate use of fixed effects (Table A7  in the appendix).
      When developing our  hypotheses, we first look to theoretical finance, particularly at
Modigliani and Miller’s (1963)  second proposition.  According to the proposition,  firm value  is
expected to increase with the risk associated with leverage. Furthermore, leverage is priced in other
theoretical financial models as a risk factor, either directly or indirectly. These theoretical
frameworks  support  the hypothesis that there should be a positive relationship between leverage
and  expected  excess return  in our  regression.
       Empirical findings on the leverage-return relationship have been mixed. Depending on  the
definition of leverage,  sample  period  and geography,  among other differences,  researchers  find
different evidence of the leverage-return relationship.  Our regression  equation  is similar to the  one
used  by Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012) and D’Mello and Sivaprasad (2015) and  we  therefore
consider their findings  when developing our hypotheses. It is important to note, though, that these
studies were conducted on samples  different than ours, varying in time and  geographical scope.
However, in complement to other studies in the US, we find them helpful for our hypothesis
development.  While D’Mello and Sivaprasad (2015) find a positive relation  for their Indian
sample,  Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012)  find  a  negative  in the UK. In addition, they discover a
different relation between individual leverage on a firm  level and on an industry level, which

                                      17
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

complicates the relation even further.  The authors find a general negative relation between returns
and leverage, but a positive relation between industry level gearing and returns. Considering  more
closely related  studies  in the US,  we find several studies revealing a negative relationship.
However, these are often conducted calculating returns on a twelve-month subsequent basis. Our
study is distinct from this as we measure the excess return of a subsequent quarter,  providing  an
interpretation of  a more immediate expectation of the market pricing of leverage. Therefore,  these
studies provide limited guidance to what we should expect from our results. Instead,  assuming that
the market is efficient, theoretical financial studies as the second proposition might give a better
idea of how firm value develops on a shorter term.
       Given  the  mixed  background  of  the  empirical evidence  of the theoretical relation, our
hypotheses for the general study on all cycles need to be two-sided and test whether there is an
effect at all because it is not certain  whether the relation will be positive or negative.  To further
complicate things, the effect can differ depending on industry.  Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012)
find a positive relation in three industries, and negative relation in six others. Because the industry
definition differs between our sample and theirs it is not meaningful to expect any particular results
based on their study for our sample. However, we do expect to see different relations in different
industries and therefore we test the null-hypothesis of no relation for each industry as well.  A third
distinction in our method is the interaction between net cash positions and leverage.  A firm’s
ability to generate and sustain cash should on its own affect excess returns. More interestingly
though is how this affects investors valuation of leverage when  combined.  Hypothetically, if a firm
has more cash than outstanding debt the incremental risk of increased leverage should be reduced.
Therefore, we expect to find a negative relation between netcashxln_levrat and the expected excess
return in subsequent quarters.

                            Hypotheses for all cycles and expansion

                  '
               `a :  b1 = 0,  firm  leverage  is not related to expected  excess return

                    '
                 `' :  b1 ¹  0,  firm  leverage  is related to expected  excess  return

       Next, we conduct the analysis on each business cycle separately where the method is
repeated.  First, we run the regression for the full sample  as well as for each industry  with only
observations for contraction and, second, exclusively for observations in periods of expansion.  An

                                      18
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

alternative method could be  to  introduce  a  dummy variable for  the  two cycles. We consciously
decide not to as it would limit our interpretations of the results. By conducting regressions in each
cycle on its own, we are able to distinguish the full effect of all variables on expected excess returns
more distinctly, instead of creating many interaction variables. Moreover, we are able to analyze
the all-cycle sample as well, which is of interest as it  better  contributes to previous studies in the
US, who normally study the full time-series.
        It is difficult to predict with certainty what relation will be found between the cycles as
little research has been made with this distinction. However, in the scenario  that  the economy is in
downturn and companies suffer from financial instability and decreasing demand, it is reasonable
to expect that  investors require a risk premium for higher levered firms. Thus,  the relationship
between leverage and returns should be positive in periods of contractions to compensate investors
for the increasing risk of financial distress costs.  The hypothesis for periods of expansion is the
same as for the full sample  because  we are  unsure what the effect will be.

                             Hypotheses for periods of contraction

    U
  `a :  b1 ≤  0,  firm leverage is negatively related or is not related at all to expected excess return

               U
            `' :  b1 >  0,  firm leverage is positively related to expected excess return

       To  further the analysis of the relationship between leverage and returns  found in the
regression analysis, we  create  portfolios of  firms  based on  their  leverage  in an ascending order.
After the portfolios are constructed we are able to quantify the  relationship in terms of average
returns  over our sample period.  We expect that the average return of each portfolio will be highly
dependent on the respective economic cycle and not solely driven by leverage’s effect on expected
returns.  We  acknowledge the fact that our regression equation will probably not capture the full
extent to what explains returns. Therefore, the decile analysis can possibly differ in how returns
are related to the decile levels  compared to the regression. In different economic cycles especially,
firms may be  exposed  to  an increased systematic risk  which  contributes more  to  the stock price
development  than leverage  would in isolation. For example, in contractions, highly levered firms
may perform worse as a consequence  of  distress costs related to leverage (Hu and Gong, 2018)
and therefore we can expect that excess returns are worse in these periods.  In general,  it will
therefore be difficult to predict what pattern we will see  with regard  to deciles’  leverage and their

                                      19
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

average subsequent returns. The same uncertainty applies for our analysis across  all cycles and
periods of  expansions as well  why our expectations are unclear for these scenarios as well.
4.2 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Table  1a,  1b  and  1c presents summary statistics for the dependent variable excess return,  ER, and
the percentage values of the  independent variable leverage,  levrat_percent, as well as for the
control variables,  size, pe  and  mb.  Only observations where values for all these variables are
recorded is included in the dataset, hence  the  equally many  observations  across all variables.
        The mean excess return  for  subsequent  quarters,  ERt+1,  is  0.98% in the full sample across
all cycles and it  is observed  to be  -1.23% to 1.42%  in  contraction and expansion cycles
respectively.  We also  find  that the average firm leverage,  levrat_percent,  varies between periods
of contraction and expansion, from  74.19% to  76.42%, and the standard deviation  also  increases
in  periods of expansion. The minimum value of debt is  zero as a consequence  of  the removal of
negative  values,  as we do not consider these as  economically relevant for  our model  to consider.
The maximum values of debt  are  observed  to be as high as 1371.81%, i.e. debt taking on almost
14 times the book value of equity in a company,  after winsorizing at a 1 to 99% level. The average
market value of the firms in our sample for the entire sample period is 7.62  billion USD.  The
minimum firm size is too small to be displayed in billions of dollars with two decimals but varies
between 44,700 to 64,000  USD  between the contraction and expansion cycle.  Furthermore, the
average price-to-earnings and market-to-book  ratio ranges from 12.3  to  16.7  and 2.3  to  2.9
respectively.  Lastly,  Table  1a,  1b  and  1c  provides information on the distribution of observations
between the different cycles.  Out of the total  111,987  observations recorded during the entire
sample period,  18,567  (17%) is related to periods of contraction and  93,420  (83%) to periods of
expansion.
       Next, we decompose  the average leverage of industries,  industrylevrat_percent, for each
industry to show how the industry’s mean leverage develop over the sample period. In  Figure 1,
we see the average leverage for different industries and its development over time. The overall
average leverage shows an upward facing trend over time  and  it is  especially  strong  for  Consumer
Goods,  Services  and  Transportation & Public Utilities. The  four industries  reach  record-breaking
levels of leverage around the time of the final quarter in the sample,  2015Q2.  Looking at the
average leverage for the  entire  sample of firms, we can see that there has been a spike in the last
quarters of the sample  (appendix,  Figure  A1a).  Since the financial crisis of 2008, the cost of

                                      20
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

leverage has been low as central banks has stimulated the economy with low interest  rates. This
could serve as an explanation as for why leverage has been increasing lately.  Basic Materials is
the only industry that has seen a decline in leverage  during  the last decade.  The highest levered
industry has on average been Transportation and  Public Utilities throughout the sample history.
       Furthermore, we investigate  summary statistics  of  netcash  which tells us the distribution
of firms with net debt or net cash positions, i.e. firms with net debt greater than zero, or firms with
less than zero indicating that cash is larger than interest-bearing debt  respectively.  Table 2 presents
the results and we can conclude that  the large majority of  observations within our sample  have a
net debt position, 76.2%, and the share increases to 81.0% in periods of contraction. During periods
of expansion, almost a fourth of all the observations relate to a net cash position, indicating that
firms are on average more financially healthy  in expansions.
       Finally, we investigate how the variables correlate. A detailed table of the correlation
matrix is provided in Table A5  in the appendix.

                                      21
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

5.1 REGRESSION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS – ALL CYCLES
The purpose of the  following  analysis is to understand what the relation between leverage and
returns is in the full sample and across different industries  with no regards to the economic cycle.
       The results are shown in  Table  3  for the  regression on the  total sample as well  as the six
separate industries.  For the  total  sample  (across  all  industries),  the regression proves a statistically
significant  positive  relationship  between  leverage and  expected  excess returns on a 99%
confidence level.  The independent variable for leverage,  ln_levrat,  is the natural logarithm of the
leverage ratio, hence a 1% change  in leverage is associated with  an increase in  expected  excess
return  of  0.01 ∗  ScL_cdefg%,#  in each industry,  i.  For the full sample, a  1% increase in leverage is
related to an increase of 0.013% in  the expected  excess return  for  the  average  subsequent  quarter.
Our  results are in line with what Modigliani and Miller’s second proposition suggests (1963).
       Looking at the different industries, we find proof that the relationship between leverage
and returns is positive and significant for companies within  Consumer Goods,  Industrials,
Transportation & Public Utilities, Retail & Wholesale Trade and Services at  a 99% level. The
relation is indicated to be  positive  within Basic Materials,  but we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that  leverage has no effect on expected excess returns  on a statistically significant level. The
positive relation is strongest for companies within  Services  where a 1% increase in leverage is
related to  0.026% increase in  expected  excess return.
        For the total sample we observe a statistically significant positive relation between average
industry leverage,  ln_industrylevrat,  and excess returns,  ER. This is consistent with the findings
of  Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012). In all industries, except Retail & Wholesale Trade and
Services, there is also a statistically significant relation at the 99% confidence level. The coefficient
should be interpreted in the same manner as  ln_levrat  which means that a 1% increase in mean
industry leverage is related to approximately 0.062% increase in  expected excess return for  a
subsequent  quarter  in the total sample. Consequently, we find interesting evidence of a stronger
relation between mean industry leverage and  expected  excess return than for individual firm
leverage. The risk associated with a company’s equity thus increases more when the entire industry
on average raises the leverage than when an individual company does so.  Different from
Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012),  we do not find any contradictive results  between the

                                      22
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

statistically significant relations of mean industry leverage or individual firm leverage  to  expected
excess returns. While Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012) concluded that the second proposition
only holds when measuring mean industry leverage, but not firm leverage,  we find supportive
evidence of the proposition regardless of the two leverage measures.  The divergence in our results
from Muradoglu and Sivaprasad (2012) could be evidence of a different investor sentiment in the
UK and US of how industry gearing is valued or simply attributable to the differences in our
methods.
       Before running the regression, we hypothesized that the cash position of a company may
have an effect on  excess returns. We  interact  net cash position  with leverage to be able to
understand the leverage-return relationship given a net cash position.  The regression  results for the
total sample  suggest  that firms  with  a net cash position  increase  the expected excess return  which
is counterintuitive. Theoretically, a net cash position lowers the financial risk in a company and
thus we expect expected return on equity to decrease, not increase.  However, when interacted with
leverage, our hypothesis is confirmed. The relation between  netcashxln_levrat  and  ER  is negative
for the total sample  which suggests that if a firm with a net cash position increases its leverage,
the expected excess return decrease.  The result is in line with our expectations that the incremental
risk  of leverage  is reduced when a  firm  has more cash than outstanding debt.  For  the total sample,
a 1% increase in leverage in a firm with a net cash position, decreases the  expected  excess return
for  the next quarter with 0.01%.  Combining the effect from  ln_levrat  and  netcashxln_levrat,  the
net effect on the expected excess  return  by a 1% increase in leverage  is an increase of  0.003%  for
a firm with a net cash position.  Hence, the incremental risk premium from leverage is lower for
firms with a net cash position  than those without (0.013% for a 1% increase in leverage).  The
variable is statistically significant for the full sample of firms, as well as for firms within Industrials
and Services on an industry-level, although the relationship is suggested to be negative for all
industries. The  economic interpretation  for the  separate industries is the same  as for the total
sample. For companies within Services, a 1% increase in leverage is related to the largest increase
in  expected excess return among the industries. This is also the industry where the interaction
between net  cash positions and leverage has the largest effect too, which make  it evident that  the
market’s required return  within this industry is sensitive to capital structure decisions of firms.  In
fact, a 1% increase in leverage combined with a net cash position  is related to a total effect of

                                      23
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

-0,0005% decrease in expected excess return,  suggesting that a firm with a net cash position within
Services  reduces the equity risk premium for increasing leverage.
        Weighing in all variables for the full sample, our results suggests that excess returns are
expected to increase with higher leverage on a firm and industry level, but  the effect on the risk
premium is lower for firms  with a net cash position. Furthermore,  the excess return is expected to
decrease with size, market-to-book and price-to-earnings. When industries are separated, the
results consistently show evidence of a positive relation between both individual firm leverage and
average industry leverage and  excess returns.  We also conduct a step-wise regression to robust-
check our conclusions on the relation between excess return and our independent and control
variables. In sum, all concluded relations hold for the different robust regressions, see Table A6 in
the appendix for more details.
5.2 REGRESSION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS – CONTRACTION
As suggested by Hu and Gong (2018),  we  must consider the market conditions in an integral
analysis of the  leverage-return  relationship  to capture the full scope of  the effect. This section
explores how the relationship between leverage and returns change  for periods of contraction.
       The  regression  results for contraction cycles  are presented in  Table 4.  Similar to the all-
cycle analysis, we observe a  positive  effect of leverage on returns  on an  aggregate cross-industry
level  at a 99% confidence level.  We can therefore conclude that leverage is related to increasing
expected returns stemming from a riskier capital  structure. The effect is the largest for Services,
where a 1% increase in leverage is related to an increase of 0.047% in  expected  excess return for
a  subsequent quarter.  For the full sample, a 1% increase in leverage is related to an increase of
0.018% in  expected  excess return for  a  subsequent quarter  in periods of contraction.  The  positive
relationship  holds for all industries separately, however  at various significance levels. When
dividing  the aggregate effect  in to that of specific industries,  statistical significance is lost for
industries Transportation & Public Utilities, Retail & Wholesale Trade and for Basic Materials.
For Industrials, the relation remains significant at the 95% confidence level.
       Perhaps the  most important finding from the result of  these  regressions is how the  positive
impact  on  expected  excess returns  from a 1% increase in leverage has a stronger effect on  excess
returns in a period of contraction than for all cycles  (and for expansions  as we  will  explore  in  the
next  section).  In comparison to the above results for periods of contraction, the regression analysis
on all cycles suggest that firms on average increase the expected return by  0.013% for every 1%

                                      24
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

increase in leverage,  which is  a  lower relation than that in contractions.  The  relatively higher
relation  in contractions  holds  true  for all industries except for  firms in  Transportation  & Public
Utilities  or  Retail & Wholesale Trade.  Theoretically, highly levered firms should be more
vulnerable in economic downturns as the financial distress costs associated with increasing default
risk is higher (Cook and Tang,  2010).  Therefore, a rational investor would require higher returns
to compensate for the incremental risk.  While our regression does not reveal information on how
the immediate  market reaction  in a recession, it is generally known that stock markets usually
plummets, and given that default risk is priced, this is what we should expect as  well. In contrast,
our  results support the idea that default risk increases the expected return going forward (Cai and
Zhang, 2011), but with mixed statistical significance  between industries. The relation is significant
for firms in  Consumer Goods, Industrials, and Services,  at  the 99% confidence level. For  the rest
of the industries, we cannot draw any clear conclusions given the lack of statistical significance.
       Hypothetically, firms with financially stable positions should be able to better guard against
the negative effects  of  leverage in economic downturns, which in turn would lower the financial
distress risk of these firms. Hence, firms with net cash positions  should  acquire less risk with
increasing   leverage   than   firms  with   net   debt   positions.   The   negative   relation   between
netcashxln_levrat  and  expected  excess  return supports this argument. For the total sample of  firms
in contractions  with net cash positions, we  observe a  negative  effect of  0.013%  on  excess  return
for the interaction variable,  effectively  decreasing the incremental risk of leverage.  However, we
cannot definitively confirm that this result holds for the industries individually as only firms within
Services  proves  to have a statistically significant effect from this variable.
       Furthermore, the average leverage within  an industry continues to affect  predicted  excess
returns. We  find  a  positive  relation for the full sample where a 1% increase in average industry
leverage  increases the expected  excess  return by 0.126%  for a subsequent quarter.  In comparison,
the  effect from  average industry  leverage  on expected excess return in  other  cycles is  relatively
smaller,  approximately  0.062% across  all  cycles,  or 0.055% for expansions.  On an industry level,
the overall positive relation observed in the all-cycle  analysis  remains. For all industries except
Basic Materials, investors expect higher returns with increases in average industry leverage in
contractions compared to expansions. The results are significant at the 99% level for all industries
except  Basic Materials (significant at the 90% level) and for  Services.  Evidently, investors  expect

                                      25
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

higher returns by  increased leverage on an industry level  and  even more  so  in  periods of
contraction.
5.3 REGRESSION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS - EXPANSION
In a final regression  analysis, we  reexamine the model  specified  in  the regression equation  on an
aggregate level as well as for each industry, but exclusively for  periods of  expansions.  The
regression results are  presented in Table 5. For periods of expansion, the  positive relation between
expected  excess  returns and leverage is sustained  for  firms in general and for each industry
separately.  The null hypothesis that leverage has no  or negative  effect on  excess  returns can be
rejected for firms in  each  industry  except  Basic Materials. Comparing the results  in  Table 5  with
Table 3  and  Table 4, we observe that the  positive  relation between returns and leverage is  lowest
in periods of expansion.  In the previous section, we found  that leverage  would increase the
expected return in periods of contractions more than  in  all cycles and as a natural result, an
investor’s expected  return increases by the least for increasing leverage in  periods of expansions.
As Hu & Gong (2018) points out, capital is abundant  in an expansion  and  investors’  risk appetite
increase. Hence  additional firm  leverage  should be related to  lower  equity premiums  in  periods of
expansion and larger premiums  in  contractions  when financial distress and bankruptcy costs  are
more prevalent.  For example,  expected  excess  returns  within  Industrials, on average,  increase by
0.013% by a 1% increase in leverage during in the period before a quarter of  expansion,  compared
to  expected increase in excess return by 0.016% and 0.015% in a period of contraction  and for all
cycles respectively.
       Similar to in the regression  for contractions,  increasing  leverage for  firms  with net cash
positions  are related to  a  decreasing  risk premium. A  1% increase in leverage  for  a firm with a  net
cash position in expansions is  related to a  0.009%  decrease of the expected excess return.  The
effect is significant  for  the  total  sample on  a 99% confidence level, as well as for  Industrials and
Services. For the rest of the industries, the effect  is  statistically insignificant.
       Analyzing the effect of mean industry leverage on  excess  returns, we find a positive
relation  for  firms  in  all  industries  except  Retail  &  Wholesale  Trade.  In  all  industries,
ln_industrylevrat  becomes less positive  in  expansions  compared to  contractions, confirming the
notion that investors require a larger risk premium for leverage in periods of contraction than
expansion. The effect is statistically significant at the 99% level for all industries except Retail &
Wholesale Trade and Services.  Most interestingly, we see that firms in  Retail & Wholesale Trade

                                      26
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

has a negative coefficient on  industry leverage,  indicating that an increase in average leverage for
the industry lower expected return (or the risk) of an individual firm within the industry. However,
as the relationship is not statistically significate, we cannot  conclude this with  certainty.
5.4  DISCUSSION  OF  RESULTS  –  ECONOMIC  IMPLICATIONS  OF  LEVERAGE  IN

DIFFERENT BUSINESS CYCLES
Consistently throughout the analysis of our specified regression model, we have circled back to
the differences between  business  cycles. There is an ongoing discussion on what the main
determinants  of  the capital  structure dynamics  are,  whether  it  is  driven  mainly by firm
characteristics or changing capital and economic market conditions (Halling, Yu and Zechner,
(2016)). In this paper we focus on trying to shed light of the latter’s impact and we have in the
previous sections shown evidence of the leverage-return relationship for the entire  sample period
and for contractions and expansions separately. The  positive  relationship is consistent throughout
all scenarios but with varying magnitude. Why is it that leverage  increases  the  expected  excess
return more in times of economic contraction?  We have touched upon some explanations to this
result already when commenting the regression analysis.  To entangle this relationship further, it is
important to understand that during recessions, firms’ financial structure experience significant
shocks and  capital structure decisions may affect how the market reacts to the consequences of
these shocks. For example, shocks include reduction in corporate cash flow, difficulty in raising
capital through financial intermediaries and  changes in  term-structure of  interest  rates (Halling,
Yu and Zechner  (2016)). An initial analysis of the average leverage for our sample tells us that
firms, on average, have a higher level of leverage in times of expansion than contraction by 2.2%.
The  discrepancy  is  economically small but  different from contractions on a 95%  statistically
significant level (see appendix,  Table  A4). On an industry level,  the mean leverage difference of
higher leverage in periods of expansion  is true with statistical significance only for firms within
Basic Materials, Consumer Goods and Industrials. Firms within Transportation & Public Utilities
and Services show a higher level of leverage in periods of contraction with statistical significance
(90% and 99%)  and for firms within Retail & Wholesale Trade the difference is indefinite. On a
total  sample level, this  indicates  that firms may be inclined to take on more debt in economic
upswings or  change their  equity structure either by corporate actions or losses in retained earnings.
Because the leverage ratio is affected by changes in both debt and  equity, it is difficult to
disentangle  what  change  that  drives the relation with  expected  excess  returns.  Generally, though,

                                      27
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

the results from our  analysis suggests  that  firms are  more highly levered in periods of expansions,
but  that the shocks that affect firms’ capital  structure increases the risk associated with equity more
in periods of contraction,  and  therefore  increased  leverage  has a larger  effect on expected excess
return  for these cycles  as well.
       In a second analysis of mean differences in excess returns, presented in appendix Table A4,
we find that the average  excess  return is consistently higher in periods of expansion throughout all
industries and the total  sample. Interestingly, firms within Transportation & Public Utilities, Retail
& Wholesale Trade and Services on average recorded a lower leverage in periods of expansion but
with higher excess returns  on average for a subsequent quarter  which suggests that there are more
factors explaining returns than solely leverage.  We will explore this more in detail by assigning
the observations into deciles in section 5.5.
        Given that firms on average are less levered  in periods of contraction  (Table  A4),  if a firm
issues  new debt, the increase  of debt  is greater  relative  to equity  in periods of contraction than
expansion. Therefore, the relative increase in expected excess return should naturally be larger too.
Moreover, Halling, Yu and Zechner  (2016)  suggest that  as external financing is costlier in
recessions, the cost of  equity financing becomes  goes up as well.  Therefore, it is  more  problematic
for firms to rebalance the debt-to-equity ratio by raising equity  which may effectively cause firms
to report higher debt-to-equity ratios without necessarily increasing debt. Firms with this problem
could be associated with other  risk  factors not controlled for in our method, but  they may also fuel
the positive leverage-return relationship without  having the effect  necessarily  stemming from
disproportionately more debt. For example, firms  that  continue to be profitable  and  use retained
earnings to finance  new investment opportunities, but do not rebalance the capital structure with
new equity, will  experience an increased  expected return because of better  expected  profitability.
Neither the effect of  equity  changes  nor changes in debt  is individually controlled for in  our study
of the leverage-return relationship  and therefore it is not possible to conclude if increasing debt or
decreasing equity is driving the increasing expected return for increasing leverage.
       As discussed, many factors magnify the risk relating capital  structure decisions in  different
economic cycles.  Due to the limitations  of our study and regression model, we cannot possibly
explain these effects in detail and it would be naïve to prescribe leverage the full explanatory value
to  expected  excess returns.  In the next section, we aim to shine light on this discrepancy and the
limitations of our explanatory value of the returns. We aim to provide a better understanding of

                                      28
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

how different levels of leverage on average have performed during our sample period and how our
control variables  contribute  to that  result.
5.5 ANALYSIS OF RETURNS IN DECILES

In  Table  6,  we present the time-series average values of  excess returns, leverage, market-to-book
and price-to-earnings  for  the  deciles created  across all cycles.  We create  the same table for
observations in periods of contraction  (Table  7)  and expansion  (Table  8) to be able to distinguish
differences between the two.  Our  regression  results and  analysis  tell  us that  increases  in  leverage
are  related to higher expected returns. The following analysis of time-series averaged returns, both
equally and value-weighted, will help us determine what the average subsequent quarter return has
been for different levels of leverage.
       To start off our analysis, we look to the time-series average excess return,  TAER,  and its
value-weighted counterpart,  w_TAER. The relation between the deciles’ leverage and the returns
are not  in definitive support  of our regression results. In the lower deciles  (low-levered firms),
TAER  is generally at par with higher deciles which is neither inconsistent nor affirmative of the
results that leverage increase expected return. Looking at the value-weighted average returns,
higher deciles (above 5) have on average a higher value which supports our regression results. The
relatively unclear relationship between average returns in the deciles and leverage is an important
finding, though. Dimitrov and Jain (2008) finds a similar result in their study and shines light on
how this can be interpreted. The decile analysis suggests that high leverage is not the sole
explanatory factor to how risk is priced in stocks. Evidently, our regression model granted us the
interpretation that leverage has a positive effect on expected returns, but it, of course, does not
explain the full causal relation to expected returns. If increases in leverage was an exclusive
variable contributing to positive expected returns, we would find this relation in our decile analysis
as well.  Moreover,  our  averages are over an extensive time-period and as a consequence it
smoothens out variations which, in a shorter horizon, could provide a clearer relation between our
deciles as well.  Interestingly, there is an evident negative relation in our deciles in the average
level of price-to-earnings ratio, indicating that highly levered firms are associated with low
valuations relative to their earnings.  Normally, there is a strong association between high price-to-
earnings ratios and stocks growing quickly  as investors expect high earnings growth  –  valuing the
stock higher.  Our decile analysis complements this information and suggests that firms with high
earnings expectations have on average been low levered during our  sample period, and vice versa.

                                      29
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

The low  levered firms have also on average been valued higher relative to their book  value of
equity  and  thus  we observe a negative relation in market-to-book in the deciles as well.  Our
findings  suggest  that value-stocks on average are more highly levered, as these tend to have lower
price-to-earnings and market-to-book ratios.  The regression  results from  Table 3  indicated  a
negative relation between expected excess returns and  size,  price-to-earnings and market-to-book.
The decile analysis presents  results  in line with this.
       Looking at  Table  7, we analyze the deciles in periods of contractions.  First, we find that
equal-weighted  average  returns  (TAER)  decrease  with  the deciles which is contradictive to  what
the regression analysis suggested (Table 4).  Theoretically, and according to our regression, we
expect that in periods of contraction, when leverage is associated with even more risk as it is
magnified by macroeconomic stress, expected returns  should  increase  more. Our method allows
us to conclude that on average, this has not been  reflected in  the subsequent quarters during our
sample period in recessions  when equal-weighting the averages.  Similarly,  to before, this result is
an important finding as well as it contributes to the understanding of risk. Leverage is positively
related to expected excess returns, and increasingly so in periods of contraction, but there are
variables omitted in our method that clearly could help explain the equal-weighted return relation
better.  The reasons why we see decreasing  average returns  as leverage increases could hence be
due to a factor that is inversely related to leverage with higher effect on excess return.  Examples
of such factors  could be the market-to-book ratio or the price-per-earnings-ratio.  We observe that
these variables negatively relate to deciles, indicating that value-stocks have been more highly
levered in periods of contractions.  It could also be that our measure of expected returns on a
subsequent quarter basis is too short of a  time-frame to capture the full expectations by the market
in our regression.  In addition, George and Hwang (2010) theorize that under the assumption that
firms make optimal capital structure decisions, lower levered firms choose to be low levered
because they  are inherently highly exposed to  systematic risk, and thus avoid the increased risk
from leverage.  Consequently, investors will expect higher returns for the lower levered firms of
this characteristic. In part, this could explain the  negative relation between equal-weighted average
returns  and leverage.  The value-weighted measure somewhat relaxes the contradictive findings
and shows a less clear relation. Instead, the least negative values of w_TAER are observed in higher
deciles, in line with what we would expect.  The difference in  equal and value-weighted average
returns suggests that  the negative relation between deciles and returns observed on an equal-

                                      30
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

weighted basis are largely attributable to the size of firms and smaller firms seem to, on average,
earn better returns in economic downturns, contributing to this result.  It is important to note that
the value-weighting of returns is made within each decile separately and therefore there can still
exist small firms skewing the equal-weighted returns in the lower deciles which on average contain
larger firms.  In general, the tendency of the size-distribution between deciles are similar as what
we observed in  Table  6  for all cycles.
       Finally, we  complete our  analysis  by  examining  periods of expansion  in  Table  8.
Comparable to periods of  contractions,  the deciles are  somewhat  negatively related to  TAER  with
the notable exception of decile 10 that, on average, generate the best average  return over  periods
of expansion.  We acknowledge  the  fact that decile 10 captures the outmost highly levered firms in

                                                        th
our sample and the  average leverage  in  the 10  deciles is  more  than  twice the level of decile 9.
Modigliani and Miller would not be surprised by  this result on its own, considering their second
proposition (1963). However, if the second proposition would exclusively be able to explain firm
valuation, the tenth  decile  should be  consistently highest  across all our decile tables, which is not
the case.  The argument that our method omits variables which may help explain this relationship
still holds, but the result is still interesting.  Hu and Gong (2018) points out that firms with an above
target level leverage  thrives  in periods of expansions as they  can sustain more leverage without
bearing the associated negative costs because the macroeconomic conditions are favorable. On the
contrary, the highly levered firms are theorized to suffer in recessions.  Although we study level of
leverage overall and not  leverage in comparison to target leverage, we believe that their findings
are applicable.  Our results indicate that the most highly levered firms, on average, generates lower
returns in the subsequent quarters in periods of contraction, whereas the most highly levered firms
generate high returns in periods of expansion, a finding similar to the theoretical framework of Hu
& Gong (2018).  The price-to-earnings ratios complement this view. In periods of expansion, the
ratios are on average higher than in periods of contraction. This is an indication of investors are
expecting better earnings development in periods of expansion which can be attributed to the
generally better economic climate in these periods.  The increased average price-to-earnings  ratio
for decile 10 in periods of expansion may contribute to the  explanation of its high return. We can
conclude that for periods of expansion, lower levered firms  generate  better average returns in
general and they are generally larger in size with relatively high market-to-book and price-to-
earnings ratios, indicating that they are  growth-stocks  with high valuations.

                                      31
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

6. CONCLUSION

In this study, we have  analyzed the leverage-return relationship in a sample of S&P 500 firms in
the US from 1969Q4 to  2015Q2  and distinctly examined how the relation changes between
business cycles. Our empirical results suggest that  an increase in  leverage is  positively related to
the  expected  excess return, indicating that  the second proposition of Modigliani and Miller (1963)
holds true.  The  positive  relation  is  observed  across all business cycles, but the  positive  effect on
expected  excess  return  is stronger in periods  of contraction and milder in expansion.  We attribute
the  strengthened effect  on excess return  observed in contractions  to  negative financial shocks
associated to  changing macroeconomic conditions  which increases  the risk associated with
leverage.
        In complement to the regression analysis, we conduct an analysis based on leverage deciles,
representing different levels of average firm leverage over our sample period and in each cycle
respectively.  We find that averaging returns on an equal and value-weighted basis over the entire
time period do not present a relation between decile leverage and returns consistent with the
regression analysis. Instead, the relation is indistinguishable between all cycles and negative in
periods of contraction and expansion alone.  The finding is important as it suggests that  leverage
in isolation has insufficiently explanatory value to expected excess returns  on a subsequent
quarterly average basis. To some extent, price-to-earnings and market-to-book ratios seem to
explain this result, but we discuss that it is potentially the result of an omitted variable not
controlled for in our analysis which is  inversely related to returns.  Finally, comparing the results
of the decile analysis in periods of expansion with contraction, we find evidence supporting the
theory of Hu and Gong  (2018) that highly levered firms thrive in periods of expansion and suffer
more in periods of contractions.
        Our findings contribute to previous empirical research  on the leverage-return relationship
in US firms and industries and uniquely so by analyzing  how the relationship is affected by
different business cycles.  Going forward, our analysis may provide a foundation for additional
research on the link between macroeconomic conditions and capital structure research.  Working
with this paper, we have discovered three areas of interest which future research may continue
exploring. Firstly,  our research does not account for early or late-cyclical industries or sectors. The
definition of business cycles provided by NBER is standardized and with a more sophisticated
measure, one could explore with better accuracy how business cyclicality  affects  the leverage-

                                      32
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

return relationship. Secondly,  it could be beneficial to robust check our conclusions on other
definitions of leverage including different combinations of long or short-term debt and market
values of equity. Finally,  our study is limited to raw, equal or value-weighted, returns and a
complementary study could investigate the relation between risk-adjusted returns and leverage in
different business cycles.

                                      33
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS – TABLES AND FIGURES

                                             Table 1a, 1b, 1c.
 Summary statistics of variables in the sample on all cycles, periods of contraction and expansion. ER  measures the
  excess return in time t+1 in percentages (%).  Levrat_percent  reports leverage ratio (debt-to-equity) in percentages
  (%) and  size_absolute  is the market value of firms defined in billions of USD. Variables for price-to-earnings,  pe,
                                and market-to-book,  mb, are expressed as ratios.

 Table 1a
 Summary statistics for all cycles.

                                            Full sample
                                         Standard
  Variable               Mean                          Min.         Max.           Obs.
                                        Deviation
  ER                     0.98            19.99        -58.35         95.07        111,987
  levrat_percent            76.05           112.45          0.00       1371.81         111,987
  size_absolute             7.62            23.37          0.00        733.62         111,987
  pe                     16.00            32.31        -226.14        283.93         111,987
  mb                     2.82            3.04          0.00         32.39        111,987

 Table 1b
 Summary statistics for periods of contraction.

                                           Contraction
                                         Standard
  Variable               Mean                         Min.         Max.           Obs.
                                        Deviation
  ER                     -1.23            24.26        -58.35         95.07          18,567
  levrat_percent            74.19           107.97          0.00       1371.81          18,567
  size_absolute             6.09            20.79          0.00        519.01          18,567
  pe                     12.32            26.27       -226.14        283.93          18,567
  mb                     2.25            2.61         0.02         32.39          18,567

 Table 1c
 Summary statistics for periods of expansion.

                                         Expansion
                                         Standard
  Variable               Mean                         Min.         Max.            Obs.
                                        Deviation
  ER                     1.42            19.00       -58.35         95.07           93,420
  levrat_percent           76.42           113.32         0.00       1371.81           93,420
  size_absolute             7.92            23.83         0.00        733.62           93,420
  pe                     16.73             33.33      -226.14        283.93           93,420
  mb                     2.94             3.11         0.00         32.39          93,420

                                      34
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                             Table 2
  Summary statistics of  netcash  for all cycles, contraction and expansion.  The dummy variable assumes the value 0
   when net debt is larger than 0, indicating a net debt position, and 1 when net debt is less than 0, indicating a net
                                                     cash position.
                    Full sample                Contraction                Expansion

  netcash           Obs.     Percent              Obs.   Percent           Obs.     Percent
  0 (net debt)      85,374        76.2            15,047      81.0         70,327       75.3
  1 (net
                  26,613        23.8
  cash)                                          35,20      19.0         23,093       24.7

  Total           111,987         100            18,567      100          93,420        100

                                           Figure 1
 Graphical illustration of  industrylevrat_percent: the development of the average level of leverage in each industry.
      Data is sampled between 1969Q4 and 2015Q2. Mean industry leverage is measured in  percentages (%).

         200


         150


         100

   Industrylevrat_percent
         50


         0
         1969Q2    1976Q4    1984Q2    1991Q4    1999Q2    2006Q4    2014Q2
                                             Calendar Data Year and Quarter

                            Basic Materials                      Consumer Goods
                               Industrials                             Transportation & Public Utilities
                             Retail & Wholesale Trade               Services

                                      35
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

REGRESSION TABLES
                                                               Table 3
   Regression results for all cycles for the full sample and for each industry separately. The regression is made on an unbalanced panel data set, controlling for
  firm fixed effects and with standard errors clustered on a company level. Excess returns, ER, is measured in time t+1 and regressed on the main independent
  natural logarithm of debt-to-equity ratio,  ln_levrat,  in time  t. The regression controls for the natural logarithm of average industry leverage,  ln_industrylevrat
    and the firm market value,  ln_size  as well as the market-to-book ratio,  mb,  price-to-earnings ratio,  pe,  net cash position,  netcash, and interaction variable
                                               between net cash positions and leverage,  netcashxln_levrat.
                                                                                                                        Retail &
                                                Basic         Consumer                    Transportation &     Wholesale
                              Total sample      Materials         Goods         Industrials      Public Utilities        Trade          Services
  VARIABLES               ER          ER          ER          ER           ER           ER          ER

  ln_levrat                    1.323***         0.483         0.856***        1.457***         1.137***         1.228***        2.571***
                                   (0.118)          (0.447)          (0.210)          (0.200)           (0.378)           (0.345)          (0.418)
  ln_industrylevrat             6.221***        4.907***       10.828***       10.916***        5.134***          0.488          0.899
                                   (0.340)          (0.951)          (0.756)          (0.701)           (0.885)           (0.920)          (0.839)
  ln_size                      -1.499***       -1.251***       -2.219***       -2.485***        -0.508***        -0.599***       -2.284***
                                   (0.076)          (0.216)          (0.191)          (0.163)           (0.156)           (0.172)          (0.247)
  mb                        -0.604***       -1.435***       -0.365***       -0.756***        -0.711***        -1.024***       -0.566***
                                   (0.042)          (0.336)          (0.052)          (0.088)           (0.147)           (0.121)          (0.086)
  pe                          -0.009***         0.002          -0.012**         -0.003            -0.011          -0.040***         -0.011
                                 (0.002)          (0.005)          (0.006)          (0.004)           (0.007)           (0.009)          (0.007)
  netcash                    4.939***         2.524         2.826***        6.238***         3.437**         3.401***       10.716***
                                   (0.512)          (2.129)          (1.043)          (0.818)           (1.725)           (1.286)          (1.736)
  netcashxln_levrat             -1.033***         -0.542           -0.286         -1.333***          -0.697            -0.217         -2.618***
                                   (0.160)          (0.740)          (0.347)          (0.240)           (0.588)           (0.403)          (0.469)
  Constant                    -28.619***      -17.918***      -44.034***      -46.736***       -28.016***         -2.042         -8.917**
                                   (1.387)          (3.685)          (3.005)          (2.721)           (3.947)           (3.618)          (3.509)

  Observations                111,987         9,079          26,164         33,021          20,397          12,412         10,914
  R-squared                    0.018           0.019           0.020           0.026            0.008            0.019           0.031
  Number of compid            1,234           98            297           371            202            129           137
                                                             Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                     36
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                                               Table 4
    Regression results for periods of contraction for the full sample and for each industry separately. The regression is made on  an unbalanced panel data set,
 controlling for firm fixed effects and with standard errors clustered on a company level. Excess returns, ER, is measured in time t+1 and regressed on the main
     independent natural logarithm of debt-to-equity ratio,  ln_levrat,  in time  t.  The regression controls for the natural logarithm of average industry leverage,
     ln_industrylevrat  and the firm market value,  ln_size  as well as the market-to-book ratio,  mb,  price-to-earnings ratio,  pe,  net cash position,  netcash, and
                                      interaction variable between net cash positions and leverage, netcashxln_levrat.
                                                                                                                        Retail &
                                                            Consumer                    Transportation&    Wholesale
                           Total sample      Basic Materials        Goods         Industrials     Public. Utilities.       Trade          Services
  VARIABLES            ER            ER            ER           ER           ER           ER          ER

  ln_levrat                 1.778***           1.217           1.913***         1.613**          0.577           0.459         4.726***
                                (0.344)            (1.256)            (0.490)           (0.699)           (0.854)           (1.094)          (1.134)
  ln_industrylevrat          12.588***         4.866*         18.640***       20.544***       14.456***        9.534***         4.075
                                (1.019)            (2.778)            (2.039)           (2.455)           (2.578)           (3.432)          (3.897)
  ln_size                   -2.999***          -1.270**          -5.101***        -4.172***        -2.159***        -1.988***       -3.167***
                               (0.203)            (0.529)            (0.479)           (0.424)           (0.457)           (0.505)          (0.617)
  mb                     -1.635***         -3.096***         -0.912***        -2.135***        -2.390***        -1.599***       -1.914***
                                 (0.152)            (0.835)            (0.169)           (0.332)           (0.423)           (0.458)           (0.404)
  pe                       -0.031***           -0.019            -0.002           -0.028*           -0.029           -0.062          -0.050**
                               (0.008)            (0.020)            (0.016)           (0.015)           (0.026)           (0.041)          (0.022)
  netcash                 7.955***         15.980**         8.014***        7.673***          3.403           6.498        15.379***
                                 (1.465)            (7.289)            (2.373)           (2.662)           (4.600)           (4.157)           (5.238)
   netcashxln_levrat           -1.323***           -4.432            -1.444           -0.679           -0.296           -0.989          -3.168**
                                (0.509)            (2.676)            (0.914)           (0.878)           (1.431)           (1.439)          (1.546)
  Constant                 -58.052***         -20.479*         -79.411***       -87.735***       -70.976***       -38.732***        -29.184
                              (4.167)           (10.834)           (7.914)          (9.665)          (11.939)         (13.838)         (17.861)

  Observations               18,567            1,484            4,567           5,485           3,383           2,017           1,631
  R-squared                 0.048            0.035            0.057           0.065           0.038           0.040           0.071
  Number of compid          1,188             93             282            357            199            128           129
                                                             Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                     37
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                                               Table 5
     Regression results for periods of expansion for the full sample and for each industry separately. The regression is made on an unbalanced panel data set,
 controlling for firm fixed effects and with standard errors clustered on a company level. Excess returns, ER, is measured in time t+1 and regressed on the main
     independent natural logarithm of debt-to-equity ratio,  ln_levrat,  in time  t.  The regression controls for the natural logarithm of average industry leverage,
     ln_industrylevrat  and the firm market value,  ln_size  as well as the market-to-book ratio,  mb,  price-to-earnings ratio,  pe,  net cash position,  netcash, and
                                      interaction variable between net cash positions and leverage, netcashxln_levrat.
                                                                                                                        Retail &
                                                Basic         Consumer                    Transportation &     Wholesale
                              Total sample      Materials         Goods         Industrials      Public Utilities        Trade          Services
  VARIABLES               ER          ER          ER          ER           ER           ER          ER

  ln_levrat                   1.167***         0.261         0.663***        1.296***         1.050**         1.235***        2.341***
                                (0.121)          (0.446)          (0.228)          (0.199)          (0.412)           (0.337)          (0.433)
  ln_industrylevrat             5.521***        3.693***        9.313***        9.578***         7.868***          -0.204          1.291
                                (0.342)          (0.939)          (0.742)          (0.698)          (0.900)           (0.909)          (0.884)
  ln_size                      -1.284***        -1.225***        -1.749***        -2.200***         -0.499***         -0.358**        -2.094***
                                (0.075)          (0.209)          (0.196)          (0.162)          (0.158)           (0.160)          (0.251)
  mb                         -0.531***       -1.190***       -0.311***       -0.680***        -0.610***        -0.993***       -0.483***
                                (0.042)          (0.315)          (0.052)          (0.088)          (0.160)           (0.125)          (0.090)
  pe                          -0.008***         0.002          -0.016**         -0.000           -0.011*          -0.037***         -0.007
                                (0.003)          (0.005)          (0.006)          (0.004)          (0.006)           (0.010)          (0.007)
  netcash                    4.009***         0.093          1.944*        5.163***          2.836          2.777**        9.971***
                                (0.540)          (1.913)          (1.050)          (0.904)          (2.129)           (1.298)          (1.803)
  netcashxln_levrat             -0.911***         0.083           -0.179         -1.213***          -0.721            -0.164         -2.516***
                                (0.170)          (0.695)          (0.342)          (0.269)          (0.691)           (0.407)          (0.494)
  Constant                    -24.648***      -11.742***      -37.084***      -40.053***       -40.323***          1.056         -9.755***
                                (1.400)          (3.682)          (2.877)          (2.763)          (4.113)           (3.595)          (3.694)

  Observations                 93,420          7,595          21,597         27,536          17,014          10,395          9,283
  R-squared                   0.015          0.016          0.015          0.023           0.010           0.018          0.027
  Number of compid            1,233           98            297           371            201            129           137
                                                             Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                                             *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                     38
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

 DECILE ANALYSIS TABLES
                                             Table 6
    Table presenting deciles generated on leverage in an ascending order in all cycles. The variables avg_levrat,
      TAER, avg_size, avg_mb and avg_pe represent a simple mean over the entire time-series of our sample
           period for each decile.  w_TAER  is a weighted mean of the time-series average excess return.
          Decile     avg_levrat     TAER     w_TAER     avg_size     avg_mb      avg_pe

                 1         0.94       1.35         0.80         7.03         4.10        22.42
                 2         8.25       1.18         1.07        12.17         3.37        19.82
                 3        19.66       0.90         0.41        10.02         2.74        17.26
                 4        30.68       0.77         0.59         8.39         2.51        15.79
                 5        41.95       0.96         1.14         8.18         2.41        16.72
                 6        54.47       1.00         1.13         7.40         2.31        15.11
                 7        69.94       0.80         0.85         6.77         2.24        14.78
                 8        92.78       0.92         0.92         5.82         2.15        14.16
                 9       130.90       0.40         0.51         5.82         2.29        13.10
                10       313.10       1.50         1.47         4.55         4.08        10.71

                                             Table 7
    Table presenting deciles generated on leverage in an ascending order in periods of contraction. The variables
    avg_levrat, TAER, avg_size, avg_mb and avg_pe  represent a simple mean over the entire time-series of our
        sample period for each decile.  w_TAER  is a weighted mean of the time-series average excess return.

         Decile      avg_levrat     TAER      w_TAER     avg_size    avg_mb     avg_pe

                 1         1.21        0.06         -5.38        5.79        3.29       17.90

                  2         9.11        -0.95          -6.68       10.54        2.70       15.41

                  3        20.37        -0.60          -5.07        8.24        2.27       13.20

                  4        31.20        -1.03          -4.76        7.09        1.93       12.34

                  5        41.62        -1.51          -6.44        6.35        1.90       12.93

                  6        53.75        -1.38          -4.97        6.17        1.83       12.38

                  7        68.87        -2.15          -5.30        5.57        1.83       10.26

                  8        92.04        -1.10          -4.27        4.15        1.71       10.53

                  9       129.91        -1.67         -4.78        4.14        1.83       10.83

                 10       295.69        -1.95          -6.07        2.88        3.18        7.30

                                      39
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                             Table 8
     Table presenting deciles generated on leverage in an ascending order in periods of expansion. The variables
    avg_levrat, TAER, avg_size, avg_mb and avg_pe  represent a simple mean over the entire time-series of our
        sample period for each decile.  w_TAER  is a  weighted mean of the time-series average excess return.

           Decile     avg_levrat    TAER    w_TAER     avg_size     avg_mb      avg_pe

                  1         0.88     1.61         1.19         7.28         4.26        23.32
                  2         8.08     1.60         1.90        12.50         3.50        20.70
                  3        19.52     1.20         0.89        10.37         2.84        18.07
                  4        30.57     1.13         1.00         8.65         2.63        16.47
                  5        42.02     1.45         1.63         8.54         2.52        17.48
                  6        54.61     1.48         1.55         7.65         2.41        15.65
                  7        70.15     1.38         1.29         7.01         2.32        15.68
                  8        92.93     1.32         1.27         6.16         2.24        14.88
                  9       131.09     0.82         0.94         6.15         2.39        13.56
                 10       316.56     2.18         2.24         4.88         4.26        11.38

                                      40
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

REFERENCES

BHANDARI, L.C. 1988, "Debt/Equity Ratio and Expected Common Stock Returns: Empirical
     Evidence",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 507-528.

Black, F. 1972, "Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing", The Journal of Business,
     vol. 45,  no. 3, pp. 444-455.

Brown, S.J. & Warner, J.B. 1980,  Measuring security price performance.

Cai, J. & Zhang, Z. 2011,  Leverage change, debt overhang, and stock prices.

Cook, D.O. & Tang, T. 2010,  Macroeconomic conditions and capital structure  adjustment speed.

D’Mello, L. & Sivaprasad, S. 2015, "An Investment Strategy Based on Leverage: Evidence from
    BSE 500",  Journal of Emerging Market Finance,  vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 210-238.

Dimitrov, V. & Jain, P.C. 2008, "The Value-Relevance of Changes in  Financial Leverage Beyond
    Growth in Assets and GAAP Earnings",  Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance,  vol. 23,
     no. 2, pp. 191-222.

Fama, E.F. & French, K.R. 2015,  A five-factor asset pricing model.

Fama, E.F. & French, K.R. 1993,  Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.

George, T.J. & Hwang, C. 2010,  A resolution of the distress risk and leverage puzzles in the cross
      section of stock returns.

Halling, M., Yu, J. & Zechner, J. 2016, "Leverage dynamics over the business cycle",  Journal of
     Financial Economics,  vol. 122, no. 1, pp. 21-41.

Ho, R.Y.W., Strange, R. & Piesse, J. 2008,  Corporate financial leverage and asset pricing in the
     Hong Kong market.

Hu, T. & Gong, C.M. 2018, "Does reference point matter in the leverage–return relationship?
     Evidence from the US stock market",  Applied Economics,  vol. 50, no. 21, pp. 2339-2355.

John,   L.   1965,   "SECURITY   PRICES,   RISK,   AND   MAXIMAL   GAINS   FROM
    DIVERSIFICATION*",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 587-615.

Lee, C., Ng, D. &  Swaminathan, B. 2009, "Testing International Asset Pricing Models Using
     Implied Costs of Capital",  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,  vol. 44, no. 2, pp.
    307-335.

Modigliani, F. & Miller, M.H. 1963, "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital: A
     Correction",  The American Economic Review,  vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 433-443.

                                      41
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

Modigliani, F. & Miller, M.H. 1958, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
     Investment",  The American Economic Review,  vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 261-297.

Muradoğlu, Y.G. & Sivaprasad, S. 2012,  Capital structure and abnormal returns.

Myers, S.C. 1977,  Determinants of corporate borrowing.

Opler, T.C. & Titman, S. 1994, "Financial Distress and Corporate Performance",  The Journal of
     Finance,  vol. 49, no. 3,  pp. 1015-1040.

Penman, S.H., Richardson, S.A. & Tuna,  İ. 2007, "The Book-to-Price Effect in Stock Returns:
     Accounting for Leverage",  Journal of Accounting Research,  vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 427-467.

RAJAN, R.G. & LUIGI, Z. 1995, "What Do We Know about Capital Structure? Some Evidence
     from International Data",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1421-1460.

Schwartz, E. 1959, "Theory of the Capital Structure of the Firm",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 14,
     no. 1, pp. 18-39.

Sharpe, W.F. 1964, "CAPITAL ASSET PRICES: A THEORY OF MARKET EQUILIBRIUM
    UNDER CONDITIONS OF RISK*",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 425-442.

Wooldridge, J.M. 2012, Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 5th edn, South-Western
     College Pub.

                                      42
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

APPENDICES
                                     Table A1

           Variable                                       Description

 riskfreequarter                 3-month T-bill rate, collected on a monthly basis and divided by four to
                                     represent a quarterly risk-free rate

 ER                        Excess return in time t+1 (subsequent quarter) based on the stock return each
                                     quarter deducted by  the quarterly risk-free rate.

                                  Market value of each company in time  t. Calculated as the closing price
 size
                                quarter times the number of outstanding shares. (Natural logarithm of
 (ln_size)
                                    size)

 mb                         Market-to-book ratio  of each company in time  t  calculated as share price  of
                                    the closing  quarter divided by book equity value per share.

                                  Price-to-earnings ratio of each company in each quarter,  t.  Calculated as
 pe                           closing quarter price divided by eps.

 netcash                     Dummy variable which takes on the value 1 (0) if Debt – Cash is less (more)
                                   than zero indicating a net cash position (net debt).

 levrat_percent
                                Leverage ratio calculated as Debt divided by Equity  in time  t.  (Natural
 (ln_levrat)                      logarithm of leverage ratio)

 industrylevrat
                              Mean  leverage ratio  of the industry  in each  quarter.  (Natural logarithm of
 (ln_industrylevrat)              mean industry leverage ratio).

                                Interaction variable between netcash and ln_levrat. Netcash is multiplied
 netcashxln_levrat
                                  with ln_levrat.

                               Each company is assigned a decile  number in each quarter. Deciles are
 decile                           generated from 1-10 in an ascending order based on leverage ratio for
                                 companies in a quarter.

                              Time-series  Average  Excess  Return.  Calculated  for  each  decile  and
 TAER
                                  represents an average quarterly return for the entire sample period.

                                Weighted Time-series Average Excess Return. Calculated for each decile
 w_TAER                   and represents an average quarterly return for the entire sample period.
                               Excess returns are weighted on the size of each firm in time  t+1.

                                      43
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                Mean leverage for an average quarter for all companies in each decile.
 avg_levrat                     The average is across the entire time series for all cycles, periods of
                                 contraction or expansion.  Represents a time-series average

                                Mean size for an average quarter for all companies in each decile. The
 avg_size                      average is across the entire time series for all cycles, periods of
                                   contraction or expansion. Represents a time-series average.

                                 Mean market-to-book ratio for an average quarter for all companies in
 avg_mb                     each decile. The average is across the entire time series for all cycles,
                                    periods of contraction or expansion. Represents a time-series average.

                                  Mean price-to-earnings ratio for an  average quarter for all companies in
 avg_pe                       each decile. The average is across the entire time series for all cycles,
                                    periods of contraction or expansion. Represents a time-series average.

                                       Table A2
                       Table of SIC codes with industry definitions and sector  constituents.

 Code                   Industry                                                   Sector
 1000                    Basic Materials                                               Mining
                                                                                             Oil & Gas
                                                                                       Heavy Construction
                                                                                              Water & Electricity
 2000                   Consumer Goods                                     Food & Beverage
                                                                                                        Cigarettes
                                                                                  Household Goods
                                                                                          Personal Goods
 3000                     Industrials                                          Industrial Engineering
                                                                                  Heavy Machinery
                                                                               Electronic & Electric Equipment
                                                                                  Aerospace & Defense
 4000                    Transportation & Public Utilities                  Railroad & Trucking Services
                                                                                  Communication services
 5000                    Retail and Wholesale Trade
                                                                                                            Retail traders
                                                                                             Wholesale traders
 7000-8000                Services                                                Personal Services
                                                                                       Business  Services
                                                                                                  Public Service

                                      44
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                      Table A3
  Table defining periods of contraction and expansion. Number of quarters included in each period in parenthesis.

                                Quarters included in each business cycle

                               Contraction                Expansion
                      1969Q4 – 1970Q4 (5)            1971Q1 – 1973Q3 (22)
                      1973Q4 – 1975Q1 (6)            1975Q2 – 1979Q4 (38)
                      1980Q1 – 1980Q3 (3)             1980Q4 – 1981Q2 (3)
                      1981Q3 – 1982Q4 (6)            1983Q1 – 1990Q2 (60)
                      1990Q3 – 1991Q1 (3)            1991Q2 – 2000Q4 (78)
                      2001Q1 – 2001Q4 (4)            2002Q1 – 2007Q3 (46)
                      2007Q4 – 2009Q2 (6)            2009Q3 – 2015Q3 (50)

                                      Table A4
    Table of differences in mean in variables leverage,  levrat_percent (%),  and excess returns,  ER (%).  Z-test is
     conducted to determine statistically significant differences between means. Standard errors in parentheses.

                    Mean difference in levrat_percent            Mean difference in ER
                                            Mean Diff                             Mean Diff
      Industry       Expansion    Contraction     (Exp  -       Expansion   Contraction     (Exp  -
                                              Cont)                                  Cont)
  Full sample            76.42         74.19                       1.42         -1.23
                                               2.23**                              2.64***
                         (0.38)         (0.82)                     (0.06)         (0.18)
  Basic  Materials         69.25         60.54                       1.79         -2.19
                                              8.71***                              1.96***
                         (1.30)         (2.80)                     (0.22)         (0.63)
  Consumer
  Goods                60.18         53.85     6.33***          1.04         -0.93    1.96***
                         (0.77)         (1.60)                     (0.13)         (0.36)
  Industrials             60.07         56.06                       1.74         -1.62
                                               4.01**                              3.36***
                         (0.68)         (1.46)                     (0.11)         (0.33)
  Transportation
  & Public
  Utilities              125.82        129.36       -3.54*           0.77         -2.72    3.49***
                         (0.87)         (1.86)                     (0.15)         (0.42)
  Retail &
  Wholesale
  Trade                 69.47         71.20        -1.73          1.14          0.60       0.55
                          (1.11)          (2.4)                     (0.19)         (0.54)
  Services              85.78         93.74                       2.53          0.99
                                                 -7.95***                                 1.54**
                         (1.18)         (2.67)                     (0.20)         (0.60)
  *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p<0.01

                                      45
                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                                  Table A5
 Correlation matrix of all variables used in the regression model.  Variables included are Excess returns, ER, measured in time t+1, the natural logarithm
   of debt-to-equity ratio,  ln_levrat,  the natural logarithm of average industry leverage,  ln_industrylevrat,  the firm market value,  ln_size,  the market-to-
         book ratio,  mb,  price-to-earnings ratio,  pe,  net cash position,  netcash, and interaction variable between net cash positions and leverage,
                                                                  netcashxln_levrat.

  Variables              ER      ln_levrat    ln_indust~t       ln_size           pe          mb       netcash    netcashxln~t

  ER                  1
  ln_levrat            -0.0028            1
  ln_indust~t       0.0187***    0.2503***            1
  ln_size          -0.0506***       -0.0024     0.2820***            1
  pe              -0.0241***    -0.1037***      0.0277**    0.1398***            1
  mb             -0.0411***   -0.0869***     0.0744***    0.3422***    0.1904***            1
  netcash          0.0276***    -0.6852***    -0.0766***    0.0870***    0.0855***    0.2181***            1
  netcashxln~t      0.0216***    -0.1876***    -0.0641***    0.1038***     0.353***    0.1442***    0.7388***              1
   *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p<0.01

                                                     46
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                                          Table A6
Eight, step-wise regressions on the full sample across all cycles to robust check the regression analysis conclusions. The regression is  made on an unbalanced panel
 data set, controlling for firm fixed effects and with standard errors clustered on a company level. Variables include: Excess returns, ER, measured in time t+1,  the
 natural logarithm of debt-to-equity ratio,  ln_levrat,  in time  t, the natural logarithm of average industry leverage,  ln_industrylevrat, the firm market value,  ln_size,
   the market-to-book ratio,  mb,  price-to-earnings ratio,  pe,  net cash position,  netcash, and interaction variable between net cash and leverage,  netcashxln_levrat.
                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
 VARIABLES            ER         ER          ER          ER          ER          ER          ER          ER

 ln_levrat                0.514***      0.394***       0.618***       0.989***       0.286***       0.503***       0.484***       1.323***
                           (0.065)        (0.068)         (0.078)         (0.102)         (0.073)         (0.080)         (0.080)         (0.118)
 ln_industrylevrat                      2.633***       2.491***       2.259***       6.617***       6.738***       6.719***       6.221***
                                         (0.234)         (0.236)         (0.238)         (0.324)         (0.339)         (0.339)         (0.340)
 netcash                                          1.389***       3.578***                                             4.939***
                                                         (0.226)         (0.463)                                                 (0.512)
 netcashxln_levrat                                                   -0.769***                                                 -1.033***
                                                                         (0.142)                                                  (0.160)
 ln_size                                                                          -1.835***       -1.536***       -1.517***       -1.499***
                                                                                      (0.073)         (0.076)         (0.076)         (0.076)
 mb                                                                                       -0.575***      -0.559***      -0.604***
                                                                                                      (0.042)         (0.042)         (0.042)
 pe                                                                                                        -0.010***      -0.009***
                                                                                                                      (0.002)         (0.002)
 Constant                 -0.863***     -11.686***     -12.209***      -12.744***     -27.562***     -27.362***     -27.110***      -28.619***
                           (0.233)        (0.954)         (0.954)         (0.969)         (1.314)         (1.382)         (1.379)         (1.387)

 Observations             111,987       111,987        111,987        111,987        111,987        111,987        111,987        111,987
 R-squared                0.001         0.001         0.002         0.002         0.012         0.016         0.017         0.018
 Number of compid          1,234         1,234         1,234          1,234         1,234         1,234         1,234          1,234
 Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                     47
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                                                          Table A7

  Hausman test to test difference between fixed and random effects. The test is conducted on the main regression equation for the full sample in all cycles.  The
                                                            null hypothesis is rejected on a 99% significance level (p<0.01).

                                                  (b)              (B)              (b-B)                sqrt(diag(V_b-V_B))
   Variables                              Fixed         Random         Difference                            S.E.

   ln_levrat                                1.323            0.572             0.752                            0.064
   ln_industr~t                             6.221            1.627             4.594                            0.268
    ln_size                                   -1.499            -0.528             -0.972                             0.041
    mb                                    -0.604           -0.237             -0.366                            0.017
    pe                                      -0.009            -0.008              0.000                             0.000
   netcash                                 4.939            4.218             0.722                           0.240
    netcashxln~t                              -1.033            -0.466             -0.567                             0.074

                                              b = consistent under Ho and Ha; obtained from xtreg
                                        B = inconsistent under Ha, efficient under Ho; obtained from xtreg
                                                Test: Ho: difference in coefficients not systematic
                                                      chi2(7) = (b-B)'[(V_b-V_B)^(-1)](b-B)
                                                        =   1437.03
                                                       Prob>chi2 =    0.0000

                                                     48
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                          Figure A1a                                                 Figure A1b
    Graph of mean leverage development for all firms in the sample over the        Graph of the natural logarithm of leverage averaged for all firms in the
   entire sample period. Leverage measured as book value of debt divided by      sample over the entire sample  period. Leverage measured as book value of
                             book value of equity.                                                   debt divided by book value of equity.

                                                                                                    4.2
         120


                                                                              4

         100


                                                                                    3.8
         80

                                                                                       (mean) ln_levrat
    Mean leverage (%)
                                                                                                    3.6

         60

                                                                                                    3.4

         40
        1969Q2   1976Q4   1984Q2   1991Q4   1999Q2   2006Q4   2014Q2          1969Q2   1976Q4   1984Q2   1991Q4   1999Q2   2006Q4   2014Q2
                                              Calendar Data Year and Quarter                                                                               Calendar Data Year and Quarter

                                                     49
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND EXCESS RETURNS ACROSS BUSINESS CYCLES            ARNQUIST & JOHANSSON

                          Figure A2a                                                 Figure A2b
   Graph of average firm market values (size) over the sample period. Market       Graph of the average market value of firms over the sample period. Size
                value (y-axis) measured in billions of US dollars.                              measured as the natural logarithm of the market values.

                                                                                   3
         30


                                                                                   2


         20
                                                                                   1


                                                                                             (mean) ln_size0

   Average size (USDbn)
         10

                                                                                                        -1


           0                                                                                 -2
        1969Q2   1976Q4   1984Q2   1991Q4   1999Q2   2006Q4   2014Q2          1969Q2   1976Q4   1984Q2   1991Q4   1999Q2   2006Q4   2014Q2
                                              Calendar Data Year and Quarter                                                                               Calendar Data Year and Quarter

                                                     50
                                              STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS