         Stockholm School of Economics

                Bachelor Thesis in Finance

     Nordic Private Equity Performance

   Do Nordic Private Equity funds outperform public markets,
     and how do they compare to their global counterparts?

                                             †                      ‡
            Michael Wielondek         Daniel Espelund

                                    Abstract

      This paper sets out to examine the cross-sectional performance of Nordic Private Equity
      funds. More specifically, the paper aims to evaluate the performance of the buyout and
       venture capital funds with vintages 1994-2012, and assess it in relation to relevant bench-
       marks in order to appraise the value creation potential as compared to public markets, and
      global competitors within the field. The performance is measured using both conventional
      return and PME metrics, and also a novel Time Weighted Return-based measure devised in
      the paper. The studied sample consists of 2,224 records with one or more observable per-
      formance measures, out of which 75 are attributable to the Nordic region. The synthe-
      sized analysis indicates an outperformance by Nordic buyout funds in relation to public
       market equivalent investments. Its significance and magnitude are however sensitive to as-
      sumptions with regard to risk adjustments. The Nordic venture capital funds on the other
      hand exhibit strong underperformance. A similar pattern can be observed in the regional
      comparison, with Nordic buyout funds exhibiting statistically significant outperformance
      as compared to European and US-based peers on the basis of absolute performance met-
       rics, such as the Internal Rate of Return. Venture capital funds show underperformance
      on the basis of PME abnormal returns. Lastly, the paper finds evidence of a robust re-
      lationship between the performance of Nordic funds, the fund type, and relative vintage.

      Keywords: Private Equity, Nordic, Performance, Public Markets, PME, TWR, TWRA
      JEL Classification: G12, G23, G24, G29, G32

                                  Supervised by:
                                                            ∗
                        Daniel Metzger
                                 Spring 2018

    †
     23668@student.hhs.se
    ‡
     23587@student.hhs.se
    ∗
     We would like to thank our tutor, Daniel Metzger, for guidance and helpful input, as well as invaluable
assistance with gaining access to relevant data sources which made this thesis possible.
Contents

1 Introduction 1

2 Background on Private Equity 5
   2.1 The Business of Private Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   2.2 Terminology Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   2.3 Performance Metrics and Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   2.4 Exploration of Risk Factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   2.5 Prior Performance Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3 Methodology 19

4 Data and Descriptive Statistics 24
   4.1 Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   4.2 Descriptive Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

5 Results and Discussion 32
   5.1 Nordic Returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   5.2 Cross-Regional Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   5.3 Performance Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

6 Conclusion 41

References 44

A Summary of Prior Studies 48

B Performance Formulas 51

C Supporting Figures 55

D Extended Findings 60

                                                                  i
List of Figures

   2.1 Illustrative structure of a Private Equity fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   2.2 J-Curve effect: Illustrative cash flows for a 1998 Nordic buyout fund . . . 14

   C.1 Comparison of indexes used as basis for PME analysis . . . . . . . . . . . 56
   C.2 Histogram: Distribution of TWR for subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
   C.3 Histogram: Distribution of TWRA for subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
   C.4 Histogram: Fund vintage of Nordic sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
   C.5 Histogram: Distribution of fund value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
   C.6 Nordic fundraising during past 10 years (EUR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

                                                                  ii
List of Tables

   4.1 Overview of regional metrics - local index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   4.2 Buyout funds: Overview of regional metrics - local index . . . . . . . . . . 27
   4.3 VC funds: Overview of regional metrics - local index . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   4.4 Global PME performance given different beta (β) assumptions . . . . . . 29
   4.5 KS-PME Performance – local index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   4.6 Nordic funds: descriptives of performance measures . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   4.7 Correlation between performance measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

   5.1 Significance of Nordic PE abnormal returns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
   5.2 Cross-regional comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   5.3 Nordic Performance: Regressions & Robustness checks . . . . . . . . . . . 38

   A.1 Comprehensive overview of prior studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

   B.1 Illustrative example: Adjusting index Beta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

   C.1 Overview of the data funnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
   C.2 Average investment length for Nordic PE deals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
   C.3 Local indexes used as basis for PME . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56

   D.1 Extended: Full Nordic performance descriptives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
   D.2 TWRA Performance (local index) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
   D.3 Extended: MIRR performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
   D.4 Extended: DirectAlpha performance (local index) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
   D.5 Extended: PME+ performance (local index) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

                                                                 iii
Chapter 1

Introduction

                                               1
Since it’s swift and paradigm shift-inducing  emergence as a global phenomenon in the
early 1980s, Private Equity has largely remained an enigmatic asset class. It has been
loosely associated with a range of characteristics, which more often than not proved to
be inconsistent with empirical evidence, and remained relatively poorly empirically un-
derstood, particularly on a regional basis. The opaque nature of the industry, inherently
secretive characteristics of most fund managers, and consequent lack of readily available
data further aggravated the ambiguity and mythos forming around it – it comes as no
surprise that given this mostly positively loaded ideological polysemy from a returns-
oriented perspective, in today’s low volatility and interest rate environment, investors
who are increasingly directing capital towards riskier assets in the hunt for yield, opt to
enter the asset class in hope of finding alpha without fundamentally understanding it.
   In this paper, we explore the performance of Nordic Private Equity funds, and as-
sess it in relation to relevant benchmarks in order to evaluate the value creation potential
as compared to public markets, and global competitors within the field. The study is
restricted to fund vintages between 1994-2012, and is based on data gathered from Pre-
qin. Firstly, our analysis draws upon a meta-application of previously devised metrics,
commonly used in related research and prior studies. These consist of the conven-
tional performance (IRR, TVPI, and MIRR) and PME metrics (KS-PME, DirectAlpha,
and PME+). It then complements it by introducing a novel measure, TWRA, which al-
lows for greater robustness in the synthesized analysis based on smaller datasets. This
feature becomes apparent as the newly formulated measure utilizes the more readily

    1
     Already in 1989, Jensen (1999) predicted that a gradual shift to the PE-model as dominant corporate
organizational form was likely to occur given its efficient nature.

                                      1
                                                                      Chapter 1. Introduction

available TVPI and inferred aggregate industry parameters, rather than individual raw
cash flows, as inputs. An elementary attempt to adjust for risk factors is made by rais-
ing the break-even level which is assumed to correspond to the transition into abnormal
returns. The specific level is based on prior studies and is directly connected to qualita-
tive meaning and implications of the underlying risk factors. Finally, the analysis pivots
towards the regional differences, and compares the Nordic funds against their European
(excl. Nordics) and US-based peers. Lastly, the study attempts to robustly decompose
the drivers which affect the fund returns through a deeper regression analysis.
   Within the scope of our research, the Nordic region includes Denmark, Finland,
                        1
Norway, and Sweden.  These countries have been consistently rated near the top of
global competitiveness indexes, and tend to be regarded as one of the most economically
vibrant parts of Europe (BerchWood, 2013). Moreover, considering The Nordic Way has
largely become synonymous with high living standards, inclusive welfare states, and
resilient economic climate (Eklund et al., 2011), it is fair so assume that the dynamics
which underly the region, and subsequently the entities which drive them, such as the
prolific funds studied in this paper, are worth exploring in greater detail.
   Furthermore, hand in hand with the overarching economic development of the re-
gion, the Nordic Private Equity market has seen great proliferation over the last two
decades, with Sweden growing into one of the key competitive clusters within the
field. Over the last 10 years, more than 1,000 Swedish companies have received fund-
ing through Private Equity, adding up to around 15 billion EUR in total (SVCA, 2017).
The aggregate fund-raising for the entire Nordic region extended upwards of 70 bil-
                          2
lion during this period.  Moreover, the over 300 fund managers active in the region,
a group which includes international hallmark names such as EQT, Nordic Capital, and
Altor Equity Partners, have contributed to the creation of a unique PE competence cluster
in Stockholm and surrounding areas, which harmonizes very well with the established
knowledge economy of the region. We therefore believe there is an economic argument
to be made on the basis of the competitive advantage generated by such concentration
of expertise, akin to that made in regard to Silicon Valley within technology industry. As
                                                                                    3
described by Porter (1990), once a cluster forms, the whole group of industries becomes

    1
     For the purpose of this paper, we have largely excluded Iceland due to the lack of appropriate data.
    2
     Based on Preqin Fund raising data as of April 2018, see figure C.6.
    3
     In the case of Private Equity, this group would most commonly constitute lawyers, investment bankers,
consultants, as well as other actors who become integral to the business processes.

                                      2
                                                                      Chapter 1. Introduction

mutually supporting, and has a strong propensity to induce a semi-persistent cycle of
innovation which drives the competitive advantage, and by extension potential abnor-
mal returns. This, in turn, points us towards the hypothesis of Nordic outperformance,
which becomes central to the conducted research and analysis.
    The key findings of the paper are threefold – firstly, we find evidence for statistically
significant outperformance of Nordic buyout (BO) funds as compared to public markets,
with an approximate annual abnormal return of 5%. The results for venture capital
(VC) show the opposite – a significant underpeformance of c. -7% in relation to a public
market equivalent investment. The magnitude of the generated alpha is sensitive to the
benchmark index – we find that when using a local index which more closely matches
                                     1
properties of the specific fund type the alpha generation is weaker than when compared
to the more conventional broader global index by c. -3%. However, after applying
adjustments for risk factors through a more conservative assumption with regard to
the abnormal returns threshold, the significance drops below the level at which a valid
inference can be made. Thus, we cannot fully reject the null-hypothesis of no abnormal
returns under the most stringent assumptions in regard to risk. On the other hand, the
underperformance of VCs remains significant across the board, and thus the inference
can be made that VC’s underperform public markets. The general dichotomy in returns
of fund types aligns with prior findings on an international level (Harris et al., 2016).
    Secondly, we find statistically significant evidence for the outperformance of Nordic
buyout firms in relation to their European and US-based peers on the basis of absolute
performance metrics (IRR, TVPI, and TWR). Due to the low sample size, we are unable
to confirm the robustness in terms of abnormal returns (PME). However, we do note that
the outperformance seems to be more defined against the US than Europe. In terms of
VC, we find that the Nordic funds seem to underperform both US and Europe in terms
of abnormal returns. Due to the low sample size attributable to VC, we do not believe
the inference to be as robust as the findings with regard to BO funds. Nevertheless,
the finding does point us toward the direction of a phenomenon which yields itself
to further research. Notably, considering that the region exhibits comparatively strong
foothold in both the fields technology and finance, one would at face value expect the
data to point toward the opposite direction given that the field of VC largely draws upon
competencies found in both of these fields, thus indicating the value of further research.

    1
     Refer to figure C.3, and the methodology section for more details.

                                      3
                                                                      Chapter 1. Introduction

   Lastly, we find evidence of a robust relationship between the performance of Nordic
funds and the fund type and relative vintage. The relationship with fund type has been
discussed above and is reaffirmed by the synthesized robust regression analysis, and
suggests that Nordic VC funds underperform the buyout funds by 75% (in terms of rel-
ative performance). The second independent variable (relative vintage), points towards
a gradual decline of performance over the last 20 years, with c. -8% average relative per-
formance drop for each year since 1990. We test the hypothesis of concave relationship
between the fund size and performance, however we are unable to find evidence strong
enough to reject the null-hypothesis. The two variables have however been connected
and associated with the same relationship in international studies (Harris et al., 2016,
Kaplan and Schoar, 2005, Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009, Strömberg, 2018), pointing to-
wards an international, rather than local phenomena being in play. Prior research points
towards a cyclicality in the PE market, bound to the cost of illiquidity and its intimate
                         1
link to the fundraising,  which has been shown to be a strong predictor of performance.
The aforementioned research points towards a negative correlation between the total
amount of raised funds, and the performance for a specific vintage. However, due to
the small time-frame of our study, we refer to future research to assess the underlying
qualitative reasons behind the apparent relationship.
   Concludingly, the paper contributes to the existing body of knowledge by introduc-
ing an element of regional analysis on an ostensibly unique population, based on a
theoretically grounded economical argument for a hypothetically positive divergence in
performance as compared to the aggregated global mean. Furthermore, it introduces a
novel metric appropriate for analysis of regions with low levels of available data, such
as the Nordics explored herewithin. The study also allows us to reaffirm certain glob-
ally observable trends such as the divergence between VCs and BOs fund performance
through the last decade, or the depressed returns during the majority of 2000s, and thus
increases the significance of these findings by confirming their inferred persistence on
a more homogeneous and narrow population. Furthermore, it opens up avenues for
continued research, which could extend, elaborate, and build upon the fundamental
findings identified within the scope of this paper.

    1
     In other words, when capital is cheap, fundraising tends to experience a substantial acceleration in
terms of capital inflows.

                                      4
Chapter 2

Background on Private Equity

2.1 The Business of Private Equity

In the strictest sense, Private Equity can simply be defined as the broad asset class
                          1
consisting of equity-like  securities that are not publicly traded (Gilligan and Wright,
2010). However, since its inception, the term has been primarily used to describe the
underlying industry consisting of Asset Management Companies (AMC) which facilitate
the access to the asset class through various forms of structured investment vehicles.
   Thus, Private Equity is generally considered a blanket term applied to describe the
broad industry and organizational form responsible for the financing provided in a wide
variety of situations, ranging from the capital injections provided to business startups,
to the Public-to-Private buyouts of large publicly listed companies (British Private Eq-
uity & Venture Capital Association, 2010). The industry is typically segmented into two
key areas, Buyouts (BO) and Venture Capital (VC), however it can also encompass more
intricate structures in the form of Fund of Funds (FOF), Growth Capital, Real Estate invest-
ment vehicles, Special Purpose Acquisition Companies (SPAC), and other less recognizable
investment structures. Furthermore, the exact scope of the definitions tends to vary
by geographical location – in Europe, particularly in the Nordic region, Risk Capital is
often used as a native label for a wide range of equity investments, meanwhile in the
U.S. most entities draw a clear line between both types and stages of funding (Fraser-
Sampson, 2007, SVCA, Zarabi, 2009). Nevertheless, the principal and overarching idea
which fundamentally defines the industry across all regions is simply the notion of

    1
     In recent years, investment through convertibles and other derivates has become more widely adopted.

                                      5
2.1. The Business of Private Equity Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

investments in unquoted equity stakes, or in some cases even their de facto derivatives.
   The main difference between the aforementioned Buyout and Venture Capital firms,
which constitute the majority of the industry, is the strategy which underpins their
activity – BOs firms typically acquire majority stakes in mature companies, normally
using significant amounts of debt. On the other hand, VCs firms tend to focus on
smaller minority investments in early-stage business with significantly more aggressive
risk profiles. VC funds also tend to have a larger equity focus compared to BO funds
given the companies they invest in are not capable of handling the same debt levels.
Furthermore, the active role of the BO sponsor which helps to steer the acquired com-
pany in a strategic direction post-acquisition, as compared to the typically more limited
engagement of VCs, emphasizes the difference in activity and skill sets.
    Regarding the underlying legal structures – the vast majority of Private Equity funds
are organized as limited partnerships, with the Private Equity firms serving as the
general partner (GP), and large institutional investors and high-net-worth individuals
(HNWI) committing the majority of callable capital as the limited partners (LP) (Metrick
and Yasuda, 2009). However, in order to align interests and avoid agency problems, the
GPs tend to co-invest and contribute their own capital. Broadly speaking, the structure
exists as a solution to the problem of: "how can a group of entities create a structure that
                                                                                                          1
would bind them together as investors for a finite period without creating multiple tax charges?"
   The funds customarily have a fixed life-time of approximately 10 years, however
they typically allow for an extension at the discretion of the manager (typically a so
called grace period of 2 years). The first 5 years are generally dedicated to allocating the
committed capital (so called "drawdown" period), and then managing the investments
for the remaining 3-7 years before executing an exit strategy (Gilligan and Wright, 2010).
Successful asset managers stay in business by raising a new fund every 3 to 5 years, a
process generally driven by the historic performance which tends to be treated as an
indicator of the manager’s skill by the LPs (Metrick and Yasuda, 2009).
    The compensation structure for the GP is fairly standardized across the industry, and
consists of a carry and management fee, as well as capital gains from co-investments
(Metrick and Yasuda, 2009). According to Robinson and Sensoy (2013), buyout funds
charge an average (median) management fee of 1.78% (2.00%). The corresponding fee
for VC funds is 2.24% (2.50%). Meanwhile, the share of the carry equals 20% of all

    1
     A more detailed discussion of the presented reasoning can be reviewed in Gilligan and Wright (2010)

                                      6
2.1. The Business of Private Equity Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

                Figure 2.1: Illustrative structure of a Private Equity fund

profits above the hurdle rate for almost all private equity funds. In their sample of 837
funds, 10% of the VC funds and only 1% of the buyout funds charged a higher carry
than the aforementioned 20%. The average rate amounted to 20.44% for VC GPs and
19.96% for BO fund GPs.
   In contrast to publicly-listed companies, which can often have a fairly diffuse own-
ership structure, Private Equity firms generally work closely alongside the management
teams to enhance the operating performance of the business (Kaplan and Strömberg,
2009). This "active ownership" approach allows the private equity sponsor to enhance
the value in the business through involvement in all areas of operation, from the top-line
growth, efficiency savings, cash generation and procurement, to supply-chains, market-
ing and sales, improving reporting and human resources. Furthermore, this approach
also allows the GP to use their accumulated industry and operating knowledge to de-
velop and implement value creation plans for the investments, a particularly important
value driver for BO funds which often rely on successful operational initiatives.
   The underlying business model is backed by several key ideas such as; seekers of
market failure (1), solving the principal-agent problem (2), and sacrificing liquidity to
solve information asymmetries (3). Firstly, private equity often looks for markets failures
to be able to take advantage of them. One aspect that is frequently discussed is the
effect of tax deductibility of interest on investment returns. Private equity often uses

                                      7
2.2. Terminology Specification Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

large amount of debt to be able to take advantage of the tax shield created by the high
leverage. Secondly, private equity try to solve the principal-agent problem by aligning
the interest of the managers and shareholders. Private equity addresses one of the main
issues, namely corporate governance. By making management owners, private equity
firms act as a form of long-term corporate governance form. Another view of private
equity is that it acts as a "shock therapy" for underperforming firms. Lastly, by investing
in private companies, PE-funds sacrifice liquidity as they are unable to sell and make
quick exits. They compensate this by reducing the information asymmetries through
thorough due diligence processes. The access to information continues during the life
of the investment, as the private equity fund has the right to further information through
owning the company and participating on the board of directors.
   Lastly, the Nordic region has consistently exhibited strong economic fundamentals,
and enterprising cultures which have paved the way for the region’s private equity
industry. Consisting of over 300 private equity funds managers, the Nordic private
                                            1
equity market is both large and mature.  The region has in recent years also seen less
economic stress compared to Europe overall, largely due to the region’s strong private
and public institutions which creates an innovative and creative business environment,
thus making the Nordics posed to grow faster than the surrounding European region
(BerchWood, 2013). Moreover, the Nordic private equity market has been one of the
most dynamic, second only to Ireland/UK in PE-penetration, which is measured as
PE-owned business enterprise value in comparison to GDPs in the associated countries.

2.2 Terminology Specification

In order to clarify the industry-specific terms used in the paper, we restrict and specify
the PE-related vocabulary as follows: Private Equity is treated by it’s general, broader
Anglo-Saxon definition which encompasses all non-listed equity-linked investments.
However, it is worth noting that the bulk of the presented empirical evidence is re-
stricted to Buyout (BO) and Venture Capital (VC) due to the natural imbalance of the
investment forms in the underlying population.
   The Private Equity managers operating the investment structures are referred to as
General Partners (GP), and the investors as Limited Partners (LP). However, for gener-

    1
     As of April 2018, the total number of private equity fund managers reached 332 (Preqin 2018).

                                      8
2.3. Performance Metrics and Benchmarking Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

alization purposes we shall also refer to the firms more broadly as Asset Management
Companies (AMCs), and the LPs simply as investors.

2.3 Performance Metrics and Benchmarking

The most commonly used metrics for the evaluation of private equity performance are
the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and the Total Value to Paid In (TVPI) multiple, generally
referred to as the investment multiple, or more colloquially, the unrealized multiple of
money (MoM). For benchmarking against other asset classes, alternative methods have
been developed; comparison against public markets is typically done through the Pub-
lic Market Equivalent (PME) methods. By the same token, a less elaborate Time Weighted
Return (TWR) metric can also be applied in order to establish a potential heuristic bench-
mark against asset classes with significantly different liquidity characteristics.
   The IRR is widely used in corporate finance due to its function as a relative cash
flow-based measure of performance – it considers the cash calls and distributions made
by a fund and discounts them so as to arrive at a net present value of zero, thus yielding
the annualized effective compounded return rate. In other words, it is the annual yield
of an investment’s underlying cash flows. It is a key measure for benchmarking returns
between funds and investments due to its design which intuitively accounts for the time
preference of money and investments, and thus by extension the “commitment risk”
reflecting the uncertainty with regard to the timing of capital calls and distributions to
investors. While in theory the most appropriate measure given the intertemporal nature
of Private Equity fund commitments, it has its drawbacks – since it is very sensitive
to the timing of cash flows, it becomes easy to manipulate by skilled practitioners. By
utilizing bridge loans which delay equity commitments, and taking out aggressively
timed dividends through debt-driven recapitalizations, an IRR-maximizing AMC will
be able to inflate IRR figures, albeit at the cost of increased financial risk (Gilligan and
Wright, 2010, Salehi-Sangari and Hellqvist, 2014). Furthermore, such arrangements will
come at the cost of a lower TVPI, since interest paid on the additional debt will lower the
cash available for subsequent distributions. Moreover, IRR equals to the effective rate of
return if, and only if, intermediary dividends are reinvested at the IRR rate (Phalippou,
2008), which in reality is improbable. This is essential, as this simplification can yield
vast logical inconsistencies when the method is applied inappropriately.

                                      9
2.3. Performance Metrics and Benchmarking Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

    While it is possible to some extent adjust the IRR measures to better reflect reality of
the achieved returns, by applying a different discount factor to inflows and outflows (the
                                                               1
MIRR method), and by weighting each IRR by the duration (Phalippou and Gottschalg,
2009), the measure still remains problematic due to an array of surrounding issues such
as the lack of adjustments for the risk associated with the investments.
   The MIRR measure enables us to address the larger pitfalls of IRR, by instead of
assuming the reinvestment rate, specifying a fixed rate of investing and borrowing. All
investments are then discounted back to the time of the initial cash flow to obtain a
Present value (PV), while all distributions are discounted forward to the ending time to
obtain a Future value (FV).
                √
                                       t FV(Distributions)
                     MIRR =                 − 1 (2.1)
                                        PV(Calls)

While a more robust measure, it becomes subject to many assumptions related to the
investment and financing rates (which tend to vary with time, and have idiosyncratic
properties), as well as the treatment of the time period t (treatment of start year and
investment horizon). The measure nonetheless remains a valuable supplement to the
performance evaluation toolkit, however it might be more fit for evaluation of individual
funds rather than aggregate performance, due to its sensitivity to assumptions.
   TVPI on the other hand is a simpler measure which allows us to gauge the absolute
return made on the committed capital irrespective of time frame as per:

            T
                        Distribution
          ∑ CFt + N AVT
           t=1                       Total distributions + Unrealized value of fund
  TVPI =                  =
                 T                                   Total contributions
                            Contribution
             ∑ CFt
                 t=1
                                                                                                 (2.2)
While the measure lacks the complexity associated with IRR, it provides us with a per-
formance metric less prone to manipulation. Due to the lack of the time-dimension
it is less appropriate for comparison of funds with different time horizons. However,
given the fairly uniform nature of the industry, it remains a valuable metric for in-group
comparisons of the distinct types of private equity investments.
   Another, albeit simplistic, approach is to potentially evaluate a form of Time Weighted

    1
    Duration has to be treated as in a fixed-income context, i.e. by computing the weighted average
payment time using the present value of the payments as weights.

                                      10
2.3. Performance Metrics and Benchmarking Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

Return (TWR) metric. By considering a simple compound annual growth rate (CAGR)
for the fund’s absolute return in relation to average investment length, we are able to
arrive at a fairly reasonable estimate of average performance as per below:

                                                                               1
                            TWR = TVPI n − 1 (2.3)

Where n corresponds to the average time the capital in committed to an investment. In
other words, if a fund has a 12 year life span, out of which 7 is spent in the "drawdown"
phase, and 5 in active investment, then n ≈ 5 can be assumed. Alternatively, given large
enough sample, it also also possible to estimate n by simply averaging the life-time of
underlying deals. While the measure is less robust and doesn’t account for the tim-
ing of cash flows (CFA Institute, 2012), it is less prone to unwanted manipulations. It
is certainly not the most appropriate measure for accurate comparison between funds
due to the uncertainty in estimating the exact n for individual funds, however, as the
investment horizon is fairly uniform across the industry, stochastic asset-wide compar-
isons can yield fairly valuable insights. Also, as the returns of public market indexes
are generally reported as a TWR-based measure, it is a valuable tool when comparing
alternative assets against it. Moreover, its simple nature makes it fairly welcoming to
additional discretionary adjustments based on complementary analysis of additional
factors related to the structure and risk of the investments.
   Considering that the returns attainable through capital placements in public markets
constitute an unequivocal opportunity cost to investors, it is essential to evaluate the
relative performance of the asset class against it. After all, as the institutional investors
have to take an active decision when choosing whether to allocate capital into this fairly
long-term, opaque, and inflexible asset class, having a clear measure of relative perfor-
mance becomes paramount. As the cash flow-based IRR metric is not comparable to
time weighted returns (TWR) of public markets, alternative methods have been devised.
   The Public Market Equivalent (PME) approach is a fairly new concept, first introduced
by Long and Nickels (1996) as the Index Comparison Model (ICM). The measure compares
the performance by synthesizing a theoretical investment into the corresponding public
index which mimics the cash flows of the underlying fund. In simple terms, each capital
call is treated as an investment, while distributions are instead assumed to correspond
to a sell off from the benchmark public market portfolio. Worth noting is that all cash

                                      11
2.3. Performance Metrics and Benchmarking Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

flows are treated as net of fees. What makes the returns differ between the private
equity fund and the benchmark portfolio is the net asset value (NAV), which in the
benchmark portfolio is a fictive value calculated as the difference between the sum of
the future value of all contributions and the sum of the future value of all distributions,
compounded with benchmark returns. The subsequent comparison is made on the
basis of the fund’s IRR and the fictive portfolio, with the difference corresponding to
the average yearly abnormal return. While the measure is very intuitive, it comes with
important caveats. Most importantly, frequent large withdrawals from the index result
in a net short position in the index comparison, which results in a nonsensical outcome.
   More recently, more robust methods have been developed. The PME+ method pub-
lished by Capital Dynamics in 2003 was designed to correct the main issues associated
with the original ICM method by introducing a scaling factor which allowed the NAV
of the index investment to match the NAV of the fund. Nonetheless, the method came
with many of its own issues such as high sensitivity to early distributions.
   The KS-PME method developed by Kaplan and Schoar (2005) provides us with an-
other approach to dealing with the problem. In contrast to the prior PME methods,
which rely on creating a separate theoretical market portfolio that replicates the fund
cash flows, the KS-PME instead approaches the issue by comparing the future values
(FV) of distributions and capital calls using a discount rate bound to the relevant public
market benchmark returns. The method bears stark resemblance to the TVPI multiple,
however includes the time-dimension through the discrete discount factors calculated
                                                                          1
using benchmark returns as seen below (It as discount factor ):

                   T     Distribution
                      CFt             N AVT
              ∑     It +   I
                             T     FV(Total distributions + Unrealized value of fund)
                t=1
KS − PME =                =
                      T    Contribution                         FV(Total contributions)
                             CFt
                    ∑      It
                    t=1
                                                                                                 (2.4)
While the Long Nickels PME needs to be compared to the actual IRR, the KS-PME gives
a direct indication of the performance of the fund compared to the performance of the
index in the form of a multiple. A KS-PME above 1 indicates that the fund outperformed
the index (and vice versa). Furthermore, the method is valid regardless of the risk
of PE investments, and is less susceptible to variations in the timing and systematic
risks of the underlying cash flows along with potential GP manipulations (Sorensen and

    1
     The index derived from compounded annual returns of the underlying public market benchmark.

                                      12
2.3. Performance Metrics and Benchmarking Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

Jagannathan, 2013). As the KS-PME is more robust than the two previously discussed
heuristic counterparts, it will generally generate more reliable results. Unfortunately,
the model is not without flaws, as it does not explicitly control for the systemic risk
                                           1
(corresponding to the beta) of the funds,  and also gives no information about the actual
annual abnormal returns – or in other words the alpha generated by the fund.
   The DirectAlpha developed by Gredil et al. (2014) was in turn created to solve the
aforementioned problem associated with KS-PME’s lack of annual rate-of-return mea-
sure. The model builds upon the fundamental methodology established by Kaplan and
Schoar (2005), but rather than finding a comparative multiple, it produces the IRR of
the indexed future value of cash flows which corresponds to the continuous yearly ab-
normal rate of return of the fund. More exactly, the DirectAlpha is deduced from the
KS-PME calculation by computing an IRR using the discounted contributions and dis-
tributions, and subsequently taking the natural logarithm of the resulting value.
   We are also able to derive a new public-market based benchmark by applying a novel
approach based on the aforementioned TWR measure. By comparing the rate of return
given by the TWR approach to an appropriate index with the associated returns (rm),
we would be able to arrive at a measure that, on average, provides us with a reasonable
heuristic estimate of the potential abnormal returns. As both measures would have
comparable units of measure, the calculation would yield a valid result (albeit, with
inherited flaws carried over from the TWR). It is worth noting that the estimation of
rm is somewhat problematic due to the nature of TWR, which does not define an exact
investment period. However, by using a geometric average of index returns over either
the funds total life, or a more specific sub-period, we can yet again arrive at a sensible
estimate.
                     TWRA = TWRal pha = TWR − rm (2.5)

Given perfect information access, the TWRA method would be redundant as it is a less
robust and precise measure by design. However, as the amount of data available in
terms of TVPI measures typically outstrips the available cash flow data by up to 3:1
due to the opaque nature of the industry (see table C.1), by being able to harvest and
                          2
utilize the remaining 3 which previously remained excluded from most evaluations, we

    1
     Albeit, Sorensen and Jagannathan (2013) do show that under the assumption of investor log-utility
and of that the benchmark captures total wealth in the economy (rw = rm), one need not compute betas of
PE investments, and any changes in PE cash flow betas due to changes in financial leverage or operating
leverage of the business are automatically taken into account in KS-PME.

                                      13
2.3. Performance Metrics and Benchmarking Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

          30


          20


          10


       Cash flows (millions)0


          −10
          1/1/98 1/1/00 1/1/02 1/1/04 1/1/06 1/1/08 1/1/10 1/1/12
                                                     Date

                                    Capital calls and distributions Cumulative amount

           For legal reasons, the name and other specifications of the fund cannot be disclosed.

    Figure 2.2: J-Curve effect: Illustrative cash flows for a 1998 Nordic buyout fund

are able to incrementally boost the robustness of the performed analysis. This becomes
particularly important in studies on smaller samples (such as Nordics), as the inclusion
of TWRA allows for increased statistical power due to the sample size expansion.
   Lastly, it is important emphasize the the J-curve effect – a fundamental phenomenon
within private equity which illustrates the historical tendency of private equity funds
to deliver negative returns in early years. By extension, it clearly illustrates the weak-
nesses of IRR-based methods when evaluating recently formed funds without properly
accounting for the NAV. The J-curve effect comes from the structure of cash in- and out-
flows which in general show companies have a cumulative outflow of capital early in
the funds life cycle (often lowest after three years) and steadily increases over time.
This creates a situation were the net IRR is negative until the distributions match at
least the contributions. The moment when distributions match contributions is called
the payback point (Fraser-Sampson, 2007). Given the J-curve effect, fund performance
with very recent vintages (within three to five years) tends to have fairly low credibility.
Therefore, it is generally recommended to discard more recent vintages in analysis, or
alternatively only consider liquidated funds. However, when considering the NAV as a
factor when estimating returns of active funds, it is worth noting that the most recent
research indicates that the valuation of subsequent distributions of active funds tend to
be underestimated by an average of 35% (Jenkinson et al., 2013).

                                      14
2.4. Exploration of Risk Factors Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

2.4 Exploration of Risk Factors

The most prominent and self-evident difference between public and private equity is
that the latter is not directly traded on public exchanges. This basic distinction yields
the key insight that a liquidity risk, and by extension the associated risk premia, comes
into play when evaluating the returns of the asset class. Due to the nature of the assets,
this premium-requiring risk can in turn be classified into two discrete classes, namely
market risk and funding risk (Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009).
   The market risk simply illustrates the limited ability to sell and exchange the asset
on a secondary market. The risk, which is not only bound to the idiosyncratic asset
liquidity, but also it’s covariance with the overall market liquidity, justifies a premium,
which varies with time due to changing market conditions. The commonly used Pastor-
Stambaugh liquidity factor captures this type of liquidity premium (Pastor, 2003), as
illustrated by the fact that publicly traded securities whose returns co-vary positively
with aggregate public stock market liquidity are associated with a higher returns.
   The funding risk on the other hand illuminates the risk induced by the capital com-
mitment by the investors – as the investors do not invest all the money immediately,
rather are subject to discrete capital calls over the fund’s lifetime (following the typical
j-curve), they are required to maintain a reasonable liquidity buffer in order to be able to
honor their commitments. Due to the discrete nature of the calls, this liquidity require-
ments induces a risk, for which the investors need to be compensated. It is however
worth noting that given the predictable shape of the j-curve, the risk can to some extent
be diversified away through cross-vintage investment diversification, so as to allow the
cash flows from one fund to implicitly cover the liquidity requirements created by the
capital calls of another, more recent commitment. However, the systematic liquidity risk
remains at all times due to the exogenous factors which can not be diversified away, and
thus still requires the compensation through appropriate risk premium.
   Interestingly, market liquidity and funding liquidity tend to co-vary and reinforce
each other because of investor leverage and margin requirements (Brunnermeier and
Pedersen, 2009). As an economic downturn tends to contribute to increased rates of
margin-calls for investors, which in turn force sell-offs that decreases market liquidity
due to the apparent supply-demand mismatch, thus continuously pushing the asset
prices down, it will result in a negative liquidity spiral.

                                      15
2.4. Exploration of Risk Factors Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

   Moreover, Private Equity returns are often evaluated through capital asset pricing
models which broadly load the risk into two classes: systematic and idiosyncratic risk.
This simplification of the risk factors can yield fair logical approximations on publicly
traded assets, private equity might however be affected by systematic risk factors that
are not present in public markets due to market segmentation and incompleteness.
    Authors such as Ang et al. (2017) provide evidence suggesting that PE returns are not
completely spanned by factors contributing to public equity returns. Rather, the returns
seem to be more closely related to variables capturing the aggregate activity in the PE
market, such as commitments to private equity funds relative to stock market capitaliza-
tion (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009), and the cost of high-yield debt financing (Axelson
et al., 2013) which has significant impact on returns simply due to the large average
assumed leverage for buyout funds. Thus, since PE returns are not perfectly spanned
by public equity returns, investing in PE leads to the investors taking on additional un-
diversifiable risk. Because of this, investors will require additional compensation. It’s
magnitude is however hard to estimate, and thus determining if the asset class generates
abnormal returns, or only compensates for an additional layer of risk, is quite difficult.
   Furthermore, even given partial overlap in risk factors, their relative loading can
differ significantly, and thus alter the underlying return characteristics of the Private
Equity investments (Strömberg, 2018). Based on this however, it should still be possible
to evaluate this risk by creating a public market portfolio which caries similar param-
eters. As shown by Stafford (2015), average returns of small and illiquid value stocks
have been highly consistent with that of the pre-fee aggregate private equity, thus by
extension indicating that levered small/mid-cap value-focused indexes could prove to
be a valuable benchmark for PME analysis, as they would largely implicitly compensate
for the unique factor loading of the asset class (however, adjustments would still have to
be considered to account for excessive funding risk, and asset-specific systematic risk).
   Thus, the risk associated with Private Equity can be broadly connected to three core
pillars outlined above – the liquidity risk (1), the unique systematic risk of the Private
Equity asset class (2), and finally the difference in other factor loadings compared to
publicly traded assets (3). All three have to be in some way considered when trying
to distill a performance measure on risk-adjusted basis. Nonetheless, the fairly opaque
nature of the asset class, and the at times very blurry distinction between the poten-
tial sources of risks, makes proper analysis of risk factors difficult without taking on
increasingly restrictive theoretical assumptions.

                                      16
2.5. Prior Performance Findings Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

2.5 Prior Performance Findings

The performance of Private Equity has been the subject of a wide range of research over
                1
the past years.  Kaplan and Schoar (2005) conducted a study on the returns to BO and
VC funds using cash flow data from the database Venture Economics. The focus of their
study was to analyze how persistent returns across funds of the general partner (GP).
The result was that BO investors returned slightly less than the public market. VC funds
beat the public markets on a capital-weighted basis and slightly underperformed on an
equal-weighted basis. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) work was later updated by Phalippou
and Gottschalg (2009). By using updated data, they found qualitatively similar results
and reached a similar conclusion except from slightly more negative results for BO
funds. The main differences between the papers is that instead of using the net asset
value applied by Kaplan and Schoar (2005), any remaining investments held by funds
for which VE does not report cash flows after 10 years were assumed to have no value.
   Stucke (2011) found problems with the data from Venture Economics: he shows strong
proof that a large portion of funds had stopped being updated following 2001 and were
still retained in the database. Even though no cash flows were recorded, net asset values
(NAVs) were instead rolled forward each quarter. This resulted in decreasing fund-
level IRRs in the database as time progressed. Multiples of invested capital remained
constant instead of increasing. This was in-line with research from Harris et al. (2011)
which found that returns stemming from the VE database were consistently lower than
those of other commercial databases for most vintage years. The VE data shows clear
biases as it understates the returns which would suggest the results from Kaplan and
Schoar (2005) and Phalippou and Gottschalg (2009) play down fund results, especially
for BO funds.
   Prior papers focused on funds that were close to, or already fully liquidated. This
resulted in that they only included funds that started investing prior to 1995. Since then,
we have seen a rise in the size and number of funds being raised. Around USD 148bn
was raised between 1980-1995 by VC and BO funds in the U.S. This can be compared to
the USD 668bn for funds between 1996-2004 and the boom of 2005-2008 when VC and
BO funds were able to raise USD 794bn.
   Newer research, such as Robinson and Sensoy (2011) analyze the returns in BO and

    1
    For a full, comprehensive review, please refer to the summary table in Appendix A.

                                      17
2.5. Prior Performance Findings Chapter 2. Background on Private Equity

VC funds by a large bank LP. Their study found that on average BO firms beat the S&P
500 by 18% over the life of the fund while, VC funds outperformed by about 3%. They
also found that funds raised in booming markets underperformed in absolute terms
(IRR) but not relative to the PME (S&P 500).
   Higson and Stucke (2012) study performance of BO funds in the US using cash flow
data from Cambridge Associates (CA). Their study finds significant outperformance by BO
funds relative to the S&P 500. Their study was exclusively on BO and exclude VC funds.
They also find criticality in returns to U.S. BO over time. TVPIs and IRRs show a wave
pattern with higher returns in the beginning of each decade (1980s, 1990s and 2000s)
and lower in the second half of each period. They also find a decreasing downward
trend for absolute returns over all 29 vintage years.
   Harris et al. (2016) study fund performance for BO and VC funds using a new dataset
from Burgiss. Their findings largely reaffirm the inferences found in prior research, in
that BO funds have outperformed public market equivalents for the past 30 years. They
also find that VC funds outperformed in the 1990s, but have underperformed since.
In their study, they compare the databases Burgiss, CA and Preqin, and find that the
datasets yield quantitatively and qualitatively similar performance results. Notably, The
VE data showed lower performance for BO funds which is consistent with Stucke (2014).
   Korteweg and Nagel (2016) study performance persistency. In their paper, the au-
thors use a new variance decomposition model in order to assess the three components
of persistency in performance. Their findings indicate large amounts of long-term per-
sistence, but less investible persistence, meaning it is hard to consistently choose top
quartile PE funds.
   In a study by Korteweg and Nagel (2016) they risk-adjust the returns of VC funds. By
using Stochastic discount factor, they generalize the popular PME method, so as to ac-
tively risk-adjust the returns. The findings indicate substantially different performance
returns, specifically in times with strong public markets and for investments with betas
far from one.
   Lastly, Sorensen and Jagannathan (2013) research justifies the PME as a performance
measure. They find that under certain conditions, the systematic risk in private equity
funds performance is already taken into consideration when discounting them with
realized market returns.

                                      18
Chapter 3

Methodology

The existing body of research has largely focused on the evaluation of the Private Eq-
uity asset class on a global scale, with a notable emphasis on the US market. While
highly relevant, the insights have been largely drawn on a higher macro-plane, with
attribute groupings that do not provide insights about the finer details of the studied
performance factors on a more local level. Furthermore, the literature encompasses a
wide range of approaches, with varying levels of compatibility, in estimating the risk
adjustments and their impact on returns. The different methods tend to apply some-
what different theoretical frameworks, and even given partial theoretical overlaps, the
subsequent methodology used to estimate the parameters required by the applied mod-
els tends to vary, and results in a high inconsistency in the produced estimates. A clear
example of this is the vast difference between the CAPM beta (β) estimates produced
by existing studies, with a range of approximately [1, 3] for BO funds, and [2, 4] for VC
funds (Axelson et al., 2014, Jegadeesh et al., 2012, Lin et al., 2011, Strömberg, 2018).
   Therefore, this paper aims to narrow down the scope of the cross-sectional explo-
ration of Private Equity returns in order to gain a finer detail fidelity with respect to
the Nordic region. Furthermore, it aims to synthesize a range of performance mea-
sures, which when jointly analyzed could yield a more robust heuristic approximation
of the abnormal returns produced by the asset class, as compared to the individual
approaches. Thus, our approach results in a meta-application of the different meth-
ods with a distinct focus on a significantly narrower, and arguably more homogeneous,
target population. Furthermore, rather than focusing on estimating the inherent risk
parameters, the exploration builds upon estimates derived in previous studies, and in-

                                      19
                                                                 Chapter 3. Methodology

stead focuses on qualitative analysis of results yielded given assumptions with regard
to the estimated parameters. This more detailed analysis is further complemented by a
                                                                                   1
broader comparison against the performance of the US and Europe.
   In order to conduct the study and implement the relevant performance measures, a
dataset consisting of investor (LP) cash flows generated by the funds (net of fees on a
per-fund level) is required. The cash flows time series has to be the primitive data type
as all of the PME measures are principally based on the Time Value of Money (TVM),
which natively requires this time series format. Fundamentally, the IRR also requires
this underlying data, however due to the TVPI and IRR being the de facto standard
performance metrics used in the industry, they tend to be reported independently. This
reporting dichotomy in the underlying data generally results in the IRR/TVPI data be-
ing significantly more available than the underlying raw cash flow data required for
proprietary calculations of most risk adjusted metrics (such as the various PME mea-
sures or MIRR). Thus, broadly speaking the amount of PME performance observations
will be less than TVPI/IRR on a broad cross-sectional basis. However, the TWR, which
is a useful, albeit crude, metric that can be compared against public markets, can be
                              2
derived directly from TVPI,  and therefore provides us with an avenue to expand the
analysis to previously excluded entities. As shown in table C.1, the overall available
data tends to be quickly funneled into a substantially smaller usable sample, and the
inclusion of TWR does allow us to extend the analysis outside of the typical scope.
   The final engineered dataset used for statistical analysis should thus consist of a
cross-sectional sample of funds. The set should then include performance metrics calcu-
lated on the basis of raw cash flows and/or reported performance figures, and associated
fund metadata such as fund type or vintage, so as to enable more granular analysis.
    Regarding available data sources, Burgiss, Preqin, Pitchbook, and Cambridge Associates
are widely considered to be the primary providers of reliable Private Equity data, and
are commonly used within the context of academic research of the asset class. This
paper uses Preqin as the primary source of Private Equity data, and combines it with
                                                                                          3
other complementary data sources in order to synthesize the final dataset.
   Based on the above, the detailed methodology applied in order to compute the pri-

    1
     Excluding the Nordic region so as to avoid any data distortions due to dependency between regions.
    2
     Given that a reasonable estimate of the average investment length is available, or can be produced
from other datasets.
    3
    See section Data Sources on page 24.

                                      20
                                                                 Chapter 3. Methodology

mary return metrics used is as follows; the Preqin cash flow data was used to compute
the PME+, KS-PME, and DirectAlpha using two distinct public market indexes for each
fund, a local [1], and a global [2] index. Furthermore, the global index was recom-
                                                                                      1          2
puted for 6 additional discrete beta values between 1 and 4 with a step of 0.5. A MIRR
measure was then also calculated with the assumptions of a finacing rate of 2% and rein-
vestment rate of 10%. The rates were chosen so as to emphasize the divergence between
potential rates, rather than accurate representation. The cash flow-based measures were
then merged with the broader Preqin performance data which included funds with re-
                                                 3
ported IRR/TVPI values, and fund metadata.  Then, the TWR and TWRA [3] measures
were calculated for three different assumptions regarding investment length, based on
prior empirical findings. The analysis was restricted to the fund vintages of 1994-2012
in order to accommodate the underlying vintage distribution and j-curve effect. Lastly,
outliers were pruned using the 1.5x IQR method. More details and implementation
specifications for each calculated measure can be referenced in appendix B.
    [1] As BO fund returns tend to resemble value stocks, and VCs small growth stocks
(Strömberg, 2018), a local index was selected for each of the three analyzed regions
(Nordic, Europe, and US) and fund types (BO, VC) in order to match the indexes and
funds on the basis of fund type and region (see table C.3 for exact mapping). For
example, European BO funds were matched with MSCI SMID VALUE index, while US
VC funds with the MSCI SMALL GROWTH index. The pairing was done in order to
accommodate the aforementioned similarities in assumed factor loadings – by using a
benchmark with hypothetically similar risk properties to each evaluated PE fund, we
are able to implicitly account for both systemic risk and sensitivities to the underlying
risk factors. While the method is far from perfect due to the naturally imperfect factor
parity, it does provide us with a useful heuristic proxy for the results. Moreover, it also
follows reason that it is highly relevant to benchmark the Private Equity returns against
a public index whose underlying assets (businesses with certain characteristics) are as
                                                                          4
close as possible to that of the fund (small value businesses).
   [2] The MSCI World Standard was chosen as the global index in order to accommodate
the strong asset pricing justification for using PMEs calculated using the market return

    1
    Refer to Appendix A for detailed description of β-adjustment process.
    2
     Modified IRR, which produces a more robust and legitimate rate of return (McKinsey, 2015).
    3
     The metadata was subsequently recoded into usable dummy variables in order to enable analysis.
    4
     In the case of BOs, or small growth companies in the case of VC.

                                      21
                                                                 Chapter 3. Methodology

without making assumptions about systematic risk presented by Sorensen and Jagan-
nathan (2013). As the Private Equity investors generally consist of institutional investors
and HNWIs, it is reasonable to assume a strong degree of global diversification of con-
stituent wealth, in which case the return on the wealth of individual investors should
closely resemble the global returns illustrated by the index (rw = rm) which satisfies
one of theoretical criterions for the justification (the second being log-utility preference
of investors). Nevertheless, to further investigate the sensitivity of our conclusions, we
also compute the index and associated discount rates that approximate assumed theo-
retical betas of [1,4], given the assumption that the global index natively corresponds
to β = 1.0, and can thus be re-levered in order to synthesize a theoretically higher beta
index through the formulaic application of the fundamental CAPM equation.
    [3] Both VC and BO fund investments tend to have lifetime of three to seven years,
with a historical average oscillating between 4-6 years (Bain and Company and MacArthur,
2014, Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). We reaffirm this finding in relation to the Nordic
funds by our proprietary analysis of data exported from the Preqin database of deal ex-
its, which indicates a mean (median) investment length of 5.1 (4.7) years for BO funds,
and 5.4 (4.7) for VC (see table C.2). Based on the empirical findings we then calculate
the TWR measure for five years in order to arrive at a metric which represent a crude
measure of returns. This measure can in turn be used in conjunction with IRR and
MIRR, so as to perform comparisons across groups and draw robust inferences.
   In order to evaluate the relative performance of the TWR in comparison to a public
                                                                           1
index, we calculate the TWRA, for both the local and global index.  We assume that
the public market yearly returns used as basis for the TWRA calculation equal to the
                                                       2
geometric average return of the appropriate index  between the fund vintage and ten
years forward (or alternatively the closest possible time-period in the case of insufficient
data, such as when Vintage > 2008). As the metric is not risk adjusted by default, it is
bound to be slightly inflated, and might require quantitative or qualitative adjustments
and considerations in order to draw legitimate conclusions. It is nonetheless a valuable
tool when used to validate the more robust PME analysis. This is particularly essential
due to the fact that the measure allows us to tap into data points which normally would
not contribute to the statistical analysis, as funds with cash flows are in practice more or

    1
     See figure C.2 and C.3 for produced distributions.
    2
     Local or global as per the same assignment procedure as for all other PME methods (table C.3).

                                      22
                                                                 Chapter 3. Methodology

                                                       1
less a subset of funds with any performance measure.  The sample-size expansion comes
with a boost to statistical power, as the TWRA measure, even given it’s simpler and
less sophisticated nature, can be an important validator of the results obtained with
the conventional PME methods. Thus, the introduction of this novel measure results in
increased robustness of the synthesized analysis, which is key given our limited data.
    After arriving at the final dataset, statistical tests were applied in order to evalu-
ate the significance of the synthesized return measures, and also the differences be-
tween groups based on region, fund type, and vintage. The main analysis consisted
of a series of: [1] tests of significance of Nordic abnormal returns across all relevant
measures (both t-test and non-parametric rank-sum tests in order to account for small
sample size for PME measures); [2] cross-regional evaluation which applied series of
one-sided t-tests in order to test null-hypothesis that Europe/US performance is equal
or greater than that of the Nordic funds. The tests were performed in order to iden-
tify any potential material evidence of Nordic outperformance which would result in
the rejection of the aforementioned null-hypotheses on an appropriate confidence lev-
els, and thus infer certain information about the properties of the Nordic Private Eq-
uity funds. Finally, a series of linear regression models in the form of ln(Returns) =
               2
ln(FundSize ) + ln(Vintage) + FundType(Dummy) were fit, with white-corrected stan-
dard errors in order to account for heteroskedasticity and inherent noise in the data,
in order to establish and estimate any potential relationships among a sub-selection of
explored variables for the Nordic region. The results were cross-evaluated through a
robustness check of the signs and significance of coefficients across the return metrics.
   Lastly, as the approach combines a range of methods, it allows us to evaluate the
spectrum of results on a more balanced, aggregate basis. Furthermore, the principal
focus on a more narrow, and arguably homogeneous population (Nordics), with hypo-
thetically distinct economic properties, potentially allows for a clearer and unambiguous
analysis, and by extension contribution to the existing body of research. In particular,
given the limited amount of research with a focus on the Nordic region. Lastly, by intro-
ducing a novel TWR/TWRA metric into the analysis, a measure rarely found in papers
evaluating this asset class, we are able to contribute with the results of this unique
approach, which can complement the conventional PME analysis as per the reasoning
presented above.

    1
     Based on exploratory analysis of data, also refer to table C.1.

                                      23
Chapter 4

Data and Descriptive Statistics

4.1 Data Sources

The underlying Private Equity data used as basis for the conducted study has been
collected from Preqin, one of the global leading commercial providers of alternative asset
industry data. Preqin obtains its data primarily through request based on the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA). The data is typically gathered from US and UK pension funds
as the FOIA requires these institutions to provide information about their investments.
GPs are also aloud to submit information about their funds, which further contributes
to the accuracy and general quality of the the underlying data.
   The Preqin data is further complemented by additional data from other sources such
as MSCI, Carnegie and the US Federal Reserve. The first two are used to construct relevant
index benchmarks, and subsequently applied to calculate PME performance measures
and other related metrics. The Fed data allows us to access historic risk-free rates,
defined by proxy as the T-bill rate, used to relever the global index to higher beta levels.
   Overall, out of the 33,693 unique funds available through Preqin, 2,224 had perfor-
mance metrics, and were associated with relevant regions and fund types. Out of these,
c. 75 records were related to Nordic BO and VC funds. The relevant index data for local
indexes was available since 1994, hence the fund vintage limitation of the study.
   In terms of biases, the data was analyzed in order to identify any potential issues
related to any potential underlying biases. Given that the data is collected via the FOIA,
we can assume a high credibility for the dataset. This especially holds true for the BO
funds, as most larger pension funds invest in them. The data may experience some

                                      24
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

backfill bias and lack of fund diversity. Given our specific research region, our data
may be prone to lack some of the smaller private equity funds that are active in the
Nordic region. As the data is gathered through the FOIA, we will only receive data
from funds that have interaction with international pension funds. This may lead to us
not capturing the full picture of Nordic private equity performance, as smaller funds
may have differing performance compared to the larger ones.
   Backfill biases occurs when funds backlog performance into a database, as they are
likely to backfill the results of earlier transactions to funds they are currently invested
in. This will result in less successful managers not being able to raise a second fund,
which will exclude them from the dataset. On the other hand, the successful GPs will
more likely be included in the dataset. This is important in regards to the Nordic data.
As it has much fewer observations, the results may become extra skewed due to this
phenomenon. However, Harris et al. (2011) find in their paper when comparing different
databases to Burgiss, that all datasets show very similar results. It should however be
mentioned that they did not focus on the Nordic region and that using a more region
specific comparison could result in a different outcome.
   Also, our dataset contains a limited amount of VC performance records in compar-
ison to the BO funds. This may weaken the robustness of results from the fund type.
One should also take into consideration that many top performing VC funds oppose
to showing their results and thereby do not accept LPs who have report requirements.
However, top performing VC funds have excessive amount of investors, meaning that
not everyone who wants, can invest in them. Therefore, excluding them could generate
a more accurate picture for the average LP, as an average LP will not be able to invest
in top performing VC funds. This has bearing on whether the mean or median is more
appropriate for analysis.

4.2 Descriptive Statistics

In order to build a fundamental picture of the underlying data, we now quantitatively
describe and summarize the identified features associated with it. We aim to summarize
the findings obtained from the studied sample, so as to construct a solid foundation for
further inferential analysis. Below follows a brief exploration, which presents the key
features, and further describes them in relation to the main topic.

                                      25
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

                  Table 4.1: Overview of regional metrics - local index

This table shows the average return for PME and performance ratios, comparing results for PE funds to
a local index and their reported performance measures. The first row of each region shows the mean
followed by the median and the standard deviation. The table is divided into regions showing the average
return for each specific region. The table includes the entire dataset of funds. The PME measures use
available cash flow data in their calculation.

                           PME (Local Index) Performance
       Region
              KS-PME DirectAlpha PME+ TWRA MIRR IRR TVPI TWR
                     1.14 3.79 3.58 2.94 7.77 15.03 1.60 8.40
        Europe 1.16 4.73 4.59 3.78 8.17 12.30 1.54 9.16
                     0.42 9.32 9.97 10.63 4.02 19.21 0.76 9.75

                     0.92 -0.80 -0.84 1.94 7.44 20.87 2.13 8.56
        Nordic 0.87 -1.95 -2.44 3.18 7.27 15.60 1.65 9.92
                     0.47 12.07 11.82 11.64 4.58 26.88 2.17 11.70

                     0.93 -1.15 -0.83 -0.04 7.43 13.28 1.76 7.72
        US 0.93 -0.80 -0.82 0.70 7.74 9.70 1.50 8.73
                     0.43 10.97 11.73 11.07 4.46 30.57 2.00 10.39

                     0.96 -0.43 -0.20 0.79 7.48 13.92 1.73 7.93
        Total 0.95 0.13 0.00 1.55 7.82 10.60 1.52 8.88
                     0.44 10.90 11.58 11.05 4.40 28.34 1.78 10.28

   The table 4.1 shows regional sample performance. The sample shows similar results
regarding performance between the different explored metrics within the same region.
Europe shows alpha generation for all measures (KS-PME, DirectAlpha, PME+, and
TWRA) while Nordics and the US show underperformance against their local indexes.
The TWRA measure shows higher performance relative to other PME measures in our
sample performance, with a higher median compared to the mean. The Nordics and US
also show a higher standard deviation for the sample performance. The MIRR exhibits
very similar results for all regions, with Europe demonstrating both the highest mean
and median. The Nordics is the only region that has a lower median compared to its
mean under the MIRR. Nordic funds are the highest performing under the IRR. They
have the highest mean, median and difference between the two. The US shows the
lowest performance but the highest standard deviation.
   Overall the performance of the total dataset is negative under the KS-PME as well
as under the mean for DirectAlpha and PME+. The median for the whole dataset un-
der DirectAlpha and the mean and median for TWRA are the only measures showing
overperformance for the sample set.
   The dataset shows very different results when dividing the dataset into BO funds and

                                      26
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

          Table 4.2: Buyout funds: Overview of regional metrics - local index

This table shows the average return for PME and performance ratios, comparing results for PE funds to
a local index and their reported performance measures. The first row of each region shows the mean
followed by the median and the standard deviation. The table is divided into regions and fund type
showing the average return for each specific region. The table includes only buyout funds. The PME
measures are calculated using cash flow data.

                                               Buyout
                           PME (Local Index) Performance
       Region
              KS-PME DirectAlpha PME+ TWRA MIRR IRR TVPI TWR
                     1.17 4.63 4.18 5.80 7.87 17.83 1.76 10.61
        Europe 1.18 5.56 5.15 6.42 8.25 13.90 1.67 10.93
                     0.38 8.82 9.61 9.31 3.96 19.64 0.71 8.60

                     1.08 3.66 4.13 5.31 9.03 21.97 2.03 12.26
        Nordic 1.00 3.34 2.23 5.19 9.45 16.30 1.78 11.84
                     0.45 10.85 9.84 9.90 4.00 19.23 1.00 9.35

                     1.10 2.59 3.10 3.23 8.64 13.97 1.75 10.47
        US 1.07 2.79 2.73 3.66 8.94 13.05 1.68 10.93
                     0.38 9.40 10.34 9.10 3.42 14.79 0.72 8.75

                     1.11 3.06 3.36 4.14 8.48 15.48 1.76 10.60
        Total 1.11 3.27 3.33 4.51 8.81 13.40 1.68 10.93
                     0.38 9.34 10.17 9.27 3.57 16.71 0.73 8.73

VC funds. As seen in table 4.2, BO funds generate alpha for all PME performance mea-
sures, with Europe having the highest performance across all measures. The Nordics
showed higher performance under the DirectAlpha, PME+ and TWRA, while the US
sample performance exhibited higher results for KS-PME. Overall the TWRA measure
showed higher performance in comparison to PME+ and DirectAlpha for all regions.
For the performance measures, the Nordic region was the highest performing. It was
also the region which exhibited the largest difference between its mean and median.
   For VC funds, the sample shows opposite results from the BO funds. Table 4.3
shows almost all explored metrics generating negative returns. The only region showing
positive average fund returns is Europe under the PME+. The European region once
again exhibits the highest relative performance of the three regions and the Nordics has
the lowest relative returns for all PME measures. The Nordics and US also have much
higher IRR values with the Nordic IRR more than twice that of Europe. The Nordics also
show a larger difference between the MIRR and IRR compared to other regions and is
the only region which has negative time weighted return for both PME and performance
measures. Also, all regions demonstrate negative TWRA returns but only the Nordic

                                      27
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

            Table 4.3: VC funds: Overview of regional metrics - local index

This table shows the average return for PME and performance ratios, comparing results for PE funds to
a local index and their reported performance measures. The first row of each region shows the mean
followed by the median and the standard deviation. The table is divided into regions and fund type
showing the average return for each specific region. The table includes only VC funds. The PME measures
are calculated using cash flow data.

                                                  Venture Capital
                         PME (Local Index) Performance
     Region
            KS-PME DirectAlpha PME+ TWRA MIRR IRR TVPI TWR
                   0.94 -0.99 0.16 -3.23 7.10 7.16 1.26 3.58
     Europe 0.83 -1.02 0.92 -3.46 5.95 6.20 1.20 4.73
                  0.54 10.8 11.41 10.72 4.50 15.52 0.75 10.36

                   0.54 -11.63 -12.20 -7.35 3.22 17.52 2.37 -1.44
     Nordic 0.54 -12.02 -15.04 -7.18 4.02 5.75 1.04 -2.41
                  0.27 7.18 7.33 11.20 3.26 43.41 3.64 11.75

                   0.75 -5.29 -5.21 -3.30 6.10 12.61 1.77 4.90
     US 0.71 -5.41 -5.61 -2.96 5.78 5.50 1.29 5.39
                  0.42 11.11 11.63 11.87 5.05 40.32 2.68 11.16

                   0.76 -5.17 -5.05 -3.37 6.11 11.98 1.70 4.51
     Total 0.71 -5.21 -5.35 -3.00 5.76 5.60 1.27 5.22
                  0.43 11.09 11.64 11.65 5.02 38.08 2.49 11.06

regions has negative TWR.
   The next table (4.4) shows different PME performance metrics with increasing beta
values, given the underlying global index corresponds to β = 1. The Nordic area is the
highest performing for BO funds when all companies are compared to a global instead
of a local index. They all however, have very similar performance, this does change with
increased beta values, with the US becoming the highest performing area as beta levels
rise. Also worth noting is that performance generally decreases until around 2.0x beta
until they start increasing again. Both Europe and the US have their highest sample
performance at 3.0x beta compared to Nordics, whose highest performance is at an
unchanged beta level.
    For VC funds, Europe is the only area consistently generating positive returns across
all three performance measures. The Nordic region shows the lowest KS-PME perfor-
mance at 1.5-2x beta values, lowest DirectAlpha at 2.5x beta and lowest PME+ at 2.0.
The US generates positive sample performance from 2.5x for KS-PME and positive Di-
rectAlpha at 3x beta.
   The concave relationship between beta and performance can be attributed to the

                                      28
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

       Table 4.4: Global PME performance given different beta (β) assumptions

This table shows the the PME average performance on a global index with different beta values for the
measures KS-PME, DirectAlpha and PME+. The index used as the global index is the MSCI world index
and then leveraged through different beta values. The table is diveded by fund type (buyout and VC) and
by region (Nordic, Europe and US). The table uses cash flow data from preqin.

                                      Buyout Venture Capital

                            Europe Nordic US Europe Nordic US
              KS-PME 1.21 1.26 1.25 1.06 0.66 0.95
              DirectAlpha 5.28 5.92 5.74 3.32 -8.18 -0.54
              PME + 5.28 6.33 6.03 3.63 -8.82 -0.28
              KS-PME 1.5x 1.18 1.22 1.23 1.02 0.63 0.93
              DirectAlpha 1.5x 3.75 4.61 4.98 1.91 -9.34 -1.15
              PME + 1.5x 4.02 4.72 5.16 2.30 -7.34 -0.96
              KS-PME 2.0x 1.17 1.12 1.24 1.01 0.63 0.96
              DirectAlpha 2.0x 2.95 3.90 4.84 1.02 -9.97 -1.30
              PME + 2.0x 3.22 3.56 4.71 1.43 -7.40 -1.01
              KS-PME 2.5x 1.17 1.14 1.28 0.96 0.66 1.02
              DirectAlpha 2.5x 2.68 3.79 5.33 0.66 -10.04 -0.66
              PME + 2.5x 2.92 2.86 4.83 1.04 -6.81 -1.00
              KS-PME 3.0x 1.23 1.19 1.36 1.01 0.71 1.13
              DirectAlpha 3.0x 3.04 4.34 6.18 0.86 -9.52 0.89
              PME + 3.0x 2.23 4.74 5.46 1.15 -5.57 -0.27

effects of leverage. As seen in figure C.1 the synthesized indexes with a beta from 2.0x
and up were depressed post 2008 due to the effects of leverage during the market crash.
This implies that a sample skewed towards post 2008 will exhibit better returns with
higher beta values and vice versa given our time frame.
   As seen in table 4.5, BO funds outperform VC funds for the KS-PME measure on
almost a year to year basis, but also on an average during the entire time-series. VC
funds have shown higher performance when using a weighted average measure instead
of a normal mean. The table also shows that BO funds has consistently overperformed
even during years of crisis (dotcom bubble and the crash of 2008). VC funds show
additional underperformance during years when financial markets were weak. Similar
results can be observed when analyzing other metrics across vintages (as seen in tables
D.2-D.5).
   The Nordic data in table 4.6 shows that the TWRA measure generates the highest
return for Nordic funds. The TWRA and KS-PME are the measures which generate
positive returns compared to PME+ and DirectAlpha which generate negative returns.
The TWRA also has the highest number of observations for all types of measures. The
global PME measures generate the highest returns compared to the local variants. Fur-

                                      29
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

                    Table 4.5: KS-PME Performance – local index

This table shows the average, median and weighted average KS-PME returns by vintage year, comparing
PE returns to equivalent-timed investments in the a local index using the Preqin data. The local index is
based of where the fund is located. Vintage years are defined by the date of the first investment by a fund.
Weighted averages are based of the value committed to the fund as a weight. The data only includes funds
which had cash flow data in the database.

                          Buyout Funds Venture Capital
       Vintage
              Funds Average Median W. Average Funds Average Median W. Average
      1994 15 1.30 1.27 1.34 6 0.91 0.73 1.18
      1995 12 0.98 0.91 1.17 7 0.73 0.76 0.90
      1996 18 1.11 1.16 1.13 11 0.90 0.98 0.93
      1997 21 0.94 1.03 1.08 16 0.99 0.81 1.24
      1998 38 0.95 0.90 0.93 24 0.67 0.56 0.79
      1999 29 0.94 1.01 0.95 32 0.50 0.47 0.52
      2000 33 1.25 1.24 1.27 62 0.56 0.52 0.58
      2001 19 1.15 1.14 1.31 43 0.70 0.68 0.72
      2002 23 1.24 1.21 1.34 19 0.63 0.54 0.73
      2003 15 1.29 1.28 1.55 15 0.70 0.81 0.68
      2004 20 1.19 1.24 1.32 19 0.60 0.57 0.61
      2005 46 1.20 1.16 1.39 26 0.76 0.75 0.84
      2006 57 1.14 1.19 1.27 38 0.70 0.71 0.76
      2007 56 1.09 1.01 1.08 41 0.93 0.87 1.04
      2008 58 1.09 1.06 1.12 31 0.88 0.65 0.83
      2009 25 1.18 1.18 1.22 14 0.95 0.82 0.94
      2010 30 1.10 1.14 1.06 13 0.97 0.89 0.94
      2011 39 1.01 1.03 1.01 19 1.08 1.17 1.10
      2012 46 1.15 1.14 1.12 16 1.02 0.96 1.14

      Average 600 1.12 1.12 1.19 452 0.80 0.75 0.87

            Table 4.6: Nordic funds: descriptives of performance measures

This table shows number of observations, average returns, standard deviations and max and min values
for different performance measures in the Nordic region. The performance measures are based of data
from the preqin database except for TWR which instead uses a a 5 year average on the return when time
weighted. The PME performance is divided into local and global PME. Local PMEs uses cash flow data
and compare against a local index. For the Nordic region this index is the Carnegie Small Cap Index.
Global index is based of the MSCI Global Index.

          Type Variable Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
           Performance IRR 65 20.87 26.88 -18.00 168.50
                         TVPI 81 2.13 2.17 0.03 16.58
                        MIRR 22 7.44 4.58 -2.54 15.53
                        TWR 74 8.56 11.70 -19.89 33.24
          PME Local KS-PME 23 0.92 0.47 0.18 1.87
                         Local DirectAlpha 24 -0.80 12.07 -20.99 26.95
                         Local PME+ 23 -0.84 11.82 -21.82 27.83
                         Local TWRA 75 1.94 11.64 -27.72 27.64
                         Global KS-PME 23 1.08 0.56 0.25 2.37
                         Global DirectAlpha 23 1.62 10.67 -17.14 26.19
                         Global PME+ 22 1.51 10.90 -22.00 28.46
                         Global TWRA 75 5.66 11.88 -20.36 31.85

                                      30
4.2. Descriptive Statistics Chapter 4. Data and Descriptive Statistics

                Table 4.7: Correlation between performance measures

The table shows the correlation between the KS-PME, DirectAlpha, PME+, TWRA, IRR, MIRR, TVPI and
TWR mean returns for all the funds in the dataset. The returns are in absolute numbers. The funds date
from 1994-2012. Data based on Preqin as of April 2018.

                 KS-PME DirectAlpha PME+ TWRA IRR MIRR TVPI TWR
       KS-PME 1.00
       DirectAlpha 0.93 1.00
       PME+ 0.92 0.98 1.00
       TWRA 0.84 0.83 0.79 1.00
       IRR 0.86 0.90 0.90 0.70 1.00
       MIRR 0.85 0.83 0.81 0.78 0.76 1.00
       TVPI 0.89 0.82 0.82 0.90 0.72 0.79 1.00
       TWR 0.87 0.87 0.85 0.94 0.77 0.84 0.96 1.00

thermore, we observe the magnitude between local and global PME metrics is substan-
tial and points towards the importance of the underlying index. Also, the table shows
how the PME measures generate similar max and min values compared to each other.
These ranges do not differ much between global and local variants.
   The IRR generates the highest performance returns of the different measurements. It
also has the largest difference between min and max. The TWR and MIRR show similar
mean returns. However, they show a larger contrast in their max in min values. The
performance measures also inhabits a larger sample size, with all measures having similar
amount of observations to that of the TWRA.
   The final table 4.7 shows the correlation between the different performance mea-
sures. It shows that no measure has a lower correlation than 0.72 between each other
(between TVPI and IRR). All the PME measures (KS-PME, DirectAlpha, PME+ and
TWRA) show high correlations between each other. Except for the perfect correlation
between variables, PME+ and DirectAlpha show the highest correlation with a value of
0.98.

                                      31
Chapter 5

Results and Discussion

5.1 Nordic Returns

The results obtained through both parametric and non-parametric tests of the null-
hypothesis of no abnormal returns (α ≤ 0) infer a statistically significant outperfor-
mance of Nordic BO funds. We observe a 95% confidence interval of c. [-2%, 12%] for
the alpha returns on an annualized basis across the metrics, with approximate mean
overperformance of c. 5% given our data. The results are however sensitive to the
choice of underlying index used as basis for PME discounting, and indicate a higher
performance when using a broader global market index, as per the argument put forth
in Sorensen and Jagannathan (2013). Albeit, based on arguments presented in the back-
ground, we do believe that the usage of a local index, chosen on the basis of fund type
and region, and which more closely resembles the attributes and risk properties of a
Private Equity fund, allows for a more logical comparison on like-for-like basis (as the
underlying assets, i.e. small businesses, carry similar properties). The local fund as-
sumption is also not subject to the theoretical restrictions of the Rubinstein CAPM, on
which the unadjusted global index argument is based upon (log-utility of investor con-
sumption function, and that the global market returns approximate the investors return
on wealth across time, rw = rm, and thus implicitly accommodates the assumed risk).
   The result holds across the various performance measurements, and remains in most
cases significant at a 10% significance level for both t-tests and non-parametric rank-sum
tests. The very limited sample size of funds with available cash flows hamstrings the
statistical power of the tests on associated metrics. However, the derived TWRA measure

                                      32
5.1. Nordic Returns Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

                Table 5.1: Significance of Nordic PE abnormal returns

The Nordic buyout funds achieve statistically significant abnormal returns. The result is particularly
apparent given a global market benchmark, in which all metrics outperform on a 5% significance level.
The opposite can be observed on the VC sample, which indicates an underperformance. The sample
covers all records with available performance metrics on an equally-weighted basis, based on Preqin data.

                                                                            p-value
   Type Index Measure Obs Mean [95% CI] t-test rank-sum (one-sided)
   BO Local KSPME 16 1.08 0.84 1.32 0.24 0.60
                    DirectAlpha* 17 3.66 -1.91 9.24 0.09 0.31
                   PME+* 16 4.13 -1.11 9.38 0.06 0.30
                   TWRA** 55 5.31 2.64 7.99 0.00 0.00
           Global KSPME** 16 1.26 0.97 1.55 0.04 0.11
                    DirectAlpha** 16 5.92 1.04 10.79 0.01 0.04
                   PME+** 15 6.33 1.61 11.04 0.01 0.03
                   TWRA** 55 8.81 5.95 11.66 0.00 0.00
   VC Local KSPME 7 0.54 0.29 0.79 1.00 1.00
                    DirectAlpha 7 -11.63 -18.28 -4.99 1.00 1.00
                   PME+ 7 -12.20 -18.98 -5.42 1.00 1.00
                   TWRA 20 -7.35 -12.59 -2.11 1.00 0.94
          Global KSPME 7 0.66 0.37 0.95 0.99 0.99
                    DirectAlpha 7 -8.18 -14.53 -1.84 0.99 0.99
                   PME+ 7 -8.82 -16.24 -1.41 0.99 0.99
                   TWRA 20 -2.99 -8.21 2.23 0.88 0.94
    Both Local KSPME 23 0.92 0.71 1.12 0.79 0.95
                    DirectAlpha 24 -0.80 -5.90 4.30 0.63 0.85
                   PME+ 23 -0.84 -5.95 4.27 0.63 0.86
                   TWRA* 75 1.94 -0.74 4.61 0.08 0.01
          Global KSPME 23 1.08 0.84 1.32 0.26 0.50
                    DirectAlpha 23 1.62 -2.99 6.24 0.24 0.34
                   PME+ 22 1.51 -3.33 6.34 0.26 0.33
                   TWRA** 75 5.66 2.93 8.39 0.00 0.00

       H0: No abnormal returns (α ≤ 0)| *: 10% significance on either test | **: 5% significance on both tests

which does not rely on raw cash flow data, does reaffirm the identified value creation.
As the TWRA measure is directly derived from the vastly more available TVPI data, it
allows us to utilize previously inaccessible data points, and thus has higher statistical
power due to the sample size expansion, which increases the robustness of the explored
statistical inference.
   The Nordic VC sub-sample, on the other hand, exhibits the opposite performance
trends, with a 95% confidence interval implying negative abnormal returns across the
majority of the spectrum of evaluated metrics, in the range [-19%, 2%] on the basis
of annual abnormal returns across the metrics (mean underperformance of c. 7%). The
result does align with, and reaffirms the prior findings on European and US funds (Har-
ris et al., 2016), which show a statistically significant underperformance for all except

                                      33
5.1. Nordic Returns Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

top-quartile VC funds. The studies further indicate broader and more general outper-
formance of BO funds, which also aligns with our findings. It is however worth noting
that the magnitude of the performance does vary, as previous papers (Harris et al., 2016)
show that the difference between top and bottom performing quartiles differs by around
100% on average.
   There is limited evidence of Private Equity outperformance on aggregate basis across
fund types, as illustrated by the significance of the obtained results. This is sensible
given that the VC performance on average pulls down the abnormal returns generated
by BO funds on equally-weighted basis. On a value-weighted basis, there is however
reason to suspect higher significance, due to the, on average, larger size of BO funds in
comparison to the VC (as illustrated in figure C.5).
   Overall, it is worth noting that due to the slightly negatively skewed distribution
of most performance metrics, we expect the median returns to be slightly less than the
means. However, as seen in the descriptive exploration, this effect is fairly limited.
Whether the average or median return is more relevant from an investor perspective
is arguable and depends on the assumptions with regard to the market and the con-
stituent investors – if the investors can choose freely among funds, one should focus on
observing the average return. However, if there exists asymmetry in information, access,
and fund-picking skill of individual investors, the median becomes more appropriate.
Given prior research, we primarily focus on the mean metric, which is generally more
accommodating to a broader spectrum of assumptions.
   Furthermore, we expect the value-weighted means to be slightly higher than the
equally-weighted counterparts, as demonstrated in the descriptive analysis in table 4.5.
This is based on the assumption of concave relationship between fund value and per-
formance, which has been found in other regions through prior studies (Lorenzo, 2013).
As the distribution of fund value is heavily biased towards mid-market in our sample
(mean of c. 150mn EUR, as seen in figure C.5), we expect the value-weighted returns to
approach the theoretical maxima under the concave assumption. The relationship will
be further explored in more detail in section 5.3.
   In terms of validity of the measurements of the various methods, we find the TWRA
and KS-PME (and by extension DirectAlpha) to be most reliable. The TWRA benefits
from derivation which does not require cash flow data, and thus enables us to vastly

                                      34
5.1. Nordic Returns Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

                                           1
expand our set of usable observations.  It is however an inferior measure due to it’s
approximative nature, and lack of sensitivity to the exact timing of distributions and
capital calls. It should therefore not be used as the metric driving the inferences, rather
it should contribute as a form of robustness check which can increase our confidence
                                                                                  2
in the distilled conclusions. Instead, the KS-PME and DirectAlpha , should be used as
the main metrics when evaluating the existence of abnormal returns. In other words,
if the KS-PME or DirectAlpha indicates a statistically significant result, it should be
validated against the TWRA which then solidifies or rejects the conclusion given its
higher statistical power derived from the larger sample size.
   Pivoting back to the discussion with regard to the usage of appropriate index, it
is also worth to interconnect the other dimensions of risk which have to be consid-
ered when evaluating the abnormality of the returns. Firstly, liquidity risk, out of which
the market risk can to some extent be factored in when using a local index due to the
inherently lower liquidity of small-cap stocks (in contrast to global index), has to be
considered. Is the remaining funding risk, and thus the premium required as compen-
sation for being required to retain a liquid position throughout the funds life-time in
order to be able to answer the capital calls, large enough to diminish the observed ab-
normal returns? Likewise, is the idiosyncratic risk associated with industry (or in other
words, Private Equity-specific systematic risk), as well as potentially different factor
loadings, substantial enough to further devalue the obtained inferences? Prior research
by Sorensen et al. (2011) indicates that a 1-2% adjustment has to be made in order to
account for these factors. Exact estimation of the adjustment for the different index,
region, and fund type combinations is futile due to the inherent uncertainty. Nonethe-
less, a more stringent null-hypothesis for the existence of abnormal returns could be
formulated as H0 : (α − 2%) ≤ 0 in order to evaluate the potential alpha through a more
rigorous lens. Given this more conservative approach, most of our cash flow based PME
measures fall short in terms of significance, however, the TWRA still remains significant
on 5% level, thus pointing to, less certain but still plausible, abnormal returns for the
Nordic BO funds. On the other hand, this adjustment further solidifies the inference
with regard to the underperformance of VC funds.

    1                               1
     As seen in table C.1, only 3 of the records which have TVPI, also have corresponding cash flow data
which can be used to synthesize the PME measures.
    2
     Which derives an annual alpha through applying the IRR on the discounted cash flows as per the
KS-PME method.

                                      35
5.2. Cross-Regional Comparison Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

5.2 Cross-Regional Comparison

                        Table 5.2: Cross-regional comparison

The table shows a regression for Nordic performance against Europe and US, by fund type. Small p-values
indicate Nordic outperformance, and large p-values point towards statistically significant underperfor-
mance. As seen, there is limited evidence of Nordic PE outperformance on PME basis. However, the
conventional performance measures do show a statistically significant unilateral performance shift in
favour of Nordic BO funds (IRR/TVPI/TWR). It is however worth noting that these measures have a
greater sample size (c. 2.5x that of the MIRR, KS-PME and DirectAlpha), and thus more easily achieve
statistical power. Albeit, TWRA, with its larger sample, does infer significant potential outperformance in
terms of abnormal returns as compared to other regions. Perf. column refers to Nordic performance in
relation to both of the comparison regions (blank indicates intermediate performance). The sample covers
all records with performance metrics on equally-weighted basis, based on Preqin data as of April 2018.

                                                                          p-val
                                              Buyouts Venture Capital
    Type Measure Europe US Perf. Sig. Europe US Perf. Sig.
    Performance IRR 0.05 0.00 Over ** 0.15 0.31 Over
                  TVPI 0.01 0.00 Over ** 0.02 0.12 Over *
                 MIRR 0.11 0.34 Over 0.95 0.92 Under *
                 TWR 0.10 0.07 Over * 0.97 0.99 Under **
    PME Local KS-PME 0.82 0.56 Under 0.98 0.90 Under *
                  Local DirectAlpha 0.66 0.68 – 0.99 0.93 Under *
                  Local TWRA 0.64 0.05 – 0.93 0.94 Under *
                  Global KS-PME 0.34 0.46 Over 0.97 0.94 Under *
                  Global DirectAlpha 0.40 0.47 Over 0.99 0.97 Under **
                  Global TWRA 0.09 0.04 Over * 0.87 0.96 Under *

       H0: Other >= Nordic (coefficients >= 0 for regression Measure ∼ f actor(Region) with Nordic as base)
                        *: 10% significance on either region | **: 5% significance on both regions

   Regional comparison between the Nordics, Europe and US yields statistically sig-
nificant outperformance by Nordic BO firms on the basis of conventional performance
metrics as seen in table 5.2. However, due to the limited amount of cash flow data,
such inference cannot be made on the basis of derived PME metrics, which rely on the
availability aforementioned cash flows. The TWRA measure, which is not constrained
by the same limitation, does however point toward potential outperformance in terms
of the generated abnormal returns. This however depends on the underlying index,
due to the large divergence in index performance across the regions (see figure C.1).
As the European index has been significantly lower than the US and Nordic compari-
son index, the local European PME performance has been able to easily outstrip the US
and EU-based metrics, simply due to the vast difference in the discount factor derived
from the index rate of return. When compared using the same global index, the results
fall more in line with the conventional performance metrics – TWRA with its larger
statistical power, points towards a 10% significance level for both US and EU on the
null-hypothesis H0 : Other ≤ Nordic in terms of TWRA returns.

                                      36
5.2. Cross-Regional Comparison Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

   Thus, given the high statistical significance of the Nordic outperformance in terms
of TVPI and IRR for BO funds (and interestingly enough TVPI against European VC
funds), it is fairly safe to infer that Nordic BO funds are able to perform better within
the dimensions explored by those metrics. However, this does not necessarily mean a
true outperformance, as the measures are easily manipulated, and do not necessarily tell
the whole story (McKinsey, 2015). Nonetheless, the MIRR which accounts for many of
the issues, does point towards a similar direction. It is not statistically significant, most
likely due to the aforementioned limitations related to the small amounts of available
cash flow data. However, it does shed light on the fact that Nordic private equity firms
are better at manipulating IRR performance. As mentioned in previous chapters, the
IRR can easily be manipulated through a variety of measures delaying cash outflow.
The lower statistical significance seen in the MIRR measure against both Europe and US
points towards the fact that the Nordics potentially utilize IRR manipulation and are
seemingly better at it compared to its global counterparts. Moreover, the measure also
provides us with a sanity check and acts as a robustness indicator.
   Nordic VCs mostly underperform in comparison to their US and European counter-
part. All PME measures demonstrate inferior returns with reverse statistical significance,
showing a clear underperformance to the null-hypothesis (H0 : Other ≤ Nordic). This
underperformance is interestingly enough not reflected in the conventional performance
metrics, where we observe a dichotomy between the IRR/TVPI and the other metrics.
Interestingly, we also find similar patterns across Europe and the US, with both regions
having similar 10% significance in outperforming the Nordic VC funds.
   Thus, in a concluding manner, there is robust evidence of a Nordic buyout outper-
formance in absolute, conventional performance metrics. However, when delving into
measures of abnormal returns, the evidence for BO funds is not strong enough to point
towards a clear statistically valid inference with regard to the difference in the alpha
generated between different regions. The analysis of abnormal returns is very sensitive
to the treatment and assignment of the indexes used for the PME calculations, and can
vary heavily given a divergence between the indexes used for different regions (as is
the case with the local measures within our context). However, it is worth noting the
statistically significant underperformance of Nordic VC funds on the basis of generated
abnormal returns, given both local and global indexes. This underperformance is how-
ever not reflected in the TVPI and IRR measures. The nature of this divergence requires
further research to be fully understood.

                                      37
5.3. Performance Drivers Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

5.3 Performance Drivers

The regression has shown the robustness of the interaction between the explored per-
formance metrics and the independent variables. As seen in table 5.3, we observe sta-
                                   1
tistically significant correlations.  The result is however not significant enough to draw
a strong inference. On the other hand, it remains important as it highlights a number
of variables, that given appropriate transformations, correlate with the performance,
and provide us with an interesting avenue to explore any underlying dynamics of the
relationship. The underlying regression model, initially synthesized on the IRR met-
ric, is further applied on three additional performance metrics in order to establish the
                                                                                   2
robustness of the coefficients of the explored independent variables.

           Table 5.3: Nordic Performance: Regressions & Robustness checks

The table shows the mixed robust regression for four performance metrics, controlling for the fund type,
size, and relative vintage (Vintage − 1990). The base model is applied across four metrics in order to
establish robustness of coefficients of studied independent variables. We raise fund size to power of two,
in order to evaluate the possibility of a concave relationship. The sample covers all records with relevant
performance metrics on equally-weighted basis, based on Preqin data as of April 2018.

                                           (Robust)
                                  Coef. Std. Err. t-statistic P>|t| [95% Conf. Interval]
   ln(IRR) VC(Binary)* -0.82 0.43 -1.90 0.06 -1.68 0.04
                                   2
   n = 58 ln(FundSize )** -0.13 0.03 -3.94 0.00 -0.20 -0.06
    2
   R = 0.20 RelativeVintage* -0.06 0.03 -1.80 0.08 -0.12 0.01
                 Constant** 5.09 0.55 9.20 0.00 3.98 6.20
   ln(TWR) VC(Binary)* -0.67 0.36 -1.87 0.07 -1.38 0.05
                                   2
   n = 58 ln(FundSize ) -0.04 0.03 -1.51 0.14 -0.10 0.01
    2
   R = 0.18 RelativeVintage** -0.07 0.02 -4.25 0.00 -0.10 -0.04
                 Constant** 3.84 0.35 11.02 0.00 3.14 4.53
   ln(KS-PME) VC(Binary)** -0.78 0.26 -2.94 0.01 -1.33 -0.22
                                   2
   n = 23 ln(FundSize ) 0.04 0.03 1.12 0.28 -0.03 0.10
    2
   R = 0.40 RelativeVintage* -0.07 0.03 -1.96 0.07 -0.14 0.00
                Constant 0.62 0.65 0.96 0.35 -0.73 1.97
   ln(TWRA) VC (Binary)* -0.89 0.52 -1.72 0.09 -1.94 0.15
                                   2
   n = 48 ln(FundSize ) -0.02 0.05 -0.39 0.70 -0.13 0.09
    2
   R = 0.23 RelativeVintage** -0.11 0.05 -2.18 0.03 -0.21 -0.01
                 Constant** 3.61 0.55 6.59 0.00 2.50 4.71

                                         *: 10% significance | **: 5% significance

    1
    Note that in a mixed power/semilog regression in the form ln(Y) = β0 + β1ln(X1) + β2 X2 + e, a
change of one percent in the independent variable X1 will approximately correspond to a change in the
dependent variable Y equal to the independent variable’s coefficient B1 (in percent). In other words, B1 is
the elasticity of Y with regard to X1. On the other hand, an absolute change of one in X2 will correspond
to roughly B2 × 100 percent change in the dependent variable Y.
    2
     We expect the coefficient to retain the same sign across the different dependent variables.

                                      38
5.3. Performance Drivers Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

   The independent regression variables were selected based on of previous findings
and the results presented in the earlier sections. The VC dummy carries important
explanatory value as shown by the dichotomy between the inferred mean returns dis-
tribution across the two fund types (as seen in previous sections). The fund size is a
variable heavily studied in previous literature (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005, Robinson and
Sensoy, 2011, Sabrie et al., 2017). We also put forth the argument that larger funds are
subject to reversion to the mean, on the basis that the larger funds generally partake in
the acquisition of more mature companies. Lastly, vintage is analyzed to add a tempo-
ral element to the regression. Yet again, the inclusion of the variable stems from prior
research Harris et al. (2016) and a qualitative argument – the private equity market has
become more saturated and mature in the Nordics given the rise in popularity of the as-
set class and the increase in the total amount of private equity firms (BerchWood, 2013),
as well as the diffusion of operational expertise into the general industry.
   Pivoting back to the variables, the VC dummy highlights the historical underper-
formance of the fund type. The change in VC will on average incur a decrease in the
performance metric, of which the magnitude will vary, but broadly result in around 75%
decrease in performance for the studied metrics. The question why this underperfor-
mance exists is difficult to answer without a deeper qualitative analysis on the dynamics
of the Nordic VC industry, however studies on international results do point towards
the surplus of capital injected into the VC funds following the dotcom bubble, all while
the actual availability of viable deals grew at a lower pace. This imbalance between
capital and investment opportunities with positive NPV depressed the returns of funds
on the basis of basic economic principles of supply and demand.
    As mentioned above, we speculated that the fund size will exhibit a concave relation-
ship with the fund performance. As mentioned before, this relationship has been found
                                                                                      1
in certain other studies, but also follows a fairly streamlined logical argument.  How-
ever, the effect was very unpronounced within the scope of our research and couldn’t
be robustly validated across dependent variables other than the IRR used to devise and
construct the core model. Also, the implied magnitude of the effect was fairly limited.

    1
     If we consider a firm as a set of loosely correlated units, which might or might not under/overperform
during a discrete period t, then given a large enough firm there should be a certain level of reversion to the
mean, as the standard error of the average return which makes up the firm performance would decrease.
This would in other words mean that the deals would perform more consistently, but would be less likely
to reach heavy outperformance levels, and thus we would expect larger funds to less likely perform in the
top quartile, simply due to the diminished implicit element of chance which impacts the industry.

                                      39
5.3. Performance Drivers Chapter 5. Results and Discussion

   Lastly, we observe a robust relationship between the fund vintage and the perfor-
mance, which shows that funds with higher vintage years perform weaker than their
earlier counterparts with statistical significance. Our data indicates that, on average,
for each year since 1990, our performance measures have been decreasing by c. 8% a
year (on relative basis). This relationship can be explained by considering our earlier
findings (see figure C.4 and table 4.5); as the frequency distribution of funds is skewed
towards later vintages, with a spike in the early 2000s. The data shows that the returns
in the late 90s were lower than that of the early 2000s, however the frequency weighting
which implicitly impacts the regression instead provides more explanatory power for
the period post 2000. The low amount of observations before the year 2000 simply does
not outweigh the more apparent negative relationship observed between 2000 and 2012.
This explains why relative vintage year exhibits negative correlation with all explored
performance metrics, at least in quantitative terms. It is difficult to pinpoint a com-
prehensive qualitative explanation for this relation, however we speculate that a more
mature market and higher entry multiples all contributed to the lower performance in
later years (Bain and Company and MacArthur, 2014).
    Overall, we thus find that fund type and relative vintage do have statistically signif-
icant (10% level) impact on the different performance measures based on the available
data for the Nordic region, and that they are robust across several different performance
metrics. However, we do not find enough evidence to support the notion of a concave
relationship between fund size and the various performance measures. We however
do not believe the evidence to be strong enough to draw a more general inference; as
the study has a fairly limited time-frame, and does not account for other data sources,
it would be unwise to assume a static relationship. Rather, as previous research indi-
cates a level of cyclicality in the industry, and closer relationship with industry-specific
variables, it is fair to assume that the identified relationships are more likely manifes-
tations of other underlying drivers, and are by extension volatile over time. Thus, the
research instead points towards the need for qualitative studies which can identify the
underlying industry dynamics which result in the observed relationships.

                                      40
Chapter 6

Conclusion

This paper has investigated the performance of Nordic Private Equity, and assessed it
in relation to relevant benchmarks, with the aim of evaluating the underlying value
creation potential as compared to public markets, and global competitors within the
field. Due to restrictions derived from the required overlaps in underlying data, and
uncertainty pertaining to the j-curve effect, the study was restricted to funds with vin-
tages of 1994-2012. The raw data was primarily obtained from Preqin, but also included
complementary sources such as MSCI, Carnegie, and the US Federal Reserve. The final
engineered set used as basis for statistical analysis included 2,224 records with usable
performance metrics, out of which c. 75 records could be associated with the Nordic
region. The study drew primarily upon existing methods used in the related research
(IRR, TVPI, and PME variations), but also devised a novel measure, TWRA, which al-
                                                                                                          1
lowed for greater robustness in the synthesized analysis based on smaller datasets.
Lastly, an additional rudimentary approach to risk adjustments was applied based on
prior findings to further augment the analysis with an additional layer of complexity.
    The synthesized analysis has illuminated three tiers of key findings – the first being
the statistically significant outperformance of Nordic BO funds as compared to public
markets, with an approximate annual abnormal return of 5%. This result was more
pronounced on the basis of a global, rather than local, benchmark index. However, we
argue that a local index gives the best representation, as it exhibits similar risk proper-
ties, which consequently makes it more appropriate for a like-for-like comparison. On
the other hand, the opposite inference was drawn with regard to VC funds, as a signif-

    1
    Due to its independence from cash flow data. Instead, the measure is based on TVPI and implied
population parameters.

                                      41
                                                                     Chapter 6. Conclusion

icant underperformance of c. 7% per annum was noted in relation to a public market
equivalent investments. However, after adjusting for risk by applying a more conser-
vative abnormal returns threshold, the significance of the BO fund findings fell below
a level at which a valid inference could be made. Nonetheless, this adjustment further
consolidated the underperformance of VC funds. The identified general divergence in
returns of fund types aligns with findings on an international level (Harris et al., 2016).
   The second tier consisted of findings regarding regional comparison of returns. The
study finds significant evidence for the outperformance of Nordic BO firms in relation
to their European and US-based peers on the basis of absolute performance metrics
(IRR, TVPI, and TWR). Due to the low sample size, the robustness in terms of abnormal
returns (PME) can not be confirmed. In terms of VC, the findings indicate that the
Nordic funds seem to underperform both US and Europe in terms of abnormal returns.
   Lastly, when decomposing the identified performance drivers or correlation, the
study presents evidence of a robust relationship between the performance of Nordic
funds and the fund type and relative vintage. The exploration of the relationship with
fund type reaffirms the findings based on the first two tiers of findings, and suggests
that Nordic VC funds underperform the BO funds by 75% in terms of relative perfor-
mance. The relative vintage on the other hand points towards a noticeable gradual
decline in performance over the last 20 years, with c. 8% average relative performance
drop since 1990 on an annual basis. The hypothesis of concave relationship between the
fund size and performance is tested, however the evidence is found to be not strong
enough to reject the null-hypothesis. The two variables have however been explored
in similar fashion in international studies (Harris et al., 2016, Kaplan and Schoar, 2005,
Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009, Strömberg, 2018), thus indicating an international, rather
than local phenomena. The prior research points towards a cyclicality in the PE mar-
ket, bound to fundraising aggregates, which have been shown to be strong predictors
of performance. However, given the limited time-frame of the study, we refer to future
research to assess the underlying qualitative reasons behind the identified relationships.
    In terms of issues, the findings and analysis presented within the frame of this paper
are mainly constrained by the limitations of the available data. With a more extensive
dataset, and larger samples, one could evaluate the performance with greater preci-
     1
sion.  Moreover, additional datasets such as Burgiss or Cambridge Analytics could have

    1
     Narrower confidence intervals due to the sample size expansion would imply an increase in precision,
the accuracy however still remains primarily bound to the validity of the applied methodology.

                                      42
                                                                     Chapter 6. Conclusion

been used to complement our current data and created a more extensive dataset. This
would in turn allow for more complete analysis and comprehensive understanding of
the performance. Qualitative discussion with EQT showed that the firm, one of the re-
gion’s private equity entities, has until recently not submit information to Preqin, and
has historically cooperated with other vendors, a fact which further substantiates the
argument for the use of a more comprehensive dataset in future research.
    Additionally, given the opaque nature of the private equity industry, adjustments re-
garding the various risk factors become hard to estimate and present while maintaining
a pragmatic approach to the analysis. As it is hard to calculate exact factor loadings, de-
fault risks, and illiquidity premiums, there exists an underlying issue of not being fully
able to capture every risk aspect or capture it to its full extent. There will always be
large uncertainty in these estimates as there currently is no bullet proof way of properly
capturing every aspect of risk in relation to the industry.
    Furthermore, there exists a large set of different performance measures available, all
trying to show the best possible measure of performance for PE firms. The measures all
have their own pros and cons, and thus present us with the issue of knowing which one
yields the most credible results. As most of the measures are largely heuristic in nature,
and their accuracy depends on the context of application, is is fairly difficult to truly
have a "correct" measure, as they all illuminate some aspect of the performance that the
others in some way lack. Moreover, as some show statistical significance, and some do
not, it is often difficult to draw a strong inference based on their joint analysis.
   Looking forward, there are several promising directions in which future research
can pivot. Firstly, with a larger dataset, one could expand upon and refine our cur-
rent research methodology. Secondly, a qualitative study of the underlying drivers for
Nordic private equity firms could prove to be valuable. Thirdly, one could research
the qualitative differences between fund types, and also the associated competencies.
As seen in our study, there is a large difference between the two fund types. Further-
more, a study which would continue to explore the different risk-factors connected to
PE investments would be highly relevant. This is particularly true as a significantly
more well-functioning secondary market has developed over the last decade, making
the conventional illiquidity argument seem less impactful in a more modern context.

                                      43
References

A. Ang, B. Chen, W.N. Goetzmann, and L. Phalippou. Estimating Private Equity Returns
  from Limited Partner Cash Flows. SSRN Electronic Journal, 2017.

U. Axelson, T. Jenkinson, P. Strömberg, and M.S. Weisbach. Borrow Cheap, Buy High?
  The Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts. Journal of Finance, 68(6):2223–
  2267, 2013.

U. Axelson, M. Sorensen, and P. Strömberg. Alpha and Beta of Buyout Deals: A Jump
  CAPM for Long-Term Illiquid Investments. Working Paper, 2014.

Bain and Company and H.H. MacArthur. GLOBAL PRIVATE EQUITY REPORT 2018
  About Bain & Company ’ s Private Equity business. Bain & Company, page 61, 2014.

BerchWood. The Nordic Private Equity Way - A Model That Works. 2013.

British Private Equity & Venture Capital Association. A Guide to Private Equity. pages
  1–54, 2010.

M.K. Brunnermeier and L.H. Pedersen. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Review
  of Financial Studies, 22(6):2201–2238, 2009.

CFA Institute. Overview of the Global Investment Performance Standards. pages 1–88,
  2012.

K. Eklund, H. Berggren, and L. Trägårdh. Shared norms for the new reality: the nordic
  way. /Klausschwab/Shared-Normsfor-the-New-, pages 1–15, 2011.

G. Fraser-Sampson. Private Equity as an Asset Class. 1 edition, 2007.

J. Gilligan and M. Wright. Private Equity Demystified, An Explanatory Guide. 2010.

                                      44
References References

O. Gredil, B. Griffiths, and R. Stucke. Benchmarking Private Equity The Direct Alpha
  Method. Unpublished working paper, 2014.

R.S. Harris, T. Jenkinson, and S.N. Kaplan. Private Equity Performance : What Do We
  Know? 2011.

R.S. Harris, T. Jenkinson, and S.N. Kaplan. How Do Private Equity Investments Perform
  Compared to Public Equity? Journal of Investment Management, 14(3):14–37, 2016.

C. Higson and R. Stucke. The Performance of Private Equity. SSRN Electronic Journal,
  18(1):1729–1749, 2012.

N. Jegadeesh, R. Kraussl, and J.M. Pollet. Risk and Expceted Returns of Private Equity
  Investments: Evidence Based on Market Prices. Rev. Financ. Stud., (404):1–18, 2012.

T. Jenkinson, M. Sousa, and R. Stucke. How Fair are the Valuations of Private Equity
  Funds? SSRN Electronic Journal, (Februar):1–27, 2013.

M.C. Jensen. Eclipse of the Public Corporation. SSRN Electronic Journal, (October 1989),
  1999.

S.N. Kaplan and A. Schoar. Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence and Cap-
  ital Flows Several of these results differ markedly from those for mutual funds. The
  Journal of Finance, 60:1791–1823, 2005.

S.N. Kaplan and P. Strömberg. Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 23(1):121–146, 2009.

A. Korteweg and S. Nagel. Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Venture Capital. Journal of
  Finance, 71(3):1437–1470, 2016.

T.c. Lin, L. Phalippou, and J. Driessen. A New Method to Estimate Risk and Return
  of Non-traded Assets from Cash Flows : The Case of Private Equity Funds A New
  Method to Estimate Risk and Return of Non-traded Assets from Cash Flows : The
  Case of Private Equity Funds. 2011.

A. Long and C. Nickels. A Private Investment Benchmark. AIMR Conference on Venture
  Capital Investing, pages 1–17, 1996.

A.D. Lorenzo. Private Equity Performance Drivers. 2013.

                                      45
References References

McKinsey. A better way to understand internal rate of return, 2015. URL https:
  //www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/
   our-insights/a-better-way-to-understand-internal-rate-of-return.

A. Metrick and A. Yasuda. The Economics of Private Equity Funds. The Review of
  Financial Studies, pages 1–57, 2009.

L. Pastor. Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns. The Journal of Political Economy,
  111(3):642, 2003.

L. Phalippou. The Hazards of Using IRR to Measure Performance: The Case of Private
  Equity. SSRN Electronic Journal, pages 1–23, 2008.

L. Phalippou and O. Gottschalg. The performance of private equity funds. Review of
  Financial Studies, 22(4):1747–1776, 2009.

M.E. Porter. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. Harvard Business Review, (March-
  April), 1990.

D.T. Robinson and B.A. Sensoy. Do private equity fund managers earn their fees? Com-
  pensation, ownership, and cash flow performance. Review of Financial Studies, 26(11):
  2760–2797, 2013.

D. Robinson and B. Sensoy. Private Equity in the 21st Century: Liquidity, Cash Flows,
  and Performance from 1984-2010. NBER Working Paper, 2011.

J. Sabrie, E. Tutor, and P. Str. Evaluating Private Equity Returns from the Investor Per-
  spective - are Limited Partners Getting Carried Away? 2017.

A. Salehi-Sangari and O. Hellqvist. The effects of leveraged recapitalizations in private
  equity portfolio companies. Bachelor Thesis, (242), 2014.

M. Sorensen and R. Jagannathan. The Public Market Equivalent and Private Equity
  Performance. SSRN Electronic Journal, 2013.

M. Sorensen, N. Wang, and J. Yang. Valuing private equity. pages 1–43, 12 2011.

E. Stafford. Replicating Private Equity with Value Investing, Homemade Leverage, and
  Hold-to-Maturity Accounting. Working Paper, (December):1–43, 2015.

                                      46
References References

P. Strömberg. Evaluating Investments in Unlisted Equity for the Norwegian Government
  Pension Fund Global ( Gpfg ). pages 1–154, 2018.

R. Stucke. Updating History. SSRN Working Paper No. 2009067, pages 1–44, 2011.

R. Stucke. An ABC of PME. (March), 2014.

SVCA. Riskkapital på tre minuter - SVCA. URL https://archive.
  is/20130418110403/http://svca.se/sv/Om-riskkapital/Om-riskkapital/
   Riskkapital-pa-tre-minuter/.

SVCA. The Swedish Private Equity Market.
  (Julyhttp://arc.hhs.se/download.aspx?MediumId=1945), 2017.

S. Zarabi. Private Equity i Sverige. 2009.

                                      47
Appendix A

Summary of Prior Studies

   Authors Country Type Findings
   Kaplan      US LBOs Investors in post-buy-out capital earn a median market-adjusted return
    (1989)                                 of 37%.
   Ljungqvist   US VC and   Mature funds started 1981–1993 generate IRRs in excess of S&P 500 re-
   and                    LBOs      turns net of fees; returns robust to assumptions about timing of invest-
    Richardson               funds      ment and portfolio company risk; buy-out funds generally outperform
    (2002)                                   venture funds, these differences partially reflect differences in leverage
                                         used in investments; sample from one LP with disproportionate share
                                            of larger buy-out funds.
   Jones and   US VC and   LBO funds have a value-weighted IRR of 4.6% and VC funds have a
   Rhodes-                LBOs      value-weighted IRR of 19.3%, commensurate with factor risks borne by
    Kropf                    funds      investors; considerable variation in fund returns
    (2003)
   Cumming    US, Eu-   MBO/MBI, Private returns to investors in relation to law quality, fund characteristics
   and Walz   rope      LBO and   and corporate governance mechanisms.
   (2004)                 VC
   Kaplan      US VC and   LBO fund returns gross of fees earn returns in excess of S&P 500 but net
    and Schoar              buy-out    of fees slightly less than S&P 500; unlike mutual funds is persistence in
    (2005)                    funds      returns among top performing funds; higher returns for funds raised
                                            in 1980s; acknowledge that average returns potentially biased as do not
                                             control for differences in market risk and possible sample selection bias
                                          towards larger and first-time funds; funds raised in boom times less
                                             likely to raise follow-on funds and thus appear to perform less well.
   Groh and   US and   MBOs Risk-adjusted performance of US buy-outs significantly greater than
    Gottschalg    non-US               S&P index.
    (2006)
   Knigge,      Multi-     VC and   In contrast to VC funds, the performance of buy-out funds is largely
    Nowak and   country    buy-out    driven by the experience of the fund managers regardless of market
    Schmidt                 funds      timing.
    (2006)
   Driessen,     US VC and   Data from 797 mature private funds over 24 years shows high market
   Lin and             buy-out    beta for venture capital funds and low beta for buy-out funds, and ev-
    Phalippou               funds      idence that private equity risk-adjusted returns are surprisingly low.
    (2007)                                Higher returns larger and more experienced funds mainly caused by
                                          higher risk exposures, not abnormal performance.
   Froud,       UK Mid-      General partners in successful mid-sized funds can expect carried inter-
    Johal,                    and        est to generate £5–£15m on top of their salaries while general partners
    Leaver and              large-      in large, successful funds can expect $50–150m
    Williams                  size
    (2007)                    funds

                                      48
                                                  Chapter A. Summary of Prior Studies

Lerner,      US VC and   Early- and later-stage funds have higher returns than buy-out funds
Schoar                  LBOs      in funds raised 1991-1998; considerable variation in returns by type of
and Wong-             funds      institution; presence of unsophisticated performanceinsensitive LPs al-
sunwai                             lows poorly performing GPs to raise new funds
(2007)
Ljungqvist,   US LBO      Established funds accelerate investments and earn higher returns when
Richard-                 Funds      opportunities improve, competition eases and credit conditions loosen;
son and                        first-time funds less sensitive to market conditions but invest in riskier
Wolfenzon                          deals; following periods of good performance funds become more con-
(2007)                                   servative.
Metrick      US VC and   Buy-out fund managers earn lower revenue per managed dollar than
and Yasuda            LBO      managers of VC funds; buy-out managers have substantially higher
(2007)                    funds      present values for revenue per partner and revenue per professional
                                   than VC managers; buy-out fund managers generate more from fees
                                       than from carried interest. buy-out managers build on prior experience
                                        by raising larger funds, which leads to significantly higher revenue per
                                      partner despite funds having lower revenue per dollar; buy-out man-
                                        agers build on prior experience by raising larger funds, which leads to
                                       significantly higher revenue per partner despite funds have lower rev-
                                         enue per dollar.
Nikoskelainen UK MBOs Private returns to investors enhanced by contextdependent corporate
and Wright                        governance mechanisms.
(2007)
Diller and   Europe VC and   Highly significant impact of total fund inflows on fund returns. Pri-
Kaserer                MBO      vate equity funds’ returns driven by GP’s skills as well as stand-alone
(2008)                     funds       investment risk.
Philappou    US and   LBO      After adjusting for sample bias and overstated accounting values for
and         non-US    Funds     non-exited investments, average fund performance changes from slight
Gottschalg                           overperformance to underperformance of 3% pa with respect to S&P
(2009)                                  500; gross of fees, funds outperform by 3% pa; venture funds underper-
                                      form more than buy-out funds; previous past performance most impor-
                                       tant in explaining fund performance; funds raised 1980–2003.
Lopez di   Worldwide Private     Median investment IRR (PME) 21% (1.3), gross of fees; one in 10 in-
Silanes,                    equity      vestments goes bankrupt but one in four has an IRR above 50%; one in
Phalip-                     invest-      eight investments held for less than two years, but have highest returns;
pou and             ments     scale of private equity firm investors is influential: investments held
Gottschalg                           at times of a high number of simultaneous investments underperform
(2011)                                  substantially, with diseconomies of scale highest for independent firms,
                                        less hierarchical firms, and those with managers of similar professional
                                    backgrounds.
Maula,      UK MBOs Industry growth drives exited buy-out returns and is particularly high
Nikoske-                             in MBOs, divisional buy-outs and top-quartile deals.
lainen and
Wright
(2011)
Robinson     US Buy-out    Using data from a single LP, buy-out fund returns outperform public
and Sensoy              funds      market benchmark.
(2011)
Stucke      US VC and   Previous studies’ findings may be biased downwards due to data source
(2011)                     buy-out    used; severe anomalies in underlying data result from ceasing data up-
                        funds      dates. Many empirical results established using these databases may
                                         not be replicable with correct data; the claim that private equity has not
                                       outperformed public equity is unlikely to hold with true numbers.
Franzoni,     Worldwide Liquidated The unconditional liquidity risk premium on private equity is close to
Nowak and              buy-out    3% annually and, the inclusion of this liquidity risk premium reduces
Phalippou                 invest-      alpha to zero.
(2012)                   ments

                                   49
                                                     Chapter A. Summary of Prior Studies

   Harris,      US VC and   US buy-out fund net of fee returns have exceeded those of public mar-
    Jenkinson                buy-out    kets for most vintages since 1984 using various benchmarks (eg, 3% pa
    and Kaplan              funds      using S&P 500) and various data sources from multiple LPs; but some
    (2012)                                 data sources biased downwards in fund returns; both absolute perfor-
                                            mance and performance relative to public markets are negatively related
                                          to aggregate capital commitment.
   Higson      US Buy-out    For almost all vintage years since 1980, US buyout funds significantly
   and Stucke             funds      outperformed S&P 500. Liquidated funds 1980–2000 delivered excess
    (2012)                                   returns 450 basis points per year. of funds do better than the S&P; excess
                                              returns driven by top-decile funds; higher returns for funds set up in the
                                            first half of each of the past three decades; significant downward trend
                                              in absolute returns over all 29 vintage years; results robust to measuring
                                            excess returns via money multiples instead of IRRs.
    Kleymenova,  Worldwide Secondary  A PE fund interest is more liquid if the fund is larger, has a buy-out-
    Talmor and              buy-out    focused strategy, less undrawn capital, has made fewer distributions
    Vasvari                   funds      and is managed by a manager whose funds were previously sold in the
    (2012)                                 secondaries market; private equity funds’ liquidity improves if more
                                           non-traditional buyers, as opposed to dedicated secondary funds, pro-
                                            vide bids and overall market conditions are favourable
   Phalippou    US Buy-out    Adjusting for size premium as buy-out funds mainly invest in small
    (2012)                    funds      companies, average buy-out fund return is in line with small-cap listed
                                          equity
    Axelson,     Worldwide Buy-out Gross of fee betas of 2.2%–2.4% and alphas of 8.3%–8.6% annually.
    Sorensen,
   and
    Stromberg
    (2013)
    Castellaneta,  Europe     Private     Completeness of feedback on performance of past deals has a positive
    Gottschalg    and US     equity-     impact on the IRR of subsequent deals; this positive impact is mod-
    and Wright              backed     erated by the proportion of feedbacks on past deals showing negative
    (2013)                     buy-outs    returns.
    Cornelli,      Worldwide Private     Private equity firms experiencing the highest turnover of executives be-
    Lichtner,                  equity      tween funds (or those in the top turnover tercile) outperformed those
    Perem-                  funds      experiencing the lowest turnover (or those in the bottom turnover ter-
    betov,                                   cile) by 13.5%; funds that replenished with operational expertise demon-
    Simintzi                               strated improved performance, especially during recessions; turnover of
   and Vig                       professionals with financial backgrounds did not impact performance;
    (2013)                                  turnover of professionals with private equity experience negatively im-
                                         pacted performance.
   Harris,      US VC and   Sustained significance for pre-2000 funds for buy-out funds and partic-
    Jenkinson,               buy-out    ularly for venture funds. Post-2000, mixed evidence of persistence in
    Kaplan                 funds      buy-out funds. Sorting by quartile of performance of previous funds,
   and Stucke                        performance of the current fund is statistically indistinguishable regard-
    (2013)                                   less of quartile; performance size relationship absent. Post-2000, perfor-
                                            mance in venture capital funds remains as persistent as pre-2000.
   Sensoy,      US Investments Superior performance of endowments in 1991–1998 due to greater ac-
   Wang and            by LPs   cess to top-performing VC funds; in 1999–2006 endowments do not out-
    Weisbach                in buy-   perform as as no longer have greater access to funds that are likely to
    (2013)                   out and   restrict access, and do not make better investment selections than other
                               venture     types of institutional investors.
                          m funds
   Valkama,    UK MBOs Governance variables have limited role in driving value creation but
    Maula,                               use of a ratchet is positively related to both equity and enterprise value
    Nikoske-                             returns; leverage has a positive impact on median and top-quartile eq-
    lainen and                        uity returns; returns are driven by buy-out size and acquisitions made
    Wright                               during holding period; the effect of industry growth is strong in insider-
    (2013)                                   driven, divisional buy-outs, and top quartile transactions.

                Table A.1: Comprehensive overview of prior studies

Key source: Gilligan and Wright (2010)

                                      50
Appendix B

Performance Formulas

Code Repository

A code repository with modularized utility functions devised and built as part of the
research process, and subsequently used to calculate the performance measurements,
can be found at: https://github.com/satzen/PyPME (Python)
   The code is released under open source MIT license and can thus be used to ease
implementation of further research. Thus, we hope it might diminish the odds of im-
plementation errors, and increase research agility due to it’s straightforward implemen-
tation, with native support for raw Preqin exported data format (as of April 2018).

IRR

Solving for r using Newtonian method. Adjusted for period lengths (XIRR).

                                            T
                                                 CFt
                           IRR : 0 = ∑      t (B.1)
                                          t=1 (1 + r)

MIRR

The MIRR is calculated by discounting all capital calls back to present (defined as time
of first capital call) at the financing rate r f , and distribution cash flows to the time t at
the reinvestment rate ri.
                √
                                       t FV(Distributions)
                     MIRR =                 − 1 (B.2)
                                        PV(Calls)

The rates used in the paper remain conservative, with a r f = 2% and ri = 10%.

                                      51
                                                        Chapter B. Performance Formulas

TVPI

The TVPI is simply calculated as the sum of the nominal value of all distributions and
the net asset value (NAV) at the relevant date, divided by the sum of contributions. In
other words, it is the multiple of money (MoM) which accounts for unrealized value
through the NAV, as per below:

            T
                        Distribution
          ∑ CFt + N AVT
           t=1                       Total distributions + Unrealized value of fund
  TVPI =                  =
                 T                                   Total contributions
                            Contribution
             ∑ CFt
                 t=1
                                                                                           (B.3)

TWR & TWRA

Computed as a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) based on the TVPI (MoM) mul-
tiple and average investment length.
                                √n
                           TWR =  TVPI − 1 (B.4)

Where n equals to the average investment length.
   An approximate measure of abnormal returns can in turn be computed by compar-
ing the TWR against a public index measure:

                    TWRA = TWRal pha = TWR − rmarket (B.5)

Where rmarket can be calculated using an appropriate market index and time period.
   Within the frame of this paper, we compare the TWR against a global and local index,
and assume that rmarket equals to the geometric average return of the index between the
fund vintage and and ten years forward (i.e. 10 years starting from the vintage year).
We calculate an array of TWR/A measures for the range [4,6] of value n. The n = 5
assumption results are most commonly presented in the paper, as it is the closest to the
available empirical findings (see table C.2 and Strömberg (2018) for reference). Others
are primarily used for initial data exploration. Thus to further clarify, unless otherwise
stated, all TWR and TWRA tables refer to results obtained given n = 5 and rmarket based
on a geometric mean of the 10 years starting from the vintage year of the fund. If data
is insufficient (Vintage > 2008) closest possible date is used instead.

                                      52
                                                        Chapter B. Performance Formulas

PME+

The PME+ is calculated by synthesizing a theoretical investment into the relevant public
market index, which mimics the original cash flows of the PE fund. Distributions are
treated as sell-offs, and capital calls as investments. The method then adjusts for the
NAV value by introducing a scaling term for distributions (λ), which makes sure that
the NAV of the theoretical investment is equal to that of the PE fund, so as to avoid the
issues associated nonsensical (negative) NAV values which could occur under certain
conditions. Finally, the method then calculates the IRR of the theoretical investment. In
order to get the abnormal returns, we then simply subtract it from the fund IRR.

         PME+al pha = IRRPE − IRR(Contributions, λ × Distributions, N AV) (B.6)

KS-PME

KS-PME is essentially a market-adjusted cash multiple. The measure is calculated in
similar fashion to the TVPI multiple, except for the fact that the distributions and capital
calls are discounted at the rate derived from a public market benchmark.

                   T     Distribution
                      CFt             N AVT
              ∑     It +   I
                             T     FV(Total distributions + Unrealized value of fund)
                t=1
KS − PME =                =
                      T    Contribution                         FV(Total contributions)
                             CFt
                    ∑      It
                    t=1
                                                                                           (B.7)

DirectAlpha

The DirectAlpha metric builds on the same methodology as the KS-PME upon which it
was based, but instead of calculating a cash multiple, it estimates an IRR which corre-
sponds to the yearly abnormal rate (i.e. the alpha). Calculated by solving for r in the
following equation, and adjusted for period lengths (XIRR):

      T
        FV(CFt)    N AVT
 α = ∑       t +      T = IRR(FV(Distributions), FV(Contributions), N AV) (B.8)
     t=1 (1 + r)    (1 + r)

   And subsequently taking the natural logarithm as per below:

                            DirectAl pha = ln(1 + α) (B.9)

                                      53
                                                        Chapter B. Performance Formulas

                 Table B.1: Illustrative example: Adjusting index Beta

                                      x              f         y
        Date Index x r       ∆ Time r annual r       Adjusted Index y
            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        2002-11-29 601 5.3% 0.079 1.4% 7.8% 598
        2002-12-31 572 -5.0% 0.088 1.4% -7.5% 554
        2003-01-31 554 -3.1% 0.085 1.4% -4.7% 527
        2003-02-28 543 -1.9% 0.077 1.4% -2.9% 512
        2003-03-31 540 -0.6% 0.085 1.4% -0.9% 507
        2003-04-30 587 8.6% 0.082 1.4% 12.9% 573
        2003-05-30 619 5.5% 0.082 1.4% 8.1% 619
        2003-06-30 629 1.6% 0.085 1.4% 2.3% 634
        2003-07-31 641 1.9% 0.085 1.2% 2.8% 651
        2003-08-29 653 2.0% 0.079 1.2% 2.9% 670
        2003-09-30 656 0.5% 0.088 1.2% 0.7% 675
        2003-10-31 695 5.8% 0.085 1.2% 8.7% 734
        2003-11-28 704 1.4% 0.077 1.2% 2.0% 748
            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

                                  Given β = 1.5

Beta adjustments

                                                                                   x    dx
Given an index timeseries xt, with subsequent derived return series rt = dt , an annual
                                         f                                                                          Days(t)       f
risk-free rate timeseries r t , adjusted arithmetically for the time delta t (   365 × r annual ),
and new β value, we are able to compute an adjusted index yt using the CAPM formula.

                                                       y       f          x      f
                                 rt = r t + β(rt − r t ) (B.10)

   Now let us apply the new returns series as a geometric chain:

                                                               y
                                yt = yt−1 × (1 + rt ) (B.11)

   With t = 0 holding the following equality: y0 = x0. In other words, at any time T
                                                     T        y
the derived index will be equal to: yT = x0 × ∏t=1(1 + rt ). Refer to table B.1 for more
explicit illustrative example calculation.

                                      54
Appendix C

Supporting Figures

                       Table C.1: Overview of the data funnel

As seen below, there is a significant disparity between the availability of general fund metadata, general
performance metrics (TVPI/IRR), and cash flows required to calculate PME-measures and discretionary
adjustments on per-fund level. Only approximately 8% of relevant funds in the database have available
cash flows, and 24% have any performance measures. Preqin data as of April 2018.

           Scope Stage Amount
            General Amount of funds in Preqin database 33,693
                       Amount of funds in relevant type, regions, and vintage 12,369
                      Amount of funds with perfornance measures (IRR) 2,224
                      Amount of funds with cashflows 1,132
            Nordic Nordic funds in Preqin database 643
                      Nordic funds in relevant type and vintage 320
                     Nordic funds with performance measures (IRR) 75
                      Nordic funds with cash flows 25
                     Buyout funds with performance measures 53
                      Buyout funds with cash flows 18
                     VC funds with performance measures 22
                      VC funds with cash flows 7

              Table C.2: Average investment length for Nordic PE deals

The average length of Nordic deals seem to coincide with prior global findings (Strömberg, 2018),
indicating an average of c. 5 years. The Nordic median is slightly less, at 4.7 years, indicating a positive
skew in the data. Length remains consistent across study type. Preqin deal data as of April 2018.

Type Mean Investment Length Median Investment Length # observations
Buyout 5.05 4.73 912
Venture Capital 5.48 4.70 684

Calculated as Years(Date(Exit) − Date(Initial Investment)), based on Preqin deal data as of April 2018.

                                      55
                                                             Chapter C. Supporting Figures

          Figure C.1: Comparison of indexes used as basis for PME analysis

                   Table C.3: Local indexes used as basis for PME

Closest available indexes with appropriate historical length (1994-2014) selected for the local PME analysis.
Global benchmark chosen so as to reflect (Sorensen and Jagannathan, 2013) argument stating that a
discount rate reflecting the investors average return on wealth would implicitly cover the relevant risk
adjustment. As PE investors generally able to diversify internationally, it is reasonable to assume the
approximation of global returns as proxy for return on wealth (rw = rm).

        Type Region Closest Local Benchmark Index
       Buyout NA MSCI NORTH AMERICA SMID VALUE
                     EUROPE MSCI EUROPE SMID VALUE
                     NORDICS CARNEGIE SMALL CAP INDEX NORDIC
       Venture Capital NA MSCI NORTH AMERICA SMALL GROWTH
                    EUROPE MSCI EUROPE SMALL GROWTH
                     NORDICS CARNEGIE SMALL CAP INDEX NORDIC

                    Global Benchmark index: MSCI World Standard

                                      56
                                                   Chapter C. Supporting Figures

           Europe, BO Europe, VC Nordic, BO
    .1

    .05

   0
           Nordic, VC US, BO US, VC
    .1

    .05

   0
Density                     −20 0 20 40 −20 0 20 40

                 Total
    .1

    .05

   0
    −20 0 20 40
                               TWR (5 years)

                                     Density
                                  kdensity TWR
                               normal TWR

 Graphs by Study: Region and Study: Type

    Figure C.2: Histogram: Distribution of TWR for subgroups

           Europe, BO Europe, VC Nordic, BO

    .08
    .06
    .04
    .02
   0
           Nordic, VC US, BO US, VC

    .08
    .06
    .04
    .02
   0
Density                     −40 −20 0 20 40 −40 −20 0 20 40

                 Total

    .08
    .06
    .04
    .02
   0
    −40 −20 0 20 40
             TWRA (based on 5−year TWR, and local market index)

                          Density
                           kdensity TWRA 5 years (local index)
                          normal TWRA 5 years (local)

 Graphs by Study: Region and Study: Type

   Figure C.3: Histogram: Distribution of TWRA for subgroups

                             57
                                                             Chapter C. Supporting Figures

                    15


                    10

                   Frequency

                    5


                    0
                         1995 2000 2005 2010
                                                         Vintage

               Figure C.4: Histogram: Fund vintage of Nordic sample
Source: Preqin data as of April 2018.

                      Europe, BO Europe, VC Nordic, BO

                 .002


                 .0015


                 .001

                5.0e−04

               0
                     Nordic, VC US, BO US, VC
           Density
                 .002


                 .0015


                 .001

                5.0e−04

               0
                0 5000 10000 15000 0 5000 10000 15000 0 5000 10000 15000
                                     Fund Value (mn EUR)
               Graphs by Study: Region and Study: Type

                  Figure C.5: Histogram: Distribution of fund value
Source: Preqin data as of April 2018.

                                      58
                                                             Chapter C. Supporting Figures

              Figure C.6: Nordic fundraising during past 10 years (EUR)
Source: Preqin data as of April 2018.

                                      59
Appendix D

Extended Findings

The following pages contain content, primarily descriptive tables, with extended find-
ings. The results are provided for reference, as an extension of the key topics discussed
within the scope of the body of the paper.

                                      60
                                                           Chapter D. Extended Findings

             Table D.1: Extended: Full Nordic performance descriptives

This table shows the extended results for Nordic VC and buyout funds. It is divided into Performance and
PME measures showing total number of observations, average performance returns, standard deviation
and max and min values. The IRR and TVPI are collected from the database Preqin. The local and global
PME measures use the underlying cash flows and compares PE returns to equivalent-timed investments
into the respective local and global index. The data includes all available Nordic PE funds. Preqin data as
of April 2018.

       Fund Type Measure Obs Mean Std. Dev. Min Max
       BO Performance IRR 49.0 22.0 19.2 -5.5 79.8
                              TVPI 56.0 2.0 1.0 0.6 5.8
                              MIRR 16.0 9.0 4.0 2.9 15.5
                             TWR 54.0 12.3 9.3 -11.3 33.2
               PME Local KS-PME 16.0 1.1 0.5 0.2 1.9
                               Local DirectAlpha 17.0 3.7 10.8 -16.7 27.0
                               Local PME+ 16.0 4.1 9.8 -7.3 27.8
                              Local TWRA 55.0 5.3 9.9 -21.5 27.6
                               Global KS-PME 16.0 1.3 0.5 0.2 2.4
                               Global DirectAlpha 16.0 5.9 9.1 -10.4 26.2
                               Global PME+ 15.0 6.3 8.5 -3.8 28.5
                              Global TWRA 55.0 8.8 10.6 -17.8 31.9
       VC Performance IRR 16.0 17.5 43.4 -18.0 168.5
                              TVPI 25.0 2.4 3.6 0.0 16.6
                              MIRR 6.0 3.2 3.3 -2.5 7.3
                             TWR 20.0 -1.4 11.8 -19.9 18.0
               PME Local KS-PME 7.0 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.9
                               Local DirectAlpha 7.0 -11.6 7.2 -21.0 -1.6
                               Local PME+ 7.0 -12.2 7.3 -21.8 -1.8
                              Local TWRA 20.0 -7.4 11.2 -27.7 11.0
                               Global KS-PME 7.0 0.7 0.3 0.2 1.1
                               Global DirectAlpha 7.0 -8.2 6.9 -17.1 2.3
                               Global PME+ 7.0 -8.8 8.0 -22.0 2.4
                              Global TWRA 20.0 -3.0 11.2 -20.4 16.4
        Totals Performance IRR 65.0 20.9 26.9 -18.0 168.5
                              TVPI 81.0 2.1 2.2 0.0 16.6
                              MIRR 22.0 7.4 4.6 -2.5 15.5
                             TWR 74.0 8.6 11.7 -19.9 33.2
               PME Local KS-PME 23.0 0.9 0.5 0.2 1.9
                               Local DirectAlpha 24.0 -0.8 12.1 -21.0 27.0
                              Local PME+ 23.0 -0.8 11.8 -21.8 27.8
                              Local TWRA 75.0 1.9 11.6 -27.7 27.6
                               Global KS-PME 23.0 1.1 0.6 0.2 2.4
                               Global DirectAlpha 23.0 1.6 10.7 -17.1 26.2
                              Global PME+ 22.0 1.5 10.9 -22.0 28.5
                              Global TWRA 75.0 5.7 11.9 -20.4 31.9

                                      61
                                                           Chapter D. Extended Findings

                    Table D.2: TWRA Performance (local index)

This table shows the number of funds, average , median and weighted average TWRA (5 year basis)
returns by vintage year, comparing PE time-weighted returns to equivalent-timed investments in the a
local index using the Preqin data. The local index is based of where the fund is located. Vintage years are
defined by the date of the first investment by a fund. Weighted averages are based of the value committed
to the fund as a weight. The sample only includes funds which with relevant performance metrics (TVPI).
Preqin data as of April 2018.

                      Buyout Funds Venture Capital
  Vintage
           Funds Average Median W. Average Funds Average Median W. Average
     1994 40 4.36 4.25 6.27 23 2.48 3.80 6.34
     1995 32 0.05 1.72 -1.00 24 4.69 5.50 6.38
     1996 31 -1.00 2.08 0.10 31 -0.69 -0.06 -0.42
     1997 53 -2.13 -1.82 -1.05 55 3.11 0.91 6.40
     1998 66 -0.22 0.61 -1.77 57 -7.16 -3.93 -7.41
     1999 65 6.90 8.93 6.12 61 -5.97 -7.62 -7.15
     2000 84 8.67 9.84 8.12 107 -5.07 -3.98 -4.59
     2001 45 7.90 8.03 9.41 78 -4.39 -2.89 -2.61
     2002 46 7.43 8.07 8.71 39 -6.50 -5.49 -3.88
     2003 50 4.59 4.19 6.85 36 -6.94 -5.85 -7.03
     2004 47 5.02 4.64 5.11 27 -7.77 -6.06 -6.79
     2005 91 4.19 4.51 5.72 56 -3.52 -4.69 -2.99
     2006 113 5.19 6.44 4.69 71 -3.94 -2.48 -2.87
     2007 106 7.67 8.84 6.91 73 1.46 1.32 3.84
     2008 89 6.57 6.84 7.66 62 -0.21 -0.91 -3.06
     2009 41 0.65 0.03 1.66 33 -9.18 -8.55 -5.51
     2010 45 1.07 1.75 0.81 29 -3.18 -3.97 -2.73
     2011 60 2.57 2.90 3.01 41 -2.54 -1.69 -0.07
     2012 69 -1.32 -1.84 -1.51 40 -6.13 -7.39 -3.90

  Average 1173 3.59 4.21 3.99 943 -3.23 -2.84 -2.00

                                      62
                                                           Chapter D. Extended Findings

                     Table D.3: Extended: MIRR performance

This table shows the average, median and weighted average Modified internal rate of return (MIRR returns)
by vintage year, calculated by discounting all capital calls back to present at the financing rate, and
distribution cash flows to the time t at the reinvestment rate. Weighted averages are based of the value
committed to the fund as a weight. The data only includes funds which had cash flows data in the
database. Preqin data as of April 2018.

                      Buyout Funds Venture Capital
  Vintage
           Funds Average Median W. Average Funds Average Median W. Average
  1994 16 10.28 10.57 10.17 9 11.24 12.65 12.17
  1995 12 7.78 8.36 8.98 12 10.79 11.14 13.93
  1996 18 8.60 9.49 8.88 14 9.32 9.36 9.22
  1997 21 8.19 8.68 9.12 19 9.37 9.37 10.00
  1998 39 8.18 8.04 8.22 22 6.41 6.85 6.96
  1999 29 8.10 8.74 8.21 30 4.10 3.75 3.86
  2000 34 10.09 10.08 10.22 61 3.79 4.15 4.12
  2001 20 10.20 10.82 11.14 41 5.36 5.80 5.88
  2002 23 9.89 10.66 10.74 19 4.46 4.34 5.33
  2003 14 9.49 9.36 10.62 15 4.66 5.85 4.51
  2004 22 9.01 9.33 10.05 16 4.03 4.95 3.89
  2005 50 7.71 7.76 8.45 25 5.31 4.91 6.06
  2006 56 6.98 7.67 7.06 34 4.06 4.07 5.21
  2007 55 7.60 7.90 7.44 38 7.94 8.43 8.92
  2008 58 8.18 8.61 8.29 25 6.08 5.58 4.69
  2009 24 9.91 10.11 10.04 14 7.02 5.06 7.17
  2010 28 9.19 9.66 7.49 13 7.30 6.38 6.98
  2011 35 8.60 8.50 7.56 18 9.29 10.66 9.43
  2012 44 8.25 8.93 7.92 14 8.89 8.33 10.25

  Average 598 8.75 9.12 8.98 439 6.81 6.93 7.29

                                      63
                                                           Chapter D. Extended Findings

             Table D.4: Extended: DirectAlpha performance (local index)

This table shows the average, median and weighted average DirectAlpha returns by vintage year,
comparing PE returns to equivalent-timed investments in the a local index using the Preqin data. The local
index is based of where the fund is located. Vintage years are defined by the date of the first investment
by a fund. Weighted averages are based of the value committed to the fund as a weight. The sample only
includes funds which had cash flow data in the database. Preqin data as of April 2018.

                      Buyout Funds Venture Capital
  Vintage
           Funds Average Median W. Average Funds Average Median W. Average
  1994 15 6.35 5.73 10.12 6 -2.08 -6.27 3.81
  1995 11 2.17 -2.45 5.12 6 -4.63 -3.35 -1.30
  1996 18 1.44 2.85 2.93 10 -1.56 -0.47 -1.93
  1997 21 -1.65 0.58 1.59 15 -2.56 -7.35 0.34
  1998 36 -1.88 -2.67 -3.08 21 -5.97 -6.98 -2.98
  1999 26 -0.13 0.93 0.85 29 -12.80 -12.11 -11.72
  2000 34 5.16 5.50 5.21 57 -9.29 -9.19 -9.04
  2001 18 4.27 3.72 10.04 40 -6.79 -5.73 -5.86
  2002 23 4.59 6.57 6.60 19 -9.31 -8.56 -6.16
  2003 14 7.10 5.86 10.13 14 -7.32 -3.35 -7.95
  2004 21 8.49 6.41 10.51 18 -8.83 -6.94 -7.63
  2005 48 3.14 2.79 6.80 26 -4.10 -5.17 -3.11
  2006 54 3.20 3.88 5.30 38 -8.40 -6.12 -5.84
  2007 55 1.48 1.69 1.94 42 0.61 1.20 2.06
  2008 59 2.06 3.43 3.26 28 -3.59 -3.59 -3.26
  2009 23 6.06 6.71 6.55 14 -1.42 -2.25 -1.79
  2010 30 4.14 4.85 4.03 15 3.19 0.93 2.01
  2011 38 2.07 1.69 4.71 19 0.28 5.09 0.84
  2012 47 5.60 6.32 7.79 17 3.10 3.27 5.15

  Average 591 3.35 3.39 5.28 434 -4.29 -4.05 -2.86

                                      64
                                                           Chapter D. Extended Findings

               Table D.5: Extended: PME+ performance (local index)

This table shows the average, median and weighted average PME+ returns by vintage year, comparing
PE returns to equivalent-timed investments in the a local index using the Preqin data. The local index is
based of where the fund is located. Vintage years are defined by the date of the first investment by a fund.
Weighted averages are based of the value committed to the fund as a weight. The sample only includes
funds which had cash flow data in the database. Preqin data as of April 2018.

                      Buyout Funds Venture Capital
  Vintage
           Funds Average Median W. Average Funds Average Median W. Average
  1994 13 4.75 0.22 10.65 6 -2.06 -6.60 5.34
  1995 11 -2.10 -2.95 4.06 7 -3.74 -2.48 -0.69
  1996 18 2.65 3.03 4.76 10 -1.47 -0.52 -2.10
  1997 21 -1.47 0.60 1.80 13 -2.77 -10.22 2.15
  1998 39 -1.83 -2.48 -2.67 20 -6.46 -8.46 -2.58
  1999 26 0.09 1.05 1.22 30 -11.76 -11.11 -10.91
  2000 33 6.26 5.56 6.41 59 -9.82 -9.41 -9.12
  2001 18 5.75 4.49 13.29 41 -7.74 -6.69 -6.32
  2002 22 5.72 8.66 9.29 19 -10.19 -10.85 -6.69
  2003 14 9.03 7.30 14.43 14 -7.53 -3.22 -8.15
  2004 20 8.89 6.59 12.25 19 -8.10 -7.17 -7.37
  2005 47 4.16 3.01 7.39 24 -2.33 -4.35 -1.23
  2006 55 3.14 3.75 5.09 37 -7.56 -6.18 -5.27
  2007 56 1.16 1.24 1.74 39 -0.46 0.00 1.98
  2008 58 1.71 3.49 3.60 28 -3.37 -4.74 -2.89
  2009 23 7.39 7.97 7.68 14 -0.81 -2.46 -1.60
  2010 30 5.21 5.59 5.01 15 5.42 1.04 3.73
  2011 37 2.69 2.26 5.94 19 1.72 6.50 2.10
  2012 46 6.19 5.82 9.16 17 5.38 1.85 6.58

  Average 587 3.65 3.43 6.37 431 -3.88 -4.48 -2.27

                                      65