Stockholm School of Economics
Bachelor´s Thesis in Finance
Spring 2018

NEGATIVE EQUITY AND ITS EFFECT ON DIVORCE
                RATES

 A study on the effect of debt and distressed housing markets
                     on US divorce rates

       Lucas Mattsson             Amgad Mosleh
        23743@student.hhs.se                23703@student.hhs.se

Abstract:  Several lifestyle and financial variables have been  observed to have an  effect on
divorce rates, but the  possible  effect of  debt and housing prices  remains unknown. Variables
that have been used, such as employment, education level and income have  been  shown to  not
fully explain variations  in divorce rates. In this paper we measure the  prevalence  of negative
equity  for  American households to see if it has any significant effect  on  divorce  rates, while
suggesting that  as the share of homeowners with underwater mortgages increases,  divorce  rates
will decrease due to locked-in effects.  We exploit the financial shock in 2008  which  reduced
the overall house price index and decreased asset values for numerous households. By gathering
data on both  a  county and state level, we use aggregate data to measure if  distressed housing
prices and debt has a  significant effect on divorce rates.  In contrary to our thesis, although with
slight explanatory value, low debt-to-income values in households  seem to reduce divorce rates
and high debt-to-income values  seem to increase divorce rates.  Furthermore, our research
suggests that the  differences  in  divorce laws  between  states and counties  as well as  the
decreasing overall marriage rate have  had  the largest impact on American divorce rates.

Keywords:  business cycle, divorce, marriage, debt, unemployment,  housing prices
Tutor:  Marieke Bos
Acknowledgements:  We would like to extend our gratitude to Marieke Bos for providing us
with insightful and guiding comments over the course of this project.
                                                                          2

                               1.  INTRODUCTION

             Financial factors have been shown to influence household decisions and more
specifically to affect the propensity for couples to divorce in earlier studies.  By analyzing data
between 1960-2005, researchers found a negative correlation of unemployment rates and
divorce rates (Amato and Beattie,  2010).  Furthermore, previous research has shown  that
financial challenges could cause hardship in  relationships, leading to an increase in  divorce
rates. Some academic research suggests that economic hardship increases marriage dissolutions
(South 1985), whereas  other  suggest the opposite (Hellerstein and Morrill,  2010).
            Less explored is  how  household debt in combination with decreasing  housing
prices affect couples´ tendency to  divorce.  The effects of leverage on  household decisions  was
studied by Jennifer Brown and David A. Matsa in the paper “Locked in by Leverage: Job search
during the housing crisis”,  which  demonstrates  that work applicants in distressed housing
markets limited their job search to a narrower geographical area (Brown & Matsa, 2017). While
household debt might affect employment decisions,  it is also imaginable that the locked-in
effects could function in a similar  way for  married homeowners, namely that decreasing
housing  prices  and high levels of debt  decreases  the propensity to divorce.  In  a downturn,  some
homeowners might not be able to sell their house and walk away if their property is underwater.
             The ideal way to test our thesis would be to have a large number of married
couples that would randomly be assigned a certain level of debt  while  decreasing the housing
prices. We would then  test if the different levels of debt had any effect on the  respective
couples´ probabilities  of  divorce.  Another way of testing the hypothesis would be to have
couples with equal amounts of debt assigned a  random  decrease in the price of their house.
Afterward we could test  whether  this exogenous shock had any effect of these  couples’
propensity to divorce.  Unfortunately,  there does  not  exist any data on such a disaggregate level
and the general lack of US  data on divorces has been lamented before.  Instead of conducting
these experiments,  we will use aggregate data on two different levels, state and county,  to  test
whether the differences in debt levels and housing prices have  any effect on the crude divorce
rate in that specific  geographical area.
            However, there are problems associated with using aggregate level data to
produce  inferences  for  individual  units.  There  might  exist  relevant  variation  between
individuals in both of the data sets that is lost on  an aggregate level.  For instance,  individuals
with higher debt-to-income ratios  might be  less likely to divorce than individuals with lower
ratios in distressed housing markets, but that this effect is lost  when comparing averages
                                                                          3

between  states or counties. This problem could be mitigated by using  individual, disaggregated
data. Unfortunately, this data is not available and we have thus concluded that it is still
worthwhile to conduct the analyses with aggregate data while keeping the potential pitfalls of
the data in mind.
             In 2008 the US housing market experienced a significant price decrease. Since
then,  the fall in prices has been followed by a recovery in US housing prices  (Figure 2). The
rapid decrease will serve as the exogenous shock in this experiment and this is one reason for
why the empirical analysis takes place in the US. In addition to the large variation in housing
prices,  there exists plenty of market data and a sufficiently big  sample in terms of the number
of states and counties  to make the results from aggregate data  interesting.
             Another important reason  to  why  this study was done using  US  empirical data,  is
that there  exist  two  very  distinct  kinds  of legal  differences between US states. Firstly, in terms
of foreclosure laws,  the states could be divided into  recourse  states and  non-recourse  states. In
the  recourse  states,  homeowners  who  foreclose  on their houses  will be  personally liable for the
bank´s losses. On the other hand, in the non-recourse states, homeowners can turn the keys over
to the bank and  seize to  be accountable for the mortgage on the house. It is expected that
decreases in housing prices and higher leveraged ratios will have a more pronounced effect on
the  non-recourse  states, since couples in these states will be liable for the bank´s losses.
             Secondly, there exists  different legal restrictions for how a married couple´s
property is separated in the case of divorce. In states that practice community property assets
are basically split between the spouses evenly, without considering which spouse has the largest
income. In contrary, equitable distribution examines the assets and tries to create a fair
distribution based on income and contribution. A worthwhile comparison would be the average
divorce rates of states that practice  community property law with the average  of the states that
practice equitable  distribution law. One could  hypothesize  that the findings would suggest an
increase in divorce rates in the community property states, mainly due to the increased
bargaining power of the spouse with the least assets. On the other hand, it could also mean that
community property states have lower divorce states due to incentives created for the partner
with the highest assets to keep the marriage together in fear of  losing  assets.
              By using time series data from the period 1999 to 2016 on both a state and county
level  we  can  test the influence of leverage ratios and housing prices on divorce  rates.  The
literature on divorce  rates is mostly focused on ex-post individual data even though some
quantitative studies have been performed on subjects such as divorce laws and unemployment.
To the best of our knowledge, there has not been any study conducted on  the  correlation
                                                                          4

between  negative equity and divorce rates yet. The contribution of this thesis is to show  if there
is any  correlation between these phenomena. To find economic indicators for how a certain
geographic area will develop  demographically  is important to forecast nativity, tax revenue,
recipients of welfare programs as well as the labor market  behavior  for men and women.
Ultimately,  a misunderstanding of the aggregate welfare effects  of a business cycle downturn
might contribute to a wrongful measurement of said effect,  an idea which has been discussed
previously (Schaller, 2013).
             After conducting regression analyses on both the state and county level data we
can  make  a few conclusions about how economic factors, leverage in particular, affect divorce
rates. Firstly, the lower bound for the debt-to-income ratio has a significant,  positive effect on
divorce rates. There is little evidence suggesting that the locked-in effect of a high debt to
income ratio combined with a distressed housing market has any decreasing effect on divorce
rates, the positive effect of the lower bound provide prima facie evidence against this
hypothesis. On the other hand, we find that social and legal factors have a quite large effect on
divorce rates compared to economic factors, such a housing prices, income or unemployment.
The variation in marriage rates provide the highest explanatory value for explaining the
variation in divorce rates.
              The findings in this research can be related to previous research conducted on the
influence of legal,  financial and sociological  factors on divorce rates.  Significant research has
been conducted on the effects of no-fault laws, i.e. laws stipulating that a divorce should be
granted to any married individual filing for it regardless of reasons (Nakonezny, Shull and
Rodgers, 1995).  During financial distress, spouses will  their  bargaining power to protect their
interests in a dispute (Olafsson and Thörnqvist 2016).  The bargaining power is determined by
the spouses expected utilities outside the marriage. The expected utilities are in this case what
income the spouses will have on their own, their so called, fall-back incomes.  For instance,
according to some research papers, as female employment increased, the risk of divorce
increased by 22% (Poortman and Kalmijn 2002). However, the amount of quantitative research
on divorce rates remains sparse and most of the studies focus on the  subjective experiences  of
the individuals involved.
             This paper has been organized in the following manner: Section 2 discusses the
motivation for conducting our research in  this  specific way, Sections 3 describes our data
sources, institutional  preconditions and method for testing our hypothesis, Section 4 presents
the results we arrive at and in Section 5 the conclusions drawn from this study will be
summarized.  All figures and tables are found in the Appendix.
                                                                          5

                                2.  MOTIVATION
              The amount of research on the impact of financial factors on divorce rates is quite
small. In previous research economic hardship  has been  suggested  to  increases  marriage
dissolutions  (South,  1985). However, other research suggest that the mechanics might works
the other way around  (Hellerstein and Morrill,  2010).  In this study we  have  tested  whether an
increase in debt-to-income ratios combined with decreasing housing prices leads to higher
divorce rates.
              The debt-to-income ratios for households vary  drastically, both between states or
counties and between points in time. The variation of the upper and lower bound for the debt-
to-income ratio  is illustrated  over time  in the descriptive statistics in Figure 3.  This figure
illustrates that there has been a raise in both the lower and the upper bound for the debt to
income ratios which peaked coincidentally with the Great Recession and that these ratios have
decreased  since.  Those  two  measurements, the upper and lower bound for the debt-to-income
ratios will serve as  a  starting point to test  whether  the locked-in effects that we except to have
taken place  during the financial crisis are an economic reality.
             To gain a  better understanding of how these ratios affect the divorce rates in
different areas  we have run regressions on divorce rates for solely the high and low variables.
If there is any  explanatory value in the lower and upper bounds of a state´s or county´s debt-to-
income ratios  this should become apparent after the regressions. However,  this method  does
not fully  incorporate the effect of  whether the combination of increased leverage ratios and
negative  prices  affects divorce rates. For instance, households might increase their  debt  in
response to a positive growth in housing prices because they know that their property is worth
more. Debt-to-income ratios  alone  does  not make for a good proxy of negative equity.  To find
a better measurement for when the locked-in effect of negative equity will take place we  have
combined  it with a price index.
             Because the debt-to-income ratio is not an adequate  measurement  of negative
equity alone  we  have  combined  it with the prices of local housing prices. This adds a new
variable which both incorporates  the debt-to-income ratio of the geographical area as well as
the  growth  in housing prices. To construct this  variable,  we  have  used  two  restrictions to
conclude whether there is a reasonable risk that  a significant proportion of the homeowners in
an area will have  negative equity.
              The first restriction is that there should be a decline in housing prices which means
that the housing price index for the area should  have decreased compared to the value it had the
year before. This ensures that a significant  number  of homeowners will have bought their
                                                                          6

property for a higher price than its current  value.  It  should also mean that a larger than average
proportion of the homeowners  will owe more on their house than  what  the property is worth.
Even though a proportion of the purchase price is sometimes paid by the homeowner as a down
payment, as the national housing markets peaked this proportion had become  less  and  less
significant. In 1998 the median loan-to-value ratio of the 75 metropolitan areas used in the
research paper  “Did Credit Market Policies Cause the Housing Bubble”  was 84 %, in  2006 the
ratio had increased to 88 %. However, one quarter of all home purchases made  in 2006 was
made by a debt-to-income ratio of 99 % (L.Glaeser et. al). This should reassure us that even a
small decrease in prices might have led to a big proportion of homeowners with higher loans
than the values of their homes.
              The second restriction  is that either the lower or higher bound  should be in the
highest quartile of values. To determine this, we separated all yearly observations for each state
or county into  quartiles based on  the  upper and lower bound for  their  debt-to-income ratios.
The observations that were in either the highest quartile in terms of their lower bound level or
in the highest quartile in terms of the upper bound level and had seen a negative development
in prices for that  specific year,  were included in a new group which we deem to have a larger
prevalence of homeowners with negative equity than in the other geographical areas.
              In the state level data set,  the number of observations that can be described  as
having an increased probability of negative equity is 105 compared to 719 observations that are
less  probable to have negative equity.  In the county level data set a total of 1178 observations
have higher probability of negative equity compared to 8183 observations that are less probable
to have negative equity.  Again,  a county or state being in the probable group  means to have
both a top quartile level debt-to-income ratio as well as a negative development of prices in that
particular year.  However,  the average divorce rate is lower for the states  and counties  that do
not have a high probability of negative equity (Table 4).  This suggests that states and counties
with a combination of high debt-to-income ratios and negative prices  do have higher divorce
rates in general.
             In our regressions we have included all four of  these variables, i.e. lower bound
for debt-to-income ratios, upper bound for debt-to-income ratios, negative price development
in the current year and whether the observation is likely to have a higher prevalence of
homeowners with negative equity.
             The effect of community property laws  has  been tested to  conclude  whether they
have any effect on divorce rates in general and in particular whether they have any effect when
added to a model which incorporates what debt-to-income ratio different states have.  The
                                                                          7

potential effect of different divorce laws is not clearly articulated in previous literature and
could affect the dependent variable in either way, this is further elaborated on in Section 3.1.
Another legal variable is the prevalence of non-recourse laws. In states that practice non-
recourse laws the negative equity is assumed to have a smaller effect on divorce rates since
homeowners can hand over their  home to the bank without carrying the responsibilities for the
bank´s credit losses.  Both  variables have been incorporated  as dummy variables in the
regression models.
             Divorce rates have been decreasing since  the end of the twentieth century until
the end of our data set, 2016. During the decrease,  another macroeconomic variable has seen
record highs, namely unemployment which is available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In
late 2009 the national unemployment rate reached a 26-year high at 10%. Previous research has
explored the question  of  whether  or not these two phenomena are in some  way connected, i.e.
if there is a causal connection between a country´s business cycle and its divorce rate. However,
there are good economic arguments for why unemployment  rates might affect divorce rates  in
either way. Firstly,  layoffs might have a decreasing effect on income and thus also on
relationship stability. However, in a recession both spouses should face worse economic
prospects outside their marriage since the economies of scale that might exist within a couple
may be more appealing in bad economic times than in good. Economic theory does not lead  us
to any definitive conclusion on this matter  (Schaller, 2013).
             The effect of income, just as many other financial factors, shows little to no
conclusive results in having any direct effect on divorce rates (Schaller, 2013). Half of
American families fall in to poverty after having a divorce and a total of 75% of all women who
apply for welfare benefits do so because of a divorce or a disrupted relationship (Burgess,
Propper and Aassve, 2002). This means that families, and women in particular, will endure a
divorce even if it means there is a high probability of living in poverty. This is most likely for
a reason that financial factors cannot explain. In contrary to Schaller (2013), Nunley and Seals
(2010) argue that negative household income shocks increase the probability of divorce,
whereas little evidence were found suggesting that an increased household income lowers
divorce rates. Becker et al. (1977) contends that surprises, both positive and negative, increase
the probability of divorce, meaning that instead of  focusing on the direction of the financial
change, it is the change itself that prompts divorces. Their framework argues that the spouses
expected outcomes  from marriages change from an increased household income volatility,
which in turn, increases the risk of divorce. In this paper we wish to test these theories to make
a  comparison on an aggregate  basis  by using American state and county level data.
                                                                          8

                                   3.  DATA
             In this section we will describe the empirical preconditions,  sample selection for
both state and county level data  and  the  methodology of this study.

3.1  Empirical preconditions
             This section will describe the explanatory models and previous research  used in
this paper. Firstly, there are two important legal differences between the states used in our state
level data sets. These differences can also be applied on the individual counties since the legal
structures of the state they belong to applies within their borders.
            In the past and even in the present, changing laws on divorce have had a
significant effect  on the divorce rates. The  clearest  example was the introduction of the no-fault
law, meaning that no one can be held accountable for the separation of a marriage. According
to Nakonezny, Shull and Rodgers (1995), who researched the effect of the no-fault divorce law
across the 50 states, a significant correlation between the new law and increased divorce rates
were found. Most likely since, no matter what faults one may  have  committed, bargaining
power in court remains the same.
             Another important factor  is the complexity of divorce laws in the current county
or state that the couple resides in and who the laws favor in case of a dissolution. The US applies
two types of divorce laws  –  community property and the equitable distribution law. The first
one, community property, basically splits all assets between the spouses creating an equal split
without considering which spouse has the largest income. In contrary, equitable distribution,
examines the assets and tries to create a fair distribution based on income and contribution. A
reasonable assumption would be that divorce rates in states that practice community property
laws would be higher than in states with equitable distribution laws, because the bargaining
power of the lower earning spouse would be higher. However, the effect might also be that the
incentives for the higher earning partner to stay in the marriage are stronger. Which of these
effect might be stronger is not  obvious.
             Another  important legal distinction between states is whether they practice non-
recourse laws or not. By applying recourse laws, the borrowers are personally liable for the debt
and the lenders, in most cases banks, can collect the deficiency in payment if the borrowers fail
to pay their debt. In states where non-recourse laws are applied, banks are unable to collect
deficiencies from the borrower’s  personal income and assets. If the borrowers are unable to pay
their debts, the lenders simply collect the assets that the loan was used for. A relevant example
is the financial crisis in 2008, where banks that distributed  mortgages in non-recourse states
                                                                          9

received thousands of underpriced houses as their owners were unable to pay their mortgages,
incurring huge losses.  This is an exceptional attribute of the American home mortgage market
and according to Ron Harris (2010), during the financial crisis in 2008, at least 558 000
mortgage defaults  took place due to strategic walk-away mortgage default, causing nearly 20
% of  all foreclosures in the country. Most of these were likely not to happen in a state that
enforces recourse laws. According to Ghent and Kudlyak (2010), the threat of deficiency
judgment  enforced by recourse laws deters potential strategic defaulters, as their empirical
analysis of  the  loans  made between 1997 and 2008 shows a 32 % lower probability of default
in recourse states than in non-recourse states. This research mandates a comparison of recourse
and non-recourse states and how this  affects  the divorce rates during a financial crisis, since
households with non-recourse loans do not suffer any losses to their personal assets whereas
household that have recourse loans do.
              In the paper,” Bargaining  over risk”,  Olafsson and Thörnqvist (2016) expand on
the idea to threat households as two separate decision-making units rather than one. The
rationale for this is quite intuitive, the two adults that make up the household will have
differences in preferences other and these differences will impact what decisions they make as
a unit. In this setting each individual will have a certain degree of bargaining power which the
will use when  bargaining about the decisions of the household. The bargaining power for each
spouse is determined by that spouse´s expected utility outside the marriage and the expected
utility is the income each spouse would be able to make on her own, titled a fall-back income.
             The concept of bargaining power is related to our research in the following way.
In states that practice community property law the fall-back income for each spouse does at
least include half of the property held together. This could significantly increase the bargaining
power of the lower earning spouse. However, if this would have a positive or negative impact
on divorce rates is not clear. On one hand, as the fall-back income of the lower earning spouse
increases it might lead to an increase in that person´s likelihood to file for divorce. However,
this should be offset by the potential decrease in the fall-back income of the other spouse.
                                                                         10

3.2 Sample selection  for  the  state level data
             The  state level  panel data set  used in this  study was assembled using multiple
sources. The data on debt-to-income ratios was extracted from the Federal Reserve, the data on
housing prices was extracted from the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the data on divorce
and marriage  rates was published by  CDC/NCHS and was made available through their
National Vital Statistics System,  the data on unemployment was published by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and the income data was made available by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
             The data set is relatively  balanced and contains observation from 51 states,
including the District of Columbia which is not formally a state. Only two variables had missing
observations. Firstly, the upper bound variable high which is an observation on the upper bound
of the debt-to-income ratio in that particular state, the total number  of observations  is  822.
Secondly, the variable for divorce rate,  d_rate,  was only present in 824 individual state years.
The full number for a complete set of observation would have been 918, including 51 states and
18 years of observations.
             The data set does also include three dummy variables, out of which two were
programmed using additional data. The first one is a dummy variable representing the presence
of community property laws in that particular state. The states which practice community
property law are the following: Arizona, California, Idaho, Lousiana, Nevada, New Mexiko,
Texas, Washington and Wisconsin. The second dummy variable is named  non_recourse  and
represents that the state does practice non-recourse laws as described in the  section 3.1. The
states which practice non-recourse laws are the following: Alaska, Arizona, California,
Connecticut, Idaho, Minnesota, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Texas, Utah and
Washington.
             When any of the variables has been reported in a higher than yearly frequency the
data for the first quarter has been used. If the data was only available as one data point for each
year the yearly average is used, as is the case for state level unemployment data.  The data for
each state and year has been matched firstly according to the year it concerns and secondly
according to the FIPS code of that particular state. This ensures  that all data is correctly
matched.
                                                                         11

3.3 Sample selection for the county  level data
             The process of arriving at the complete  county level data set proved to be more
tedious. The data sources for all the variables were nearly the same, except for marriage and
divorce rates. These two variables were extracted from the individual  reports published by the
states, often in their respective Vital Statistics reports.  US county level data is sparse and the
challenge of finding this data could be separated into two quite different problems.
              Firstly,  since  there is no central agency to  collect the county level data on divorce
rates the format they are presented in differs, some states present their data in terms of rates,
some as a number of divorces per county and others present both. The data set that only includes
an absolute number of divorces have been matched together with additional population data to
calculate a  crude  divorce rate. This data originates from the  Census Bureau.
              Secondly, a number of states do not publish any data on divorces on a county level
basis and a large part  of the states that do publish data on county level divorce rates have only
started to do so in recent years. This causes the data to become unbalanced since some states
lack complete data on divorce rates. The second problem was mitigated by using state and time
fixed effect. This means that a number of dummy variables, one  for each combination of year
and state, has been created when running the regressions. These dummy variables incorporate
the unobserved heterogeneity found in unbalanced data sets.
            The  original data set contains 56 303 observations of individual counties and
years. This amounts to observations for around 3100 counties the years between 1999 and 2016.
The set of counties was  restricted  to the ones  that has published divorce rate statistics on a
county level basis during  any period in  the  last  18 years, which amounts to only 9 363
observations or an average of 520 individual counties per year. The number of observations per
year differs greatly, from  87 observations in 1999 to 912 observations in 2010, the distribution
of the observations can be found in Table 4.

3.4 Methodology
            We  analyze the data for divorce rates on both a state and county level to find out
whether decreasing housing prices and increasing  leveraged ratios has a decreasing effect on
divorce rates. The rapid decrease in housing prices after 2007 serves as a shock to housing
prices, which we exploit to arrive at the results presented in section 4.
             To increase the  quality  of our  results,  we  collect  both state and county level data
to ensure a large enough data set to be able to capture the true effect of the independent variables
in the population. The  county level data was restricted to the counties which provided
                                                                         12

information on county level divorce rates.  Fixed effects for both time and state have been
incorporated into the model.  Fixed effects is a way of mitigating the problem of unobserved
heterogeneity and  takes into account the effects of variables that affect  our dependent but is not
incorporated into the model. This means that for each year and state an individual dummy
variable has been created which assumes a value of 1 if the observation is made in that particular
year or state and 0 otherwise.
             There exists unobserved heterogeneity in the county level data set which is caused
by the difference in which state  the counties  are situated. These could for  instance  be economic
preconditions that are limited to the state  in  which the county  is situated. To mitigate the
problem with unobserved heterogeneity we have clustered the standard errors on a state level
for the county level regressions, this has also been specified in the explanatory text of each table
that contains  regression results.

                                   4.  RESULTS
             This section is separated into  multiple  parts. Firstly, a  part  which presents the
descriptive statistics and  the regression results from the use of state level data. Secondly, a
section presenting the descriptive statistics and regression results using county level data. Lastly
the  results  from both of our data sets will be discussed.

4.1  Descriptive statistics  for  state level data
             The descriptive statistics show a decreasing trend for divorce  rates  over time.
Figure 1 shows a consistent negative trend for average US crude divorce rates from 1999 to
2016. To mitigate the problem with unobserved heterogeneity between points in time, time
fixed effect dummies have been  incorporated into the data set,  a process which was described
at length in Section 3.4.
              A general overview of the data used in the state level regressions can be found in
Table 2.  Figure 2 illustrates the price shock of US housing prices which proves that there exists
variation in this variable.  In the years following 2007 housing prices decreased until 2012 when
they started to recover.  Figure 3 clearly shows how the debt-to-income ratio for households
increased until the peak of 2010 and has been decreasing since.  Table 5  illustrates the decrease
in divorces by comparing individual state level divorce rates of 1999 and 2016.  The divorce
rate has decreased in all states  but  Connecticut, Montana, Rhode Island and Texas.
                                                                         13

4.2 Results for state level regressions
             In this section we will present the results from the statistical inference  for each
variable separately. Furthermore, we will discuss  how the regression results fit into the broader
theoretical  framework laid out in earlier sections.
             The variable low has a significant positive effect on divorce rates in the regression
models which do not take fixed effects into consideration (Table  6). As time fixed effects are
added to the regressions the variable has an even more significant positive  effect on divorce
rates  (Table 7 and 9). However, the individual explanatory value is  relatively  high when
combined with fixed effects.  The model which  incorporates  fixed effects  has an  R2  of 0.9036
(Table 9)  but  the variable is not significant.  This indicates that the vast part of the explanatory
value comes from the fixed effects and not from the independent variable.  When  excluding
fixed  effects,  the R2  is a mere  0.0337  but  the variable is significant on a 1 % level  (Table 6).
After conducting  a winsorization of the data  with 2.5 % tails  the  significance rises but  the
variable is  still not  significant in the simple regression model. The  lower bound for a state´s
debt-to-income ratio  has  a significantly positive effect on divorce rates while still providing a
low explanatory value, when we control for state and time fixed effects the variable does not
have a significant impact. This could be seen as evidence for the economic hardship explanation
of divorce rates, even though the results are ambiguous. However, the statistical analysis of the
lower bound for state level debt-to-income ratios do not  provide evidence for the locked-in by
leverage hypothesis.
             The variable  high  does have a negative effect on divorce rates in the regression
models  presented in Table 6. As time and state fixed effects are added to the regressions the
sign shifts between positive and negative.  Another effect of the introduction of fixed effects
into the models is that  high  ceases  to have a significant impact in any of  the regression models
(Table 9). The winsorization does marginally increase the significance of  high  in some of the
regression models, namely model 2,3,4 and 5 (Table 16).  The individual explanatory value is
low without fixed effect, the R2 value shifts changes from 0.0337 to 0.0287 as the variable is
introduced into the the model. This decrease in explanatory value is caused by the increase in
the sample size due to a lack of observations for the  high  variable.  Table 9 illustrate the effect
of incorporating fixed effects into the model does not change the individual explanatory value
of  high  very much, the explanatory value changes from 0.9036 to 0.8990 which means that the
effect is still negative due to a decreased sample size.  The shift between positive  and negative
signs for this  variable  and the low significance  does not provide evidence in accordance with
our hypothesis.
                                                                         14

             The variable  p_index  has a significantly  positive  effect in the regression models
that  incorporate both state and time fixed effects (Table 9). However, the effect becomes
negative as the  income  variable is introduced, this happens because there is a rather high
positive correlation between the two variables (Table 18). The effect is also significantly
positive  on an individual level (Table 14) even tough the incremental increase in  explanatory
value between  model 2 and 3 is quite small, R2 increases by 0.0175 when incorporating fixed
effects (Table 9).  The positive effect from the price index is  suggestive evidence for the locked-
in by leverage thesis. Areas that have experienced a dramatic increase in the value of the homes
in that area will tend to have higher divorce rates. However, this measurement is not connected
to debt in any way and  there might be other causes to this positive correlation. We do not deem
this to be sufficient evidence for out thesis.
             A negative price pattern in the housing market and  greater predicted prevalence
of  negative equity  for  households do not  appear to have any significant effect  in the state level
regressions. The insignificance of the results remains in both the regressions that do and do not
incorporate fixed effect into the regression models (Table 6 &  9).  The individual regression
results  illustrated in Table 15 prove that neither of these dummy variable have a significant
effect on divorce rates.  Although some significance can be found in Table 8, a state level
regression without time fixed effects, the lack of significance in remaining regressions are too
vast.  Not even after the data has been winsorized are the effects  from these two variables
significant.  As these dummy-variables seem to have no effect on divorce rates, our thesis in
regard to being locked-in by leverage is not supported.
             The variables p_index and income appear to be highly positively correlated (Table
18). This causes a negative effect on the p_index coefficient as income is dropped. In the models
that include  income  and incorporate fixed effects the income variable has a consistent
significantly positive effect on divorce rates, in the same way as  p_index  did. However, in the
individual regressions the effect from  income  is negative but not significant. This leads us  to
the conclusion that  income  does not have any clear effect on divorce rates.
            The unemployment variable  unemp  is not significant in hardly any of the
regressions.  In the regressions that incorporate both time and state fixed effects  unemp  has a
negative  effect on divorce rates  (Table 9). The simple regression for  unemp  does also suggest
that unemployment has a negative effect on divorce rates even though this result is not
statistically significant either (Table 14). Unemployment does not have a significant effect on
divorce rates in any of the models as  the data is winsorized (Table 16). Our conclusion is that
unemployment does not have an impact on divorce rates in this data set. This is coherent with
                                                                         15

the view put forward by previous literature, namely that there are sound economic arguments
for why unemployment might affect  divorce  rates in either way and that empirical research has
not been able to support solely one of the theories (Section 2).
                        The  dummy  variable representing the community property  states,
comprop, shows a  highly  negative and  significant effect  in the regression models which both
include and exclude state and time fixed effect (Table 6 & 9). The individual explanatory value
for this variable is quite  low  as the R2 value does neither increase nor decrease when including
the variable into the models that incorporate both time and state fixed effects. In the simple
regressions for only the  comprop  variable the negative effect is also significant.  The negative
significance is most likely due to balanced fall-back incomes in case of a divorce, evening out
bargaining power between each spouse.
             Non_recourse seems to have a positive significance in all the regressions that both
incorporate and exclude fixed effects (Table 6,7,8 & 9). However, the explanatory value for the
model does not increase when the variable is added (Table 9). For the individual regressions
the effect is significantly negative and the positive effect is only  present  when the variable is
combined in a model with a greater number of variables. The reason for this is perhaps, although
a  bit far fetched, due to the reduced  locked-in effect, created by being able to preserve your
personal assets in case of default. This theory, if true, supports  our thesis.  However, it is more
likely that this significant effect is due to some kind of unobserved heterogeneity in the sample
set, meaning that  states with non-recourse loan differ from the rest of the states in some way
that is not taken into  account  by our variables.
             For marriage  rates  we can  observe a positive significant effect on divorce rates
throughout all the regressions, except for the winsorized regression, found in Table 16. The
outcome on Table 16  is due to the outliers carrying most of the  cause  for  the significance.  In
Table 6 we can observe a big jump in explanatory value when the  m_rate  variable is included
in the models that does not incorporate fixed effect. The R2 value increases from 0.1177  to
0.3519 which is the single biggest effect from any variable in the Table 6 regressions.  The high
R2 value and the consistently strong significance outcomes through the regressions, suggest
that an increasing marriage rate causes an increasing divorce rate and vice versa. Table 1 one
shows a decreasing divorce rate in relation to a decreasing marriage rate. As the variable with
the strongest effect on the divorce rate and a direct correlation, one may ask the cause for the
decreasing marriage rates. A positive correlation between the decrease of marriage rates and
the increase of cohabiting rate can be found, suggesting that marriage rates are not only affected
by divorce rates (Bumpass, Sweet, and Cherlin 1991). This suggests that we find societies
                                                                         16

evolving and start shifting their living arrangements  towards  a secular approach, which in turn
reduces marriage rates and therefore also divorce rates.

4.3 Descriptive statistics for county level data
             The descriptive statistics for the variables used in the  county level data can be
found in Table 3.  The variation for the variable  d_rate  is significantly higher compared to the
mean for the observations. The range for the observations is quite wide, especially for the
observations for divorce and marriage  rates, this might lead one to question the quality of the
data used in the county level regressions. To mitigate the problem of extreme values we have
used winsorizations for some regression (Table 17). Even though this changes the original data
it might make the conclusions which can be made from the county level data clearer.
             The county level data has an upward bias due to a few  outliers. When conducting
a  winsorization  with 2.5 % tails  on  d_rate  the mean decreases significantly and so does the
standard deviation. With regards to the mean and standard variation the winsorized county level
data resembles the state level data, since the standard deviation is proportionately as big in both
of the descriptive statistics (Table 2 & 3).

4.4 Results for the county level regressions
             The regression tables for the county level data have seemingly less significance
and explanatory value in comparison to the state level regressions.
Table 10  shows the regressions without fixed effects and Table 11  shows the regressions with
time but without  state  fixed effects  –  none of the variables have any significance and the
explanatory value for each  model  is low. In contrary, Table 12, showing the outcome for state
fixed effects, has a high significance for  both  comprop  and  non_recourse. The explanatory
values remain unchanged throughout the regressions. The significance value for  comprop  is
negative and positive for  non_recourse, matching the results for the state regressions.
             Table 12, showing the regression outcomes on a county level with combined state
and year fixed effects, finds strong significance for  non_recourse  although  the explanatory
value remains at  0. The individual regression outcomes  for each variable on Table 15  finds
strong significance for both non_recourse and comprop, although as we have seen continuously
throughout the county level regressions, with a low explanatory value.
              What’s obvious about the county level data in comparison to the state level data,
is the observation of consistently lower explanatory values for all the variables, not to mention
the only two significant variables being  non_recourse  and  comprop. This is mainly due to the
                                                                         17

extreme variation found in the county data in comparison to the state level data. The county
data has a vast number of outliers that creates extreme values causing high standard deviation
outcomes. When the county data is winsorized, the data resembles the state values and become
more reasonable. Although this is the case, one can neither ignore or exclude these values since
they reflect the true nature of the aggregate data.

4.5 Discussion on the results
             The regression analysis on economic factors such as unemployment, income and
the debt related variables do not appear to have a particularly large effect on divorce rates in
the US. In some respect this is what could have been expected with regards to the previous
literature on economic factors and divorce rates. The result for the unemployment rate on
divorce rates did not have a significant effect in either of the data sets. However, when
comparing this to previous literature it fits  into the pre-existing framework. Some previous
studies have shown that increases in the unemployment rate have a positive effect on divorce
rates, while others proclaim that it has a negative effect. The economic arguments for  both
positions were outlined in Section 2. Income does not seem to have a distinctive effect on
divorce rates in our data sets. This can be explained by the disregard for the economic effects a
divorce might have on a spouse which was also detailed at the end of Section 2.  On the other
hand, various  social  and legal factors seem to have a quite  high  explanatory value, including
the effect of marriage rates and community property law.  Both  results seem to indicate that the
explanatory value for economic variables on divorce rates is generally low on an aggregate
level.
              A problem with using debt-to-income ratios is that these might not be adequate
for constructing a measurement of how prevalent negative equity might be in  a  particular
geographical area. It would have been ideal to use a debt-to-value measurement of the degree
of negative equity instead of debt-to-income, but unfortunately the time series data for that
specific ratio is not available. This could be a source of bias in our study since housing markets
with generally high debt-to-income might compensate  by  having a larger part of their debt as
secured, in the sense that the debt is tied to an asset and thus less risky. In that case the debt-to-
income ratio would  actually indicate a higher prevalence of negative equity than in states with
high debt-to-value ratios, which should be the actual indicator of negative equity. Although the
reasoning for this opposite relationship between debt-to-income ratios and debt-to-value ratios
might be  a bit extreme,  it serves as an example of how a bias could appear from using a less
than perfect proxy for debt levels.
                                                                         18

             The effect of marriage rates deserves a separate discussion on how its impact on
our results should be understood. Marriage rate was the variable with the highest effect on
divorce rates and it had a significantly positive effect in  all  the regressions.  The  decrease  in
marriage rates in the US can partly be explained by an increase in cohabitation rates (Bumpass,
Sweet, and Cherlin 1991). It might be that when researchers try to formulate which factors lead
to a decrease in  couples’  propensity to stay together on an aggregate level they formulate it in
questions about marriage and divorce rates. However, not all couples that live together are
married and the same goes for couples who own houses together. This does not mean that they
are not under the same locked-in effects as the married couples who own property together.
Furthermore, couples that cohabitate could theoretically enjoy the same economies of scale as
couples that are married, which would affect much of the research conducted on how the general
business cycle affect divorce rates. To conduct better research on the subject in the future it will
become increasingly important for official agencies to provide data on cohabitation, given that
the trend of secularization in marriage remains.
             However, this analysis might suffer from a degree of reverse causality, the
decrease in divorce rates might not be caused  by an increasingly secularist  approach towards
marriage but it could also be the other way around. It would not be unreasonable to suggest that
the decrease in divorce rates might lead to a decrease in marriage rates, since fewer divorces
might lead to more permanent relationships thus decreasing the number of marriages an
individual has over her lifetime. This hypothesis would be worthy of further analysis.

                               5.  CONCLUSIONS
             This paper explores the question of whether  or  not high debt-to-income ratios in
combination with decreasing housing prices have any effects on divorce rates in American
states and counties. The statistical analysis is conducted on a state and a county level for each
variable.  Since few other studies have been conducted on the subject we use the framework
from other areas of research to explain our findings.
              The  lower bound of the debt-to-income ratios seems to have a positive effect on
divorce  rates. These findings contradict the thesis about how locked-in effects would work and
present more evidence supporting the relationship hardship thesis. We  hypothesize  that a
significant reason to why debt-to-income ratios increase is due to economic hardships, which
have been shown in a number of studies to  decrease  marriage  stability (Schaller 2013).
However, the explanatory value of this variable is quite low and we can not exclude the
                                                                         19

possibility that this  significant  result might be caused by some other factor linked to both debt-
to-income ratios and divorce rates.
           When  we combine the factors that are correlated with higher probability of
negative equity, having a high debt-to-income ratio and owning a house in a distressed housing
market,  we do not find any evidence for this to have any significant effect on divorce rates.
These finding does not support the locked-in theory of leverage on divorce rates.
             The unemployment factor did not have a significant effect in  either  of our data
sets. This is in line with  previous research about how the effects of unemployment rates on
marriage and divorce rates are not clearly explained in empirical studies. Furthermore, the
mechanics  for how the business cycle affects divorce rates is not easily predicted using
economic theory.
              The most important factor for explaining the decrease in divorce rates appear to
be social  and legal  factors. In previous research a number of social factors have been shown to
have a significant impact on divorce rates,  including  the raise of cohabitation (Stevenson &
Wolfers, 2007). In our research  marriage rate is  the factor which appears to have the highest
explanatory value for explaining variation in divorce rates.
                                                                         20

                       REFERENCES

Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2015): “House prices, collateral, and self-employment,”
Journal of  Financial Economics, 117, 288  –  306.

Amato and Beattie (2011): ‘’Does the unemployment rate affect the divorce rate? An analysis
of state data 1960–2005’’, Social Science Research, Volume 40, 705  –  715.

Becker et al. (1977): ‘’An Economic Analysis of  Marital Instability’’, Vol. 85, No. 6, 1141-
1187, The Journal of Political Economy

Brown and Matsa (2017): Locked in by Leverage: ‘’Job Search during the Housing Crisis’’,
Working Paper

Burgess, Propper and Aassve (2002): ‘’The Role of Income in Marriage  and Divorce
Transitions among Young American’’, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research,
Working Paper

Ghent and Kudlyak (2010): ‘’Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Theory and
Evidence from U.S. States’’, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper, No.09-10R

Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010): ‘’Did Credit Market Policies Cause the Housing
Bubble?’’, Rappaport Institute, Taubman Center

Harris (2010): ‘’Recourse and Non-Recourse Mortgages:  Foreclosure, Bankruptcy, Policy’’,
Tel Aviv  University  -  Buchmann Faculty of Law

Hellerstein, J.K. and M.S. Morrill. (2011): “Booms, Busts, and Divorce,” The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 117

Nakonezny, Shull and Rodgers (1995): ‘’The Effect of No-Fault Divorce Law on the Divorce
Rate Across the 50 States and Its Relation to Income, Education and Religiosity’’, Journal of
Marriage and the Family 57, 477-488

Nunley and Seals (2010): ‘’The Effects of Household Income Volatility on Divorce’’, Vol. 69,
983-1010, The American Journal of Economics and Sociology

Olafsson and Thörnqvist (2016): ‘’Bargaining over Risk  -  The Impact of Decision Power on
Household Portfolios’’, Working Paper

Poortman and Kalmijn (2002): ‘’Women's Labour Market Position and Divorce in the
Netherlands:   Evaluating   Economic   Interpretations   of   the   Work   Effect’’,   Volume
18,  Issue  2,  175–202, European Journal of Population

Schaller (2013): ‘’For richer, if not for poorer? Marriage and divorce over the business cycle’’,
Volume 26, Issue 3, 1007–1033, Journal of Population Economics
                                                                         21

South (1985): “Economic Conditions and the Divorce Rate: A Time Series Analysis of the
Postwar  United States.” Journal of Marriage and Family 47(1): 31-  41

Stevenson and Wolfers (2007): ‘’Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving Forces’’,
University of Pennsylvania, Working Paper
                         APPENDIX

               FIGURE 1. Average divorce  and marriage  rate for all US states
    The figure illustrates a decline in the average crude divorce rate  and the average crude
     marriage rate  for all US states during the last 18 year. US divorce  and marriage  rates
demonstrate a clear downward trend. To mitigate this problem we have used time fixed effects
                                      in both of our data sets.

            12

            10

             8

             6

             4

             2

             0

                                         Divorce rate          Marriage rate

                        FIGURE 2. Average HPI for all US states
 The figure illustrates  the fall in US housing prices after 2007 and the price recovery. There is
                             variation in housing prices over time.

             180,0
             160,0
             140,0
             120,0
             100,0
               80,0
               60,0
               40,0
               20,0
                 0,0

                                                      HPI
           FIGURE 3. Average upper and lower bound for debt to income ratios
The figure illustrates the variation of the values for the average upper and lower bound of the
   debt to income ratios for households  in US states between 1999 and 2016. I might seem
strange that the lower bound crosses the upper bound during the peak years in 2009 and 2010.
                 This is due to missing values in the data for the upper bound.

             2
              1,8
              1,6
              1,4
              1,2
             1
              0,8
              0,6
              0,4
              0,2
             0

                                     Lower bound         Upper bound

          FIGURE 4. Number of observations per year in  the county level data set
  The figure illustrates the number of observations made per year. This graph illustrates the
  imbalance of the county level data set, a problem that is mitigated through the use of fixed
                                                effects.

           1000
            900
            800
            700
            600
            500
            400
            300
            200
            100
              0
                          TABLE 1. Definitions of  the  variables
Variable       Definition
state_fips       The identification code for the  county or state. For states this is a number
                ranging from 1 to 56. For counties the fips code is constructed by
               combinding the state code and  the a county specific code, eg. 01001 is the
               county of Autauga (001) in Alabama (01).
low           The lower bound for the debt to household income ratio in the geographical
                    county or state.
high           The upper bound for the debt to household income ratio in the  geographical
                    county or state.
d_rate         The crude divorce rate is calculated as the number of divorces approved in
                the county or state  divided by its population in thousands.
p_index        A price index which assumes the value of 100 for  the state or county in the
               year of 2000.
m_rate         The crude marriage rate is calculated as the number of divorces approved in
               a  county or state  divided by its population in thousands.
unemp         The unemployment rate in the  county or state.
income        The gross income per capita in the area.
comprop       A dummy variable which assumes the value of 1 if the  county  or  state
                practices community property and 0 if it does not.
non_recourse   A dummy variable which assumes the value of 1 if the  county  or  state
                 practices non-recourse mortages and 0 if it does not.
neg_prices     A dummy variable which assumes the value of 1 if the price change was
                 negative in that particular year and 0 if it was not.
neg_equity     A dummy variable which assumes the value of 1 if the  price change was
                negative in that particular year and i the area was part of the highest
                leveraged quartile in the same year, i.e. it had either a lower or upper debt to
                income ratio in the highest quartile.
             TABLE 2. Descriptive  statistics for all variabels  on a state level
 This table shows a summarization for all the variables used in the state level regressions.
  As  discussed in  the  main text the state  level data set is complete except for the variable
   high  and  d_rate.  The difference between the  winsorized  d_rate  and the unwinsorized
                                d_rate  is not particularly large.

Variable            Obs       Mean       Std. Dev.      Min          Max
low                     918      1.4276         .4729          0.39          2.13
high                     822      1.5469         .3152          1.09          2.13
d_rate                   824      3.7750         .9526           1.2           9.9
p_index                 918    131.0545       27.8169         87.98        287.45
m_rate                  911      8.3276        6.6821             4          82.3
unemp                  918      5.7251        1.9791           2.3          13.7
income                  918    38167.95       9082.94        20563        75756
comprop                918       .1765         .3814            0            1
non_recourse             918       .2353         .4244            0            1
neg_prices               918       .2614         .4397            0             1
neg_equity               918       .1340         .3408            0            1
d_rate (winsorized)        824      3.7495         .8170           2.5           5.3
             TABLE 3. Descriptive statistics for all variabels  on a county level
       This table shows a summarization for all the variables used in the  county  level
   regressions.  The variation in this data set is larger for certain variables, including  d_rate
  and  m_rate.  There is also a substantial difference between the winsorized  d_rate  and the
      unwinsorized  d_rate  in terms of mean and standard deviation. The values for the
     winsorized  d_rate  more closely resembles the data found in the state level data set.

 Variable            Obs       Mean       Std. Dev.     Min         Max
 low                    9361      1.8114        .8929            0          3.46
 high                    8150      1.9466         .8177           .78           3.46
 d_rate                  9361      4.9960      19.0907            0         392.9
 p_index                8357    132.3476      22.3765         87.05         287.3
 m_rate                 9361      6.6628      21.1005            0           995
 unemp                 9361      7.0593       2.6295           1.3          26.3
 income                 9339    33496.49      9416.88        14993        199813
 comprop                9361       .3052         .4605             0             1
 non_recourse            9361       .2695        .4437            0             1
 neg_prices              9361       .3893         .4876            0             1
 neg_equity              9361       .1258        .3317            0             1
 d_rate (winsorized)       9361      3.7867        1.1657           1.9            6.2

                TABLE 4.  Descriptive statistics for  neg_equity  and  d_rate
    The table illustrates that states  and counties  predicted to have a higher proportion of
  households with negative equity have higher divorce rates  on average.  This fact does not
support the thesis that higher leverage and decreasing housing prices causes divorce rates to
                                        decrease.

State level data
neg_equity           Mean               Std. dev.             Frequency
0                   3.759249            .97414772           719
1                   3.8828571           .78488818           105
Total                3.775                .95259765            824
County level data
neg_equity           Mean               Std. dev.             Frequency
0                   4.8455775           17.575242           8,183
1                   6.041088            27.382141           1,178
Total                4.996022             19.090695            9,361
                  TABLE 5. Divorce rates for each US in alfabethical order
 This table illustrates the differences between the divorce rate of different states as well as
            how the average divorce rate for each state has changed over time.

Alabama                                              5,7                      3,8
Alaska                                                 5,0                      3,9
Arizona                                                4,6                      3,4
Arkansas                                               6,2                      3,9
California                                                    ---                         ---
Colorado                                               4,8                      3,6
Connecticut                                             3,0                      3,2
Delaware                                              4,5                      3,1
District of Columbia                                      3,6                       2,7
Florida                                                  5,1                       3,9
Georgia                                                  4,1                        ---
Hawaii                                                  3,8                       ---
Idaho                                                  5,4                      4,0
Illinois                                                   3,3                       2,0
Indiana                                                      ---                         ---
Iowa                                                  3,3                      1,3
Kansas                                                3,4                      2,7
Kentucky                                              5,5                      3,8
Louisiana                                                 ---                       2,0
Maine                                                5,1                      3,4
Maryland                                              3,2                      2,7
Massachusetts                                           2,5                      2,3
Michigan                                              3,8                      2,9
Minnesota                                                3,2                       ---
Mississippi                                              5,0                       3,2
Missouri                                                4,4                      3,3
Montana                                              2,8                      3,1
Nebraska                                               3,7                      3,1
Nevada                                               7,8                      4,3
New Hampshire                                        5,1                      3,4
New Jersey                                             3,0                      2,7
New Mexico                                            4,6                       ---
New York                                             3,3                      2,7
North Carolina                                           4,6                      3,2
North Dakota                                           4,4                      2,6
Ohio                                                  3,9                      3,0
Oklahoma                                               ---                      4,4
Oregon                                                4,6                      3,4
Pennsylvania                                            3,1                      2,6
Rhode  Island                                           2,7                      2,8
South Carolina                                           3,8                      2,5
South Dakota                                           3,7                      2,8
Tennessee                                              5,8                      3,8
Texas                                                 3,8                      4,2
Utah                                                  4,0                      3,6
Vermont                                              4,4                      3,1
Virginia                                                 4,4                       3,4
Washington                                            5,0                      3,5
West Virginia                                           4,9                      3,8
Wisconsin                                              3,2                      2,6
Wyoming                                            5,7                     4,2
                                          TABLE 6. Regression outcomes on a state level without any fixed effects

                                                       The table illustrates which factors  have a significant impact on  divorce rates. Marriage rates
                                                          have the biggest single contribution to explaining divorce rates. The effect from both the lower
                                                            and the upper bound have a significant effect, the lower bound has a positive effect and the
                                                           higher bound a  negative. *, ** and *** represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance,
                                                                                                     respectively.

                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent                 d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate
low                   .3709008***   .5842878***     .3153128*     .3965861**     .3870453**    .5017572***    .4858711***    .5336342***    .5273326***    .4992183***
high                                    -.3429074       .2198177      -.0846268      -.0085051    -.4233161**     -.3897121*    -.4870861**     -.4911422**     -.4315438**
p_index                                          -.0113742***    -.009076***    -.009151***     .004925***    .0049774***    .0054242***    .0054373***     .005399***
m_rate                                                      .0724745***    .0713578***    .0670708***    .0688795***    .0709589***     .071228***    .0711508***
unemp                                                                    -.0396698**       .0093005       .0104316       .0143991       .0068242       .0075949
income                                                                                    -.0000528***   -.0000535***   -.0000547***    -.0000549***     -.000055***
comprop                                                                                                  -.1376146*   -.2147789***    -.2125733***    -.2144378***
non_recourse                                                                                                    .206807***     .214493***     .212928***
neg_prices                                                                                                                       .0640535       .0899962
neg_equity                                                                                                                                               -.0974632
constant                3.252354***   3.492344***    4.448194***    3.924636***    4.059489***    4.506123***    4.491479***    4.494914***    4.541157***      4.4931***
Obs                         824          751          751          751          751          751          751          751           751           751
R2                          0.0337        0.0287         0.1177         0.3519         0.3572         0.4856         0.4879         0.4948         0.4953         0.4957
Adjusted R2                   0.0325         0.0261         0.1142         0.3484         0.3528         0.4815         0.4831         0.4893         0.4891         0.4888
                                        TABLE 7. Regression outcomes  on a state level with time but without state  fixed effects

                                                            The table illustrates what factors do have a significant impact on divorce rates. Marriage rates
                                                             do have the biggest single contribution to explaining divorce rates. In all of the regressions is
                                                   the variable  low  significantly positive. The signs of the  low  and  high  variables differ and the
                                                     dummy variable  neg_prices  is not significant, neither is  neg_equity. *, ** and *** represents
                                                                                    10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent                 d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                   .7649046***   1.100155***    1.045968***    .9123458***    .9076044***    .8218662***    .7982066***     .824591***     .840657***    .8097571***
high                                   -.4664398*      -.4030266    -.5395698**    -.5319587**    -.695873***   -.6550812***    -.735503***     -.729307***    -.6547113***
p_index                                             -.0012177       -.002221      -.0022679    .0097088***    .0098073***    .0100999***    .0098679***      .00987***
m_rate                                                      .0672514***    .0672498***    .0646796***     .066476***    .0687753***    .0683792***     .068217***
unemp                                                                      -.0034183       .0035772        .005201       .0065092       .0131768       .0155319
income                                                                                    -.0000572***   -.0000585***   -.0000604***    -.0000597***    -.0000597***
comprop                                                                                                  -.1367265*    -.215421***    -.2119953***    -.2141951***
non_recourse                                                                                                   .2050412***    .1873735***    .1849083***
neg_prices                                                                                                                                 -.1983285       -.1611431
neg_equity                                                                                                                                               -.1303069
constant                3.622009***   3.921017***    4.002136***    3.700632***    3.713637***    4.451956***    4.443499***    4.484384***     4.44999***    4.377355***
Obs                         751          751          751          751          751          751          751          751           751           751
R2                          0.2074        0.2183         0.2188         0.4111         0.4111         0.5115         0.5137         0.5203         0.5221         0.5228
Adjusted R2                   0.1897         0.1980         0.1974         0.3942         0.3934         0.4960         0.4976         0.5038         0.5049         0.5050
                                        TABLE 8. Regression outcomes  on a state level with state but without time  fixed effects

                                                              The table illustrates which factors have a significant effect on divorce rates with state fixed
                                                      effect incorporated into the model.  Neg_prices  do have a  significantly positive effect on
                                                      divorce rates while the  neg_equity  variable is still not statistically significant.  *, ** and ***
                                                                               represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                   -.4990958***    -.3075767***    -.2470517**   -.2495659***   -.2337148***      -.0738358      -.0738358      -.0738358        -.079034       -.0946096
high                                  -.3805068**       .0078026      .2286685*    .3879078***      -.0492675      -.0492675      -.0492675       -.1248217       -.0916292
p_index                                          -.0079959***   -.0077843***   -.0085613***       .0006688       .0006688       .0006688       .0007257        .000695
m_rate                                                      .0833761***     .080563***    .0705345***    .0705345***    .0705345***    .0694117***    .0694153***
unemp                                                                      -.0361755***       .0074897       .0074897       .0074897      -.0153593      -.0150131
income                                                                                    -.0000357***   -.0000357***   -.0000357***    -.0000358***    -.0000359***
comprop                                                                                                -1.256364***   -1.256364***    -1.299872***    -1.303675***
non_recourse                                                                                                   1.347883***    1.440445***    1.440874***
neg_prices                                                                                                                  .1726523***    .1863365***
neg_equity                                                                                                                                               -.0526196
constant              5.317291***      5.63729***    5.879708***     4.77706***    4.845074***    5.151366***    5.151366***    5.151366***    5.378781***    5.354834***
Obs                        824           751          751          751          751          751          751          751           751           751
R2                         0.8096          0.7984         0.8159         0.8659         0.8682         0.8930         0.8930         0.8930         0.8958         0.8959
Adjusted R2                 0.7976          0.7840         0.8064         0.8559         0.8582         0.8847         0.8847         0.8847         0.8875         0.8875
                                          TABLE 9. Regression outcomes  on a state level  with both time and state  fixed effects

                                                             The table illustrates the regression results with both time and state fixed effects incorporated
                                                       into the models. The variable  low  is the only significant variable  out of all the leverage
                                                             variables.  *, ** and *** represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                     .1116687      .1809985**    .3037869***     .1725961**     .1656537**     .1730395**     .1730395**     .1730395**     .1784714**      .163512**
high                                   -.1880511    -.2515871**      -.1152809       -.073588       .0345802       .0345802       .0345802       .0413763       .0939173
p_index                                            .004716***     .0022583**     .0019895**    -.0023344**    -.0023344**    -.0023344**    -.0022779**     -.002275**
m_rate                                                      .0542525***    .0536371***    .0470117***    .0470117***    .0470117***    .0469926***    .0469257***
unemp                                                                           -.0161783      -.0023072      -.0023072      -.0023072        -.001226       .0004844

income                                                                              .0000489***    .0000489***    .0000489***    .0000485***    .0000487***
comprop                                                                                                -1.716712***   -1.716712***    -1.708543***    -1.711488***
non_recourse                                                                                                   .7983025***     .787347***    .7758534***
neg_prices                                                                                                                                 -.0384785        -.017916
neg_equity                                                                                                                                               -.0753884
constant              5.041125***     5.202277***    4.786961***    4.370208***     4.42984***    3.629394***    3.629394***    3.629394***    3.616331***    3.557216***
Obs                        824           751          751          751          751          751          751          751           751           751
R2                         0.9036          0.8990         0.9012         0.9185         0.9187         0.9244         0.9244         0.9244         0.9245         0.9247
Adjusted R2                 0.8952          0.8880         0.8913         0.9102         0.9103         0.9165         0.9165         0.9165         0.9164         0.9165
                                           TABLE 10. Regression outcomes  on a  county  level  without fixed effects

                                                      The table illustrates the regression results from the regressions using county level data. None of
                                                  the variables  in the regressions are significant. The standard errors have been  clustered on a
                                                         state level.  *, ** and *** represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                       .5633061        -.3198499      -1.035058      -1.052267       -1.01866      -1.017287      -.8023084      -.9061199       -.9027012       -.5205838
high                                  1.007028       1.775214       1.803988       1.791016       1.797889       1.645914       1.65438       1.654451        1.20557
p_index                                                -.0391384      -.0384451       -.038886       -.043614      -.0433722      -.0531458       -.0530642       -.0528529
m_rate                                                         .0227094       .022611       .0226854       .0236709       .0241077       .0241075        .023996
unemp                                                                            -.0243342      -.0170488      -.0199757      -.0734284       -.0635126        -.063831

income                                                                                  .0000269      .0000261      .0000329       .0000335       .0000329
comprop                                                                                                     .636391      -.2800193       -.2745862       -.2809027
non_recourse                                                                                                      1.993477       1.976506       1.993767
neg_prices                                                                                                                                 -.1074838       -.2717871
neg_equity                                                                                                                                     1.054927
constant               3.97563***     3.471243***     8.414854**     8.141096**    8.340724***    7.983981***     7.74546***    9.064354***    9.001604***    9.258888***
Obs                       9361          8150         7289         7289         7289         7267         7267         7267          7267          7267
R2                         0.0007          0.0011         0.0033         0.0039         0.0039         0.0041         0.0043         0.0058         0.0058         0.0059
                                   TABLE 11. Regression outcomes  on a  county  level  with time but without state fixed effects

                                                      The table illustrates the result from the regressions which have incorporated time fixed effects
                                                 but not state fixed effects. The results from these regressions  are not significant. Standard errors
                                                  have been clustered on a state level.  *, ** and *** represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance,
                                                                                                respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                       .6457598        -.1675205      -1.008791      -.9877279      -1.145215      -1.122815      -.9618571      -1.144027       -1.186374       -.7925787
high                                  .9785083       1.780476       1.782432       1.843595       1.816073       1.702215       1.774804       1.787581       1.323346
p_index                                                -.0353744        -.033362      -.0302644      -.0365484      -.0376161      -.0504058       -.0497615       -.0494215
m_rate                                                         .0237967      .0240551      .0239074      .0247894      .0247941       .0248402       .0247654
unemp                                                                     .1391658      .2005985      .1957246      .1188607       .1056807       .1066118

income                                                                                  .0000545      .0000524      .0000573       .0000567       .0000556
comprop                                                                                                    .6492862      -.1662859        -.181946       -.1853716
non_recourse                                                                                                      1.852982       1.902017       1.918242
neg_prices                                                                                                                       .5135535       .3587357
neg_equity                                                                                                                                     1.095109
constant              7.914058***     7.731446***     10.95618**     10.61797**    9.687426***    8.824135***    8.711955***    9.957269***    9.913778***    10.15634***
Obs                       9361          8150         7289         7289         7289         7267         7267         7267          7267          7267
R2                         0.0022          0.0034         0.0046         0.0053         0.0055         0.0060         0.0062         0.0074         0.0075         0.0076
                                   TABLE 12. Regression outcomes  on a  county  level  with  state  but without  time  fixed effects

                                                       The table illustrates the result from the regressions which have incorporated state fixed effects
                                              but not time fixed effects. The variables comprop and non_recourse are the only significant
                                                        variable. Standard errors have been clustered on a state level. *, ** and *** represents 10, 5
                                                                                  and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                    .3608986        -1.220725       -1.916594      -1.930344      -1.912838      -1.914293      -1.959097      -1.959097       -1.979045       -1.610445
high                                1.572664       2.274403       2.295563       2.28723       2.283746       2.319686       2.319686       2.320804       1.886203
p_index                                              -.0509337      -.0512653      -.0516168      -.0550556      -.0568561      -.0568561       -.057035       -.0568344
m_rate                                                        .032112       .0320634       .0321203       .03208        .03208        .0321729       .0320608
unemp                                                                           -.0167845       -.007839       -.0107873      -.0107873       -.0515772       -.0543701

income                                                                                .0000229      .0000226      .0000226       .0000202       .0000196
comprop                                                                                                 -4.24329**     -4.24329**     -4.104813**     -4.130687**
non_recourse                                                                                                  12.55345***    12.50491***    12.55545***
neg_prices                                                                                                                     .4012749       .2487841
neg_equity                                                                                                                                   1.005859
constant             3.744856***     3.277943***     9.620668**     9.354671**    9.520338***    9.218854***    9.482669***    9.482669***    9.752574**     10.02621**
Obs                   9361           8150          7289         7289         7289         7267         7267         7267          7267          7267
R2                    0,0176          0,0162         0,0191        0,0204        0,0204        0,0205        0,0206        0,0206         0,0207         0,0208
                           TABLE 13. Regression outcomes  on a  county  level  with  combined  and individual  state and  time  fixed effects

                                                      The table illustrates the results from the regressions on county level data while incorporating all
                                                  fixed effects into the model. The only variable with a significant impact is non_recourse.
                                                   Standard errors have been clustered on a state level.  *, ** and  *** represents 10, 5 and 1
                                                                                      percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate

low                       .3746198        -1.314518       -2.66857      -2.693713      -2.682976      -2.685663      -2.746759      -2.746759       -2.765372       -2.368741
high                                  1.666226       2.820154       2.849677       2.843118       2.841727       2.892701       2.892701       2.893411       2.424474
p_index                                                -.0888183      -.0886526      -.0890609      -.0919526      -.0952863      -.0952863        -.093519       -.0929937
m_rate                                                         .0373816      .0373716      .0372467      .0371715      .0371715       .0371644       .0370372
unemp                                                                      -.0192198       .0088216       .0200563       .0200563       .0114245       .0098319

income                                                                                  .0000192      .0000195      .0000195       .0000188       .0000176
comprop                                                                                                      -5.947105      -5.947105       -5.946702       -6.013841
non_recourse                                                                                                   23.37025***    23.33832***    23.46511***
neg_prices                                                                                                                       .5368938       .3951617
neg_equity                                                                                                                                     1.093943
constant               4.184994***      3.71818***      14.36098       13.97503      14.11217*      13.81326*      14.14378*      14.14378*      14.01448*      14.26967*
Obs                       9361          8150         7289         7289         7289         7267         7267         7267          7267          7267
R2                         0.0187          0.0225         0.0264         0.0279         0.0279         0.0280         0.0282         0.0282         0.0282         0.0284
                          TABLE 14. Regression outcomes  on a  state  level  for individual variables with both state and time fixed effects

                                                 To better understand the individual impact of each of the variables on  d_rate  the following
                                                     simple regressions have been conducted. However, none of the variables relating to debt are
                                                        significant.  *, ** and *** represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate
low                     .1116687
high                                     -.0694922
p_index                                         .0034993***
m_rate                                                      .0535501***
unemp                                                                     -.0493258***

income                                                                              .0000529***
comprop                                                                                              -1.638889***
non_recourse                                                                                                         -.4722222***
neg_prices                                                                                                                                 -.0776479
neg_equity                                                                                                                                               -.1092771
constant              5.041125***     5.218382***    4.855771***    4.574886***    5.367807***    4.034881***    5.138819***    5.138819***    5.141336***    5.138325***
Obs                        824           751          824          824          824          824          824          824           824           824
R2                         0.9036          0.8973         0.9055         0.9214         0.9054         0.9147         0.9033         0.9033         0.9035         0.9040
Adjusted R2                 0.8952          0.8874         0.8972         0.9146         0.8972         0.9073         0.8950         0.8950         0.8951         0.8956
                                  TABLE 15. Regression outcomes  on a  county  level  for individual variables  with fixed effects

                                                      The table illustrates the regression results for the simple regressions that have been conducted
                                                            on the county level data. Only the variables relating to the legal factors are statistically
                                                    significant. The standard errors have been clustered on a state level.  *, ** and *** represents
                                                                               10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate
low                     .3746198
high                                   .6349916
p_index                                                -.0868505
m_rate                                                         .0319941
unemp                                                                         -.0612818

income                                                                                      -0,00000756
comprop                                                                                              -1.940423***
non_recourse                                                                                                   11.82118***
neg_prices                                                                                                                        .8299182
neg_equity                                                                                                                                     1.611254
constant                  .5421236       -.8896402       5.923181     .8713416**       1.567304    2.653009***    1.149092***    1.149092***       .6876181    1.074203***
Obs                       9361          8150         8357         9361         9361         9339         9361         9361          9361          9361
R2                         0.0187          0.0223         0.0216         0.0195         0.0184         0.0184         0.0184         0.0184         0.0187         0.0190
                                  TABLE 16. Regression outcomes  on a  state  level  with  state and year fixed effects, winsorized

                                                      The table illustrates the regression results after a 5 % winsorization has been conducted. Even
                                                        though the results are more significant than in the unwinsorized data the difference is quite
                                                         small.  *, ** and *** represents 10, 5 and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate
low                     .0742049      .1408986**    .2020485***    .2117728***    .2044091***    .2122654***    .2122654***    .2122654***    .2168298***    .2027067***
high                                   -.1843719*    -.2160135**     -.226117**     -.1818941*      -.0668366      -.0668366      -.0668366       -.0611256       -.0115218
p_index                                           .0023486***    .0025308***    .0022456***    -.0023536**    -.0023536**    -.0023536**    -.0023061**    -.0023034**
m_rate                                                             -.0040214      -.0046742   -.0117216***   -.0117216***   -.0117216***    -.0117376***    -.0118008***
unemp                                                                             -.01716      -.0024054      -.0024054      -.0024054       -.0014969       .0001179

income                                                                               .000052***     .000052***     .000052***    .0000517***    .0000519***
comprop                                                                                                -1.872628***   -1.872628***    -1.865764***    -1.868544***
non_recourse                                                                                                   .8639728***    .8547666***    .8439156***
neg_prices                                                                                                                                 -.0323343       -.0129213
neg_equity                                                                                                                                                 -.071174
constant              4.944723***      5.10567***    4.898838***     4.92973***     4.99298***    4.141554***    4.141554***    4.141554***    4.130576***    4.074765***
Obs                        824           751          751          751          751          751          751          751           751           751
R2                         0.9177          0.9145         0.9156         0.9157         0.9160         0.9247         0.9247         0.9247         0.9248         0.9250
Adjusted R2                 0.9105          0.9061         0.9072         0.9072         0.9073         0.9169         0.9169         0.9169         0.9168         0.9170
                                        TABLE 17. Regression outcomes  on a  county  level  with fixed effects, winsorized

                                                       This table illustrates the regression results after a 5 % winsorization has been conducted. The
                                                       sinificance of the variable low and high are higher than in the unwinsorized data but still quite
                                                        low. The standard errors have been clustered on a state level.  *, ** and *** represents 10, 5
                                                                                  and 1 percent significance, respectively.

                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
Dependent              d_rate          d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate         d_rate
low                     -.0148576        .1478596     .2129368**     .2124804**       .1967449       .1930148       .1744904       .1744904       .1765306        .207828
high                                     -.0985177    -.1450675**    -.1445316**      -.1349201      -.1307756      -.1153204      -.1153204       -.1153983       -.1524012
p_index                                              .00377       .003773       .0043714       .0044477       .0034369       .0034369       .0032432        .003284
m_rate                                                         .0006785      .0006932      .0007074      .0006847      .0006847       .0006854       .0006754
unemp                                                                      .028166      .0251939      .0286003      .0286003       .0295465       .0294208

income                                                                                       -0,00000149    -0,00000141    -0,00000141     -0,00000133     -0,00000142
comprop                                                                                                -1.803175***   -1.803175***     -1.80322***    -1.808517***
non_recourse                                                                                                    .4362517**     .4199696**     .4252513**
neg_prices                                                                                                                                 -.0588475       -.0700313
neg_equity                                                                                                                                       .086321
constant              5.433837***     5.352036***    5.294267***    5.288011***    5.068921***    5.018821***    5.063444***    5.063444***    5.097924***    5.117259***
Obs                       9361          8150         7289         7289         7289         7267         7267         7267          7267          7267
R2                         0.3524          0.3765         0.4031         0.4032         0.4044         0.4051         0.4100         0.4100         0.4103         0.4105
                                                           TABLE 18. Correlation coefficients for state level data

                                                                 This table illustrates the correlation between the variables used in our regressions.
                                                             The single highest correlation is the correlation between the upper and lower bound
                                                         for the debt-to-income ratios,  low  and  high.  The correlation between  income  and
                                                                                  p_index  is also significant.

                    low           high          d_rate       p_index       m_rate       unemp       income      comprop     non_recourse    neg_prices    neg_equity
low               1.0000
high              0.9102         1.0000
d_rate             0.1629         0.1288         1.0000
p_index            0.1511         0.2402         -0.2725        1.0000
m_rate            0.0923         0.1061         0.5266       -0.0904       1.0000
unemp             0.2324         0.2637         -0.0813        0.0532       -0.0673       1.0000
income             0.0086          0.0462         -0.5035        0.6980       -0.1515       0.1741        1.0000
comprop           0.0930         0.1283         0.1397        -0.0479       0.2668       0.0309       -0.1267       1.0000
non_recourse       0.0610         0.1149         0.0203        0.0029       -0.0603       -0.0093       0.0249       0.2861         1.0000
neg_prices          0.2541          0.2591         -0.0822        0.1075       -0.0989       0.5823       0.1795       -0.0591        -0.1156        1.0000
neg_equity          0.3078          0.4167         -0.0258        0.0978       -0.0282       0.3843       0.0640       -0.0051        -0.0258        0.5284       1.0000