     Cross-Firm Variations in Portfolio
  Recommendations for Robo-Advisors*

                                                   1                    2
                            Joel Mankowitz and Jonas Skilje
                           Stockholm School of Economics
                                  May 14, 2018

                                    Abstract
We show that there are significant differences in the consistency of advice across robo-advisors
to different investors seeking advice. By comparing the recommended portfolios for three
generic investors across a large share of actors on the U.S., U.K. and Canadian markets for
robo-advisors we found that the generic aggressive investor with a high level of financial
literacy received largely consistent portfolio recommendations across the robo-advisors while
the generic moderate investor with a moderate level of financial literacy received slightly less
consistent recommendations. In turn, the generic conservative investor in our sample received
much less consistent recommendations. The conservative investor also had the lowest financial
literacy by our measurement. The combination of receiving high variations of portfolio
recommendations  in  combination  with  low  financial  literacy  might  suggest  that  this
conservative investor  is not having his best  interests sought  after in the robo-advisor
environment. This should be investigated further by future research. Our study also shows that
the cross-firm variations across all three investors can be explained to some part by the robo-
advisor’s country of origin and exposure to fixed income products in their underlying offering.

* We would like to thank our supervisor Marieke Bos, Researcher and Deputy Director of the
Swedish House of Finance  at the Stockholm School of Economics, for support throughout our work.
We also send out a thanks to professor Paolo Sodini of the Swedish House of Finance at the
Stockholm School of Economics for valuable input in the early stages of this thesis.
1
 Email: joel.mankowitz@gmail.com
2
 Email:  jonas.skilje@gmail.com

                                        1
Table of Content

Table of Content                                                                    2
1. Introduction                                                                       3
  1.1 Related literature                                                                   6
  1.1.2 Definitions                                                                   8
  1.2 Ideal experiment                                                               8
2. Data                                                                           10
  2.1 Data collection process                                                          10
     2.1.1 Robo-advisors                                                                12
    2.1.1.1 Number of questions asked in the questionnaire and the number of portfolios provided  13
     2.1.1.2 Calculation of weight independent variables for robo-advisors                       15
    2.1.1.3 Country of origin                                                         17
  2.1.2 Dependent variables: portfolio recommendations                                   18
    2.1.2.1 Generic investors                                                         18
    2.1.2.2 Descriptives of portfolio recommendations                                    20
  2.1.3 Data preparation                                                             24
3. Method                                                                      25
  3.1 Background                                                                 25
  3.2. Hypothesis development                                                       27
4. Analysis and findings                                                              29
5. Conclusions                                                                    33
6. References                                                                      35
  6.1 Papers published in periodicals                                                     35
  6.2 Working Papers                                                             36
  6.3 Monographs                                                               37
7. Appendices                                                                    38
  7.1 Tables and figures                                                             38
  7.2 Appendix A. Generic investor questionnaire answers                                 43

                                        2
1. Introduction

Recent time’s changes in the market for financial advice for individual investors has been
manifested in an increasing use of automated digital advisors via Internet, henceforth called
robo-advisors (Berndt et al., 2017). One of the main arguments for the  use of robo-advisors is
its alleged objectivity in portfolio recommendations compared to the interest of conflict-ridden
traditional financial advisors (Burke et al., 2015; Baker et al., 2017). Yet, there is a pervasive
cross-firm variation in portfolio recommendations in the marker for robo-advice. If the
individual investor seeks various advice from several robo-advisors the recommended portfolio
allocation will differ. How can this variation be explained?
        While there is a lot of research on traditional  advisors and their different biases (Baker
et al. 2017) there is a still little research on the exploding number of robo-advisors in the world.
We wanted to try and explain how and why investor with different levels of risk-aversion are
being treated differently in this highly topical market. By creating our own dataset of robo-
advisory portfolio recommendations for generic investor profiles and firm characteristics in the
combined U.S., UK and Canadian market for robo-advice we have been able to find patterns
in the data that suggest that the variation in cross-firm advice for portfolio recommendations is
largest for conservative investors (investors with low risk-tolerance and no previous experience
with investments) while moderate and aggressive investors  in turn receive more consistent
advice on average.
       The most important factor for explaining the portfolio allocation weights across all
observations was the individual investor’s generic classifications. We have shown that our
own-constructed generic investor profiles explain more than 55% of the variations in advice
with high statistical significance, and over 78% when controlling for firm fixed effects (see
Table 11). This is a fundamental postulate that shows that the robo-advisors are on average
able to recognize the differences in risk-tolerance, financial experience and other personal
characteristics of our generic investor profiles. Our finding that robo-advisors on average can
categorize the different investors and give them different portfolio recommendations made it
more interesting to look at the portfolio recommendations across robo-advisors for each generic

                                        3
investor   in  isolation.  Especially   the  portfolio  recommendations  aimed   at  the  generic
conservative investor where the variations are the largest.
       Our dataset thus invited us to further investigate the isolated investor cases which
showed that, with some significance, UK robo-advisors on average gave smaller equity weights
to conservative portfolios but we were unable to find statistically significant explanations for
the cross-advisory variations for conservative investors when isolated. This gives reason to
think that the explanation lies with some elusive investment philosophy bias. That is, the robo-
advisor has some predetermined idea of how portfolio recommendations should look that is not
based on investor preferences. To be able to say something about investment philosophy biases
effect for individual robo-advisors we would need to have a large number of portfolio
recommendations for each advisor. On average, the investors recommend a median of 5
different portfolios (range from 1 to 100 different allocations), making such a bias hard to
measure. The firm fixed effect were shown to explain quite a lot of the variations (see Table
11) on the  aggregate level for our generic conservative investor but we have not looked at the
individual firms’ philosophies themselves. Our results are merely suggesting that investment
philosophy biases play a role in explaining the cross-firm variations in recommendations,
especially for conservative investors.
       Apart from the fundamental assumption that investor style is having a large impact on
the recommended portfolio allocations we also tested hypotheses that economies-of-scale,
country of origin, number of portfolios and number of questions asked in the questionnaire
could explain the variations across firms.
       In line with previous research by Dimmock and Kouwenberg (2010) we have been able
to attribute a small portion of portfolio recommendation variations to  country effects  -  if the
firm is originating from the United Kingdom. From our results U.K. robo-advisors are on
average recommending 15.2% less equity with some statistical significance. Perception of risk
associated with equity varies across countries and we have seen this somewhat reflected in
lower equity recommendations on average for U.K. firms compared to U.S. and Canadian
firms.
       The hypothesis that robo-advisory firms give varying portfolio recommendations
because of  an  economies-of-scale rationale  has support in previous research by Baker and
Dellaert (2018) and we have been able to find a slightly significant effect that firms that have
specialized   in   investing   in   fixed   income   assets   are   more   likely   to   give   portfolio
recommendations with more fixed  income weight on average. We found no significant
correlation showing that robo-advisors originating in each different nation of the experiment

                                        4
had any fixed specialization effect. If, say, U.S. robo-advisors on average were more
specialized towards equity, this could harm the regression by introducing multicollinearity (the
robo-advisor being from the U.S. would have both an effect on the firm’s exposure towards
equity which affects the recommendation as well as through the independent country variable).
       One other plausible hypothesis to explain the variation in recommendations across
advisors was be the difference in questions asked in the questionnaire. The questionnaire is the
foundation for the recommendation and we have been able to show that the robo-advisors are,
on average, correctly managing to give different advice to different investors based on the
answers provided by these questionnaires. The hypothesis was that the more question the robo-
advisor is asking, the more it can specialize its offering and channel the investor towards a
more customized portfolio. This would suggest that firms with a small number of questions
would be closer to some sort of default portfolio, and the more questions asked, the more the
firm can deviate from the default. This hypothesis does not, however, hold in our experiment.
First of all,  we found almost no correlation between the number of questions and the number
of portfolios offered (see Figure 1.a. and 1.b.). This is also in line with previous research (Tertilt
& Scholz, 2017). There is also no support for this hypothesis in our regression analysis; the
number of questions and the number of portfolios are explaining close to nothing of the
variation. The number of questions asked and portfolios offered have close  to no effect in the
isolated case for the generic conservative investor (see Table 11).
       Our best model is able to explain 67.4% of the variations in portfolio recommendations
on the aggregate level. It is unable to significantly explain why our generic conservative
investor is facing so much higher variance in their portfolio recommendations compared to our
generic  moderate  and  aggressive  investor  respectively.  We  can  however  show  with
significance that the variance within each generic investor style subset is somewhat significant,
meaning that there is support in suggesting that conservative investors are really facing a higher
variance in recommendations on average. While explanations such as country effects, robo-
advisors’ specializations, number of questions asked in the questionnaire or the number of
different portfolios offered are not able to explain more than 67.4% there is reason to look
closer at the generic conservative investor, since the variation here is significantly larger and
thus carries the largest portion of the overall variation. The conservative investor faced a
standard deviation of 0.22 compared to 0.17 for moderate and aggressive investors in their
portfolio recommendations.
       Previous research by Fisch et al. (2015) and Mandell (2008)  have shown that investors
with lower levels of financial literacy share a higher risk of taking poor financial decisions,

                                        5
leading to unnecessary fees as well as failure while trying to take advantage of diversification
effects. Our constructed conservative  investor profile has consistently reported low levels of
previous investment and/or financial experience (see Appendix A). While this does not exactly
translate into levels of financial literacy, as measured by e.g. OECD it has acted as a proxy for
financial literacy for the analysis of our results. This means that the conservative investor is
also, to a high degree, showing low levels of financial literacy. The effect of low financial
literacy could explain the variation because of investment philosophy bias from the robo-
advisory firm. Financially illiterate investors have a lower ability to assess the portfolio
recommendations provided and are also less likely to compare their recommendations across
robo-advisors (Fisch et al, 2015). This investment philosophy bias is, as mentioned before,
elusive and it has been beyond the scope of this paper to investigate it at proper length. Our
results suggest that this bias, measured as a firm fixed effect, plays a substantial part of
explaining the variations in recommendations. We leave a suggestion to further research in this
field to more accurately try and measure this bias. It is in the interest of consumers of robo-
advisory services as well as the providers of these same services to understand the disparity in
recommendations for, especially conservative, investors discovered in our paper.

1.1 Related literature

The academic literature on robo-advisors is scarce which is something we have been
experiencing along with Tertilt and Scholz (2017). While there is a  large recent literature
discussing the benefits and downsides of traditional financial advice such as Chalmers &
Reuter (2015) and Bhattacharya et al (2012) there is apparently little research on the quality of
robo-advisors’ advice. This is odd given the  recent time’s criticism of traditional advice in
favor  for  the  more  transparent  and  cost-efficient  robo-advisors  (Transparency  Market
Research, 2017). One of the authors on the subject, Fein (2015), has shown that robo-advisors
are not necessarily providing recommendations that are cost-minimizing, free of conflicts of
interest, nor in the best interest of the client. Fein is approaching robo-advisors from a legal
standpoint, looking at the user agreements between robo-advisors and their clients. She also
finds that it’s hard to argue that robo-advisors are giving personal advice at all since the
recommendations  “may be based on incorrect assumptions, incomplete information, or
circumstances not relevant to the user.”  (Fein, 2015, p. 9). It is of particular interest to our
study to learn about conflicts of interest and how robo-advisors are generating their portfolio

                                        6
recommendations for individual investors. On robo-advisors being free of conflicts of interest
Fein concludes:

          Robo-advisors are affected with a number of conflicts of interest that enable them to
           engage in self-dealing transactions. Among other things, as noted, in providing services
           to customers, robo-advisors use affiliated brokers, custodians, clearing firms or other
          firms from which they receive compensation. They also use their own investment
           products. (Fein, 2015, p. 15)

Fein also suggests that the robo-advisor is not necessarily acting in the best interest of their
clients. Rather, Fein argues that the agreements between clients and robo-advisors seem to lay
the responsibility of determining whether the recommendations are in the best interest of the
client on the client herself. This is troublesome if the client is not financially literate and per  se
unfit to make such assessments.
       Previous research on financial literacy such as van Rooij et al. (2011) has found that
financially illiterate investors are less likely to invest in stocks, less likely to seek professional
or qualified advice and are missing out on wealth increases associated with financial literacy.
This is in part explained by missing out on the equity premium returns since financially
illiterate investors are not willing to take on risks. This tendency among investors are relevant
to  this thesis since robo-advisors are basing their portfolio recommendations to a significant
part on the investors’ previous financial knowledge (which could serve as a proxy for financial
literacy as it is measured by e.g. the OECD International Network on  Financial Education
(INFE) in their survey instruments). It is important to point out that while van Rooij et al.
(2011) and OECD are estimating financial literacy they are testing the participants while robo-
advisors as a rule are merely asking the investors to self-evaluate their financial knowledge.
The recent literature on self-awareness regarding one’s own level of financial literacy such as
Anderson & Robinson (2018) suggests that this is not a very good measure for actual financial
literacy for many  investors. Anderson & Robinson (2018) found that Swedish investors that
were over-estimating their own financial literacy are more likely to face higher fees in their
mutual funds and risk underperforming while investors that are correctly assessing their  own
financial illiteracy are likely to not follow advice and less interested in personal finance in
general. This  opens  for conflicts of interest of robo-advisors and investors that are relevant for
this thesis. Especially since we cannot assume that, along Fein’s (2015) results, robo-advisors
are necessarily taking a clear responsibility for the advice they provide.

                                        7
1.1.2 Definitions

Robo-advisors
In this paper,  we are using the term robo-advisor to refer to the provider of online portfolio
recommendation services. These robo-advisors vary somewhat in form but share some key
characteristics: they are online, they are giving portfolio recommendations based on a
questionnaire (8-9 questions on average in our sample) and are offering a fee-based asset
management service after the initial recommendation. The robo-advisors are not entirely
defined as the opposite of a traditional, physical financial advisor. Some of the robo-advisory
services are provided by traditional advisors and some of them can be complemented with
phone-meetings and physical meetings. For the scope of our study we have only looked at the
recommendations provided through the online services for robo-advisors regardless of the
underlying firm (whether it be independent, a bank or a traditional wealth management firm).
Neither  have we distinguished  robo-advisors from  each  other  based on their  level of
sophistication. For example, one robo-advisor might be using a few questions in a questionnaire
to  channel the investor towards one out of three different portfolios, while another robo-advisor
is leveraging developed machine learning algorithms to guide the investor among hundreds or
even thousands of portfolios. They are both regarded as robo-advisors to the same extent  if
they are providing services in accordance with our definition.

1.2 Ideal experiment

The ideal experiment to test and explain cross-firm variations would include all imaginable
types of data on the robo-advisors such as underlying intentions and thought on how the firms
develop their portfolio recommendations. A detailed study on how the business model of each
individual robo-advisor and its cost and fee structure could also help explain more of the
variations. Once we had access to all these observations we would ideally be able to draw a
completely randomized sample from the population. All these independent variable data on
every robo-advisor would then be used in order to find correlations with the portfolio
recommendations they assign to various investors. These correlations might then in turn tell us
something about how robo-advisory firm characteristics are determining the recommendations.

                                        8
This would provide helpful  ex ante  guidance for investors that are aiming to consume robo-
advisory services.
       Our own experiment deviates from this ideal experiment on several pivotal points.
Some are due to lack of data while others are due to lack of resources. We fail to achieve a
randomized controlled experiment because we were limited to include only robo-advisors that
provide portfolio recommendations 1) for free and 2) to people only identified by an email
address. This  limits  our dataset to only include about half the total population of robo-advisors
and possibly introducing a selection bias. Furthermore, inference based on our sample is hard
because we are using data only from the U.S., U.K. and Canada  -  increasing the risk selection
bias problems in our sample even more. Our treatment group is hardly randomized. There are
also other approximations and model assumptions that deviate from an ideal experiment (where
all independent variable inputs would be perfectly observable with no need for proxies or
assumptions).
       Because our analysis is based on a model that does not  consider  all imaginable types of
data on the robo-advisors our results are at risk of omitted variable bias. This is a resource
problem, because the quality of the accessible data is not necessarily the best for our purposes.
For example, if the cost and fee structure would be a relevant variable that has implications for
the portfolio recommendations this would not affect our results in the model, but by leaving it
out we are over/underestimating the effects of our variables in the model in Formula 3. The
fact that the robo-advisors have variations in their exposures to different asset classes does not
itself implicate that there are automatically economies of scale, but this is an assumption we
are imposing in our model in order to find some approximations for explaining cross-firm
variations in portfolio recommendations. Furthermore, in the ideal experiment the asset classes
would not only be grouped based on type of asset but also on the riskiness
       And, we have made some more rather strict assumptions in our model. We are assuming
our generic investors to be coherent and transferable across robo-advisors. While we have
tested,  and seen with strong statistical significance that this assumption holds (see Table 6.)
there is still  a possibility of some “borderline cases” where the robo-advisor algorithms are
interpreting our generic investors differently and fail to separate them.
       Also, the grouping of assets by risk might explain more of the variations than our
current grouping by asset class. In our  model,  we are using asset class as a proxy for risk based
on the assumption that equity is riskier than fixed income. This might not always be the case
since “fixed income” includes a range of assets from government bonds that are the  least risky
to high yield bonds whose risks may well exceed that of equity assets. We believe that this

                                        9
assumption is not a significant misspecification in the model. Robo-advisors in our sample are
using equity and fixed income in their portfolio recommendations in line with our assumptions
(i.e. allocating more equity to risk-tolerant investors). Neither have we seen any robo-advisor
informing that they are using any strategy deviating from our assumption. We cannot, however,
guarantee that this is never  the case. Some robo-advisors might well for example recommend
the same level of equity for our generic aggressive and conservative investors, with the
difference that the recommended equity assets for the aggressive investor has higher risk (e.g.
emerging  market equity) compared to the equity assets for the conservative investor (e.g.
domestic equity). In this case, we would proxy the robo-advisor as recommending both the
aggressive and conservative investor the same equity exposure and thus the same level  of risk.
A  more  nuanced  measure  for  risk  would  be to  assess  the  riskiness  of  the  portfolio
recommendation based on the riskiness of each asset class. This would probably be more
correct, but constitutes a much more sophisticated type of analysis beyond the  scope of this
thesis.

2. Data

In this  section,  we will provide details on how the data was collected and prepared as well as a
detailed description of the dataset used for this thesis.

2.1 Data collection process

Our optimal dataset would consist of all possible portfolio recommendations provided by all
robo-advisors targeting the U.S., UK and Canadian markets for all individual investors. This
type of data is not available and there  are  no accumulated datasets available for analysis.
Therefore, a proprietary data sample has been generated for the purpose of analysis. Here we
will explain in detail how the data in this dataset has been extracted.
        In  short,  we gathered a list of robo-advisors and collected data on key characteristics
that would be deemed useful in our model. Table 1 shows a list of all the independent variables
collected on every robo-advisor.

                                        10
  Robo-advisor characteristics

  Independent variable                       Description

  Country of origin                               This variable takes on  the value “US”, “UK” or
                                                        “Canada”. Indicator variables for country of origin
                                                          were also used.

  Number of questions asked in the questionnaire        This variable is the count of the number of questions
                                                          asked in the profiling questionnaire. It is including
                                                            only such questions that were related to the profiling,
                                                        and excluding questions such as phone number, email
                                                             address and the like.

   Number of portfolios                               This variable is the count of all the different portfolios
                                                               that the robo-advisor is offering. The count is in most
                                                          cases clearly provided by the firm but in other cases
                                                 the count was made by randomly generating new
                                                               portfolios.

  Weight towards equity asset classes                  This is the weight towards equity asset classes in the
                                                       robo-advisor’s underlying offering.  Ranging from 0.0
                                                                 to 1.0.

  Weight towards fixed income asset classes            This is the weight towards fixed income asset classes
                                                       in the robo-advisor’s underlying offering.  Ranging
                                                             from 0.0 to 1.0.

  Weight towards other asset classes                   This is the weight towards other asset classes in the
                                                       robo-advisor’s underlying offering.  Ranging from 0.0
                                                                 to 1.0.

Table 1. Robo-advisor characteristics. The table shows the independent variables extracted from the robo-advisors
that were used in our model.

       The dependent variables of interest are the portfolio recommendations provided by
these robo-advisors. Table 2 provides  a list of the dependent variables and indicator variables
used in our model. Each variable will be explained in greater detail further on in this section.

                                        11
  Portfolio recommendations

  Dependent variable                              Description

  Investor style                                   This variable is based on  what investor profile was
                                                     used to induce the portfolio recommendation. The
                                                          investor style was either: “conservative,” “moderate”
                                                             or “aggressive”. Indicator variables for investor styles
                                                          were also used.

  Recommended weight towards equity asset classes     This  is the weight towards equity asset classes in the
                                                     robo-advisor’s  portfolio  recommendation.  Ranging
                                                             from 0.0 to 1.0.

  Recommended weight towards fixed income asset  This is the weight towards fixed income asset classes
  classes                                             in   the   robo-advisor’s   portfolio   recommendation.
                                                         Ranging from 0.0 to 1.0.

  Recommended weight towards other asset classes      This is the weight towards other asset classes in the
                                                     robo-advisor’s  portfolio  recommendation.  Ranging
                                                             from 0.0 to 1.0.

Table 2.  Portfolio recommendations. The table shows the dependent variables and indicator variables used in our
model.

2.1.1 Robo-advisors

By using market reports for robo-advisors (CBInsights, 2017; Kyle, 2017) and manually
scanning the market via the Internet we found a total population of  robo-advisors targeting the
U.S., UK and Canadian markets of personal investors. This set of 80 robo-advisors was then
narrowed down into our sample dataset based on whether they could provide portfolio
recommendations without requiring the user to fill in  social security numbers or other
deanonymizing information. This left us with 41 robo-advisors. Another 6 robo-advisors from
this subset were excluded for providing zero-variance outputs, leaving our final sample with
35 robo-advisors. We have to the best  of our ability tried to cover the entire accessible market
for robo-advisors targeting the U.S., U.K. and Canada and are confident that all these major
robo-advisors have been assessed in our data collection process although there are no official
count on  the total population of robo-advisors on these markets.
        There is an issue with potential selection bias in our sample. Picking only those robo-
advisors from the U.S., UK and Canada  and  only those providing portfolio recommendations

                                        12
on specific terms might  obstruct inference to the entire population of robo-advisors and even
to the subset of U.S., UK and Canadian robo-advisors. We cannot test whether the sample in
our data are sharing characteristics other than their low thresholds to giving portfolio
recommendations compared to the omitted robo-advisors in this experiment.  Therefore,
generalizability of our results to the market for robo-advisors  within  U.S., UK and Canada is
reduced.

2.1.1.1 Number of questions asked in the questionnaire and the number of
portfolios provided

Tertilt & Scholz (2017) suggest  that robo-advisor questionnaires are not doing a proper job of
identifying an investor’s risk profile. However, the number of questions asked could still
influence  the recommendations. Suppose that there  is a mean portfolio available that all the
advisors can recommend. The more questions the advisor is asking the investor, the more
detailed recommendations can be provided. Meaning that it is plausible that the number of
questions   asked   in   the   questionnaire   could   explain   the   variations   in   cross-advisory
recommendations.
       For this to make sense, however, there should be a correlation between the number of
questions asked in the questionnaire and the number of portfolios provided. In line with Tertilt
and Scholz (2017) however, we only found a surprisingly small correlation (see Figure 1.a. and
Figure 1.b.). Therefore,  we expect this to have little explanatory power in our model.

                                        13
14
Figure 1.a. & 1.b. The correlation between number of questions asked in the questionnaire by robo-advisors in
our sample and the number of portfolios provided by these robo-advisors. We first ran two simple linear

regressions on the model                                                    to find the regression line and
correlations. For Figure 1.a. we did not adjust the sample at all while in Figure 1.b. we dropped outliers (3
observations). We can see that the correlation is slightly smaller (0.0511 compared to 0.0589) when the sample
was  adjusted for the outlier observations. This indicates that robo-advisors are not tailoring their portfolio
offerings by the level of knowledge on investors but use some number of predetermined portfolios.

2.1.1.2 Calculation of weight independent  variables for robo-advisors

The independent variables for robo-advisors’ weights towards different asset classes in their
underlying offering were calculated using the number of assets within each asset class offered
by the robo-advisor divided by the total number of assets in the robo-advisor’s underlying
offering, Formula 1.
       The weight  w  of each asset class  i  is calculated as
                                                                              𝑛",$
                                        𝑤",$  =
                                                        𝑛",$  +  𝑛",$
                              𝑖  ∈  {equity, fixed  income, other}
 where      is the weight of the asset class   for robo-advisor   and where     is the number
 of asset offerings related to asset class   for robo-advisor   .
 Formula 1.

The assets were categorized based on the name of the asset provided by the robo-advisor
according to Table 3. Our categories follow the principles of convention by dividing them into
equity, fixed income and other asset classes.
       The method for listing these asset classes was done  ad hoc  because of the nature of the
data. The differences in how the individual robo-advisors disclaimed their investment offerings
varied too much to allow for a more precise collection of data. One issue with this approach is
that the assets could be grouped in other ways, e.g. on level of risk or beta values. The risk
level of  various  derivatives and gold would make it improbable to place them together if we
were to categorize asset classes on level of  risk. This because gold has a very low risk (Levitt,
2016). This would also probably not place company bonds and government bonds in the same
risk category. The weights found in the dataset can be found in Table 4 categorized by country.

                                        15
                          Table 4:  Asset class weights by country

Country     Variable          # of   Mean       Std. Dev.    Min.        Max.
                             Obs.

Canada      Exposure  equity   18     .52855       .08283064   .4286        .6154
             Exposure  fixed    18      .35868333   .10552364   .2308        .5
           income
             Exposure  other    18     .11263333   .05746801   0           .1538

UK         Exposure  equity   24     .5273875    .13872811   .3333       .6667
             Exposure fixed    24     .2879125    .1011179    .1667        .4667
           income
             Exposure  other    24     .1847375    .07864693   .0667        .3333

US         Exposure  equity   63     .44208571   .16625825   0           .7143
            Exposure fixed    63     .40651905   .17584834   .1642       1
           income
             Exposure  other    63     .15137143   .16537417   0           .6866

Table 4. Asset class weights by country. This table shows the distribution of asset classes by country in our sample.
We can see that aggregated U.S. robo-advisors have the highest exposure towards fixed income asset classes while
aggregated U.K. robo-advisors have the highest exposure towards other asset classes while aggregated Canadian
and U.K. robo-advisors have about the same exposure towards equity asset classes.

The theory suggests that any firm will try and maximize their profits, and one way of doing
this  is by reducing transaction costs (Olsson, 2005). This is, of course, the case for robo-
advisors as well as any other firm. Specializing in investing in one asset class could help a
robo-advisor increase profits in numerous ways such as reducing courtage fees, economies-of-
scale in analysis and management expertise. The intuition is that a hypothetical robo-advisor
would not recommend portfolio weights towards a product, e.g. gold, if the robo-advisor did
not provide any services that invested in gold. The weights of asset classes in the robo-advisor’s
underlying offering is therefore in this data being treated as a proxy for its specialization. The
hypothesis is that economies-of-scale from specialization could explain the variations in cross-
advisory portfolio recommendations.

                                        16
2.1.1.3 Country of origin

The country of origin of the robo-advisor was determined by the country they were registered
in. Country of origin of the firm is an interesting control variable since previous research
suggests that there are country differences in investor attitudes towards certain asset classes
(IMF, 2011) meaning that one possible explanation to cross-firm portfolio recommendations
could be that they are originated from different countries. Apart from investor attitudes there
could also be regulatory differences across countries affecting the recommendations (Guiso
and Sodini, 2012).  These  factors would be controlled for with this variable.
                            Table 5.  Distribution across countries
                   Country     Freq.        Percent      Cum.

                  Canada      6           17.14       17.14
                 UK         8          22.86       40.00
                  US         21          60.00       100.00
                   Total        35          100.00

Table 5. The sample’s country of origin distribution.

The number of US robo-advisors in our study is representing more than half the sample data
(see Table 5.) This is not surprising given that the size of the US market for these services is in
line with  Tertilt & Scholz (2017)  that suggests that the US market for robo-advisors is the most
developed in the world.

                                        17
Figure 2.  Scatter plot of recommended portfolio allocations by equity-to-fixed income ratio by investor style and
country of origin. In section one (“Aggressive”) we see that the spread is rather small compared to the sections
two (“Moderate”) and three (“Conservative”). The “Conservative” section has the largest spread.

Looking at Figure 2 we see that there is a tendency towards U.K. (Δ) and Canadian (⚬) clusters

for conservative and moderate investors in our sample while U.S. (㍹) observations are much

more scattered. The small samples from the UK and Canadian populations are however making
it hard to infer too much about this hypothetical country effect by just looking at the data.

2.1.2 Dependent variables: portfolio recommendations

In this part of our data we  will describe the process of gathering output data, namely the
portfolio recommendations from each robo-advisor. Most importantly, we describe the creation
of   our   generic   investor   profiles   that   were   exploited   in   extracting   the   portfolio
recommendations.

2.1.2.1 Generic investors

To  compare advice provided by individual robo-advisors we created three generic investor
profiles that would differ from each other in terms of age, previous experience with investments
and, most importantly, risk-appetite. Namely,  “Conservative,” “Moderate” and “Aggressive”.
The differences between these profile characteristics are deemed to have significant effect on
the portfolio recommendations in terms of asset allocation in the literature on modern portfolio
theory such as Merton (1969) and Moreschi (2005). Our goal with these generic investors was
to extract portfolio recommendations that would differ from each generic investor and still be
comparable between advisers. Initially, we successfully managed to extract 123 recommended
portfolios, 41 adhering to each generic investor, 3 from each robo-advisor. In the end, only 105
of these were used because of zero-variance recommendations across investor types for six
robo-advisors in our sample.
       Previous research and the discussion  on financial literacy suggest that it might be
relevant to examine what type of advice uninformed investors are receiving since they are
assumed to lack the ability to assess the quality of their recommendations. Our generic investor
profiles are a way of  assessing what type of recommendations differently informed and risk-
averse investors are facing to nuance the data and contribute to the discussion on financial
literacy.

                                        18
Each   of   these   portfolio   recommendations        has   three   weights         where
                                                              ,

                                                               and where             .

The generic investor profiles have been assembled by using identical and in some cases similar
answers to risk-profile questionnaires across robo-advisers. The generic risk profile is therefore
the sum of all the answers to these questions. The answers we provided are therefore consistent
across the advisers, making it possible to compare the portfolio recommendations between
them for each investor. Even though the questionnaires differ by both the scope and scale of
questions asked, our profiles are both realistic and coherent (See Appendix A). The coherency
of these generic investors has also been in line with the language used by the robo-advisors
(Kaya, 2017). The industry is using similar generic investor types when they create portfolios,
and while there is no correct benchmark or true underlying asset allocation recommendation
for these portfolios we can still see clear patterns in the data with regards to investor style.
       An ANOVA test (see Table 6) gave us support that the robo-advisors are able to
accurately  separate  the  investor  types  and  on   average  give  them  different  portfolio
recommendations from one another with high levels of significance (           for all investor
styles).
                                Table 6: ANOVA Test result table

                                                         No FE
                                      No FE       FE          robust       FE robust
                                          b/se          b/se          b/se          b/se
 Conservative                            -0.509***     -0.509***     -0.509***     -0.509***
                                          (0.05)        (0.03)        (0.05)        (0.03)
 Moderate                               -0.214***     -0.214***     -0.214***     -0.214***
                                          (0.05)        (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.02)
 Intercept                             0.865***     0.241***     0.865***     0.241***
                                          (0.03)        (0.02)        (0.03)        (0.02)
  =
 𝑅                                       0.551         0.786         0.551         0.786
 * p<0.05, **         p<0.01,      ***    p<0.001

                                        19
Table  6.  Notes:  ANOVA  test  result  table.  Notes:  Column  1  is  an  OLS  regression  on  the  model

                                                                where        is    the    Equity    ratio,
                 and             are investor style dummies.    is the error term. Because of degrees of
freedom limitations our Aggressive investor style dummy variable cannot be included in the model but should be

interpreted as the     (Intercept). The third column runs the same model but with    being adjusted for robo-
advisory fixed effects. The equity ratio    is calculated as              for each firm across the three types of
investors. The second and fourth columns are robustness checks. This table shows that the variations in portfolio
recommendations across generic investor styles are highly statistically significant, meaning that we are sure our
sample of robo-advisors are treating the investors differently on  average. Otherwise we would either have
constructed very unintelligible investors or the robo-advisors would not make advice based on the investor (which
we need to assume that any advisor must). The robustness checks do not change the results. However, fixed effects

are boosting the     from 0.551 to 0.786 suggesting that some part of the variations can be explained by within
variations for the robo-advisors in our sample.

This means that our generic investor profiles are doing a good job at creating portfolio
recommendations that  are relevant  to our  analysis.  Namely recommendations that  are
significantly correlated to each type of investor. While this hints towards that investor style is
explaining a large part of cross-firm  recommendations this is not really explaining why some
robo-advisors are giving one generic investor one portfolio recommendation while another
robo-advisor   might   give   the   very   same   investor   a   completely   different   portfolio
recommendation.   The   proof   of   investor   style   having   a   significant   effect   on   the
recommendations is merely showing that our categories are relevant. The assumption that
investor style is affecting portfolio recommendation is fundamental to the purpose of this study.

2.1.2.2 Descriptives of portfolio recommendations

In the following we will provide the reader with descriptives on the portfolio recommendations
(the dependent variables).
       The result from the data extraction phase has provided us with an interesting dataset
that might shed some  light on the variation in the recommendations across firms and across
generic investor types. The initial analysis of data descriptives reveals that there are larger
standard deviations for conservative investors (see Table 7 and Figure 3).

                                        20
   Table 7:  Descriptives table for portfolio recommendations across asset classes and investor style

   Investor Style           Variable             Mean         Std. Dev.      Min.     Max.

     Aggressive           Rec. equity         .80184444       .18532568       0        1
                      Rec. fixed income       .13181667      .17357587       0        1
                          Rec. other          .06659167       .0866944        0       .35
    Conservative          Rec. equity         .32026667       .21754802       0      .837
                      Rec. fixed income       .54338889      .21963829       0        1
                          Rec. other          .13634167       .2183214        0        1
     Moderate            Rec. equity         .59698333       .17385758       0       .87
                      Rec. fixed income       .33591944      .17628185       0        1
                          Rec. other            .0674         .07313808       0      .275

Table 7. Descriptives table for portfolio recommendations across asset classes and investor style. We see that the
conservative investor is facing much higher standard deviations for all asset classes  compared to moderate and
aggressive investors.

                                        21
Figure 3. Boxplot of descriptives for portfolio recommendations across asset classes and investor style. Notice
the longer range of the boxes and between the “whiskers” on the conservative investor’s boxes  for fixed income
and equity asset classes. Stars mark the outliers in our sample.

This is especially true for portfolio recommendations towards equity and fixed income weights
after adjusting the data for outliers (Std. Dev. of 0.22 for conservative investors compared to
0.17 and 0.18 for aggressive and moderate investors respectively for fixed income and Std.
Dev. of 0.22 compared to 0.19 and 0.17 for equity, perhaps best illustrated in Figure 4 and 5.)

Figure 4. Scatter plot of equity recommendations across robo-advisors grouped by investor style.

                                        22
Figure 5. Scatter plot of fixed income recommendations across robo-advisors grouped by investor style.
While the recommended weights for other asset classes were quite stable when adjusted for
outliers  firms with id’s: 18, 28, 37 (see Figure 6.).

Figure 6. Scatter plot of other asset recommendations across robo-advisors grouped by investor style.

                                        23
The conservative investors are, however, still facing substantially higher variations in their
recommended  other asset classes weights compared to moderate and aggressive investors, as
we can see in Table 7.

2.1.3 Data preparation

Since most of the variation across generic investors (as shown in part 2.1.2.2) are coming from
equity and fixed income weights, while the weights for other asset classes group is relatively
constant we introduced a ratio variable:

 Where
        = the recommended percentage  of equity in a portfolio of only equity and fixed
 income.
                  = the recommended percentage of fixed income in a portfolio of only equity
 and fixed income.
 Formula 2.

We are using this ratio of measuring the weight of equity  in relation to the sum of fixed income
assets and equity assets in the entire portfolio in order to avoid the division by zero problem in
mathematics. This ratio is now only impossible to calculate for portfolios that carry a 1.0 weight
in other asset classes.

                                        24
Figure 7.  Scatter plot of equity ratio recommendations across robo-advisors grouped by investor style.

The use of the equity ratio does not change the fact that standard deviation is still substantially
higher for the conservative investor (see  Figure 7 and  Table 8). We have thus constructed the
dependent variable that will be used in our model for analysis.

3. Method

In this part,  we will briefly describe the background and context of the targeted robo-advisory
market. After, we will present our  method for explaining the cross-advisory variations in
portfolio recommendations. We will thereafter compare our method to the ideal experiment
and list the implications of the method’s deviations from the ideal scenario.

3.1 Background

We can see a paradigm shift in the pension system facing challenges with retirement savings
in the last decades. We have shifted from a time where pensions  were  provided from the
companies through defined-benefit retirement plans (meaning that the savings  was related to

                                        25
the income and how many years you had worked), to a time with defined-contribution savings
plans (meaning that the employees themselves  must  choose how to allocate the money and
hence the savings will depend on the employees’  decisions). In  other words, the responsibility
of pensions is now on the hands of the individual workers and not the companies (Lusardi and
Mitchell, 2013).
       Furthermore, investing could be said to be complex for a lot of people and over the
years the availability and types of investments has grown within the financial market. Besides
the need to understand the markets, the difficulty further lies within disputes such as self-
awareness about risk taking as well as tax implications of different types of investments (Fisch
et al., 2017). Many investors have a limited knowledge in financial literacy (Lusardi et al.,
2012), partly due to constrained financial experience but also due to an increased risk aversion
in relation to getting older. This limitation of knowledge in financial literacy is contributing to
an increased exposure to deprived financial decisions (Fisch et al, 2017). It can also be
perceived as there is a need for advice among a substantial part of the population taking part in
the financial markets. And for many decades investors have been given financial advice from
advisors in the field where they have provided investment strategies as well as asset and
portfolio management (Fisch et al., 2017).
       So why have robo advisers become more and more popular during the  past decade?
Throughout history, particularly during the last decades, technology has disrupted different
industries and contributed to both scalability and productivity. So, why would the financial
market be an exception? (Sorrentino, 2017). Only during  the last couple of  years,  the
technological environment has changed dramatically. Today people interact with each other
24/7, all around the globe and a lot of consumers are now comfortable getting financial advice
from advisors that don't necessarily have to be physical present. At the same time, in both
emerging and mature markets, the number of consumers that potentially  need  financial advice
is increasing rapidly, making it hard for institutions such as banks and asset management firms
to grow in the same pace in order to meet the demand (McKinsey & Company, 2015).
Furthermore, the development of digital solutions and technologies are reaching new heights
and technologies such as artificial intelligence and machine  learning are  making it possible for
services as robo advisors to develop even further (Guedim, 2017). Through interactions with
our phones, the customer experience has also become very important when deciding if and
where to move assets. We can also see that in many markets, regulators pay more attention to
management fees charged from the advisors as well as making sure that the financial advice

                                        26
keeps a good standard, thus improving the transparency in the market (McKinsey & Company,
2015).
       Also, in the recent years, exchange traded funds (ETFs) have become very popular as
an investment alternative. The usage of ETFs has also led to the opportunity to build transparent
and diversified portfolios for a relative low cost which in turn suits the robo advisory industry
well (KPMG, 2016).

3.2. Hypothesis development

As has been suggested in the presentation of the study’s dataset we have used several
hypothetical explanations for the cross-firm variations in portfolio recommendations. These
hypothetical explanations can be formulated in summary as  follows.

Cross-firm variations in portfolio recommendations can be explained by
   ●   type of investor,
   ●   country differences,
   ●   number of questions asked in the questionnaire,
   ●   number of portfolios and
   ●   weights toward the three different asset classes; equity,  fixed income and others.

Each of these hypotheses are plausible in its own right given the research on the field, covered
earlier in this report. By using the quantitative measurements in the dataset, we can by statistical
methods of ordinary least squares (OLS) regression and robust regression test our model.  The
model is presented in Formula 3.

                                        27
 Where:
        the ratio of equity to the equity and fixed income portfolio for investor    by robo-
 advisor  ,
               the county of origin indicator variables,
                   the       investor       style       indicator       variables       and
                                                                                                ,
                            the number of questions asked in the questionnaire,
                               the number of portfolios in the robo-advisor  i’s offering.

 Formula 3.

Since our analysis is sensitive to outliers given the relatively small number of total observations
we have decided to both run an OLS and then further test the results with robust regressions.
Robust regression works by giving observations with high residual values a small weight in the
explanations and therefore complements our OLS nicely even after we’ve dropped the most
obvious outliers  (Wooldridge, 2016).
        We will also run the Formula 3 model controlling for firm fixed effect on each investor
style in isolation to try the residual hypothesis of the existence of  an  investment philosophy
bias on the firm level which could explain cross-firm variations. We call this a residual
hypothesis as it is elusive and not directly captured by any of our independent variables, but
indirectly captured by what we cannot explain. In order to see if the fixed effect can explain
any of the residuals of our Formula 3 model we control for within fixed effects in our
regression.

                                        28
4. Analysis and findings

In this  section,  we will present the results from  our statistical methods on the dataset as well as
an analysis of these results in relation to our research question and the related literature.

4.1 Results

We have been aiming to try and explain the variations in cross-firm portfolio recommendations
and now it’s time to present the results of our regressions.

                     Table 9:  Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression.

                        M1        M2       M3        M4
                                  b/se           b/se         b/se           b/se

      Conservative              -0.509***     -0.509***    -0.509***     -0.509***
                                  (0.05)         (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)
      Moderate                 -0.214***     -0.214***    -0.214***     -0.214***
                                  (0.05)         (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.04)
      U.S.                                 0.016       0.042         0.044
                                                (0.05)       (0.05)         (0.05)
      U.K.                                   -0.112       -0.149**      -0.152**
                                                (0.06)       (0.05)         (0.05)
      Exposure to equity                                  0.004         -0.016
                                                             (0.14)         (0.14)
      Exposure to fixed income                            -0.526***     -0.583***
                                                             (0.14)         (0.14)
      Number of questions                                            0.004
                                                                            (0.00)
      Number of portfolios                                           0.001
                                                                            (0.00)
      Constant                 0.865***     0.881***    1.067***     1.051***
                                  (0.03)         (0.05)       (0.12)         (0.12)

               =
             𝑅                   0.551         0.586        0.665         0.674
      * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0,001

                                        29
Table 9.  Table of results from our Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions.  The OLS is based on the model

In  the first column,  we are controlling for investor style by using the               and

dummies. The               dummy could not be used because of degrees of freedom limitations leading to

perfect multicollinearity. Instead, the               is the Intercept in column 1. In column 2 we also control
for country of origination using the country dummy variables. Here as well, we have excluded Canada to avoid
perfect multicollinearity. In column 3 we are introducing the independent variables for the robo-advisor  i’s
exposure to equity and fixed income respectively in their underlying offering. Lastly, in column 4, we include the
variables for number of questions asked and number of portfolios in the robo-advisor  i’s offering.

From the OLS regression we found that robo-advisors with higher exposure to fixed income in
their underlying offerings are on average making lower equity allocation recommendations.
This is in line  with the economies of scale hypothesis. There also seem to be a significant
country effect for UK robo-advisors in line with the hypothesis that the country of origination
might explain some of the variation across firms. These results hold also for a robust regression
(see Table 10) even though the strongness in the effect from exposure to fixed income to be
less strongly significant.
       When running our models for each investor style (see Table 11) we get similar results.
They are less significant although, of course, the number of observation has also shrunken
down to 35 making it much harder to find statistical evidence for any hypothesis. For the
aggressive and moderate  investors,  we are able to explain more of the variations with statistical
significance. The fixed effect control (column 4 in Table 11) is increasing the explanatory
power for conservative investor recommendations from              to              while it
lowers the explanatory power for moderate and aggressive investor recommendations.
       We cannot however explain any of the variation within the conservative generic
investor subset of the data. This means that our model does not perform a very good job at
explaining why conservative investors are getting such high variations, while we  find  some
significant effect for the other investors for the same number of observations.

4.2 Analysis

Our results above are supporting the hypothesis that economies of scale from having an
expertise  in  fixed  income  products  is  having  an  effect  on  a  robo-advisor’s  portfolio
recommendation. The higher the underlying exposure towards fixed income, the higher the

                                        30
recommendation towards fixed income assets. This effect is harder to reject if we exclude the
conservative investors from the sample (p-values of < 0.001).
       The   fact   that   conservative   investors   are   receiving   such   a   large   variation   in
recommendations across the advisors one of the key finding in this thesis. But we are unable
to find any observable characteristics in the constitution of the robo-advisors that can account
for this high variation. This might be the result of our small sample size, but we cannot find
any trends that would suggest that the variation is coming from country effects  (where our
sample sizes are the smallest). Instead, we are looking at the literature on financial literacy and
the fact that the generic conservative investor in our experiment is sharing the characteristics
of a financially illiterate investor. This means that the preferences of the conservative investor
are not being treated as actual preferences but rather as lack of knowledge of investments. As
such, they are not taken into consideration to the same extent as the preferences of the generic
moderate and  aggressive investor respectively. The preferences of conservative investors are
likely to be at odds with what the theory on portfolio investments and personal finance suggests
which makes it harder for robo-advisors to be responsive to these. For this reason, conservative
investors are receiving recommendations more based on the robo-advisory firm’s investment
philosophy rather than on the actual preferences. We can illustrate this by using two theoretical
business models for robo-advisors,
   ●   The investment  philosophy bias model
   ●   The customer preferences model
In these models,  we assume that there are no economies of scale benefits for the robo-advisor
but that portfolio recommendations are only based on investment philosophy bias and customer
preferences in each respective model.

  The   investment   philosophy   bias   model  The customer preferences model process of
                                             portfolio recommendation
  process  of portfolio recommendation

  The robo-advisor has a set of portfolios,    ,  The robo-advisor is asking questions. As the
     ,     …     based on the robo-advisor’s  algorithm learns more about the investor, it
  investment philosophy. In the questionnaire  tailors   a   portfolio   that   is   based   on   the
  phase of the portfolio recommendation, the  preferences of  its customer  and portfolio
  robo-advisor   algorithm   is   guiding   each  theory.   In   the   end,   the   recommended
  investor towards any of the n predefined  portfolio will be generated in line with the

                                        31
  portfolios.  If  the   different  robo-advisors’  investor’s  preference  rather  than  on   any
  investment philosophies are consistent across  investment philosophy bias impact from the
  firms, then the standard deviations for each  robo-advisor.
  generic          investor’s          portfolio     This type of process was very rare in our
  recommendations will be small.               sample,   which   is   also   in   line   with   the
     This  means  that  robo-advisors  in  our  advisor’s number of portfolios.
  sample   are   more   consistent   in   their
  investment philosophies when it comes to
  recommendations    for    aggressive    and
  moderate   but   less   so   for   conservative
  investors.

33 out of 35 robo-advisors in our sample had quite a low number of portfolios (n  ranging from
3-25), meaning they were operating under model 1 rather than model 2. Since we cannot find
any explanation in the independent variables of the robo-advisors to explain why conservative
investors were facing high cross-firm variations in portfolio recommendations we believe that
firms operating under model 1 is a plausible explanation. This is also in line with Fein’s (2015)
criticism of robo-advisors not actually providing personal advice but rather matching the
investor “      an investment strategy based on asset allocation formulas recommended for
investors with similar preferences” (Fein, 2015, p. 12). This means that the recommended
portfolios for conservative investors or investors with similar preferences vary a great deal
across robo-advisors.
       Our fixed effect adjustments in the model boosted the     of our model with nearly 20%
for conservative investors (see Table 11) something that also supports investment philosophy
bias hypothesis. The fixed effect from each individual robo-advisor is a good proxy for
investment philosophy bias. However, this does not explain why the variations are so much
higher for conservative investors in comparison to other investor styles.
        The low level of tailoring portfolios is  in  line with the economies-of-scale hypothesis.
If the robo-advisor has fewer portfolios to handle,  ceteris paribus, they will have increasing
economies-of-scale as the assets under management increase. This is, however, assumed to be
part of the business model for robo-advisors and explains the nature of the service offered rather
than the cross-firm variations.

                                        32
       Also in favor of this hypothesis is that our approximating assumption suggests that
conservative investors are also financially illiterate. This means that it is harder for conservative
investors to determine and assess whether a certain portfolio recommendation is in line with
their preferences or not, which is also a possible conclusion do be drawn from previous research
(Anderson & Robinson, 2018). The same conservative investors are also less likely to make
cross-firm comparisons. Note that this thesis does not suggest that conservative investors are
receiving better or worse advice compared to moderate and aggressive ones. The literature
suggests that financially illiterate and conservative investors are generally taking too little risk
and are therefore missing out on the equity premium. We have not been looking at robo-
advisors’ cost and fee structures, so there is nothing in our sample discussing the possibility
that conservative investors are victims to fraudulent behavior on behalf of  these firms.
However, given Fein’s (2015) research that shows how clients in relation to robo-advisors are
themselves responsible by agreement for determining the quality of the investment advice they
are provided, it would be alarming if conservative investors are provided such different
recommendations with full responsibility but little or no knowledge or tools to assess these
recommendations. In this study, we have not analyzed the user agreements of the robo-advisors
in our sample and therefore we cannot confirm or reject this scenario.

5. Conclusions

In this part,  we draw conclusions from our experiment  and  make suggestions for further
research on the topic of cross-firm variations within the market of robo-advisors.

5.1 Conclusion

Our study has been able to show that while there  are  large consistencies in what type of
portfolio recommendations robo-advisors are giving to investors with moderate and aggressive
investment styles, investors with conservative investment styles are facing largely inconsistent
recommendations. Some of the variations between robo-advisors can be explained by the firm’s
exposure to fixed income assets in their underlying offering; the higher the exposure towards
fixed income assets the higher recommendation  towards this class of assets. This is in line with
our economies of scale hypothesis.
        Our results also point towards that robo-advisors originating from the United Kingdoms
are on average recommending 15.2% lower equity exposure in  their  portfolios compared to the

                                        33
whole sample with some statistical significance (          ). This is in line with the hypothesis
that countries have some fixed effects, because the firms adapt to their domestic market
customers and their preferences. We interpret this to suggest the prevalence of certain essential
beliefs or preferences in the UK market that is not as prevalent in the other markets for robo-
advisors.
       We   cannot   explain   why   conservative   investors   are   facing   such   inconsistent
recommendations but suggest that it might be due to inconsistencies in investment philosophy
bias across robo-advisors. Nearly all robo-advisors in our sample are making recommendations
by guiding investors towards  ex ante  allocated portfolios. And according to our hypothesis and
analysis we conclude that there is support that the portfolios that robo-advisors are guiding the
conservative investors towards are looking very differently across advisors because of
variations in investment philosophy. Apparently, robo-advisors’ investment philosophies are
more consistent when it comes to moderate and aggressive investors.
       Another plausible explanation is that since conservative investors could also be
classified as financially illiterate, and therefore unlikely to make cross-firm comparisons on
their own, make it easier for robo-advisors to “get away” with any advice. They are thus less
likely to make inconvenient adjustments to meet the customer preferences of conservative
investors.

5.2 Suggestions for further research

There are several suggestions for further research in this interesting and important field.  First,
using riskiness of asset types as a measurement of riskiness of portfolio rather than asset classes
will improve  the accuracy of the results in this study as discussed in our Methods. It is a
limitation in this paper to assume that the robo-advisors are using asset classes to adjust their
risk exposure while there is a possibility that they also adjust for risk within their asset classes.
We urge future research to re-run our experiment with other measurements for portfolio
recommendations to further explore the issues addressed in this thesis.
        Also, by qualitatively asking the designers of the robo-advisors future researchers might
be able to find out more on how the preferences of conservative investors are being treated.
Some research questions could be: Are these preferences being treated as a proxy for financial
illiteracy rather than actual preferences? What are  the social and ethical dimensions of treating
the most vulnerable investor group in such a way? Is it defensible to nudge financially illiterate
investors towards more equity?

                                        34
       Another   interesting   topic   would   be   to   calculate   and   compare   the   economic
consequences of following the recommendations of different robo-advisors: how skilled are
these advisors? What are the cost to the customer of getting advice from fixed income
specialized robo-advisors, or UK firms, for example?

6. References

6.1 Papers  published in periodicals

   ●   Anderson and Robinson. March 20, 2018. Who Feels the Nudge? Knowledge, Self-
       Awareness and Retirement Savings Decisions. Available at SSRN:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3021962.
   ●   Baker and Dellaert. February 16, 2018. Regulating Robo Advice Across the Financial
       Services Industry. Available at SSRN:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2932189.  Page 724.
   ●   Bhattacharya et al. April 2012. Is Unbiased Financial Advice to  Retail Investors
       Sufficient? Answers from a Large Field Study. Available at JStor:
       https://www.jstor.org/stable/41407854?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents.
   ●   Chalmers, J. and Reuter, J. September 15, 2015. “Is Conflicted Investment Advice
       Better than No Advice?” Available at SSRN:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1785833.
   ●   Dimmock and Kouwenberg. June 2010. Loss-Aversion and Household Portfolio
       Choice.    Journal    of    Empirical    Finance.    Available    at    ScienceDirect:
       https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927539809000930.
   ●   Fein. November 14, 2015. Robo-Advisors: A Closer Look. Available at SSRN:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Papers.cfm?abstract_id=2658701                     or
         http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2658701.
   ●   Fisch et al. July 11, 2015. The Knowledge Gap in Workplace Retirement Investing and
       the     Role     of     Professional     Advisors.     Available     at     SSRN:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2629464.

                                        35
   ●   Fisch  et  al.  August  2017.  The Economics  of  Complex Decision  Making:  The
       Emergence of the Robo Adviser.
   ●   Guiso and Sodini. April, 2012. Household Finance: An Emerging Field. Available at
      SSRN:  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2066307.
   ●   Lusardi and Mitchell. April 13, 2014. The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy:
       Theory         and         Evidence.         Available         at:         SSRN:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2243635.
   ●   Lusardi et al. February 2012. Financial Sophistication in the Older Population.
       Available at SSRN:  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2010395.
   ●   Merton. 1969. Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time
       Case. Available at EconPapers:
       https://econpapers.repec.org/article/tprrestat/v_3a51_3ay_3a1969_3ai_3a3_3ap_3a24
       7-57.htm.
   ●   Moreschi, R. W. February 2005. “An Analysis Of The Ability Of Individuals To
       Predict Their Own Risk Tolerance”.  Journal of Business & Economics Research.
   ●   Rickard Olsson. October, 2005. Portfolio management under transaction costs: Model
       development and Swedish evidence.
   ●   Robert C. Merton. Aug, 1969. Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The
       Continuous-Time Case Source: The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 51, No.
       3.    Pp.    247-257.    Published    by:    The    MIT    Press    Stable.    URL:
         http://www.jstor.org/stable/1926560.
   ●   Tertilt and Scholz. June 13, 2017. To Advise, or Not to Advise — How Robo-
       Advisors Evaluate the Risk Preferences of Private Investors. Available at SSRN:
       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2913178  or  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2913178
   ●   Van Roij et al. 2011. Financial literacy and stock market participation. Available at
       Sciencedirect:
         https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X11000717?via%3Dihub.

6.2 Working Papers

   ●   Berndt et al. June 15, 2017. Competition in the Financial Advisory Market: Robo
       versus Traditional Advisors.
   ●   Burke et al. February 2015. Impacts of Conflicts of Interest in the Financial Services
        Industry.

                                        36
6.3 Monographs

   ●   International Monetary Fund. Monetary and Capital Markets Department. September
        21, 2011. Global Financial Stability Report, Grappling with Crisis Legacies. Chapter 2,
       pp                              59-60.                              URL:
        https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2016/12/31/Global-Financial-
        Stability-Report-September-2011-Grappling-with-Crisis-Legacies-24745.
   ●   Mandell L, 2008. Financial Literacy of High School Students. In: Xiao J.J. (eds)
       Handbook of Consumer Finance  Research.  Springer, New York, NY.
   ●   Wooldridge. 2016. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, 6th Edition.
       Page 302.

6.4 Articles

   ●   CBInsights. April 21, 2017. A Wealth Tech World: Mapping Robo-Advisors Around
       the Globe.  URL:  https://www.cbinsights.com/research/robo-advisor-global-fintech-
       map/.
   ●   Guedim. October 5, 2017. 27 Robo Advisers That are Reshaping Personal Finance.
        URL:  https://edgylabs.com/27-robo-advisers-that-are-reshaping-personal-finance.
    ●   Kaya. August 10, 2017. Robo-advice  -  a true innovation in asset management (White
       Paper). From Deutsche Bank. URL:  https://www.dbresearch.com/PROD/RPS_EN-
       PROD/PROD0000000000449125/Robo-
      advice_%C2%96_a_true_innovation_in_asset_managemen.pdf.
   ●   Kyle. December  31, 2017. The Complete Guide to Canada´s Robo Advisors.  URL:
        https://youngandthrifty.ca/complete-guide-to-canadas-robo-advisors/.
   ●   Levitt. March 29, 2016. High-  vs. Low-Beta ETFs to Help Your Diversification.  URL:
        http://etfdb.com/portfolio-management/high-vs-low-beta-etfs-to-help-your-
        diversification/.
   ●   Robo Advising, Catching up and getting ahead (White paper). From KPMG. URL:
        https://home.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/07/Robo-Advising-Catching-
       Up-And-Getting-Ahead.pdf.
   ●   Sorrentino. July 28, 2017. Are Robo-Advisors the Wave of the Future? (White paper).
       From Global Financial Private Capital. URL:
        http://www.synergygroupinc.com/i/TOTW-3.pdf.
   ●   The Virtual Financial Advisor: Delivering Personalized Advice in the Digital Age
      (White paper). From McKinsey&Company. URL:
       https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/Financial%20Services/Our

                                        37
        %20Insights/The%20virtual%20financial%20advisor/The-virtual-financial-
       advisor.ashx.
    ●   Transparency Market Research. 2017. Robo-Advisors Market  -  Global Industry
       Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends, and Forecast 2017  -  2025.  URL:
        https://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/robo-advisors-market.html.

7. Appendices

7.1 Tables and figures

    Table 3. Asset classes. This table shows the asset  classes used as well as their sub-asset
                                     classes by name.

 Asset classes

 Equity               Fixed Income              Other

 Domestic equity       Company bonds            REIT (Real-estate investment trust)

 International equity    Government bonds          Cash / Savings account

 Emerging      market
 equity                                       Gold

 Canadian equity                               Commodities

 U.S. equity                                      Real estate

 Japanese equity                                 Income strategy

                                                   Derivatives

                                              Currency

                                                     Inflation hedge/protection

                                            Money market

Table 3.  Asset classes. This table shows the asset classes used as well as their sub-asset classes by name.

                                        38
Table 8. Descriptives table for the equity ratio variable (Formula 2) by investor style.

  Investor style    Variable          Mean         Std. Dev.     Min.    Max.

  Conservative     Equity ratio       .35557429    .22258461    0       .8479
  Moderate        Equity ratio       .65105714    .17177551    0       1
  Aggressive      Equity ratio       .86501714    .17477834    0       1

                          Table 10: Robust Regression

                     M1       M2       M3       M4
                             b/se          b/se          b/se          b/se

   Conservative              -0.509***    -0.509***    -0.509***    -0.509***
                             (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.04)
   Moderate                 -0.214***    -0.214***    -0.214***    -0.214***
                             (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.03)
  U.S.                               0.016        0.042        0.044
                                          (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)
   U.K.                                 -0.112**     -0.149***    -0.152**
                                          (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.05)
   Exposure to equity                                0.004        -0.016
                                                        (0.13)        (0.12)
   Exposure to fixed income                           -0.526**     -0.583**
                                                        (0.19)        (0.21)
  Number of questions                                        0.004
                                                                     (0.00)
  Number of portfolios                                         0.001
                                                                     (0.00)
  Constant                0.865***    0.881***    1.067***    1.051***
                             (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.11)        (0.12)

         =
        𝑅                   0.551        0.586        0.665        0.674
  * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0,001

                                    39
Table 10.  Table of results from our Robust regression.  The robust regression is based on the
model

In the first column,  we are controlling for investor style by using the               and
               dummies. The             dummy could not be used because of degrees of
freedom limitations leading to perfect multicollinearity. Instead, the               is the
Intercept in column 1. In column 2 we also control for country of origination using the  country
dummy variables. Here as well, we have excluded Canada to avoid perfect multicollinearity.
In column 3 we are introducing the independent variables for the robo-advisor  i’s exposure to
equity and fixed income respectively in their underlying offering. Lastly, in column 4, we
include the variables for number of questions asked and number of portfolios in the robo-
advisor  i’s offering. This robustness check deviates very little from the OLS regression,
indicating that outliers in our small sample does  not affect the overall results.

                                        40
41
Table 11.
The   regressions   are   using   four   different   models   for   each   investor   type   (
                                                          respectively).
Model 1:
Model2:

Model  3:

Fixed Effect  control column:

Where
  = Equity ratio recommendation of the total equity plus fixed income asset portfolio
               = Country of origin is United Kingdom
                = Country of origin is United States
             = The exposure towards equity in the underlying offering
            = The exposure towards fixed income in the underlying offering
              = The number of questions asked in the questionnaire
             = The number of portfolios offered
  = The error term
   = The demeaned equity ratio recommendation of the total equity plus fixed income asset
portfolio, calculated as              .

                                        42
7.2 Appendix A. Generic investor questionnaire answers

 Questions \ Investor Type                            Conservative             Moderate         Aggressive

 Age (birth date)                                                  50 (1968-01-01)     40 (1978-01-01)      30 (1988-01-01)

 Gender                                                      male            male             male

                                                               $50,000 (USD, CAD) /      $50,000 (USD,       $50,000 (USD,
 Annual Income
                                                                     €45,708    CAD) / €45,708     CAD) / €45,708

                                                               $5,000 (USD, CAD)) /       $5,000 (USD, $5,000 (USD, CAD))
 How much to invest now
                                                                          €4,570     CAD)) / €4,570            / €4,570

 Single/Partnership                                                 Single            Single            Single

                                                                                10% of monthly     10% of monthly
                                                               10% of monthly income
 Monthly Savings                                                                 income ($420,       income ($420,
                                                                        ($420, $5,040 yearly)
                                                                                                    $5,040 yearly)        $5,040 yearly)

 Age of Retirement (years until retirement)                             67 (17 years)       67 (27 years)        67 (37 years)

                                                                                            Moderate (always in         High (highest
 Risk-tolerance                                         Low (lowest possible risk)
                                                                                                           the middle)          possible risk)

 Years in retirement                                                17              17              17

 Investment goal/reason                                          Retirement        Retirement         Retirement

                                                                                 Yes/Some/Moderate
                                                                                                                          ly
                                                              No/None/Beginner or                           Yes/Good/A
 Previous Investment Experience                                                 experienced/Some
                                                                                      novice                      sophisticated investor
                                                                                                         stocks, funds or
                                                                                     ETFs

                                                     $3333 ($40,000 yearly)
 Desired Retirement Amount (monthly)                                          $713 (7,86%)      $1,340 (14,61%)
                                                 (2,19%)

                                                                                                  "I understand that
                                                                                                           it's an inherent part
 "When you hear "risk" related to your finances, what is the first   "I worry that I could be left                          "I think of the thrill
                                                                                   of the investing
 thought that comes to mind?"                                    with nothing."/Loss                                of investing."/Thrill
                                                                                                process."/Uncertaint
                                                                               y

 Have you ever experienced a 20% or more decline in the value
                                             No                 No            Yes
 of your investments in one year?

                                                                                          Sell some./Observe
                                                                                            the market and
                                                                                           consider changing
                                                         Sell everything./Change to                     Buy more./Add to
                                                                                          to more
 If you were ever to experience a 20% decline or more in the      more conservative                                my investment to
                                                                                             conservative
 value of your investments in one year, what would you do?      investments or withdraw my                     capitalize on the
                                                                                                   investments if the
                                                         money.                                      downturn.
                                                                                              market doesn't
                                                                                                begin to recover
                                                                                             soon.

 The global stock market is often volatile. If your entire
 investment portfolio lost 10% of its value in a month during a    Sell all of your investments   Sell some          Buy more
 market decline, what would you do?

                                                                                                                  I confidently make
 How would you describe your approach to making important     I try to avoid making         I reluctantly make
                                                                                                                       decisions and don't
 financial decisions?                                               decisions.                    decisions.
                                                                                                                  look back.

                                                                                                    -45% +60%, or -36%
                                                           -10% +15% or -11% +20%,  -25% +35%, or -
 Comfort zone of fluctuations (range)?                                                             +32%, or -20%
                                                       or -5% + 10%             25% +25%
                                                                                         +30%,

                                        43
                                                                                         I want to grow my   I want to maximize
                                                                                                portfolio at a steady  growth, with
                                                                I want to preserve my
Which statement best reflects your willingness to experience                                   pace over time and   increased risk in
                                                       wealth, even if it means not
market risk in return for potential growth of your portfolio?                                   am comfortable      exchange for the
                                                                  keeping pace with inflation.
                                                                                             with some market    potential of greater
                                                                                             swings.              gains.

                                                                                                                   Yes, I have savings
                                                                                             I may need to use
If you had a large, unexpected expense arise, are you able to      No, I'd need to use the                               other than this
                                                                                        some of the money,
cover it without touching this account?                           money in this account.                             account I can easily
                                                                                                            but not all.
                                                                                                                     access.

                                                                  I'd like someone to
                                                                                                         I'd like to create a     I'd like to match or
                                                         completely manage my
What are you looking for in a financial advisor?                                          diversified          beat the performance
                                                                     investments, so that I don't
                                                                                               investment portfolio  of the markets
                                                               have to

Children/Dependees?                           No                 No            No

When deciding how to invest your money, which do you care
                                                    Minimizing losses         Both equally       Maximizing gains
about more?

                                                                                             I somewhat agree: I
How do you feel about this statement: “Historically, the benefits                                                      I strongly agree: The
                                                                       I believe this to be true only  believe this to be
of investing have been worth the risks and I believe this will                                                            benefits of investing
                                                                 some of the time             true most of the
continue in the future.”                                                                                    are worth the risks.
                                                                                               time.

                                                                                                              Very comfortable:
                                                         Less comfortable: I value    Somewhat
                                                                                                                         I'm willing to accept
How comfortable are you with fluctuations in the value of the    stability and preservation of  comfortable: I
                                                                                                                         substantial
investments in this account?                                      capital over the potential for  prefer a balanced
                                                                                                                         fluctuations in hopes
                                                                higher returns.               approach.
                                                                                                                           of higher returns.

                                                                 I would consider converting  I would stay the
                                                                  some or all of the             course; I'm           I would invest more;
During any one-year period, what would you do if there were a
                                                                investments in this account   comfortable with     I see downturns in
meaningful decline in the value of the investments in this
                                                                to cash; downturns in the     occasional           the market as
account?
                                                              market make me             downturns in the     opportunities.
                                                             uncomfortable.              market.
                                                                                        I may need some of
                                                                     Yes, it is likely I will need                           No, I won't need the
                                                                                         the money invested
Is there a chance you might need the money invested in this      the money invested in this                         money invested in
                                                                                                     in this account to
account to cover large, unexpected expenses?                    account to cover unexpected                       this account for
                                                                                       cover unexpected
                                                             expenses.                                       unexpected expenses.
                                                                                         expenses.

                                                                                             I somewhat agree: I
                                                                    I disagree: I have fewer                             I agree: I have other
Tell us if you agree with this statement: “Based on my financial                               may have other
                                                                assets and less flexibility                          assets and flexibility
situation, I can weather market downturns and absorb losses                                     assets or flexibility
                                                                      with the goal of this                                  with the goal for this
without jeopardizing my goal for this account.”                                                 with the goal for
                                                               account.                                         account.
                                                                                                   this account.

                                                       Gain 3% a year, with        Gain 10% a year,    Gain 14% a year,
Which portfolio would make you most comfortable?
                                                               minimal risk                 with medium risk    with high risk

                                                                     If heads: win $10. If tails:     If heads: win $50. If  If heads: win $100. If
You are betting on a coin flip: which bet would you take?
                                                                       lose $0.                        tails: lose $20.        tails: lose $50.

Will you depend on this portfolio for a portion of your monthly
                                                no                  no             no
income?
Do you want your portfolio to be entirely comprised of socially
                                                no                  no             no
responsible companies?
Which of the following best describes the securities you have
                                                      not sure                 not sure           not sure
held in your portfolio?

                                                                                            I only rebalance my
How do you normally determine what to buy/sell in your         I have never bought or sold
                                                                                                 portfolio             I rely on my gut
portfolio?                                                          securities before
                                                                                                 periodically

What percentage of your current income will you need in
                                                  80% of income           80% of income     80% of income
retirement?

                                       44
Generally, I prefer investments with little or no fluctuation in
value, and I'm willing to accept the lower return associated with  Strongly agree            Somewhat agree     Strongly disagree
these investments.

During market declines, I tend to sell portions of my riskier
                                                    Strongly agree            Somewhat agree     Strongly disagree
assets and invest the money in safer assets.

How stable are your current and future income sources? My
current and future income sources (for example, salary, Social   Very unstable            Stable            Very stable
Security, pension) are:

How many months of income do you have in savings? (savings
                                                     1,2                    1,2              1,2
divided by monthly earnings)

Do you expect to make withdrawals (other than RMDs) before
the end of your investment time horizon (either a one-time
                                           No                No            No
withdrawal or consistent, periodic withdrawals of more than
50% of your portfolio value)?

educational level                                   bachelor                bachelor          bachelor

work field                                              finance (mid-level)          finance (mid-level)   finance (mid-level)

                                                                                              I want to build my   I want to build my
                                                                                           wealth moderately   wealth considerably,
                                                               I want to maintain my
                                                                                               and expect returns    i.e. multiply my
                                                                  wealth and protect against
                                                                                  above regular       investment over the
                                                                       inflation. For this, I am
Which of the following most closely describes your investment                                  interest rates. For     long run. For this I
                                                                         willing to bear single-digit
objectives?                                                                                     this I am willing to   am willing to accept
                                                                      fluctuations in the
                                                                                                  accept fluctuations   greater fluctuations
                                                           performance of my
                                                                                              in my portfolio       (over 20%) in the
                                                                       portfolio.
                                                                                                  value of around 10-  value of my
                                                                                 20%.              investment.
                                                                                   75% of monthly     75% of monthly
What is the amount of your regular monthly outgoings?        75% of monthly income
                                                                                income            income

For how long does your emergency cash reserve cover your
                                                  3 months               4 months         5 months
monthly expenditure?

How much cash might you need in the next 12 months?       10% or more                      5%  None

How much cash might you need in the next 5 years?          30% or more                      10%  None

THE REALITY OF THE MARKET IS THAT IT GOES UP                                          No short term drop
AND DOWN, AT WHAT LEVEL OF SHORT TERM LOSS   10% loss               15% loss          makes me
DO YOU BEGIN TO FEEL VERY UNCOMFORTABLE?                                             uncomfortable.

Which of the following words do you most associate with
                                                     loss                    uncertainty        excitement
investing money?
In the past, have you come to regret important financial
                                                  always                sometimes        never
decisions?
I prefer the certain returns of a deposit account to risky
                                                     strongly agree            no strong opinion    strongly disagree
investments

Over the next few years, do you expect your future earnings or
                                                     stay about the same        stay about the same   stay about the same
income to:

How secure are your current and future earnings or other
                                                      Fairly secure             Fairly secure       Fairly secure
income (e.g. salary, pension, interest)?

How important to your household budgets would any income                           make a useful      make a useful
                                                   make a useful contribution
from this investment be?                                                          contribution        contribution

                                                                                                    relatively small       relatively small
The amount you are proposing to invest, ignoring any value in    relatively small portion of
                                                                                           portion of my        portion of my
your own house, represents:                                   my savings
                                                                                         savings             savings

                                                                                                   Willing to take risks
How would your best friend describe you as a risk taker?       A real risk avoider.         after completing    A real gambler.
                                                                                             adequate research.

                                       45
                                                                              30% low, 40%      10% low, 40%
If you had to invest $50,000, which of the following investment  60% low, 30% medium,
                                                                                 medium, 30% high  medium, 50% high
choices would you find most appealing?                        10% high risk investments
                                                                                    risk investments     risk investments

You are on a TV game show and can choose one of the                                     50% chance at       5% chance at
                                                   $1,000 in cash
following, which one would you take?                                              winning $5,000.     winning $100,000

You have an opportunity to invest in a startup venture that has a
20% chance of success. If successful you could make 50 to 100                               Three months'
                                                      Nothing.                                  Six months' salary
times your investment. If unsuccessful your entire investment                             salary
would be gone. How much would you invest?
Do you agree with the following statement? "Even if I could get
high returns I would prefer not to invest my money in something Strongly agree.            Disagree.          Strongly disagree.
that might decline in value"

Where are you on your financial journey?                 Building my wealth        Building my wealth  Building my wealth

                                                                                                           Maximizing returns
                                                                                            Seeking greater      while accepting
                                                               Avoiding losses while
What best describes your investing goal?                                              returns while taking  potential large
                                                                  accepting lower returns.
                                                                                            on moderate risk.    account value
                                                                                                                            fluctuations.

What would you do if your portfolio decreased 20% during a     Move to less risky
                                                                             Do nothing.        Do nothing.
market decline, but you didn't need the money for 10 years?     investments immediately.

                                       46