   Empirical evidence of stock return predictability
          using macroeconomic variables

                                                                                                       *
                            Carl Ferm and Jonatan Gustafsson

                             Bachelor Thesis in Finance

                            Stockholm School of Economics

                                         May 14, 2018

                           ABSTRACT
We investigate whether macroeconomic variables can predict returns of the OMXS30 index in the short run, and if
an investor can generate abnormal profits from using the variables with significant predictive power. Granger causality
tests, along with a predictive OLS regression framework show that the first difference of the repo rate and the log
difference in exchange rates significantly Granger cause stock returns on the Swedish market. The findings confirm
that changes in the repo rate affect stock returns in line with the transmission mechanism effect of monetary policy
and supports that currency depreciation negatively affects future stock returns. We also show that an investor could
have generated abnormal returns using macroeconomic variables by deploying a regression based rolling window
trading strategy, that yielded statistically significant four-factor alpha between 1998-2008 (without considering
transaction costs) - although generating lower returns going forward. The strategy’s worsened performance is further
linked to the negative interest rate regime, creating difficulties to estimate its recent linear interdependency with stock
returns that is used to trade on - indicating that the effectiveness of the repo rate as a monetary policy tool affects
strategy returns.

KEYWORDS: Granger Causality, Predictive Regressions, Trading Strategies, Macroeconomic Variables, Repo Rate

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: We would like to kindly thank our supervisor Irina Zviadadze and Per-Olov Edlund for providing
valuable information and advice throughout the process.

*
 Kindly address correspondence to Jonatan Gustafsson (23596@student.hhs.se) or Carl Ferm (23553@student.hhs.se)
Table of content

1 Introduction 7

2 Literature review 7
    2.1 Macroeconomic variables and stock return predictability 4
    2.2 Investment strategies and stock return predictability 5

3 Description of data and variable selection 7
    3.1 Stock return data 7
    3.2 Macroeconomic data and variable selection 7
    3.3 Variable formatting 9
    3.4 Descriptive statistics of the data 11

4 Methodology 11
    4.1 The vector autoregressive model 11
    4.2 The Granger causality test 12
    4.3 Lag selection 13
    4.4 OLS regression framework 14
    4.5 The trading strategy 14
       4.5.1 Static regression trading strategies 15
       4.5.2 Dynamic regression trading strategies 16
    4.6 Evaluation of trading strategy results 17

5 Evaluation of model assumptions 19
    5.1 Test for stationarity and unit roots 19
    5.2 Heteroscedasticity 19
    5.3 Multicollinearity 19
    5.4 Autocorrelation of residuals 20
    5.5 Omitted variable bias 20
    5.6 Normally distributed residuals 20

6 Empirical findings 20
    6.1 Evidence of macroeconomic variable’s effect on stock returns 20
    6.2 Trading strategy results 22
       6.2.1 Trading strategy variable selection 22
        6.2.2 Characteristics of the different strategies 23
       6.2.3 Comparing the dynamic strategies’ performance over time 24
        6.2.4 Strategy returns under a negative interest rate regime 25
       6.2.5 Linking strategy returns to macroeconomic phenomena 26

7 Conclusion 26

8 Limitations and suggestions for further research 27

9 References 27

10 Appendix 32

                                                                                                1
1 Introduction

The stock market is considered a useful tool for mirroring the state of the economy, and prices should
reflect the present value of stock returns. Knowing that macroeconomic variables carry information about
the state of the economy, these variables would also in theory hold predictive power with respect to future
consumption and investment opportunities, which in turn would affect firms’ ability to generate future cash
flow. Over the last decades, several studies have tried to investigate the relationship between stock returns
and macroeconomic variables. Authors do, however, still not come to conform conclusions regarding
which macroeconomic variables that have significant predictive power over stock market returns. The
selection of time horizon, country, econometric models and choice of macroeconomic variables are just
some of the factors that play a decisive role in what conclusions that have been drawn in previous research,
with most papers focusing on U.S. data (e.g. Fama & French (1989), Geske & Roll (1983) and Campbell
(1987).
        Interestingly, Pesaran and Timmermann (1995) brought the topic of predictability one step further
and tested whether predictability could have been exploited by investors in the U.S. using a wide range of
financial and economic variables. Later, Marquering & Verbeek (2004) expanded the work and showed that
investors could have profited from active asset allocation trading strategies, however with decreasing returns
over time, also considering U.S. data. Furthermore, Rapach et al. (2005) studied international stock return
predictability using macroeconomic variables and suggested in their conclusions that a potential area for
future research would be to test whether an investor could have used one or more significant
macroeconomic variables to earn abnormal returns in real time - as opposed to only test for return
predictability. This highlights the relevance to elaborate on results of predictability in a way that is
specifically aimed at investors in terms of gains from such knowledge. Thus, previous empirical studies and
results have paved the way for further assessment of how macroeconomic factors can predict stock returns,
and to what extent this information can be exploited by an investor. To extend the previous research, we
consider Sweden, which is a small open economy that is less subject to extensive macroeconomic research.
Building on the papers of Marquering & Verbeek (2004) and Rapach et al, leads us to the following
questions that are to be examined:

   I. Do macroeconomic variables have predictive power with respect to stock returns in Sweden?
  II. Can an investor earn abnormal returns from using macroeconomic variables to predict stock returns in Sweden?

To answer the questions, we specifically investigate if certain macroeconomic variables can predict Swedish
stock index returns, and if the predictive ability can be exploited to generate abnormal returns by developing
trading strategies based on the initial findings. Our data comprises monthly measurements of price levels
of the Swedish stock index OMXS30 and macroeconomic factors, including the production value index,
the repo rate, inflation, the relative strength of the Swedish krona to other currencies, the slope of the yield
curve and money supply. The time period observed is 1998-2018.

                                                                                                2
        Initially, a vector autoregressive (VAR) framework is used to examine the individual relationships
between the macroeconomic variables at a given time lag and stock returns, where one lag represents one
month. The time lags to be investigated are chosen as suggested by the established Akaike and Schwartz
Bayesian information criteria. To be able to interpret the relationships in the VAR model, the Granger
causality test is used to test whether any of the variables Granger causes stock returns, i.e. if they have
significant predictive power. To complement the analysis, predictive multivariate OLS regressions between
future OMXS30 returns and macroeconomic variables will further validate their predictive ability in terms
of linear dependences. The outcome of the regressions enables examination and interpretation of the linear
relationship between the variables, also considering the direction of the effect of a given variable.
        The variables that significantly Granger cause stock returns, and also have a significant linear
relationship with future stock returns are selected for the trading strategies, with the aim to investigate if
investors can benefit from using these as predictors. To test for the robustness of a given macroeconomic
variable as a predictor, two dynamic and two static regression-based strategies are evaluated, where the beta
and intercept for the dynamic strategies are re-estimated each month as new information becomes available.
All strategies enter a long position in the index if positive returns are predicted in the future period(s) and
a short position if negative returns are predicted. The holding period of the strategies correspond to the
time lag indicated by the lag selection criteria, which the dependent variable in the regression is also based
on. Strategy returns are evaluated based on the extent to which they generate statistically significant and
thereby risk adjusted positive Carhart four-factor alpha over the studied period, complemented with mean-
variance oriented analysis using the Sharpe ratio.
        We find that the first difference in repo rate Granger causes stock returns at a 5% significance level
at 7 lags and 1 lag. Also, the change in exchange rate Granger causes the stock returns at a 5% significance
level at 7 lags. Heteroscedasticity-robust OLS regressions further confirm statistical causality for the repo
rate with respect to both a 1 and 7 month return horizon, for which the variable has a statistically significant
negative coefficient. The results are in line with previous findings and suggest that the first difference in
repo rate is an appropriate predictor of stock returns, which also is in accordance with the monetary
transmission effect, although our results only can confirm statistical significance. The findings on the log-
difference in exchange rate are consistent with previous findings in other countries, e.g. Mookerjee & Yu
(1997), indicating that depreciation of the currency could be interpreted as increased inflation expectations.
         When evaluating the trading strategy results, only the in-sample strategy generated abnormal
returns throughout the entire dataset, while no out-of-sample strategy (that would have been practically
feasible for an investor to execute in real time) did so. More specifically, the only alpha generated from a
realistically feasible trading strategy - using past information to predict and trade on future returns - was
generated by a rolling window strategy during the first half of the data sample. The strategy generated 9.16%
annualized alpha during that period, although underperforming the other strategies during the second half
of the sample. This provides evidence that it has been historically possible to generate risk-adjusted
abnormal returns using macroeconomic variables, when not considering transaction costs (which would

                                                                                                3
partly reduce the abnormal return), but that future abnormal return generation using macroeconomic
variables is limited.
        Furthermore, the general findings include that the rolling window strategy is outperforming the
expanding window strategy over time. In addition, it is seen to better predict returns in more volatile
periods, which is line with Pesaran & Timmermann (1995), who suggest that the predictability of excess
returns is larger at times when volatility is high. However, when the repo rate turns negative, the rolling
window strategy sharply underperforms other strategies. This indicates that the fixed linear relationship
between lagged repo rate changes and stock returns used in the static strategies better predict stock returns
when there is a negative interest rate regime, as opposed to the dynamic rolling window strategy that
constantly re-estimates the same relationship over a rolling 12 month period and fails to predict returns
when the monetary policy shift to negative rates. Further analysis suggests that the performance of the
rolling window trading strategy is affected by the effectiveness of the repo rate as a monetary policy tool,
forcing the repo rate to remain at extraordinary low levels due to its recent inability to stimulate inflation.
         The conclusions drawn from our findings might contribute with insights to policy makers in terms
of highlighting the impact of monetary policy decisions on stock returns, with respect to potential side
effects of using the repo rate as a monetary policy tool, given its significant impact on stock returns. Also,
we may provide investment managers with insight into methods of predicting stock market returns and
executing automated regression based trading strategies – a frequently discussed topic in the modern and
increasingly digitized economy. Lastly, the thesis also allows for evaluation of how the negative interest rate
environment potentially affects trading strategies.

2 Literature review

2.1 Macroeconomic variables and stock return predictability
Macroeconomic variables’ effect on stock returns has previously been studied individually, although
primarily in the U.S. This includes variables such as the inflation rate (e.g. Fama 1981 and Geske & Roll
1983), money supply (Hamburger & Kochin 1971), aggregate output (Balvers et al. 1990), interest rates
(Campbell 1987) and term spreads on bonds (e.g. Chen 2008 and Bauer 2018). Other papers have also
investigated other countries than the U.S., although less extensively. Furthermore, the early papers studying
the relationship between stock returns and macroeconomic variables has mainly focused on the
contemporaneous relationship, as opposed to a predictive. Since then, many papers have extended the
research to more explicitly explore predictive power and forecasting, predominantly so by using predictive
regression models and tests based on vector autoregressive models. For example, Rapach et al. (2005)
studied macroeconomic variables and stock return predictability across countries using a predictive
regression framework with out-of-sample tests based on Granger Causality, finding different results for
different economies, likely driven by country specific differences. In the Netherlands, the U.S. and Norway,
Rapach et al. found strong evidence of predictive ability using the inflation rate, while not being able to

                                                                                                4
draw conform conclusions for other considered industrial countries. However, a conclusion to bring from
the paper is that interest rates were the most consistent and reliable forecasting variables.
        Mookerjee & Yu (1997), on the other hand, found that money supply and exchange rates have an
impact on future stock returns in Singapore by using the techniques of cointegration and causality together
with forecasting equations in the long run as well as the short run. Tripathy (2011) also investigated this
certain topic and found that changes in exchange rate and interest rate significantly influence the Indian
stock market by using an Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) time series process and
Granger causality tests. Recently, Gupta & Mampho (2013) examined both in and out-of-sample
predictability of South African stock returns using macroeconomic variables, and found that interest rates
and money supply show short term predictive ability, employing a predictive regression framework for in-
sample and MSE-F and the ENC-NEW test statistics for out-of-sample predictability.
        Although many papers have been able to find significant relationships between macroeconomic
variables and stock returns, there are, however, also papers concluding that the relationship between certain
markets and macroeconomic factors is not always definite. For example, Hamburger & Kochin (1971) came
to the conclusion that even if changes in monetary growth seem to affect the stock market, a long-term
sustainable relationship is unclear. Findings like this open up for further investigation under different
macroeconomic conditions and/or in different markets. This was specifically mentioned by e.g. Ferreira &
Santa Clara (2011) who predicted stock returns using financial metrics. They concluded that “...the
predictability of stock market returns is therefore still an open question”.
        Although there is lack of focus on smaller open economies, Gjerde & Saettem (1999) focused on
the Norwegian market and causal relations between stock returns and macroeconomic variables. They
found that real interest rate plays a major role in the Norwegian economy. In that paper, it is also said that
“a certain degree of inefficiency seems to be present in the sense that stock returns respond positively and
delayed to changes in industrial production”. Gjerde & Saettem further suggest that similar studies using a
VAR framework should be applied on other small open economies, suggesting Sweden as a suitable
candidate given its differences in industry structure compared to Norway.
        Lastly, the Swedish market has previously been studied by Ljungstedt (2015), who specifically
considers macroeconomic variables impact on the stock market. He finds statistically significant long-term
relationships between several macro variables and the stock market using cointegration analysis, including
positive long-run relations between inflation, the 10 year Swedish government bond, the SEK/USD
exchange rate and the stock market. Therefore, analysis of the Swedish market using a combination of other
methods for identifying predictive power remains undone and might provide new insights to the previous
research on smaller open economies.

2.2 Investment strategies and stock return predictability
The question of whether macroeconomic variables can predict stock returns naturally leads in to the
question whether an investor can gain from such knowledge by earning abnormal returns. This topic was

                                                                                                5
particularly addressed by Rapach et al. (2005) in their conclusions, as a suggestion for future research -
questioning whether an investor in real time could have used one or more macro variables to earn extra-
normal profits, and to examine whether some variables perform significantly better if one allows for time-
varying effects of macro variables on stock returns. This highlights the importance to assess results of
forecasting results in a way that is presentable for investors in terms of highlighting how they can increase
their utility based on the information.
       Pesaran & Timmermann (1995) examined predictability of U.S. stock returns and whether
predictability could have been exploited by investors in excess of a buy and hold strategy in the market
index, by using recursively estimated regressions over the period 1960-1992. They found that predictive
power of various economic variables over stock returns varies over time and that it tends to vary with
volatility. Also, they find that it appears to be decreasing strategy returns over time, which is consistent with
incomplete learning in the aftermath of a large shock to the economy or alternatively that the predictability
of excess returns is reflecting time-varying risk premia.
        Marquering & Verbeek (2004) builds on the research of Pesaran & Timmermann, and evaluate
different out-of-sample trading strategies on the S&P 500 index using monthly data over the period 1970-
2001, with trading rules based on coefficients from lagged regressions on financial and macroeconomic
variables (price to earnings ratio, dividend yield, inflation, industrial production, monetary growth,
commercial paper-Treasury yield and the 12 month Treasury bill). They also find that predictability of
returns is higher when volatility is high, and that asset allocation based active trading strategies outperform
static strategies in terms of Jensen’s alpha, Sharpe ratios and the Treynor-Mazuy test. They also suggest that
the profitability of the strategy was higher in the past, and that decreasing levels of predictability are
consistent with “learning in the marketplace” (Pesaran & Timmermann 1995), but may also reflect that
there is no stable relationship between asset returns and forecasting variables over time. Furthermore,
Narayan et al. (2014) provide evidence of in-sample predictability of stock returns when examining a range
of macroeconomic and institutional factors. They used a multivariate predictive regression framework for
which coefficients of the model are re-estimated each month when new information becomes available.
Their results show that investors could profit substantially from this by using static and dynamic trading
strategies based on these factors, estimating returns using a portfolio that purely bases investment decisions
on information from their predictive regression model.
        Our thesis builds on the work of Marquering & Verbeek (2004) and Rapach et al. (2005) by
extending previously used methods to a new economy and explore both stock return predictability and
combining it with a pragmatically oriented investor utility based framework in terms of abnormal return
generation by applying a framework that is similar to what has previously been used internationally and
extending the research to a small open economy, that being Sweden. More specifically, we consider the
suggestions of Rapach et al. to consider an investors’ possibilities to generate abnormal profits based on
analysis of macroeconomic variables’ predictive power, by employing an investor based framework (as
suggested by Marquering & Verbeek) but using different methods to evaluate the possibilities for an

                                                                                                6
investor to generate abnormal returns. By doing this, we hope to contribute to the existent research both
in terms of predictive power with respect to macroeconomic variables as well as in how they specifically
can be applied to generate risk adjusted returns using regression based trading strategies in Sweden, which
also allows for evaluation of how the negative interest rate environment potentially affects trading strategies.

3 Description of data and variable selection

3.1 Stock return data
Stock return is used as a dependent variable when investigating whether a macroeconomic variable has
return predictability, and the data has been collected from Thomson Reuters Eikon. The change in the
Swedish OMXS30 index is used as proxy for stock returns, since it has easily accessible historical data and
includes many of the largest publicly traded companies, which likely are exposed to effects of
macroeconomic factors. More precisely, the OMXS30 index comprises a value weighted portfolio of the
30 most traded companies on the Swedish stock exchange. By choosing an index which only includes the
most traded companies, being frequently followed by equity analysts and very liquid, we optimize the
selection with regards to investigating stocks that are correctly priced based on all available information.

3.2 Macroeconomic data and variable selection
All macroeconomic data has been collected from Sveriges Riksbank, Statistics Sweden and Thomson
Reuters Eikon. The selection of variables is mainly based on what has been found in previous international
research of macroeconomic variables’ predictive power with respect to stock returns, and variables are
selected on an individual basis. Thereby, we aim to evaluate traditional macroeconomic variables that
preferably are uncorrelated, with the aim to take into account a broad spectra of potential effects
considering only a few variables. The variables selected are the repo rate, inflation, exchange rate, money supply,
yield curve slope and aggregate output. In the following body of text, arguments for the variable selection are
presented - supporting our choices and each variable’s importance in explaining stock returns.
         Campbell (1987) mentions that short-term interest rates have tended to be negatively correlated
with stock returns in the U.S. The relationship between interest rates and stock price development is further
confirmed in several papers, including Alam & Uddin (2009). Therefore, we use the Swedish repo rate since
it is strongly correlated with market interest rates and is set directly by the central bank. The repo rate
further affects asset prices via the transmission mechanism of monetary policy (European Central Bank
2018), which has a positive relationship with market rates and thereby directly affects discount rates for
financial assets. Also, it indirectly affects stock returns via increasing borrowing costs of financial
institutions, effects of future consumption and firm investment decisions in the economy
(Finansdepartementet 2014).
        The first difference of the repo rate is chosen to represent this macroeconomic factor, as opposed
to using the variable without considering change. The reason for that is both to have consistency in the

                                                                                                7
model and to get more comparable results, since all other variables in the model are based on change data.
Also, formatting by logarithmic difference is not appropriate given its small values measured in this dataset,
overstating the percentage change, and given that the variable is already stationary since it is not a cumulative
index such as e.g. OMXS30. The data considering the repo rate comprises historical values on a monthly
basis which are collected from the Swedish Riksbank’s webpage.
         We will also use the change in the slope of the yield curve (i.e. the difference between a long and
short maturity government bond) as a factor used for prediction of stock returns, since it has been proven
to have explanatory power of the stock market in, for example, the U.S. (Chen 2008). Wide spreads between
short-term and long-term bonds lead to an upward sloping yield curve, which can indicate healthy economic
prospects - most likely faster growth and inflation in the future. On the other hand, narrower spreads lead
to a flatter or even negatively sloped yield curve, which can indicate poor economic prospects which likely
implies decreased growth and inflation. The term spread predictability over stock returns was further
confirmed by Bauer (2018), who defined the variable as the difference between U.S. 10 year and 1 year
government bonds. However, given that Sweden does not issue 1 year government bonds, but only 2 year
maturity bonds and longer, we will define the spread as the difference between the 10 year and the 2 year
government bond.
        Another macroeconomic variable that has been proved to have predictive power regarding stock
returns is aggregate output. For example, Balvers (1990) proves this relationship to be positive and
significant. A widely used definition of aggregate output for a country is Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
However, the GDP of Sweden is only available on a quarterly basis, and since monthly data will be used
throughout the study, a proxy has to be used instead. A proven output factor that has been investigated in
several papers is industrial production, which is used in Balvers (1990). Due to the relatively poor availability
of monthly output data regarding industrial production, and given the cyclical characteristics of the
construction industry, growth in the Production Value Index (PVI) for the construction industry will instead
be used as a proxy for GDP growth. It is assumed to have a positive relationship with stock returns since
it can be seen as an indicator of how the economy is performing. Furthermore, this variable may inherently
have more predictive power for the stock market compared to GDP given the construction industry’s
cyclical characteristics.
        Inflation is another factor that has been frequently investigated regarding its capabilities to
predictive stock returns, and previous research has concluded that it has significant predictive power. Based
on the results from e.g. Fama (1981) and Gupta & Mampho (2013), inflation is found to have a strong
negative correlation with future stock returns in the U.S. and South Africa respectively. Based on these
findings, amongst others, high inflation is assumed to indirectly increase the discount rate of stocks, thereby
showing an inverse relationship. When inflation increases, purchasing power declines, and each unit of
currency can buy fewer goods and services. For investors interested in income-generating stocks, or stocks
that pay dividends, the impact of high inflation makes these stocks less attractive than during low inflation,
since dividends tend to not keep up with inflation levels.

                                                                                                8
        Gupta & Mampho (2013) and Mookerje & Yu (1997) investigated which macroeconomic variables
that affect South Africa’s and Singapore’s stock markets respectively. Both papers found that money supply
has predictive power. The effect of money supply has been shown to positively impact growth rates of
dividends, and negatively impact the discount rate and risk premium, e.g. documented by Homa and Jaffee
(1971). Thereby, we will include money supply as an independent variable in this study as well. We have
defined money supply as M3 in Sweden, since that is the broadest measure, including additional
components mainly relatable to financial institutions and larger corporations.
        Since Sweden and its stock market is heavily dependent on exports, the exchange rate is of high
importance for company and stock performance. This idea is supported by findings from e.g. Tripathy
(2011) who founds that the exchange rate significantly influences stock market performance by affecting
companies’ overseas performance. Therefore, the Swedish central bank’s Total Competitiveness Weight-
index (TCW) is selected to study the change in the value of the Swedish Krona over time. More specifically,
the TCW-index weights different bilateral exchange rates to create an effective (or average) exchange rate.
It is a geometric index and its weights are based on the average aggregate flows of processed goods for 21
countries. A higher value in the index means that the krona has depreciated and a lower value means that
the krona has appreciated.

3.3 Variable formatting
Given that time series data is analysed, several potential problems emerge, including heteroscedasticity,
autocorrelation and stationarity. Therefore, the independent macro variables are formatted by considering
the monthly percentage change, except for the variables already presented in percentage when collected.
The latter are only transformed by considering the first difference, i.e. subtracting the previous period’s
value from the current period’s value. The data is further transformed to have a more linear development
by logarithmic transformation of some of the variables’ change. This logarithmic transformation is useful
for smoothening of the changes and tailor the variables to better suit linear regressions of the data -
increasing their linear characteristics and thereby the explanatory power. Finally, all variables are expressed
in percentage-form, as opposed to decimal-form, hence the multiplication by 100.
       For the dependent variable, the monthly change in closing prices of the OMXS30 stock index
obtained from Thomson Reuters Eikon, Return, is observed and transformed by dividing the index value in
period 𝑡 by the index value in period 𝑡 − 1. The change is logarithmically transformed to create a more
linear data set, and multiplied by 100 to obtain the percentage change. Going forward, new return variables
using different time lags, ReturnFW(j), will be defined where j is the lags selected. This formatting is further
elaborated on in the methodology. However, the calculation of the Return variable can be described as
presented in the following equation:

                                                         𝑂𝑀𝑋𝑆30𝑡
                               𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛 (            ) ⋅ 100
                                                 𝑂𝑀𝑋𝑆30𝑡−1

                                                                                                9
The repo rate is collected from the Riksbank, and the dRepo variable is the nominal change between monthly
time periods. Thus, dRepo is calculated as follows:

                                𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡 = (𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡 − 𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡−1) ⋅ 100

The exchange rate variable used, dTCW, is obtained from the TCW index available at the Riksbank website.
The logarithmic percentage change of the TCW index between two following months is calculated as
described in the equation below:

                                                                                𝑇𝐶𝑊𝑡
                                  𝑑𝑇𝐶𝑊𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛 (        ) ⋅ 100
                                                       𝑇𝐶𝑊𝑡−1

The logarithmically transformed difference in consumer price index, Inflation, comprises all items for
Sweden. The underlying data is collected from Thomson Reuters Eikon, and Inflation is calculated as follows:

                                                                                                      𝐶𝑃𝐼𝑡
                                 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛 (       ) ⋅ 100
                                                              𝐶𝑃𝐼𝑡−1

The change in the slope of the yield curve, dSlope, is calculated as the nominal difference between the
Swedish 10 year and 2 year government bonds (GVB) in period 𝑡 and period 𝑡 − 1. The difference is
presented in percentage, thereby being multiplied by 100. Data is collected from the Riksbank. The variable
is calculated as follows:

                                          10𝑌         2𝑌           10𝑌         2𝑌
                  𝑑𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡 = ((𝐺𝑉𝐵𝑡   − 𝐺𝑉𝐵𝑡  ) − (𝐺𝑉𝐵𝑡−1 − 𝐺𝑉𝐵𝑡−1)) ⋅ 100

Money supply is defined as the M3 amount as mentioned above. This dataset is collected from the Thomson
Reuters Eikon database. The growth in money supply is logarithmically transformed, creating gMS, and
calculated in the following way:

                                                           𝑀3
                                                                                 𝑀𝑆𝑡
                                   𝑔𝑀𝑆𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛 (   𝑀3 ) ⋅ 100
                                                        𝑀𝑆𝑡−1

The production value index (PVI) growth, gPVI, is collected from Statistics Sweden and is calculated in
accordance with the equation below:

                                                                                                𝑃𝑉𝐼𝑡
                                     𝑔𝑃𝑉𝐼𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛 (       ) ⋅ 100
                                                           𝑃𝑉𝐼𝑡−1

                                                                                               10
3.4 Descriptive statistics of the data

                                        TABLE 3.1

                          DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE SELECTED VARIABLES

                    Descriptive statistics of the dependent variable Return and the independent macroeconomic variables that are to be
                                                                              investigated
                    Obs. Mean Std.Dev Min Max
     Return 239 0.327 5.713 -18.466 16.178
     dRepo 239 -0.020 0.153 -1.105 0.357
    Inflation 239 0.098 0.407 -1.352 1.021
      gPVI 238 0.228 12.371 -46.954 41.837
     dTCW 239 0.042 1.345 -5.797 4.544
      gMS 239 0.576 1.334 -3.446 5.183
     dSlope 239 0.003 0.143 -0.634 0.531
                      Note: All values are presented in percentage.

4 Methodology

4.1 The vector autoregressive model
Using a vector autoregressive (VAR) model enables the capturing of linear dependencies between multiple
time series and at different lags. This is obtained by describing the evolution of a variable as a linear function
of its own lagged values, other variables’ lagged values and an error term. The model allows for multivariate
time series, which is the case in the investigation regarding the relationship between different
macroeconomic factors at different lags and stock returns. Furthermore, it is particularly useful for
describing the dynamic behaviour of economic and financial time series as well as for forecasting, according
to e.g. Zivot & Wang (2006).
       The VAR model thereby provides us with the linear relationship between one of the n variables,
independent as well as dependent, and its own lagged values as well as the other variables’ lagged values at
all lags up until the maximum lag 𝑗. All variables are arranged into a single (n x 1) vector 𝑦𝑡, from which the
lagged macroeconomic variables’ ability to forecast stock market returns can be investigated.

In its unrestricted form, the VAR(j) model is specified as follows:

                                                                                                                      𝑗
                                    𝑦𝑡 = 𝛼0 + ∑ 𝐴𝑖𝑦𝑡−𝑖 + 𝜀𝑡
                                                       𝑖=1

The model comprises the following variables, where

                                                                                               11
𝛼0 is the intercept term
𝐴𝑖 is an (n x n) matrix of unknown coefficients
𝑗 is the number of lags
𝜀𝑡 is an error term with zero mean and no serial correlation

The vector autoregression is, as earlier mentioned, conducted to investigate the linear interdependencies
between, and dynamics of, lagged values of the macroeconomic variables and OMXS30 returns over time.
Since the VAR compares the variables individually, it is not necessary to specify dependent and independent
variables. However, this model cannot be used to adequately interpret the relationship between multiple
variables. Therefore, a Granger causality test will be the main test for investigating macroeconomic
variables’ predictive power for stock returns. It is commonly used within the research area of predictability
as it structurally summarizes and analyzes the VAR model. Since the VAR model provides a natural
framework of all variables’ linear interdependencies, it enables the Granger causality test to investigate
whether any of the macroeconomic variables have predictive ability over stock returns at a certain lag.
Thereby, performing the VAR is necessary for conducting Granger causality tests, although not being the
optimal test to interpret results from.

4.2 The Granger causality test
The Granger causality test is a statistical test that is useful for testing whether one time series is useful in
forecasting another. This characteristic makes the test suitable for empirical investigations regarding
statistical cause-effect relationships, i.e. whether a time series’ values precede another time series’ values,
thus making it suitable for this study. As mentioned previously, the test structurally summarizes properties
of the VAR model. If values of 𝑋 provides statistically significant information about future values of 𝑌, 𝑋
is said to Granger cause 𝑌. The following fundamental principles of causality as described by Granger (1969,
1980) as:

   I. The effect does not precede its cause in time
  II. The causal series contains unique information about the series being caused that is not available
        otherwise

Given these assumptions about causality, the following proposition is made to test the following hypothesis
for identification of a causal effect of 𝑋 on 𝑌:

                         𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑌𝑡+1 ∈ 𝐴 | Ω𝑡) ≠ 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑌𝑡+1 ∈ 𝐴 | Ω𝑡 − 𝑋𝑡)

Where

                                                                                               12
A is an arbitrary non-empty set
𝑌 & 𝑋 are two random variables in the universe
Ω𝑡 denotes all information available in the entire universe at time t
Ω𝑡 − 𝑋𝑡 denotes all information available in the entire universe at time 𝑡 when 𝑋 is excluded

If the above hypothesis is accepted, 𝑋 is said to Granger cause 𝑌. The test investigates whether any of the
macroeconomic factors used in the VAR model, as well as throughout this paper, significantly add value to
predict future stock returns compared to only using lagged stock returns for prediction as the variable
evolves. That is, if past values of 𝑋(back until time 𝑡 − 𝑗) at time 𝑡 contains unique information that
increases the predictability of 𝑌𝑡+1, 𝑋 is said to granger cause 𝑌. If the null hypothesis that no explanatory
power is added by considering the additional time series is rejected, implying that the alternative hypothesis
is accepted and that the time series thereby add predictive power, i.e. variable 𝑋 Granger causes 𝑌.

4.3 Lag selection
The VAR model and Granger causality tests are sensitive to the number of lags (e.g. Thornton and Batten
1985), therefore, the lag selection is of high importance to avoid misleading statistical evidence when testing
for Granger causality. In previous papers, both the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and the Schwarz’s
Bayesian Information Criterion (SBIC) are frequently used. The criteria are defined as the equations shown
below, where LL is the log likelihood for a VAR(j), T is the number of observations, 𝑡𝑗 is the number of
estimated parameters when considering j lags.

                                                                            𝐿𝐿      2𝑡𝑗
                               𝐴𝐼𝐶 = −2 (  ) +
                                                            𝑇       𝑇
                                                              𝐿𝐿     𝑙𝑛(𝑇)
                               𝑆𝐵𝐼𝐶 = −2 (  ) +      𝑡𝑗
                                                      𝑇        𝑇

When using these criteria, the lag with the lowest AIC or SBIC value is the best fitting selection of lags
according to each model. The AIC is often less penalising (i.e. increasing the score with a lower amount)
when it comes to including additional lags to fit an optimal explanatory model for the data, often suggesting
a higher number of lags as the optimal selection for creating a “true” model. This is particularly important
when having a fair amount of observations because of the replacement of 2 in the penalizing factor of AIC
with ln(T) in the SBIC, giving the criterion a higher value when increasing the number of lags for the SBIC
relative to the AIC.

The AIC criterion has been shown by Shibata (1976) to balance well between the problems of generating
biased estimates due to too few lags included and increased complexity due to too many lags, thereby having
too many regressors included. Shibata (1976) also mentions that when the correct number of lags is unclear,

                                                                                               13
thus being hard to decide, the consistency of a model selection criterion is not as important - opening up
for the usage of the AIC. On the other hand, it is sometimes preferred to use the most parsimonious model,
i.e. the model with the lowest number of lags, given that all models specified are correct. When it comes to
taking this issue into consideration, the SBIC is often preferred as it penalizes additional lags to a higher
extent compared to AIC. Thus, it however requires that the relationship fits relatively well to a simple model
using a small amount of parameters.

According to Kuha (2004), both criteria are useful for finding a correct model. He further mentions that
AIC is a popular criteria within econometrics. To be able to come up with a conclusion and results based
on a solid foundation, suggestions from both the popular, yet sometimes overfitting, AIC and the more
prudent SBIC will be used to find the optimal number of lags according to each criteria.

4.4 OLS regression framework
The Granger causality test is primarily used to find which variables that cause stock returns. However, to
estimate the direction and magnitude of macroeconomic variables’ ability to predict stock returns,
multivariate predictive OLS regressions are conducted for stock returns 𝑟 between time 𝑡 and 𝑡 + 𝑗 and
the macroeconomic variables at time 𝑡, to further assess the predictive ability over the time horizons
suggested by the AIC and SBIC. New variables thereby have to be defined, given the indication of the lag
selection criteria, to be able to explore the predictability of stock returns over the different horizons. The
new return variable(s) will be defined as follows:

                                                                𝑂𝑀𝑋𝑆30𝑡+𝑗
                          𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝐹𝑊(𝑗) = 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 = 𝑙𝑛 (             ) ⋅ 100
                                                                  𝑂𝑀𝑋𝑆30𝑡

The predictive multivariate regressions are undertaken in the following way:

 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜 ⋅ 𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑡 + 𝛽𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⋅ 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡 + 𝛽𝑔𝑃𝑉𝐼 ⋅ 𝑔𝑃𝑉𝐼𝑡 + 𝛽𝑔𝑃𝑉𝐼 ⋅ 𝑔𝑃𝑉𝐼𝑡 + 𝛽𝑑𝑇𝐶𝑊
                  ⋅ 𝑑𝑇𝐶𝑊𝑡 + 𝛽𝑔𝑀𝑆 ⋅ 𝑔𝑀𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽𝑑𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒 ⋅ 𝑑𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

The beta coefficients generated in the predictive regressions are used to investigate which variables that
significantly contributes to the estimated linear relationship between future stock returns and the
macroeconomic variables. These coefficients will further indicate whether each variable has a negative or
positive effect on future stock returns, and to what extent a change in a certain variable affects returns.

4.5 The trading strategy
To evaluate to what extent an investor can earn abnormal risk adjusted returns based on predictions of
stock returns, we use trading strategies based on macroeconomic variables. The variables used in the trading

                                                                                               14
strategy will be the ones that both Granger cause stock returns and show evidence of a statistically
significant coefficient in the OLS regression. The actual trading strategy is based on a bivariate regression
framework between stock returns and lagged values of the macroeconomic variables on a stand-alone basis
- generating a 𝑏0 and 𝑏1 that explain their interdependencies. This method enables the prediction of stock
returns by creating a linear function which uses the intercept and beta from the regression, and the selected
macroeconomic factor as independent variable. Depending on if the predictive function predicts a positive
or negative return, a long or short position respectively is entered in period t and held until period t+j. More
specifically, the separate trading strategies are set up based on the following rules:

                     Long position in period t until t+j if: 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1 ⋅ 𝑥𝑡 > 0
                     Short position in period t until t+j if: 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1 ⋅ 𝑥𝑡 < 0
Where:
𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 is the stock returns between period t and t+j
𝑏0 is the intercept in a lagged regression with j lags
𝑏1 is the beta value in a lagged regression with j lags
𝑥𝑡 is a statistically significant macro variable in time period t.

The return is realized in period t+j, that is a period in the future with respect to j lags. Excess returns from
the different trading strategies are then regressed against the Carhart four factors to identify potential pricing
errors and assess if an investor could have generated abnormal profits using trading rules based on the
statistical tests. To test the robustness of the macroeconomic variable as a predictor, two different types of
trading strategies are tested: static and dynamic.

4.5.1 Static regression trading strategies

The static trading strategies are conducted in two ways; in-sample and out-of-sample. In general, in-sample
tests imply that the regression which generates the 𝑏0 and 𝑏1 factors is based on the same data sample as
the trading strategy is applied on, i.e. the total time series. Thereby we consider a historical relationship and
explore whether this relationship could have been used to trade on during the same period. Out-of-sample
trading strategies instead perform a regression on historical data to use the generated 𝑏0 and 𝑏1 for
predicting returns and trading on the predictions in future periods.
         For the static out-of-sample strategy, we estimate the intercept and coefficients by regressing the
chosen lagged macroeconomic variable against stock returns in the first half of the time series to predict
stock returns during the second half. This method assumes that the relationship estimated in the first half
between the macroeconomic variable and future stock returns will remain in the second half and that returns
can be predicted using it. Considering the in-sample static trading strategy, the total time series is used to
regress the chosen variable against future stock returns, and the generated coefficient and intercept are used
to predict stock returns throughout the same period.

                                                                                               15
4.5.2 Dynamic regression trading strategies

To capture how investors can profit from more dynamic trading rules based on regressions on single
macroeconomic variables, out-of-sample regressions with changing time windows are developed so that
intercepts and coefficients are continuously re-estimated every time period. Two approaches of rolling
bivariate regressions are applied for the dynamic trading strategies, being:

i) Rolling window regressions, with a window of 12 months, where intercepts and coefficients used for
prediction are recalculated every period, based on the previous 12 months in the time series, including the
current time period, impacting the trading decision in every period. Using a rolling 12-month time window
thereby allows for time varying dynamics in the relationship between stock returns and lagged changes in
either of the selected macroeconomic variables.

Under a basic bivariate regression framework

                                         𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1 ⋅ 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

The estimate for 𝑦𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 will be given as

                                                    𝑅     𝑅
                                             𝑦̂ 𝑡 = 𝑏0,𝑡 + 𝑏1,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

                                                                                                         𝑡
                                          ∑𝑖 =𝑡−11(𝑥𝑖−𝑗 − ̅𝑥)(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̅  )
                                         𝑅
                                    𝑏1,𝑡 =                          2
                                                                                                                   𝑡
                                              ∑𝑖 =𝑡−11(𝑥𝑖−𝑗 − ̅𝑥)

                                                  𝑅           𝑅
                                                   𝑏0,𝑡 = 𝑦̅  − 𝑏1,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑥̅

Figure 4.1 shows how the rolling window strategy is executed for returns with a time lag of j months, for
which j corresponds to 7 months in the example given.

                                                                                               16
                                       FIGURE 4.1

                        EXECUTION OF THE ROLLING WINDOW STRATEGY

ii) Expanding window regressions is the second dynamic strategy, developed to capture a more realistic
version of in-sample trading strategies that an investor could technically not implement in reality. This
method dynamically captures the accumulation of data from previous periods and approximates a feasible
version of the in-sample method.

The estimate for 𝑦𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡,𝑡+𝑗 will be given as

                                                     𝐸      𝐸
                                             𝑦̂ 𝑡 = 𝑏0,𝑡 + 𝑏1,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑥𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

                                                                                                          𝑡
                                           ∑𝑖 =𝑡0+𝑗(𝑥𝑖−𝑗 − ̅𝑥)(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̅  )
                                         𝐸
                                    𝑏1,𝑡 =                         2
                                                                                                                    𝑡
                                                ∑𝑖 =𝑡 +𝑗(𝑥𝑖−𝑗 − ̅𝑥)
                                                        0

                                                   𝐸           𝐸
                                                   𝑏0,𝑡 = 𝑦̅  − 𝑏1,𝑡 ⋅ 𝑥̅

Both dynamic trading models still follow the initial trading rules as the static models use, and assumes that
coefficients and intercepts are known at a certain date (since changes in a certain variable becomes public
on that date) and that an investor can trade that same day, as he will know the relevant parameters for
updating the regression and will therefore trade simultaneously.

4.6 Evaluation of trading strategy results
To evaluate the returns of the trading strategies, the Carhart four-factor model is used (Carhart 1997), which
is an extension of the Fama-French three-factor model. The factors are constructed by the Swedish House
of Finance, calculated over every Swedish stock and aggregated by month. The trading strategies’ returns
in excess of the 1-month Swedish treasury bill, 𝐸𝑋𝑅𝑡, are regressed against the factors in the following
Carhart four factor-model:

                                                                                               17
                        𝑐
         𝐸𝑋𝑅𝑡 = 𝛼  + 𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑅𝐹 ⋅ 𝑅𝑀𝑅𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵 ⋅ 𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿 ⋅ 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑀𝑂𝑀 ⋅ 𝑀𝑂𝑀𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡

Where
𝐸𝑋𝑅𝑡 is the excess returns of the strategy being tested

  𝑐
𝛼                  is the pricing error, alpha
𝑅𝑀𝑅𝐹 is the excess returns of the market, i.e. 𝑅𝑚 − 𝑅𝑓
𝑆𝑀𝐵 is a self-financing portfolio that takes a long position in stocks with low market
                capitalization and takes a short position in stocks with high market capitalization
𝐻𝑀𝐿 is a self-financing portfolio that takes a long position in high book-to-market stocks and
                  a short position in low book-to market stocks
𝑀𝑂𝑀 a self-financing portfolio that takes a long position in previous 12-month return winner
                and short previous 12-month loser stocks.

The regression results reveal the trading strategies’ monthly premium of the different factors and to what
extent a given strategy generates statistically significant four-factor alpha, i.e. whether the investment
strategy has a return in excess of the reward for the assumed risk. For strategies predicting returns more
than one month ahead, the corresponding Carhart four factor returns in the model are recalculated to
correspond to the same period so that monthly discrete returns for factor X used in a regression based
trading strategy lagged by j months is defined as:

                                                 𝑋𝑡            𝑋𝑡+1               𝑋𝑡+𝑗
                     𝑋𝑡+𝑗 = (1 +    ) ⋅ (1 +     ) ⋅. . .⋅ (1 +     ) ⋅ 100
                            100       100          100

The Sharpe ratio is also commonly used to measure risk adjusted returns when taking diversification and
portfolio construction into consideration.

                                                           𝐸[𝑟𝑝]−𝑟𝑓
                                    𝑆𝑅 =
                                                                                 𝜎𝑝

The diversification aspect is, however, not an issue when evaluating the strategies against each other as well
as against the market, due to that the “portfolios” comprise similar underlying assets, although RMRF
enjoys marginally increased diversification benefits from holding more than 30 stocks in the underlying
portfolio. The ratio enables us to consider excess return in comparison to total risk, measured as volatility,
of the different returns although not focusing on the construction of the portfolios used. Hence, this
measure will also be used for evaluating the different strategies under a mean-variance framework.

                                                                                               18
5 Evaluation of model assumptions

Several assumptions are underlying the statistical models used, which are needed to be fulfilled to generate
reliable results and enable us to draw correct conclusions from the tests. For example, the VAR model
requires variable stationarity, further discussed below. For the purpose of valid statistical analysis based on
OLS regressions, evaluation of OLS assumptions is also conducted below. When estimating the predictive
regression models for trading, OLS assumptions are, however, assumed to hold. However, these
assumptions are not evaluated explicitly, because of the fact that intercepts and coefficients only are used
for trading decisions, and that the trading results are evaluated separately in the Carhart four factor
framework.

5.1 Test for stationarity and unit roots
To be able to use the VAR model, the time series data has to be stationary. For a stochastic process to be
considered stationary, the time series must have constant mean, variance and autocorrelation structure that
are constant over time. Before variables are formatted by calculating the first log-differences, non-
stationarity is likely to persist because of behaviours such as random walks, trends and cycles or the
combination of them in a time series, for which relationships between variables are likely to be spurious.
However, by using the log-difference for a majority of the variables, further motivated in the methodology
part, the presence of non-stationary variables is inhibited. This is illustrated for the OMXS30 variable before
and after being formatted to Return in Figure A. Furthermore, the Augmented Dickey-Fuller test tests the
null hypothesis that the variable contains a unit root, with the alternative hypothesis that it is stationary. We
can clearly reject the null hypothesis in accordance with Table A. The rejection implies that the time series
is stationary, thus being useful for time series analysis.

5.2 Heteroscedasticity
A heteroscedasticity test using the Breusch–Pagan test for linear regression models is conducted for the
different regressions. For the regression of the dependent variable for 1 lag, it can be seen in Table B that
the null hypothesis of constant variance cannot be rejected, thus confirming that the data is homoscedastic
and that all coefficients are correctly estimated. However, for 7 lags heteroscedasticity is not rejected,
meaning that coefficients in a multiple regression for 7 lags would not be correctly measured. Therefore,
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors are instead used to allow for the fitting of a model that does not
contain heteroscedastic residuals and hence obtain correctly estimated coefficients, using the Newey-West
regression.

5.3 Multicollinearity
By observing correlations between the independent variables, the possible problem of multicollinearity in
the test statistics is investigated. If independent variables are highly correlated, it is hard to entangle which

                                                                                               19
effect on the dependent variable that is attributable to a certain independent variable - thus making it hard
to get reliable results from the regression. However, it does not appear to be a problem with
multicollinearity, given that no variables are highly correlated with each other as can be seen in table C1 and
C2 which show a correlation table and variance inflation factor test respectively.

5.4 Autocorrelation of residuals
To test for autocorrelation in the residuals, Durbin-Watson tests are conducted, with the output shown in
table D. The tests are based on the residuals of the regressions on future values of the Return variable and
the macroeconomic variables. For the regressions using 1 and 7 lags, the d-statistic is 1.844 and 0.338
respectively. This shows that there may be positive autocorrelation - implying that after an increase in stock
return, another increase will follow in the next period. To still have valid test statistics and standard errors,
we correct the predictive regression by running a regression with Newey-West standard errors, which is in
accordance with what Newey and West (1987) suggested.

5.5 Omitted variable bias
The purpose of this paper is not to perfectly explain future stock market development in terms of modelling
and obtaining a maximum R-squared in a regression, but rather to determine the predictability of traditional
macro variables individually. Therefore, the robustness of the models used is potentially subject to omitted
variable bias in the regressions, however, the problem does not have any condemning impact on the
relevance of the results.

5.6 Normally distributed residuals
Although the residuals from the regressions on future stock returns appear to be normally distributed when
observing Figure B1 and B2, we learn from the Jarque-Bera test that we must reject the null hypothesis of
normally distributed residuals. This can be seen in the output in Table E. However, the t-tests and linear
regressions are not deemed invalid simply because of non-normally distributed residuals. While the t-tests
and linear regressions are valid even in very small samples if the outcome variable is normally distributed,
their major usefulness comes from the fact that in large samples they are valid for any distribution. This
validity is demonstrated by Lumley et al. (2002) who simulate extremely non-normal data. Given the
relatively large sample size of more than 200 observations, we therefore assume that the OLS assumptions
hold.

6 Empirical findings

6.1 Evidence of macroeconomic variable’s effect on stock returns
Since the AIC suggests a selection of 7 lags for the full dataset and the SBIC suggests 1 lag according to
Table D, Granger causality tests are conducted for both 7 and 1 lags of the macroeconomic variables.

                                                                                               20
                                         TABLE 6.1

                                GRANGER CAUSALITY WALD TEST

                                              𝐻0: the variable does not Granger cause           𝐻0: the variable does not Granger cause
                                   OMXS30 returns at 1 month lag             OMXS30 returns at 7 months lag

     Equation Excluded chi2 df Prob > chi2 chi2 df Prob > chi2

      Return dRepo 4.1883 1 0.041* 18.015 7 0.012*

      Return Inflation 2.6046 1 0.107 13.818 7 0.055

      Return gPVI 2.577 1 0.108 7.4085 7 0.388

      Return dTCW 0.40064 1 0.527 15.891 7 0.026*

      Return gMS 0.17712 1 0.674 7.7632 7 0.354

      Return dSlope 2.4567 1 0.117 7.3994 7 0.389

      Return ALL 10.43 6 0.108 91.68 42 0.000***

                       *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%
                        Note: The Granger causality tests indicate which macroeconomic variables that have predictive ability regarding stock
                         market returns. The significant variables are shaded

As indicated by the Granger causality tests in Table 6.1, the change in repo rate Granger causes stock returns
at a 5% significance level at 7 lags and 1 lag. Also, the change in exchange rate Granger causes stock returns
at a 5% significance level at 7 lags. The predictive regressions (shown in tables G1 and G2) confirms the
statistical significance of the repo rate change but does not indicate the same result for change in exchange
rates - supporting the usefulness of the first difference in repo rate as a macro variable predicting future
changes in equity prices. The strong statistical causality of the change in repo rate further confirms the
findings of Rapach et al. (2005), who highlight that relative change in both short term interest rates and
money market rates stand out as reliable in-sample predictors compared to other macro variables in
explaining stock returns. They also specifically confirm the statically significant negative coefficient for the
relative money market rate in Sweden. The direction of the effect is in line with theories regarding the
transmission mechanism effect of monetary policy on equity prices (which mainly occurs through the
interest rate channel), given that the predictive regressions over both horizons generate negative
coefficients. Evidence suggests that stock returns are effected through the link to market rates, as well as
the indirect effect of increased borrowing costs of financial institutions, effects of future consumption and
firm investment decisions in the economy. Furthermore, the negative coefficient also supports the idea that
higher interest rates in terms of monetary policy restrict investor risk appetite, e.g. documented by Lian et
al. (2018).
         Regarding the statistical causality of the effect of change in the exchange rate on stock returns, the
coefficient for the variable is not statistically significant in the predictive regression, which limits strong
conclusions of the linear relationship. Thereby, there is not enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis
that the coefficient is equal to zero at a given significance level, although one cannot claim with certainty
that there is no effect, because of the possibility of a type II error to incorrectly accept a false null hypothesis.

                                                                                               21
However, since the exchange rate changes Granger causes stock returns over the longer horizon, we still
consider the variable to establish the direction of the effect. The negative coefficient for the variable implies
that domestic currency depreciation has a negative relationship with stock returns in the following period.
This finding is consistent with Hwang (2003), who finds that domestic currency depreciation in Korea has
a negative short run effect on stock prices, which also is in line with the findings of Mookerjee & Yu (1997).
The latter find that the unanticipated component of exchange rate changes has a positive effect on stock
returns in Singapore, suggesting that higher exchange rates lead to higher profit projections, presumably
because of lower import costs - which most likely would be a similar effect applicable for Sweden, given
the similarities with Singapore in terms of being a small open economy. Another potential reason for the
sign of the coefficient could be that a depreciation of the currency could be interpreted as increased inflation
expectations in the market stemming from e.g. imported inflation (Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis 1989),
increased domestic demand and less incentives to cut costs for domestic manufacturers, thereby negatively
influencing the stock market.
        The Granger causality tests and predictive regressions widely confirm previous international
research on macro variables’ effect on equity prices considering short term interest rate changes and changes
in the exchange rate. Meanwhile, the other variables assessed do not show any statistical significance in
terms of Granger causality. However, the 7 month stock return regression, presented in table G2, shows
that inflation and change in the production value index are statistically significant on the 5% level, meaning
that monthly changes in these variables have a linear relationship with 7 month stock returns on a monthly
rolling basis - although this does not reflect predictability to the same extent as Granger causality. In essence,
this widely confirms the general findings of Rapach et al. (2005), as well certain findings on a country
specific level, including Tripathy (2011).

6.2 Trading strategy results

6.2.1 Trading strategy variable selection

The lag selection information criteria AIC and SBIC suggested that the macroeconomic variables best
predict stock returns under lags of 7 and 1 months respectively. Following that, the Granger causality tests
at these lags indicated that the first difference in repo rate for both horizons and change in Exchange rate
for 7 lags significantly Granger cause stock returns - making them good predictors of future returns. To
further determine the direction and magnitude of the statistical causality, multivariate predictive OLS
regressions based on future OMXS30 returns at a 1 and 7 month horizon accompany the Granger causality
analysis. In accordance with tables G1 and G2, the regressions showed evidence of a significant beta
coefficient between the repo rate and the stock returns at both 1 and 7 months, but no statistical significance
was established for changes in exchange rate. Since no significant linear relationship is found for the
exchange rate variable, limiting the accuracy of predicting future returns using a linear model, only the repo
rate variable is to be used for the trading strategies at 1 lag and 7 lags respectively.

                                                                                               22
6.2.2 Characteristics of the different strategies

                                        TABLE 6.2

        REGRESSIONS ON THE 7 MONTH TRADING STRATEGIES USING THE CARHART FOUR FACTORS

                           Regression on the trading strategies’ excess returns when predicting stock market excess returns for the next 7
                                                           months

                   OutStatRepo7m InStatRepo7m ExpRepo7m RollRepo7m

                              0.348***                    0.420***                    0.312***                    -0.00403
   RMRF7m
                                    (3.95)                           (7.13)                           (4.73)                          (-0.07)

                                  0.206                       -0.203***                     -0.328***                     -0.293***
   HML7m
                                      (1.21)                           (-3.42)                           (-4.96)                           (-4.74)

                                 -0.255                        -0.104                        -0.144                        0.0446
    SMB7m
                                     (-1.94)                           (-1.34)                           (-1.68)                           (0.55)

                                 -0.0552                       -0.122**                      -0.116**                      0.327***
   MOM7m
                                     (-0.47)                           (-3.13)                           (-2.71)                           (8.46)

                              2.035                     4.140***                     0.246                       2.109
     _cons
                                  (1.42)                         (3.36)                         (0.18)                         (1.67)

                     *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%
                      Note: The values in the parentheses are the test statistics, and the other values are the beta exposure to each
                      portfolio. All portfolios are value weighted. Due to that the Carhart four factors only are available on a monthly basis
                  until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data until that date

                                        TABLE 6.3

        REGRESSIONS ON THE 1 MONTH TRADING STRATEGIES USING THE CARHART FOUR FACTORS

                      Results from the regression on the trading strategies’ excess returns when predicting stock market excess returns for
                                                                 the next month

                   OutStatRepo1m InStatRepo1m ExpRepo1m RollRepo1m

                             0.274**                    0.429***                   0.341***                    0.0241
 RM_RF_monthly
                                  (2.92)                         (6.45)                         (4.63)                         (0.33)

                                  -0.184                         -0.117                        -0.0669                        -0.107
   HML_vw
                                      (-1.15)                           (-1.70)                           (-0.88)                           (-1.44)

                                -0.408***                     -0.249***                      -0.0785                       0.0672
   SMB_vw
                                     (-3.61)                           (-3.44)                           (-0.98)                           (0.87)

                               -0.114                      0.0233                     0.221***                    0.331***
   MOM_vw
                                    (-1.03)                          (0.49)                           (4.14)                           (6.45)

                                0.819                        0.490                       -0.209                       0.590
     _cons
                                    (1.94)                           (1.44)                          (-0.55)                          (1.60)

                     *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%
                      Note: The values in the parentheses are the test statistics, and the other values are the beta exposure to each
                      portfolio. All portfolios are value weighted. Due to that the Carhart four factors only are available on a monthly basis
                      until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data until that date

By regressing the Carhart four factors on strategy returns, it can be observed that only the in-sample strategy
for the 7 month horizon generated statistically significant alpha over the full sample, whilst the rolling
window strategy generated significant alpha in the first half of the dataset (seen in table I2). The outcome

                                                                                               23
of the regressions of strategy returns against the Carhart four factors are displayed in tables 6.2 and 6.3,
along with descriptive statistics in table H1.
        Considering the in-sample static trading strategies, they are expected to generate the most
significant alphas as well as betas, given that they are developed based on the same time series for which
their predictive power is tested. Therefore, it is not surprising that the 7 month static in-sample strategy has
the highest alpha, which is statistically significant. However, Marquering & Verbeek (2004) mention that
in-sample strategies often overstate out-of-sample predictability because of overfitting, finite sample biases
and data snooping. The in-sample strategy thus confirms strong predictive ability, but cannot realistically
simulate how an investor could trade on the information in real-time.
         Regarding the out-of-sample static strategy, we observe that alpha is particularly high for trading
on the 1 month horizon, but it is not statistically significant on the 5% level, although being just above that
threshold. This suggests that an investor would not have generated abnormal returns using this strategy.
However, the lack of significance could be the result of a shorter sample period of data regressed to find
the intercept and coefficient used for predicting returns - potentially implying a less accurate approximation
of the linear relationship.
       With respect to the dynamic strategies, the rolling window strategy has a higher and more
significant alpha for both the 1 and 7 month return horizons compared to the expanding window. However,
alpha is only significant in the first half of the sample on the 7 month horizon, being the only realistically
feasible trading strategy generating statistically significant four-factor alpha in the first half - indicating that
an investor could have earned abnormal risk adjusted returns by following this strategy - translating to
9.16% on an annualized basis. Thereby, we can conclude that the more dynamic rolling window strategy is
outperforming the expanding window strategy in the first half, and while the opposite is true in the second
half - indicating that there are different characteristics of the strategies over time.
        An important issue to consider is that transaction costs are not included in the excess return of the
trading strategies. In comparison with only holding the benchmark index for the whole sample period
(represented by RMRF), additional transaction costs have to be considered. This is partly due to that the
strategy is assumed to change its position for each period which generates costs. In addition we use long-
short strategies, as opposed to long-only strategy, which may imply increased transaction costs. To control
for this, we used a transaction cost of 1%, which is classified as “high” according to Pesaran & Timmermann
(1995). This effect was approximated by subtracting 1% from each period’s return in the full sample and
regressing Carhart four factors against the new returns. This resulted in an alpha of 3.14% instead of 4.14%
for the 7 month in-sample static strategy, still being statistically significant.

6.2.3 Comparing the dynamic strategies’ performance over time

When dividing the time series into two halves of equal length, we get two samples with different
characteristics. For the first half, ranging between March 1998 and March 2008, we observe larger
fluctuations of stock returns with higher realized volatility, as can be seen when comparing the variable’s

                                                                                               24
standard deviations in Table H2 and H3. The second half includes relatively smaller fluctuations, including
the European sovereign debt crisis, with otherwise relatively steady increasing stock returns over time.
Regarding the performance of the dynamic strategies, the rolling window strategy outperforms the
expanding window strategy in the first half of the sample both with respect to 1 month and 7 months of
stock returns, when considering both Sharpe ratio and risk adjusted returns in terms of higher alpha for the
respective strategies. On the other hand, the expanding strategy clearly outperformed the rolling strategy in
the second half of the dataset.
        There is no clear reason for the initial outperformance and subsequent underperformance of the
rolling strategy, but it could be related to the fact that stock returns were more volatile in the first half
(23.2% and 18.0% standard deviation of excess returns for the first and second half of the dataset
respectively for 7 month returns). This suggests that a more dynamic strategy (i.e. the rolling window
strategy) is superior in generating abnormal returns when stock market volatility is higher, which is in line
with Pesaran & Timmermann (1995), who suggest that the predictability of excess returns is larger at times
when volatility is high, although there might not be a not a one-to-one relationship between abnormal
returns and predictability.
         Although the Sharpe ratio is higher in the first half for the rolling strategy in comparison with the
expanding window strategy, it is still lower in comparison to excess market returns for the same period,
indicating that a mean-variance investor who seeks to maximize his mean-variance efficient frontier would
not prefer the strategy. Furthermore, the alpha for the rolling window strategy is generated when the stock
market is experiencing a recession - indicating that the strategy is capable of predicting the bear market and
profiting from it (seen in figure C). That ability is in line with findings in previous research, e.g. Chen (2008),
showing that macroeconomic variables are particularly useful predictors of bear markets.

6.2.4 Strategy returns under a negative interest rate regime

When interest rates turn negative, the rolling window strategy is clearly performing worse in comparison
with both its historical average performance as well as compared to other strategies, reflected in a 27 month
period of consecutive negative returns starting in 2015. The inability to predict returns during the negative
interest rate regime could be due to the less frequent changes in the repo rate during the past 12 months,
making it harder to find a linear relationship between the change in repo rate and stock market returns.
This indicates that the fixed linear relationship between lagged repo rate changes and stock returns used in
the static strategies better predicts stock returns when there is a negative interest rate regime, as opposed
to the dynamic rolling window strategy that continuously re-estimates the same linear relationship and fails
to predict returns during this period (see graph H4). This also seems to be consistent with the fact that the
rolling window strategy has a positive and statistically significant four-factor alpha of 5.25% (translating to
9.16% annually) in the first half, while having a negative and insignificant alpha in the second, less volatile
half of the dataset.

                                                                                               25
        Furthermore, the static strategies and the expanding window strategy seem to perform relatively
well during the last years of the time series in terms of Sharpe ratio (can be seen in table H3). Towards the
end of the time series, the expanding window strategy’s beta becomes increasingly similar to the static in-
sample trading strategy, since it is regressed using almost the same time window (except for the subsequent
periods which only are included in the in-sample strategy’s window). The similar betas explain that the
expanding window strategy becomes more of a static strategy towards the end as a larger time series is
regressed.

6.2.5 Linking strategy returns to macroeconomic phenomena

To connect the statistical observations with reality, the inability for the rolling window strategy to predict
stock returns under a negative interest rate regime may in turn be related to the relationship between
changes in repo rate and inflation. As documented by Panizza & Wyplosz (2016), there is a claimed
decreasing effectiveness of interest rates as a monetary policy tool internationally - in Sweden characterized
by the fact that inflation has remained below the target for a prolonged period of time despite a low and
even negative repo rate (How monetary policy affects inflation, Sveriges Riksbank, 2018). This could potentially
translate into less frequent and/or delayed changes (increases) of the repo rate by the central bank to avoid
the risk of inhibiting inflation, which would in turn be translated into difficulties for a rolling regression
model to predict stock returns based on the linear relationship between lagged changes in the repo rate and
stock returns. However, deeper and more extensive research has to be conducted to confirm the economic
causality between repo rate changes and stock market returns.

7 Conclusion

This thesis investigates whether certain macroeconomic variables have predictive power with respect to
Swedish stock returns and if an investor can generate abnormal returns using macroeconomic variables.
Predictive power is affirmed for changes in the repo rate and changes in the exchange rate, confirming
findings in previous research on macroeconomic variables’ predictive power. The results imply that changes
in the repo rate impacts future stock returns negatively and that currency depreciation negatively affects
future stock returns, which is line with previous international findings.
         An investor constructing his portfolio with the aim of certain four-factor exposure would have
benefited from the positive statistically significant, annualized four-factor alpha of 9.16% generated by the
dynamic rolling window strategy in the first half of the time series - providing evidence that it has been
historically possible to generate risk-adjusted abnormal returns using macroeconomic variables, when not
considering transaction costs (which would partly reduce the abnormal return). However, the recent poor
performance of the rolling dynamic strategy is at the same time suggesting issues with the model, and
thereby we conclude that it is unlikely that an investor can generate abnormal returns going forward, given
the prevailing negative interest rate environment.

                                                                                               26
         When interest rates turn negative and changes in the repo rate are less frequent, the rolling window
strategy is sharply underperforming other strategies. Thereby, the fixed linear relationship between lagged
repo rate changes and stock returns used in the static strategies better predict stock returns when there is a
negative interest rate regime, as opposed to the dynamic rolling window strategy that continuously re-
estimates the same linear relationship over a rolling 12 month period. Further analysis suggests that the
performance of the rolling window trading strategy is affected by the effectiveness of the repo rate as a
monetary policy tool, forcing the repo rate to remain at extraordinary low levels due to its recent inability
to stimulate inflation.
        Our analysis brings relevant implications for portfolio managers in terms of how stock index
returns can be predicted using methods based on macroeconomic variables that have previously not been
explicitly used in the Swedish stock market. In turn, the findings considering the first difference in repo
rate further provides insights for policy makers with respect to potential side effects of using the repo rate
as a monetary policy tool, given its significant impact on stock returns. Also, it gives an idea of how investors
can exploit the predictive power and use it to construct trading strategies, as well as the advantages and
caveats of different regression based trading strategies using individual macroeconomic variables.

8 Limitations and suggestions for further research

The purpose of the thesis is to explore the explanatory power of macroeconomic variables on a general
basis and not other potential variables that might explain the stock market such as traditional financial
ratios, correlations with other international markets or other variables. We limit this paper to evaluation of
macroeconomic variables’ significance in forecasting, as opposed to constructing a forecasting model and
assessing its predictive power. Thus, the R-squared value in the linear regression is not maximized, but the
significance of individual variables is focused on instead. Including financial ratios together with the
macroeconomic variables with significant predictive ability in this paper, as well as in other papers referred
to, would thereby be an interesting area to further examine - to increase the R-squared value in a predictive
regression. Also, while the statistical causality can be determined through the tests undertaken, it does not
provide an answer that explain economic causality.
        Throughout this paper, the predictive power of the change of the repo with respect to OMXS30
stock returns is investigated. This is something that has to be considered by the Swedish central bank that
decides the repo rate, given that it is used as a tool to create a certain economic environment in Sweden.
However, to be able to make decisions based on the probable effects on stock returns, it would be
interesting, and contribute with added value to the discussion if investigating what factors in the economy
that OMXS30 return in turn can predict. Particularly, this topic is interesting since the prevailing negative
interest rate environment might lead to a structural break which could disrupt current forecasting models
used by both policy makers and investors.

                                                                                               27
9 References

Sharpe, W. (1964). “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk”. The
Journal of Finance, 19(3), pp. 425-442.

Lintner, J. (1965). “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in Stock
Portfolios and Capital Budgets”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 47:1, pp. 13-37.

Fama, E & French, K. (1993). “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds”. Journal of
Financial Economics, 33(3), pp. 3-56

Fama, E. F., & French, K. (1989). “Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds”.
Journal of Financial Economics, 25(23), pp. 23–49.

Rapach, D, Wohar, M, Rangvid. (2005), “Macro variables and international stock return predictability”.
International Journal of Forecasting, 25, pp. 137-166.

Mookerjee, R, Yu, Q. (1997). “Macroeconomic variables and stock prices in a small open economy: The
case of Singapore”. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 5, pp. 337-388.

Pesaran, M.H, Timmermann, A. (1995). “Predictability of Stock Returns: Robustness and Economic
Significance”. The Journal of Finance, 50(4), pp. 1201-1228.

Gjerde, Ø and Saettem, F. (1999). “Causal relations among stock returns and macroeconomic variables in
a small, open economy”. Journal of International Financial Markets Institutions and Money, 9, pp. 61-74.

Campbell, J. Y. (1987). “Stock returns and the term structure”. Journal of Financial Economics, 18(2), pp.
373–399.

Alam, M, Uddin, G.S. (2009). “Relationship between Interest Rate and Stock Price: Empirical Evidence
from Developed and Developing Countries”. International Journal of Business and Management, 4(3), pp. 43-
51.

Ljungstedt, N. (2015). “Macroeconomic and Stock Market Relationships in Sweden During 2000 to 2015:
a Co-integration Analysis of the OMXS30 and Macroeconomic Variables”. Bachelor thesis in Economics,
Lund University, Lund.

                                                                                               28
European Central Bank. (2018). “Transmission mechanism of monetary policy”. Available at:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/intro/transmission/html/index.en.html. Accessed at 12 May, 2018.

Ekonomiska avdelningen vid Finansdepartementet. (2014). “Transmissionsmekanismen och finansiell
stabilitetspolitik”. Available at: http://www.regeringen.se/rapporter/2014/06/transmissionsmekanismen-
och-finansiell-stabilitetspolitik. Accessed at 12 May, 2018.

Chen, S. (2008). “Predicting the bear stock market: Macroeconomic variables as leading indicators”.
Journal of Banking & Finance, 33(2), pp. 211-223

Federal Reserve Bank of San Fransisco (2018). “Economic Forecasts with the Yield Curve”. Available at:
https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2018/march/economic-
forecasts-with-yield-curve/. Accessed at 12 May, 2018.

Balvers, R., Cosimano, T., & McDonald, T. (1990). “Predicting stock returns in an efficient market”. The
Journal of Finance, 45(4), pp. 1109–1128.

Fama, E.F. (1981). “Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inflation and Money”. American Economic Review, 71(4),
pp. 545-65.

Gupta, R., & Mampho, P. M. (2013). “Macroeconomic Variables and South African Stock Return
Predictability”. Economic Modelling, 30, pp. 621-622.

Homa, K.E, Jaffee, D.M. (1971). “The Supply of Money and Common Stock Prices”. The Journal of
Finance, 26(5), pp. 1045-1066.

Tripathy, N. (2011). “Causal Relationship between Macro-Economic Indicators and Stock Market in
India”. Asian Journal of Finance & Accounting, 3(1), pp. 208-226.

Zivot, E & Wang, J. (2006). Modelling Financial Time Series with S-PLUS. 2nd Edition. New York: Springer-
Verlag.

Granger, C.W.J. (1969). “Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-spectral
Methods”. Econometrica, 37(3), pp. 424-438.

Granger C.W.J. (1980). “Testing for causality: A personal viewpoint”. Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 2, pp. 329-352

                                                                                               29
Hornton, D.L. & Batten, D.S. (1985) “Lag-Length Selection and Tests of Granger Causality between
Money and Income”. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 17, 164-178.

Shibata, R. (1976). “Selection of the order of an autoregressive model by Akaike's information criterion”.
Biometrika, 63(1), pp. 117–126.

Kuha, J. (2004). “AIC and BIC - Comparisons of Assumptions and Performance”. Sociological Methods &
Research, 33(2), pp. 188-229.

Carhart, M. M. (1997). "On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance". The Journal of Finance, 52(1), pp.
57–82.

Newey, W & West, K. (1987). “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent Covariance Matrix”. Econometrica, 55(3), pp. 703-08.

Lumley, T, Diehr, P, Emerson, S and Chen, L. (2002). “The Importance of the Normality Assumption in
Large Public Health Data Sets”. Annual Review of Public Health, 23, pp. 151-169.

Lian, C, Ma, Y and Wang, C. (2018). “Low Interest Rates and Risk Taking: Evidence from Individual
Investment Decisions”. (Working paper). Retrieved from Harvard University:
https://scholar.harvard.edu/yueranma/publications/low-interest-rates-and-risk-taking-evidence-
individual-investment-decisions. Accessed at 12 May, 2018.

Hwang, J-K. (2003). “Cointegration and the Causality between Stock Prices and Exchange Rates of the
Korean Economy”. International Business and Economics Research Journal.

Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis. (1989). Does Dollar Depreciation Cause Inflation? Available at
https://files.stlouisfed.org/research/.../Dollar_Jul_Aug1989.pdf. Accessed at 12 May, 2018.

Marquering and Verbeek. (2004), “The Economic Value of Predicting Stock Index Returns and
Volatility”. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39(2), pp. 407-429.

Narayan, P.K, Narayan, S and Thuraisamy, K.S. (2014). “Can institutions and macroeconomic factors
predict stock returns in emerging markets?” Emerging Markets Review, 17, pp. 77–95.

                                                                                               30
Panizza, U & Wyplosz, C. (2016). “The Folk Theorem of Decreasing Effectiveness of Monetary Policy:
What Do the Data Say?”. Russian Journal of Money and Finance, 77(1), pp. 71-107

Geske, R. and R. Roll (1983). "The fiscal and monetary linkage between stock returns and inflation". The
Journal of Finance, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 1-33.

A. Ferreira, M and Santa-Clara, P. (2011). “Forecasting stock market returns: The sum of the parts is
more than the whole” Journal of Financial Economics, 100, pp. 514-537

Swedish House of Finance. (2018). Fama and French factors for the Swedish market. Available at:
https://data.houseoffinance.se/otherDB/famaFrench. Accessed at 12 May, 2018.

Sveriges Riksbank. (2018). How monetary policy affects inflation. Available at: https://www.riksbank.se/en-
gb/monetary-policy/what-is-monetary-policy/how-monetary-policy-affects-inflation/. Accessed at 12
May, 2018.

                                                                                               31
10 Appendix

                                   TABLE A

                               DICKEY FULLER TEST FOR UNIT ROOT

                                                                  𝐻0: the variable contains a unit root
                                                                                Interpolated Dickey-Fuller

                     Test Statistic 1% Critical Value 5% Critical Value 10% Critical Value
        Return -13.475 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
        dRepo -7.484 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
        Inflation -15.349 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
         gPVI -16.945 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
        dTCW -12.283 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
         gMS -18.913 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
        dSlope -11.262 -3.464 -2.881 -2.571
                          MacKinnon approximate p-value for Z(t) = 0.0000
                        Note: The p-value is applicable for all variables. Being able to reject 𝐻0 implies that the data is stationary

                                    TABLE B

                  BREUSCH-PAGAN /COOK-WEISBERG TEST FOR HETEROSKEDASTICITY

                                                                     𝐻0: constant variance
                                       chi2 (1) Prob > chi2
    ReturnFW1 0.70 0.4041
    ReturnFW7 6.90 0.0086

                                    TABLE C1

                                  CORRELATION TABLE

                              The correlation between all independent variables used in the regressions are presented below
                 dRepo Inflation gPVI dTCW gMS dSlope
    dRepo 1.0000
   Inflation 0.1979 1.0000
    gPVI 0.1050 0.2663 1.0000
    dTCW -0.2355 -0.1260 0.0118 1.0000
     gMS -0.1400 -0.1640 0.2219 0.0963 1.0000
    dSlope -0.3417 -0.1088 0.0681 0.1692 0.0295 1.0000

                                                                                               32
                                  TABLE C2

                           VARIANCE INFLATION FACTOR TEST

                         VIF factors are displayed below, used for testing for multicollinearity between the independent variables
                                VIF 1/VIF
   dRepo 1.24 0.806
    gPVI 1.20 0.832
  Inflation 1.18 0.847
   dSlope 1.17 0.856
    gMS 1.14 0.876
   dTCW 1.08 0.925
  Mean VIF 1.17
                   Note: VIF < 10 indicates no multicollinearity, in accordance with e.g. Neter et al. (1996)

                                TABLE D

                          DURBIN-WATSON TEST FOR AUTOCORRELATION

                               > 2 = negative autocorr. 2 = no autocorr. < 2 = positive autocorr.
                                                                 Durbin-Watson d-statistic
regresid_lag1 1.844
regresid_lag7 0.338
                   Note: The tests are conducted on the residuals of each of the regressions conducted on 1 and 7 months future
                   stock returns using the macroeconomic variable

                                 TABLE E

                                  JARQUE-BERA NORMALITY TEST

                                                             𝐻0: Normally distributed residuals
                                   chi2 Prob > chi2
regresid_lag1 24 6.2e-06
regresig_lag7 13.5 0.0012
                Note: The tests are conducted on the residuals of each of the regressions conducted on 1 and 7 months future
                   stock returns using the macroeconomic variable

                                                                                           33
                                   TABLE F

                                    SELECTION ORDER CRITERIA

       The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Schwarz Bayesian Information Criterion (SBIC) are used to determine the number
                               of lags that are to be investigated in the VAR model and the Granger causality test
lag LL LR df p FPE AIC HQIC SBIC
 0 -2233 0.806 19.649 19.692 19.754
 1 -2060.01 345.98 49 0 0.272 18.562 18.901* 19.404*
 2 -2008.54 102.94 49 0 0.266 18.540 19.177 20.119
 3 -1946.01 125.06 49 0 0.237 18.421 19.356 20.738
 4 -1860.30 171.44 49 0 0.173 18.099 19.331 21.152
 5 -1793.61 133.37 49 0 0.149 17.944 19.473 21.734
 6 -1740.50 106.21 49 0 0.146 17.908 19.735 22.435
 7 -1674.08 132.84 49 0 0.128* 17.755* 19.879 23.020
 8 -1640.47 67.23 49 0.043 0.150 17.890 20.311 23.891
 9 -1609.82 61.284 49 0.112 0.182 18.051 20.770 24.790
10 -1563.58 92.49* 49 0 0.194 18.075 21.091 25.551
      Endogenous: Return dRepo Inflation gPVI dTCW gMS dSlope
      Exogenous: _cons
       Note: Both the dependent and independent variables are set as endogenous since the VAR model and Granger causality test
       (which the lags suggested above will be used for) examines the causal lagged relationship between all variables

                                  TABLE G1

      REGRESSION ON 1 MONTH FUTURE STOCK RETURNS USING THE MACROECONOMIC VARIABLES

                                                   Predictive regression on stock returns 1 month ahead
 ReturnFW1 Coef. Std.Err t P > t [95% Confidence Interval]
   dRepo -5.662 2.675 -2.12 0.035* -10.931 -0.392
   Inflation -1.719 0.981 -1.75 0.081 -3.652 0.214
    gPVI 0.049 0.033 1.51 0.132 -0.015 0.114
   dTCW -0.295 0.284 -1.04 0.300 -0.855 0.265
    gMS 0.112 0.294 0.38 0.705 -0.468 0.691
    dSlope -4.366 2.781 -1.57 0.118 -9.846 1.113
    _cons 0.321 0.424 0.76 0.450 -0.515 1.156
                      Number of observations 238 R-squared 0.0459
                            F(6, 231) 1.85 Adjusted R-squared 0.0212
                         Prob > F 0.0000 Root MSE 5.6639
                  *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%

                                                                                             34
                                   TABLE G2

       REGRESSION ON 7 MONTHS FUTURE STOCK RETURNS USING THE MACROECONOMIC VARIABLES

                                                   Predictive regression on stock returns 7 months ahead

ReturnFW7 Coef. Newey-West Std.Err t P > t [95% Conf. Interval]
    dRepo -41.991 7.528 -5.58 0.000*** -56.824 -27.157
    Inflation -7.568 3.152 -2.40 0.017* -13.779 -1.358
     gPVI 0.201 0.091 2.21 0.028* 0.022 0.380
    dTCW -0.693 0.738 -0.94 0.349 -2.148 0.762
     gMS -0.573 0.853 -0.67 0.502 -2.254 1.108
    dSlope -1.551 8.422 -0.18 0.854 -18.148 15.046
     _cons 2.682 1.608 1.67 0.097 -0.486 5.850

                        Number of observations 232 R-squared -

                               F(6, 225) 7.12 Adjusted R-squared -

                           Prob > F 0.0000 Root MSE -

                   *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%
                    Note: This regression produces Newey-West standard errors, for which the error structure is assumed to be
                    heteroskedastic and autocorrelated. No R-squared, adjusted R-squared nor root MSE values are generated

                                   TABLE H1

                          DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE TRADING STRATEGIES

                       Descriptive statistics for the return of all trading strategies’ excess returns and the stock market excess returns at 1 and 7
                                                           month horizons
                   Obs. Mean Std.Dev SR Min Max
   RMRF7m 220 6.214 20.836 0.298 -41.881 64.829
  InStatRepo7m 219 6.027 19.405 0.311 -45.924 72.082
 OutStatRepo7m 99 6.547 14.376 0.455 -37.734 46.046
   RollRepo7m 201 0.912 18.585 0.049 -40.489 73.049
  ExpRepo7m 210 0.997 20.418 0.049 -45.924 72.082
 RM_RF_montly 227 0.689 5.754 0.120 -18.153 21.638
  InStatRepo1m 225 0.857 5.848 0.147 -15.595 19.898
 OutStatRepo1m 105 1.257 4.896 0.257 -14.989 19.898
   RollRepo1m 213 0.634 5.816 0.109 -14.593 19.898
  ExpRepo1m 222 0.087 5.943 0.015 -15.102 19.898

                  Note: All results are presented in percentage, e.g. the RMRF7m has an average return of 6.214%. Due to that the Carhart
                      four factors only are available on a monthly basis until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data until that
                    date

                                                                                               35
                                   TABLE H2

                DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE FIRST HALF OF THE TRADING STRATEGIES

                   Descriptive statistics for the return of all trading strategies’ excess returns and the stock market excess returns at 1 and 7
                                           month horizons between March 1998 and March 2008

                   Obs Mean Std.Dev SR Min Max

   RMRF7m 114 6.070 23.210 0.262 -40.634 64.829
 InStatRepo7m 113 4.869 22.804 0.214 -45.924 72.082
 OutStatRepo7m 0
  RollRepo7m 95 2.644 21.115 0.125 -40.489 73.049
  ExpRepo7m 104 -4.110 23.429 -0.175 -45.924 72.082
RM_RF_monthly 121 0.526 6.280 0.084 -15.381 15.951
 InStatRepo1m 119 0.543 6.585 0.083 -15.595 17.280
 OutStatRepo1m 0 - - - - -
  RollRepo1m 107 1.041 6.515 0.160 -14.593 17.645
  ExpRepo1m 116 -0.719 6.661 -0.108 -15.102 17.645

                     Note: All results are presented in percentage, e.g. the RMRF7m has an average excess return of 6.214%. Due to that the
                      Carhart four factors only are available on a monthly basis until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data
                  until that date. However, the data is split between March 2008 and April 2008 since the regressions conducted on the
                       static out-of-sample trading strategy begins in March 2008. Hence, no statistics are available for the static out-of-sample
                       strategy during the first half

                                   TABLE H3

               DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE SECOND HALF OF THE TRADING STRATEGIES

                  Descriptive statistics for the return of all trading strategies’ excess returns and the stock market excess returns at 1 and 7
                                          month horizons between April 2008 and January 2017
                 Obs Mean Std.Dev SR Min Max
  RMRF7m 106 6.370 18.046 0.353 -41.881 53.855
 InStatRepo7m 106 7.261 14.969 0.485 -37.734 46.134
OutStatRepo7m 99 6.547 14.376 0.455 -37.734 46.046
  RollRepo7m 106 -0.641 15.926 -0.040 -35.787 50.839
 ExpRepo7m 106 6.008 15.500 0.388 -37.734 46.134
RM_RF_montly 106 0.875 5.110 0.171 -18.153 21.638
 InStatRepo1m 106 1.209 4.897 0.247 -14.989 19.898
OutStatRepo1m 105 1.257 4.896 0.257 -14.989 19.898
 RollRepo1m 106 0.224 5.010 0.045 -14.593 19.898
 ExpRepo1m 106 0.968 4.924 0.197 -14.989 19.898

                   Note: All results are presented in percentage, e.g. the RMRF7m has an average excess return of 6.214%. Due to that the
                    Carhart four factors only are available on a monthly basis until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data
                    until that date. However, the data is split between March 2008 and April 2008 since the regressions conducted on the static
                    out-of-sample trading strategy begins in March 2008

                                                                                              36
                                   TABLE H4

               DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF THE LAST TWO YEARS OF THE TRADING STRATEGIES

                 Descriptive statistics for the return of all trading strategies’ excess returns and the stock market excess returns at 1 and 7
                                         month horizons between January 2015 and January 2017
                 Obs Mean Std.Dev SR Min Max
   RMRF7m 25 6.715 10.816 0.621 -12.712 24.543
 InStatRepo7m 25 1.613 12.150 0.133 -16.219 22.404
OutStatRepo7m 25 1.613 12.150 0.133 -16.219 22.404
  RollRepo7m 25 -3.919 11.102 -0.353 -18.547 19.990
  ExpRepo7m 25 1.613 12.150 0.133 -16.219 22.404
RM_RF_montly 25 0.880 4.212 0.209 -7.136 8.064
 InStatRepo1m 25 0.279 4.241 0.066 -7.091 7.454
OutStatRepo1m 25 0.279 4.241 0.066 -7.091 7.454
  RollRepo1m 25 -0.578 4.199 -0.138 -7.091 7.454
  ExpRepo1m 25 0.279 4.241 0.066 -7.091 7.454

                   Note: All results are presented in percentage, e.g. the RMRF7m has an average excess return of 6.214%.

                                       TABLE I1

REGRESSIONS ON THE FIRST AND SECOND HALF OF THE 1 MONTH DYNAMIC TRADING STRATEGIES USING THE
                                  CARHART FOUR FACTORS

                   Regression on the trading strategies’ excess returns when predicting stock market excess returns for the following
                              month between March 1998 - March 2008 and April 2008 - January 2017 respectively

                             March 1998 - March 2008 April 2008 - January 2017

                    ExpRepo1m RollRepo1m ExpRepo1m RollRepo1m
                               0.355**                       0.161                        0.164                       -0.235*
 RM_RF_monthly  (3.26)                       (1.49)                       (1.57)                      (-2.18)

                                  -0.111                        -0.0694                       -0.0158                        -0.122
     HML_vw (-1.10)                        (-0.72)                        (-0.09)                        (-0.67)

                                 -0.0337                        0.131                        -0.254*                        -0.147
     SMB_vw (-0.31)                        (1.29)                        (-2.03)                        (-1.14)

                              0.281***                    0.370***                     -0.0579                       0.137
    MOM_vw  (4.28)                      (6.00)                     (-0.48)                     (1.11)

                                -0.92                        0.876                        0.666                        0.328
      _cons (-1.61)                       (1.59)                       (1.43)                       (0.68)

                     *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%
                      Note: The values in the parentheses are the test statistics, and the other values are the beta exposure to each
                      portfolio. All portfolios are value weighted. Due to that the Carhart four factors only are available on a monthly basis
                      until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data until that date

                                                                                              37
                                     TABLE I2

REGRESSIONS ON THE FIRST AND SECOND HALF OF THE 7 MONTHS DYNAMIC TRADING STRATEGIES USING
                               THE CARHART FOUR FACTORS

                      Regression on the trading strategies’ excess returns when predicting stock market returns for the next 7 months
                               between March 1998 - March 2008 and April 2008 - January 2017 respectively
                           March 1998 - March 2008 April 2008 - January 2017
                  ExpRepo7m RollRepo7m ExpRepo7m RollRepo7m
                             0.008                       -0.0026                     0.237**                       0.010
  RMRF7m (0.07)                      (-0.02)                     (2.850)                     (0.110)

                            -0.422***                    -0.339***                      0.284                        -0.413
  HML7m
                                  (-4.80)                           (-4.08)                           (1.440)                           (-1.92)

                              0.289*                       0.00432                      -0.297*                       -0.057
  SMB7m
                                  (2.30)                           (0.03)                           (-2.49)                          (-0.43)

                             -0.0928*                     0.330***                      -0.0592                       0.273*
  MOM7m  (-2.01)                      (7.78)                      (-0.48)                      (2.01)

                             -0.812                      5.246**                       1.933                       -0.838
   _cons
                                  (-0.38)                           (2.64)                           (1.18)                           (-0.47)

                   *p-value < 5% **p-value < 1% ***p-value < 0.1%
                   Note: The values in the parentheses are the test statistics, and the other values are the beta exposure to each
                   portfolio. All portfolios are value weighted. Due to that the Carhart four factors only are available on a monthly basis
                   until January 2017, the regression is only conducted using data until that date

                                                                                             38
                       FIGURE A

          OMXS30 AND RETURN DEVELOPMENT OVER TIME

                       FIGURE B1

RESIDUALS FROM THE REGRESSION ON 1 MONTH FUTURE STOCK RETURNS

                                                                               39
                               FIGURE B2

         RESIDUALS FROM THE REGRESSION ON 7 MONTH FUTURE STOCK RETURNS

                               FIGURE C

DEVELOPMENT OF THE ROLLING WINDOW 7 MONTH STRATEGY AND EXCESS MARKET RETURNS

                                                                                        40