 The Effects of Monetary Reward Distribution on
            Company Performance
               - Introducing Wage Dispersion Volatility

                                    ∗                          †
               Oliver Hanes     Michael Luxemburg
                          May 14, 2018

                                Abstract
   This paper aims to explore the effects of monetary reward distribution within the
   company on company performance. We introduce a measure called wage distribu-
   tion volatility (WDV), that captures how the pay gap between the CEO and other
   employees varies over time. Linear regression is performed for both WDV against
   company alpha and relative standard deviation of CEO salary (RSDC) against
   company alpha for a seven year period for companies listed on the Stockholm Stock
   Exchange during 2010-2016. For companies with alpha ∈ {−2, 2} and WDV <10
   we find a significant negative correlation between WDV and performance (adjusted
     2
   R  = 0.191, p < 0.01), and even stronger for companies with <1000 employees
                2
   (adjusted R  = 0.275, p < 0.01). We also create a binary classifier that is able
   to predict the sign of alpha with 78% accuracy, given the constraints. However,
   most, if not all, of the effect stems from the RSDC alone. This study suggests that
   Swedish companies should keep the total CEO salary relatively constant, especially
   if the company has less than 1000 employees, and adopt the culture behind such
   a wage composition. We suggest further research to investigate whether WDV has
   an additional effect compared to RSDC or not, and to expand to different countries.

  Keywords: WDV, CEO salary, wage dispersion, pay gap

                                Bachelor Thesis
                       Stockholm School of Economics
                             Tutor: Marieke Bos

∗
 23272@student.hhs.se
†
 23427@student.hhs.se

                                    1
Contents

1 Introduction 3
   1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   1.2 Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2 Extended Background and Mechanisms 5
   2.1 The Macroeconomic Aspects in Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   2.2 Profit Sharing and the Free Rider Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   2.3 Productivity and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   2.4 Tournament Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   2.5 Preferences Among Graduates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   2.6 Human Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

3 Data 10

4 Methods 11
   4.1 The Ideal Experiment: Enabling better Comparison Between Firms . . . 11
   4.2 Measuring Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.3 Choosing Independent Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         4.3.1 Wage Dispersion Volatility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         4.3.2 Relative Standard Deviation of CEO Salary . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         4.3.3 CEO Salary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   4.4 Regression Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   4.5 Binary Classifier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

5 Potential Biases in the Study 16

6 Results 18
   6.1 Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   6.2 SVM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

7 Conclusion 26

8 Appendix 28

                                      2
1 Introduction

1.1 Background

CEO remuneration is an invariably topical subject often discussed in media and in the
academic literature. The trigger for debate is often increases of CEO salaries due to
bonus programs. The idea of variable compensation is that the CEO is motivated to
work more in the shareholder’s interests by compensation contracts that are tied to stock
price changes. Motivating employees at lower levels with such contracts is however not
common. This may evidently be because employees at lower levels have even less impact
on the stock price than the CEO.
    In the academia total CEO remuneration and different remuneration components
are often linked to company performance. Evidence of CEO remuneration tied to com-
pany performance is inconclusive. Instead, research suggests that intrinsic motivation
outperforms extrinsic motivation for non-routine tasks and that contingent pay may
even impede performance for creative tasks [1]. Company performance is a wide topic
and can be measured in numerous ways. E.g. Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2010) measures
performance as resistance to financial crisis and finds a negative relationship to CEO
bonuses [2] and Smirnova and Zavertiaeva finds inconclusive evidence when measuring
performance as Sharpe ratio and ROA [3].
     There are also numerous studies investigating the effect of monetary compensation
for other employees. For example, as early as 1960, McGregor critically discusses variable
pay. He states that even though the logic for variable pay is evident, issues such as
prioritizing approval of fellow colleagues and distrust in the incentive system is prevailing
[6]. Kohn (1995) further discusses the effects of variable pay on motivation, and states a
number of disadvantages [5].
    The so called CEO pay gap is a comparison of CEO pay and other manager pays.
How such a gap influences company performance incorporates other mechanisms. Hen-
derson (2017) looks at the issue from both a behavioral and economical view. The
behavioural view suggests that because more equal pay promotes collaboration, greater
coordination needs encourage smaller pay gaps, and the combination of greater needs
and smaller gaps enhances firm performance. The economic view implies the opposite
because larger gaps create tournament-like incentives that address monitoring problems
associated with joint decisions [4]. An extension of the pay gap would be to study the pay
differences between employees at different levels than just top management. Further, it

                                      3
may be interesting to study this notion as a dynamic measure, incorporating fluctuations
of the pay gap in addition to size. To the knowledge of the authors, this has not been
studied in detail before.

1.2 Purpose

This report introduces a new perspective on monetary compensation by introducing the
concept of wage distribution volatility (WDV). The WDV is a measure of how much the
relative pay difference between the CEO and other employees fluctuates over time. A low
WDV indicates that all employees are rewarded and punished similarly in good and bad
times. A high WDV indicates that either the CEO or the other employees have a highly
variable salary, or that both have a highly variable salary that is uncorrelated with each
other. The report investigates how this amount of "fairness" within a company affects
its performance. The concept of pay gap volatility amounts for interesting mechanisms
not covered by looking at each group separately, or just looking at the size of the pay
gap.
     Section 2 describes relevant research related to this topic and introduces possible
mechanisms affecting the results. Section 3 and 4 describe the data and methods, re-
spectively. The method is centered around a linear regression model, described in section
4.4, but a binary classifier in the form of a support vector machine is also implemented.
Section 5 acknowledges potential biases of the results. The results and corresponding
discussion is presented in section 6. The report concludes in section 7, including recom-
mendations for future research.

                                      4
2 Extended Background and Mechanisms

WDV is based on monetary data and captures extrinsic motivation in the form of mon-
etary compensation. However, the definition of the WDV is such that it may serve as a
measure of fairness within the company. Intrinsic motivation is therefore a highly impor-
tant aspect affecting the outcome of our study, in addition to extrinsic motivators. Even
though our aim is not to draw conclusions regarding drivers and motivators for employ-
ees besides the pure monetary aspect, extrinsic and intrinsic motivation is interlinked
in a complex relationship, and many of the mechanisms behind WDV as a predictor for
performance are intrinsic. Kohn (1995) motivates a number of factors pointing towards
a complicated relationship between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, e.g. 1) Employees
may feel punished if an expected reward is not given. 2) Effective team work is under-
mined by reward schemes that create competition. 3) Rewards pulls the focus away from
root-causes of problems, towards temporary solutions. 4) Monetary incentives weakens
intrinsic motivation by shifting focus to the amount of pay from the work itself [5]. While
Kohn and many other authors are skeptical towards reward programs (see e.g. McGregor
(1960) [6]) the obvious logic of reward programs is that employees work harder for more
money. It also has to be stated once again that WDV measures the change of the pay
gap over time, which captures how evenly distributed the rewards are within the com-
pany, expressing a sense of fairness. The mechanisms behind the relationship between
WDV and performance thus vary in nature. In this section, a few of the most important
mechanisms are presented.

2.1 The Macroeconomic Aspects in Sweden

Sweden is, according to Statista [7], the second most unionized country in the world at 67
percent of total employees. The effects of unionization are according to Lemieux (1998)
increased average wages as well as compressed returns to observable measures of skill [8].
This means that the variance of employee salary is decreased when introducing unions.
Especially, dramatically lowering the employee wage in bad times does not seem to be
common in a highly unionized country. Lemieux uses data from Canada, which is the
sixth most unionized country. This suggests that a high WDV in Sweden is mostly due to
changes in CEO salary, and less because of a variable component in the salaries for other
employees. This does not however exclude the possibility that a low WDV may coexist
with a highly variable CEO salary, if the company policy is such that all employees

                                      5
gets rewarded in good times. This may still prove to be a factor worth investigating,
making the WDV contributing more information than just using the volatility of the
CEO salary.
     Another factor regarding unionization is that it may contribute to employees striving
more towards overall pay-equality and ‘fairness’ when it comes to compensation. Swedish
companies might with this reasoning be more prone to applying a wage distribution
that contributes to a lower WDV than other countries. If there is a correlation between
‘fairness’ and performance, this could imply that Swedish workers, and employers for that
matter, value the collective good and promotes these ideas through a fair distribution of
earnings, keeping employees happy and motivated. Sweden would therefore have a lower
WDV than most other countries. Former king Gustaf VI Adolfs motto: Plikten framför
allt - Duty above all, might still be very much relevant in today’s Sweden if this is the
case.

2.2 Profit Sharing and the Free Rider Problem

A classic dilemma concerning profit sharing is the free rider problem. In big firms,
where individual performance is hard, perhaps even impossible, to measure, rewarding
employees as groups for good performance might be the only feasible compensation plan
a manager can design. The idea of rewarding every employee for a job well done is
generous and would be the most natural way of compensating the employees, in the
ideal world that is. The problem arise when the most talented employees feel mistreated
and overlooked by management, and even though they get a piece of the profit-pie, they
are not content, due to the fact that the rest of his or her co-workers, who might not
deserve this reward as much, also de facto gets rewarded. A generous compensation
plan implemented in this way might rather create discontent among the employees that
the company most want to retain. A Tournament model might be more fitting, as hard
working employees will strive toward a promotion, rather than sharing at their current
level. [9]
     The implication on our study is that larger firms with more employees who have a
harder task monitoring every worker will probably not contribute to a possible correlation
as much as smaller firms. Large firms may by this reasoning have a higher WDV than
smaller firms. Smaller firms on the other hand, where individual effort is more easily
monitored, should naturally in more cases have a profit-sharing program in place.

                                      6
2.3 Productivity and Motivation

High productivity should not be perceived as the only factor affecting performance, but
productivity is nonetheless important for any company. In a study by Pfeffer and Langton
(1993) [10], high wage dispersion within academic departments have shown clear negative
effects on individual faculty members satisfaction and research productivity. The results
also point out that the negative effects of wage dispersion are lower at private universities,
when salaries are less likely to be known. This shows that one’s relative standing in the
wage hierarchy has a negative effect, if that information is disclosed to the individual.
The authors continue to discuss the effects on performance and concludes that pay-for-
performance is not always the case in many firms. The individual salary level may not
be solely based on performance but on other factors as well, such as favoritism. These
results tell us that low wage dispersion may be more important in companies where
salaries are more likely to be known, such as smaller companies, where relations between
management and employees may be more intimate. The findings in the article also have
implications on wage dispersion and performance, as compensation may not always be a
result of satisfactory individual performance. Further, Levine (1989) [13] argues that a
more compressed wage structure increases productivity.
     Van Herpen et. al. [11] discuss how reciprocity and fairness is important in employee
motivation. In order to maximize incentives, "the surplus, created by the agency contract
should be fairly divided". He continues to argue that for risk averse agents, transparency
plays an important role, as a transparent system communicates the rules associated with
the contract, creating better understanding and a higher level of support.
     This theory suggests that the effect of wage dispersion on performance have filters
that make a relationship harder to deduce. It depends e.g. on the level transparency and
the personalities of individuals in the firm. While the theory covers wage dispersion and
not WDV, it is close at hand to carry these effects over to WDV as well.

2.4 Tournament Theory

Lazear and Rosen (1981) [12] invents tournament theory to analyze the effect of wages on
incentives. They show that when workers are risk neutral, wages based upon rank induce
the same efficient allocation of resources as an incentive reward scheme based on indi-
vidual output levels. This suggests that some amount of WDV, based on rewards being
biased towards higher hierarchical levels, may not be negative for performance.

                                      7
     The conclusion of previous research seems to be that some wage dispersion has a
positive effect on firm performance. This is further discussed by Heyman (2002) [14]. He
states that there are conflicting views as to how more compressed wage structures affect
firm performance and he also uses the tournament model to show how “the prize” of a
promotion is used as an incentive when monitoring of each workers performance is costly.
Heyman’s conclusion is that there is a positive relationship between wage dispersion and
firm performance for white-collar-workers between 1991 and 1995. This is however not
straightforward to assume is valid for WDV, in addition to wage distribution. Others
argue that individual effort as well as cooperation is reduced when the wage distribution
is perceived to be unfair (Akerlof and Yellen, 1990) [15]. A high WDV is intuitively
unfair, which is arguably the reason for the attention in media, but since the studies do
not explicitly mention profit sharing or some other sense of WDV, we treat conclusions
about WDV with precaution.

2.5 Preferences Among Graduates

Lyons et al. (2010) [16] present that millennials in Canada found that the most important
factor of a job was rapid advancement and pay rises with the average expectation for
a promotion within 15 months. However, 71 percent would accept a less-than-ideal
first job. They show that graduates in Canada put more emphasis on individualistic
factors and a nurturing environment than a high initial salary. They do however, expect
rapid advancement and also the opportunity to develop new skills. The results support
that a high wage distribution might not be perceived as something bad, but rather
that millennials see this as an opportunity. As a clear majority are willing to start at
a less-than-ideal firm, it also supports a higher wage distribution. It might also be the
case that with ambition to make more money in the future, comes the realization and the
understanding that one must start with a low salary but that the promise of high return in
the future attracts graduates. The results presented by Lyons is consistent with previous
research by Quinn Trank et. al (2002) [17]. They conclude that high achieving graduates
put great emphasis on challenging and rewarding work, opportunities for training and
promotion opportunities. This group also show tendencies toward favoring pay-schemes
based on individual rather than group performance, which is also consistent with Lyon’s
conclusion, that millennials put greater emphasis on individualistic factors. No evidence
suggest however, that high achievers are willing to start at a less-than-ideal-firm and
work their way up. What all graduates seem to favour, is individualistic treatment and

                                      8
the prospect of rapid advancement.
     In firms that are abundant of these employees, rewarding and punishing the higher
levels relatively more than the lower levels may be an attractive feature. This is further
evidence on that the relationship between WDV and performance depends on which
kind of employees the company has, and it may be a point to test for differences in e.g.
industry.

2.6 Human Capital

Performance, equity and monetary based incentives have in the past been more of a
privilege for top management rather than for lower level employees. In recent years
however, more companies have adopted company wide incentive programs. Decision-
making is performed on all levels in most firms and aligning all employees with the
shareholders ambition have therefore become more important (Frye, 2004) [18]. Frye
shows a significant positive relation between Equity-Based-Compensation for employees
and firm performance, indicating that when firms become more human capital intensive,
compensation plans become more important for retaining employees.

                                      9
3 Data

Compensation for the CEO, the total compensation for all employees, and the number
of employees were manually collected from annual reports for 129 companies registered
on Stockholm Stock Exchange in August 2014. This corresponds to 49 % of the listed
companies. The companies are divided into ten industries. These industries can be seen
in e.g. [19].
    Shareholder return, Rj,t, was collected from Yahoo Finance as adjusted returns
(adjusted for both dividends and splits). Weekly values of the expected market return,
E(Rmt), and the risk free rate, Rft, were collected from the Swedish House of Finance
data center.
     All data were collected for the seven year period 2010-2016. From the annual reports
871 instances of salary and employee data was collected. 91 of the 129 companies had
complete data for the whole period (also considering that some companies did not have
complete stock data on Yahoo) and were used in the model, meaning that 637 instances
of salary and employee data were used in the end. We would like to stress that even
though each of the 91 companies exist seven times in the data, each company only exists
as one data point in the end. This is because we always calculate the volatility or mean of
a certain measure over the whole period. For example, each company only has one WDV
and one alpha. This means that we cannot and should not consider fixed effects.
     As it was discovered during initial data analysis that firms with more than about
1000 employees did not produce any pattern, the data is slightly biased towards com-
panies with less than 1000 employees. Furthermore, the choice was also biased towards
firms that provided annual reports in Swedish with well-structured information for all
collected data. Other than this, the sample can still not be considered randomized since
no sophisticated sampling method was implemented, even if the samples were picked in
a random fashion.
     The final analysis consists of companies with less than 1000 employees, WDV below
10 and alpha between -2 and 2. With these restrictions, 39 companies were eligible.
     The salary data collection was possible since Swedish corporate law (ÅRL, 5 Kap,
40 §) requires all listed companies to disclose information about the remuneration of top
managers including the CEO in their annual reports.

                                     10
4 Methods

4.1 The Ideal Experiment: Enabling better Comparison Between
    Firms

A comparison between all firms regardless of characteristics is not ideal. In the ideal
world, firms with different WDVs would be compared only to firms with all other param-
eters fixed. This is necessary for determining causation and not just correlation.
     One group of parameters is those affecting performance. Hawawini et al. (2003)
demonstrated that variance in firm performance is more attributable to industry-level
factors rather than firm-level factors for firms in the US [24]. However, McNamara
et al. (2005) take issue with their methodology and demonstrate that this is not the
case [25]. Matyjas (2014) determines that the industry effects have no significance for
performance, and displays some evidence for some effect from firm specific factors for
Polish companies [26]. Furman (2000) investigates four OECD countries and finds that
firm-specific factors are predominantly determining performance, even though industry
and corporate parent effects are also important [27]. Duhaime and Stimpert (1990)
summarize that industry, extent of diversification, economical, as well as organizational
factors influence performance [28]. Using alpha as performance measure incorporates
economical effects and also the industry effect of leverage. While it is unclear how much
industry affects the results, industry differences will be tested for in the analysis.
     Discussions about firm specific factors are often revolving around financial measures
or ownerships (see e.g. Chandrapala and Knápková (2013) and Barbosa and Louri (2005)
[29] [30]). However, the firm specific parameters we are most concerned about is the
internal motivating factors for the employees at each company, which will affect how the
company responds to a certain WDV. These may in fact also be seen at industry-level.
One mechanism behind this is explained in section 2.5. Additionally, it would not be
surprising e.g. if employees at companies in the financial sector may be more accepting
and motivated by large executive bonuses, than employees in tech-firms. There probably
exist a multitude of firm-specific factors to separate by, however the only such factor used
in this report is size expressed as the number of employees. Size may be of significant
importance as discussed in section 2.2. Only using size as a separating firm-specific factor
may be a significant deviation from the ideal experiment.
     As no sophisticated sampling method was implemented, the sample is not random-

                                     11
ized appropriately. However, this effect is mitigated by the fact that our initial sample
of 129 companies covers 49 % of the population (the number of companies registered on
the Stockholm Stock Exchange in 2014 was 265). Clustering of standard errors for a
small sample would oftentimes be necessary, but there are arguments against the need
for clustering in this context. Abadie et al. argue that clustering is either a sampling
design or experimental design issue [20]. If the sample is a subset of clusters, there is
a sampling design issue. However, our sample includes all industries and most likely all
other relevant clustering dimensions (to be precise, when applying all boundaries, the
industries utilities, telecommunications, and oil & gas are not prevalent, but it can be
reasonably argued that the number of these companies would not be more than very few
even if including the whole population). This is due to the large size of our sample. If
the assignment is correlated within the clusters, there is an experimental design issue.
Because our treatment is assigned at the individual level (and we do not have multiple
time periods) this does not either apply to our data. Thus, we find support for not im-
plementing clustering of standard errors in this report, since we do not have a significant
sampling or experimental design issue. Clustering is therefore not implemented.

4.2 Measuring Performance

There are many metrics for judging firm performance (see e.g. Al-Matari et al. (2014) for
a review of many accounting and market based performance dimensions [21]). Bacidore
et al. (1997) discuss the operating versus trading-based performance. They state that
shareholders are interested in the abnormal returns, which is the excess of what one would
expect to earn for a company in the particular systematic risk class. A positive abnormal
return means that the shareholder has earned more than the risk-adjusted cost of capital.
A negative abnormal return means inadequate compensation for risk. [22]
     The abnormal stock returns is measured by alpha. The alpha for firm i in time
period t is defined as the shareholder return, Ri,t, minus the expected shareholder return,
E(Ri,t).
                              αj,t = Ri,t − E(Ri,t) (1)

E(Ri,t) is calculated using the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), which states that

                         E(Ri,t) = Rft + βi[E(Rmt) − Rft], (2)

where Rft is the risk free rate in period t, E(Rmt) is the expected market return in

                                     12
period t, and βi is the sensitivity of the expected excess asset returns to the expected
excess market returns. βi is a measure of the firm’s systematic risk. It is calculated in
this report for every firm i as
                                    Cov(Ri,t, Rmt)
                                                                                       (3)
                                     V ar(Rmt)
     The problem with alpha is that shareholder wealth creation need not be the same as
firm performance. In the long run, the alpha and any other performance should converge,
but they are not generally the same in a one-year period [22]. The company may be
"cooking the books" or implementing other methods for short-term gains affecting the
stock price. However, since we aggregate the performance for a seven year period, this
problem is diminished. If a company has a positive alpha in total during this period, it
has arguably performed well. With regard to the seven year period, we therefore suggest
that alpha is an appropriate measure for company performance.

4.3 Choosing Independent Variables

4.3.1 Wage Dispersion Volatility

The point of this study is to compare how WDV affects firm performance. The WDV is
a measure of how much the relative pay difference fluctuates over years. A high WDV
is caused by a highly variable salary of either the CEO or of the other employees, or
that both is variable with different performance metrics in the foundation. A low WDV
means that the salaries for the CEO and the other employees fluctuates together in a
correlated manner, or that none of the salaries fluctuates significantly at all.
    If C and A are vectors with the CEO salary and average employee salary for every
year respectively, the WDV is defined as

                 √
                                 V ar(C/A)
                                10000                                           (4)
                                    M ean(C)

The WDV is thus adjusted for the size of the CEO wage in order to eliminate the size
dependence. It is multiplied by 10000 in order to obtain more convenient numbers. C
and A include seven data points for every company, and the result is one WDV value for
every company.
     An improvement would be to collect remuneration data for all executives in addi-
tion to the CEO. This would have made the possibility of a concept closer to the Gini

                                     13
coefficient possible. The Gini coefficient is an economical measure of the inequality, for
example in income distribution, built on the Lorenz curve. Including welfare services,
Sweden has the lowest Gini coefficient in the world [23]. In order to save time however,
we assume that a certain CEO salary either suggests a certain philosophy for other ex-
ecutives, or that the CEO salary on its own is enough for other employees to feel the
effect.

4.3.2 Relative Standard Deviation of CEO Salary

The relative standard deviation of CEO salary (RSDC) may capture most of WDV. This
may be because C is significantly more varying than A, as motivated in section 2. This
motivates an investigation of RSDC against alpha, as well as a multiple regression with
RSDC together with WDV against alpha. We define RSDC as
                 √
                                   V ar(C)
                                                                                       (5)
                                 M ean(C)

4.3.3 CEO Salary

Finally, the size of the CEO salary is analyzed. Since the WDV and RSDC is adjusted
for the size of CEO salary, it may be interesting to see the effect of CEO salary as a
complement. The CEO salary is the vector C, and the variable used will be

                                  M ean(C) (6)

4.4 Regression Model

Linear regression was implemented in the programming language R. The assumptions for
linear regression are 1) that the relationship is linear, 2) That there is no auto-correlation
between residuals, 3) Homoscedasticity, 4) Multivariate normality (univariate in our case)
and 5) No or little multicollinearity (not relevant when having only one regressor). As
only one independent variable is used for the prediction, it is possible to see the validity
of the assumptions for the linear regression directly in the plot. Especially the linearity
and homoscedasticity is straightforward to see in our plots. We will plot the residuals
of the model as well as the Q-Q plot in order to demonstrate the auto-correlation and
normality assumptions explicitly.
     Alpha was the target in all experiments. The first analysis included all data with

                                     14
WDV as the predictor. Then, the selection was restricted to companies with less than
1000 employees. Further, the selection was limited to companies with alphas between -2
and 2, as well as a WDV below 10.
     The equation for the regression model is the following.

                              y = β0 + β1x +  (7)

y is a vector of the alphas for every company and x is a vector of observed values in the
regressor (predictor). β0 is the intercept, β1 a parameter interpreted as the slope, and 
the error term.
    The predictor x is the WDV for every company in with the three different data
selections described above. Additionally, RSDC and the mean of CEO salary is used as
predictors in separate regressions using equation (7). In total, we perform five regressions
using this model with different predictors x. Three using WDV (4), one using RSDC (5),
and one using the mean of CEO salary (6).
     A multiple regression with WDV and RSDC does not fulfill the multicollinearity
condition. The covariance between these two are 0.67. Figure 11 in the appendix displays
this covariance.

4.5 Binary Classifier

We use a binary classifier in order to further investigate how the WDV serves as a
predictor for success. The classifier also visualizes the results in an alternative way. A
support vector machine (SVM) serves this purpose well. The boundary of a support
vector machine is easily controlled through setting the kernel and adjusting the slack
parameter C. The kernel specifies the constraint on the boundary, and C sets the relative
importance of avoiding slack versus getting a wider margin. We used a linear kernel in
order not to overfit. We used a wide margin of C = 10 since our data undoubtedly
contains a lot of information not accounted for. The SVM originally has low bias and
high variance but increasing the slack lowers the variance and increases the bias. While
a much higher variance than that of the linear regression surely leads to overfitting, a
slightly higher variance may capture a pattern not seen in the linear model. The SVM
was generated in R without any further modifications.
     In order to test the prediction accuracy of the SVM, the data will be split into 75%
training data and 25% test data.

                                     15
5 Potential Biases in the Study

Different firms use different performance measures as basis for their respective reward
programs. Our predictor is based on internal comparison of wages within each company,
and does not take into account factors that may affect how the employees at each firm
react to certain WDVs. Discriminating only by size and industry does probably leave a
significant amount unaccounted for.
     Another problem with the predictor is its use of all employees no matter the com-
pany structure. Additionally, the underlying data is compiled of salaries from the whole
companies, as groups. Companies have low wage employees in developing countries to
a varying extent, entirely disconnected from the work environment in Sweden and other
Western countries. These employees will arguably not expect to be rewarded differently
depending on the state of the company, and have little information about other parts of
the company, if any information at all. Comparison of companies with different number
of employees in developing countries is therefore fallacious. Figure 12 in the appendix
shows two deceivingly similar companies in the same industry, where one of them has a
third of the workforce in Sri Lanka.
     Change of CEO and the associated severance pay may distort the results. A change
of CEO usually means a significantly higher total salary for the year because of extra
remuneration for both the new and especially the prior CEO. As WDV is based on total
CEO salary, this problem is not avoided. However, the extra total CEO remuneration
may also be a factor that we want to capture. Extensive severance pay to the CEO is
preferably captured by the WDV. The problem is that the number of changes over the
seven year period varies for the firms, which provides an unfair comparison.
     There is also the issue of policy changes within the firm for CEO remuneration.
There may be cases where the CEO receives a permanent raise or cut that may be in
line with the essence of a low WDV, even though the WDV inevitably is high.
     We do not consider many of the factors that may affect firm performance and at
the same time might be correlated with our predictor. For example, it could be the
case that foreign ownership leads to lower performance and higher variable CEO salary
at the same time. The meaningful relationship would in this case be foreign ownership
tied to alpha, instead of WDV tied to alpha. Furthermore, firm performance may be
the cause of a highly variable CEO or other employee salary. Perhaps companies that
do worse have to make wage cuts in response, increasing WDV as an effect of poor

                                     16
performance. We cannot exclude that there are unobserved variables or any other reason
causing endogeneity, which means that any correlation found in this report should not
be taken for granted to be a causal relationship in the desired direction.
     Finally, our method for exclusion of outliers is very basic. For alpha, we judge that
a firm with less than -2 or more than 2, is delivering too abnormal returns to be part
of the study, since a high absolute alpha means that something specific outweighs all
other factors abnormally. For WDV, we discovered that most values is below 10, and
that firms with WDV above 10 had unusual characteristics in some sense, e.g. numerous
CEO replacements. The results depend strongly on where the lines are drawn. This is
for example seen in the different results of the previously mentioned Hawawini et al. [24]
and McNamara et al [25].

                                     17
6 Results

6.1 Linear Regression

When using all data, we find no correlation between WDV and alpha, arguably due to
outliers. This is seen in figure 1. Figure 1 serves as the motivation for limiting WDV
and alpha. However, it is also seen that our limits for alpha and WDV is decided rather
arbitrarily.

Figure 1: WDV as a predictor for alpha without exclusion of outliers. We see a pattern
for companies with limited alpha and WDV.

     When limiting the selection to alpha between -2 and 2 as well as limiting WDV to
less than 10, we find a significant correlation. Focusing on companies with less than 1000
further improves the correlation. This also limits the problem of employees in developing
countries, since the vast majority of Swedish companies with less than 1000 employees
do not have many of those employees.

                                     18
Figure 2: WDV as a predictor for alpha for companies with WDV < 10 and alpha between
-2 and 2. Adjusted R-squared: 0.18.

Figure 3: WDV as a predictor for alpha for companies with less than 1000 employees,
WDV < 10 and alpha between -2 and 2. Adjusted R-squared: 0.26.

     If lowering the limit of WDV so that the two data points furthest to the right
in figure 3 is excluded, the adjusted R-squared increases to 0.44. This highlights the
importance of the boundary for outliers. See table 2 in the appendix for the complete
regression information of figures 1, 2 and 3.
                                                                                              2
    Figure 4 displays the correlation between the RSDC and alpha. The adjusted R is
close to that of figure 3. This suggests that WDV is not a better predictor for performance

                                     19
than RSDC. WDV may still convey additional information, even though this information
is not enough to produce a significantly better result. The correlation of 0.67 is not high
enough to prove an argument that WDV is useless when already having RSDC. We
present no analysis of A separately and no closer analysis of the relationships between
the different parameters to be able to deduce a possible information or prediction gain
from using WDV. The main question is if the found relationship between WDV and
alpha is solely due to successful companies keeping salary for all employees including
CEO constant, or if the trend persists even for companies with a higher employee salary
volatility, as long as the CEO also has a high salary volatility. It is less common that
employees get a varying salary to the extent of the CEO (if the CEO has a highly
varying salary), and we have not investigated how often this occurs in our data. This
means that we may have missed a potentially stronger relationship between WDV and
alpha, compared to RSDC and alpha.

Figure 4: Relative standard deviation of CEO salary (RSDC) as a predictor for alpha
for companies with less than 2000 employees, WDV < 10 and alpha between -2 and 2.
Adjusted R-squared: 0.25.

     Just using the CEO salary as predictor for alpha yields no significant relationship,
as seen in figure 5. This suggests that the size of the CEO salary has nothing to do with
performance for companies within the specified outlier boundaries.

                                     20
Figure 5: CEO salary as a predictor for alpha for companies with less than 2000 employ-
ees, WDV < 10 and alpha between -2 and 2.

     The residuals for figure 3 are plotted in figure 9 and the Q-Q plot is in figure 10,
in the appendix. These show that the conditions 2 and 4 for linearity are fulfilled. The
fulfillment of the other conditions can be seen directly in the previous plots.
     Regarding biases, we can see examples of severance pay issues and policy changes
in the underlying data. For example, in Malmbergs elektriska, the CEO recieved about
1 million SEK and one year received a permanent raise to about 2 million SEK, while
salaries of the company otherwise fluctuated together with the salary of the CEO. 2
million SEK is still a low salary for a CEO of a listed company. The essence of what we
want to capture suggests a low WDV for this company, but in reality the one time raise
severely impacts the WDV. Malmbers elektriska was however excluded due to an alpha
above 2.
     As stated in the method, the comparison would also be separated by industry and
size. Figure 6 reveals the industry for each data point presented earlier in figure 3. Since
there are only 39 data points in the sample, divided over seven industries, comparing the
fit for each industry will not be fruitful. We judge that this is the case even when not
limiting the sample to less than 1000 employees, producing 59 data points, supported
by the fact that the naked eye could not find anything particularly interesting even for
this graph (not shown in the report). We therefore conclude that no particular difference
between the industries is proved.

                                     21
Figure 6: WDV as a predictor for alpha for companies with less than 1000 employees,
WDV < 10 and alpha between -2 and 2. The data points are labelled with their respective
industry.

     The mechanisms presented in section 2 helps to illuminate the results. Profit shar-
ing and the free rider problem along with monitoring difficulties is one explanation to
why the pattern weakens with larger companies. Furthermore, when workers are more
informed about their standing in the compensation hierarchy, which is more often the
case for smaller companies, they are more prone to take interest in receiving a fair com-
pensation. The macroeconomic aspects in Sweden is a possible explanation for finding
a strong relationship overall, and for smaller companies in particular. Unionization and
the mindset in Sweden including less hierarchies make Sweden a rather special case, and
it would be interesting to investigate if the strength of the relationship varies together
with the degree of e.g. unionization for different countries. Mechanisms pointing to-
wards different trends for different industries did not have a fair chance to be discussed
because of the low amount of data points for each industry, making drawing conclusions
difficult.

6.2 SVM

The SVM model yields a different graphical overview of the relationship between WDV
and alpha, which also includes the number of employees. This method enables detailed
separation by size, which was the second separating factor for closing in on the ideal
experiment. Including firms with more than 1000 employees (limited to 10000 because

                                     22
of outliers far above these numbers), leads to a fair amount of miss-classifications as seen
in figure 7. However, when reducing the sample to 1000 employees, the classification
performs remarkably well as seen in figure 8. We can see that the threshold of 1000
employees serves its purpose well, and no further separation is constructive, perhaps due
to the limited number of data points.

Figure 7: WDV combined with the number of employees as a predictor for alpha for
companies with less than 10000 employees, WDV < 10 and alpha between -2 and 2. Red
cross or ring marks a company with positive alpha, while black means negative alpha.
The rings are the data points that serve as support vectors for the model.

                                     23
Figure 8: The same as Figure 7 except that the data is limited to companies with less
than 1000 employees.

     The prediction quality after training on 75% of the sample is presented in table 1.
Observe that the number of predictions is small because of the limited number of com-
panies below 1000 employees and alpha ∈ {−2, 2} in our sample, and that the prediction
is for 25% of this sample.

                                         Truth
                          Prediction alpha < 0 alpha > 0
                         alpha < 0 3 1
                         alpha > 0 1 4

                             Table 1: SVM accuracy

     The numbers on the diagonal is the correctly classified companies. The accuracy of
the model is thus 78%. According to this, we can look at a company within the specified
number of employees and alpha at the Stockholm Stock Exchange, and determine with
a 78% accuracy if that company has a positive or negative alpha. Of course, the exact
number of 78% will not persist when changing sample size, but it has still been proven
that this model performs remarkably well above chance. This brings into question if the
method in some way is endogenous, as discussed in section 5. Perhaps companies with
large WDV have a large WDV because they have not performed well and had to make
temporary cuts to e.g. salary, making the salaries volatile. This would imply that a com-
pany cannot expect to become more successful by keeping salaries constant. If the model

                                     24
is indeed producing a causal relationship in the desired direction, this report provides
strong support for keeping the CEO salaries relatively constant over time for the specified
company characteristics. Considering the theory presented in the introduction in section
2 as well as section 2.1 and 2.2, we furthermore argue that salaries for other employees
than the CEO should be held relatively constant. Only striving towards keeping salaries
constant however, without adopting the company culture related to this practice, may
render futile results anyway.

                                     25
7 Conclusion

This paper has presented a new way of analyzing wage dispersion by introducing wage
dispersion volatility as a predictor for success. We present new research in a field that
previously focused either on management compensation or employee compensation sep-
arately, and neither as relative changes over time. Measuring relative volatility based
on intra-company wage dispersion enables comparison between different companies with
different remuneration plans. The regression analysis shows clear indications that with a
lower WDV, companies are more likely to perform above average, i.e. positive abnormal
returns. In Sweden, especially for companies with less than 1000 employees, having a
more ’fair’ compensation scheme pays off. One concern with our paper is the cause of
WDV, as it could depend either on average wages changing or the CEO wage changing,
                                                            2
or both. By using RSDC as a predictor for alpha, R  = 0.25, while using WDV as a
                                     2
predictor for alpha resulted in R  = 0.26. This means that the RSDC to a large ex-
tent explains WDV. It remains a question however, if the inclusion of average employee
salary contributes anything. The average employee salary was not investigated further.
We suspect that there are few companies that have a constant CEO salary but varying
average employee salary, producing a high WDV this way, or highly varying salaries that
correlate enough to produce a low WDV. This means that even if WDV would be able
to better explain alpha than RSDC, lack of data may be an obstacle for further research.
The paper finds support in previous research on similar topics. Mainly, typical Swedish
values concerning fairness in the workplace along with heavy unionization explain why
we see a strong trend. Other research have pointed out the effect of salary transparency,
as well as monitoring difficulties. The findings in this research align with our results that
fairness is more important in relatively smaller companies.
    Finally, a comment about the causality between WDV or RSDC and alpha has
to be made. It should not be taken for granted that we have found causality in the
described direction and that endogeneity does not exist. Unobserved variables correlated
with both WDV and alpha, e.g. foreign ownership, may explain the results. It could
also be the case that firms react to bad times by increasing volatility of salaries. This
has neither been proved nor disproved in this paper. The SVM is able to predict the
sign of alpha with 78% accuracy. From a pessimistic standpoint, this high number alone
suggests that either the data selection is skewed, or there is some form of unaccounted
relationship.

                                     26
     For future research, it would be interesting to compare our results with other coun-
tries with similar characteristics beside unionization, to see how this might affect WDV.
Another topic of interest would be to conduct further research focusing more specifically
on different industries. Further, one could investigate if low-WDV firms having a highly
variable CEO salary also fit the trend shown between WDV and alpha. This connects to
the main question left unanswered: if RSDC fully explains the WDV or if the combina-
tion with average employee salary add further prediction accuracy. The average employee
salary was not investigated separately, and doing so may be a first step for further re-
search in this topic. Low-WDV firms could also be further investigated in order to find
a common denominator among these.

                                     27
8 Appendix

                     Figure 9: Residuals from the plot in Figure 3

                       Figure 10: Q-Q from the plot in Figure 3

                                     28
                                             Dependent variable:
                            alpha alpha alpha
                               (1) (2) (3)

                                                                 ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
WDV −0.031 −0.234             −0.274
                             (0.052) (0.064) (0.073)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 1.686                 0.949                   0.985
                             (0.548) (0.299) (0.341)

Observations 91 59 39
  2
R                         0.004 0.191 0.275
             2
Adjusted R               −0.007 0.177 0.256
Residual Std. Error 4.112 (df = 89) 0.971 (df = 57) 0.989 (df = 37)
                                                        ∗∗∗                         ∗∗∗
F Statistic 0.368 (df = 1; 89) 13.485   (df = 1; 57) 14.061   (df = 1; 37)

                                                                           ∗         ∗∗          ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;  p<0.05;   p<0.01

Table 2: Summary of the three regressions with WDV as predictor. (1) includes all data,
(2) is limited to WDV < 10 and alpha ∈ {−2, 2}, (3) is additionally limited to less than
1000 employees.

                                           Dependent variable:
                                                alpha

                                                                     ∗∗∗
             RSDC −5.331
                                                    (1.452)

                                                                    ∗∗∗
                 Constant 1.091
                                                    (0.374)

                 Observations 39
                      2
             R                        0.267
                                2
                Adjusted R                     0.247
                 Residual Std. Error 0.994 (df = 37)
                                                        ∗∗∗
                  F Statistic 13.475   (df = 1; 37)

                                                 ∗         ∗∗          ∗∗∗
              Note:  p<0.1;  p<0.05;   p<0.01

Table 3: Summary of the regression with relative standard deviation of CEO salary as
predictor.

                                     29
                                           Dependent variable:
                                                alpha
             RSDC −2.995
                                                    (2.023)

            WDV −0.166
                                                    (0.102)

                                                                    ∗∗∗
                 Constant 1.235
                                                    (0.376)

                 Observations 39
                      2
             R                        0.317
                                2
                Adjusted R                     0.279
                 Residual Std. Error 0.973 (df = 36)
                                                       ∗∗∗
                  F Statistic 8.353   (df = 2; 36)

                                                 ∗         ∗∗          ∗∗∗
              Note:  p<0.1;  p<0.05;   p<0.01

Table 4: Summary of the regression with WDV and RSDC as predictors. This regression
was subject to multicollinearity and is therefore rendered useless. The table serves as a
reference for any future interest.

           Figure 11: The correlation between WDV and RSDC visualized.

                                     30
                 (a) Hexpol

                                                         (b) Holmen

Figure 12: Number of employees in different countries for Hexpol and Holmen. Tables
collected from their respective 2016 annual reports.

                                     31
References

 [1] Cable, Dan, and Vermeulen, Freek, 2016, Stop Paying Executives for Performance,
    Harvard Business Review, February 23,
     https://hbr.org/2016/02/stop-paying-executives-for-performance.

 [2] Fahlenbrach Rüdiger, and Stulz, René M., 2011, Bank CEO incentives and the
     credit crisis, Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 99, Issue 1, pp. 11-26,
     https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X10001868.

 [3] Smirnova, Aleksandra S., and Zavertiaeva, Marina A., 2017, Which came first, CEO
      compensation or firm performance? The causality dilemma in European companies,
     Research in International Business and Finance, Volume 42,
     https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0275531916302616.

 [4] Henderson, Andrew D., and Fredrickson, James W., 2017, Top Management Team
    Coordination Needs and the CEO Pay Gap: A Competitive Test of Economic and
     Behavioral Views , Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 44, No. 1
     https://journals.aom.org/doi/abs/10.5465/3069339.

 [5] Kohn, Alfie, 1995, The case against reward programs, ACA Journal, June.

 [6] Douglas, McGregor, 1960, The Human Enterprise, McGraw Hill, New York.

 [7] McCarthy, Niall, 2017, The State Of The Unions, Statista.com,
     https://www.statista.com/chart/9919/the-state-of-the-unions/.

 [8] Lemieux, Thomas, 1998. Estimating the Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality in a
    Panel Data Model with Comparative Advantage and Nonrandom Selection, Journal
     of Labor Economics 16, no. 2, pp. 261-291,
     https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/209889.

 [9] Weitzman, Martin, and Kruse, Douglas, 1990, Profit Sharing and Productivity. The
     Economic Nature of the Firm: A Reader, ch. 20,
    https://books.google.se/books?hl=sv&lr=&id=Nu5HTngps1YC&oi=fnd&
    pg=PA288&dq=profit+sharing+and+performance&ots=GN9eOE8MRR&sig=
    4RkaI1r3A-yCilEObQrCOoMHxys&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=profit\
     %20sharing\%20and\%20performance&f=false.

[10] Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Langton, Nancy, 1993, The Effect of Wage Dispersion on
     Satisfaction, Productivity, and Working Collaboratively: Evidence from College and
     University Faculty, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 382-407,

                                     32
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2393373.pdf?refreqid=excelsior\
     %3A64792a19a896935f00b66e782e683eea.

[11] Herpen, Marco Van, Praag, Mirjam Van, and Cools, Kees, 2005, The Effects of
     Performance Measurement and Compensation on Motivation: An Empirical Study,
    De Economist 153, No. 3,
    https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007\%2Fs10645-005-1990-z.
     pdf.

[12] Lazear, Edward P., and Rosen, Sherwin, 1981, Rank-Order Tournaments as Opti-
    mum Labor Contracts, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89, No. 5, pp. 841-864,
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1830810.pdf?refreqid=excelsior\
     %3Ae120d2abff803e1707e16d02906834b5.

[13] Levine, David, 1989, Cohesiveness, Productivity, and Wage Dispersion,
    https://cloudfront.escholarship.org/dist/prd/content/qt8kd4d0p4/
     qt8kd4d0p4.pdf.

[14] Heyman, Fredrik, 2007, Pay inequality and firm performance: evidence from
    matched employer–employee data, Applied Economics, 37:11, pp. 1313-1327,
    https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00036840500142101?
     scroll=top&needAccess=true.

[15] Akerlof, George A., and Yellen, Janet L., 1990, The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis
    and Unemployment, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 105, No. 2, pp.
     255-283,
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2937787.pdf?refreqid=excelsior\
     %3Ad8245254436197ab659c2a10c696a45d.

[16] Lyons, Sean T., Ng, Eddy S. W., and Schweitzer, Linda, 2010, New Generation,
     Great Expectations: A Field Study of the Millennial Generation. J Bus Psychol, 25
    pp. 281–292,
    https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007\%2Fs10869-010-9159-4.
     pdf.

[17] Trank, Christine, Quinn, Rynes, Sara L., Bretz, and Robert D. Betz Jr., 2002,
    Attracting Applicants in the War for Talent: Differences in Work Preferences
    among High Achievers, Journal of Business and Psychology, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp.
     331-345,
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/25092775.pdf?refreqid=excelsior\
     %3A1f83670856ee485776ccd612a2e74af3.

[18] Frye, Melissa B., 2004, Equity-Based Compensation for Employees: Firm Perfor-

                                     33
    mance and Determinants, The Journal of Financial Research, Vol. XXVII, No. 1,
     pp. 31–54,
    https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/j.1475-6803.2004.
     00076.x.

[19] Euroinvestor, May 16 2018,
     http://www.euroinvestor.se/sektorer.

[20] Abadie, Alberto, Athey, Susan, Athey, Guido, and Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 2017, When
     Should You Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering?, Cornell University Library,
     https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.02926.

[21] Al-Matari, Ebrahim Mohammed, 2014, The Measurements of Firm Performance’s
    Dimensions, Asian Journal of Finance & Accounting, Vol. 6, No. 1
    http://www.macrothink.org/journal/index.php/ajfa/article/viewFile/
     4761/4198.

[22] Bacidore, Jeffrey M., Boquist, John A., Milbourn, Todd T., and Thakor, Anjan V.,
     1997, The Search for the Best Financial Performance Measure, Financial Anaiysts
    Journai, May/June,
    https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/9eaf/63ef01ec579a094c254d4f2573ff828c39fb.
     pdf.

[23] Ekonomifakta, 2018, Ginikoefficient - internationellt, February 12,
    https://www.ekonomifakta.se/Fakta/Arbetsmarknad/Loner/
     Ginikoefficient---internationellt/.

[24] Hawawini, Gabriel, Subramanian, Venkat, and Verdin, Paul, 2002, Is performance
     driven by industry-or firm-specific factors? A new look at the evidence, Strategic
    Management Journal, Volume 24, Issue 1,
     https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/smj.278.

[25] McNamara, Gerry, Aime, Federico, Vaaler, Paul M., 2005, Is performance driven
     by industry- or firm-specific factors? A response to Hawawini, Subramanian, and
    Verdin, Strategic Management Journal, Volume 26, Issue 11,
     https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/smj.496.

[26] Matyjas, Zbigniew, 2014, Industry and Firm Influences on Performance: Evidence
     from Polish Public Firms, Journal of Management Policy and Practice vol. 15(2),
     http://t.www.na-businesspress.com/JMPP/MatyjasZ_Web15_2_.pdf.

[27] Furman, Jeffrey L., 2000, Does industry matter differently in different places?, MIT
    – Sloan School of Management,

                                     34
    https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/4415/459654ac5665d778fd266c7e4e1cd0056514.
     pdf.

[28] Duhaime, Irene M., and Stimpert, J.L., 1998, One More Time: A Look at the Fac-
    tors Influencing Firm Performance, faculty working paper no. 90-1630, University
    of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
    https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/bitstream/handle/2142/30033/
     onemoretimelooka1630duha.pdf?sequence=2.

[29] Chandrapala, Pathirawasam, and Knápková, Adriana, 2013, Firm-specific factors
     and financial performance of firms in the Czech Republic, Acta Universitatis Agri-
     culturae et Silviculturae Mendelianae Brunensis, 2013, LXI, No. 7, pp. 2183–2190,
    https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/7f9d/02c3b98e5654b935ec4964b13e096f184cdc.
     pdf.

[30] Barbosa, Natália, and Louri, Helen, Corporate Performance: Does Ownership
    Matter? A Comparison of Foreign- and Domestic-Owned Firms in Greece and
    Portugal, Review of Industrial Organization, August 2005, Volume 27, Issue 1, pp
    73–102,
     https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007\%2Fs11151-005-4920-y.

                                     35