 Consumer bank runs in a world of central
         bank backed digital currency

                                                         †
           Emil Sjölander* Jakob Qvick
                    May 2018

                                 Abstract

This exploratory paper is intended to improve understanding of the potential effects of the
implementation of E-krona or similar CBDC’s, with emphasis on financial stability. Our
proposed experiment measures the impact of instant or delayed withdrawals in a modified
Diamond-Dybvig setup, where participants are exposed to changes in liquidity of their bank. We
also propose running treatments of the experiment with deposit insurance, in order to explore
how increased consumer liquidity may affect current deposit insurance policy. Our preliminary
hypotheses indicate that an introduction of E-krona might decrease the stability of the financial
system. They also indicate that current deposit insurance might not be sufficiently efficient in this
new context of CBDC’s.

              Keywords: financial stability, bank run, experiments, CBDC, E-krona
            JEL classification numbers: C72, C73, C92, D14, G4

                                Bachelor Thesis

                      Stockholm School of Economics

                            Supervisor: Marieke Bos

* 23693@student.hhs.se
† 23633@student.hhs.se

A special thanks to our supervisor for her valuable inspiration, support and guidance
This page is intentionally left blank.

                                                                                2
1 Introduction

Martin Dufwenberg’s article “Banking on Experiments?” (2013) states three possible motives for
running an economical experiment: “Speaking to theorists”, “Searching for facts” and
“Whispering in the ears of princes”. While our intention of this thesis is not to whisper in the
ears of princes, perhaps it is the other two. We hope to shed some light on the possible
implications on the financial stability in the banking system, would a central bank introduce
electronic cash such as proposed by Sveriges Riksbank due to the removal of physical cash. We
also wish to address how the current Swedish deposit insurance policy is impacted by a new form
of value storage and new media of transaction.

In this paper we propose an experiment which aims to do that, by answering the following
questions:
Will a central bank central bank digital currency (CBDC) – such as that proposed by Sveriges
Riksbank – increase consumers propensity to withdraw funds from their commercial bank in the
face of financial distress?
Is the current implementation of deposit insurance similarly effective in a financial system with
much greater liquidity of consumer funds?

                                                                                               1
Since the late 90’s the use of physical cash has been down-trending . Credit and debit cards were
initially introduced to create convenience to the process of carrying money in a safe manner,
while also it also offered unlimited (in most cases) access to your bank account. Introduction of
credit cards has led to a dwindling amount of people feeling the need to carry coins and bills. In
certain countries, such as Sweden, the development has been accelerated by retail banks
(henceforth referred to as “banks”, “retail bank” and “commercial banks”) demoting the use of
physical cash for their own commercial purposes. The reason for this is simple: management of
physical cash is a large cost for banks that could be levied through the expulsion of physical cash
as a payment method. Retailers, hotels and restaurants are following suit; more and more
companies are refusing cash to take physical cash, even in the face of customer dissatisfaction.

While the eradication of physical money is another step in the evolution of a digitized society -
which the Swedish government is actively promoting - the board members of Sveriges Riksbank

1
 Sveriges Riksbank’s Payment Statistics 2017. The decline is in relative acceleration and in 2015,
only one in five payments were done with physical cash.

                                                                                3
                2
are worried . One of the reasons is that the already oligopolic bank-sector in Sweden might
introduce higher fees on bank accounts and transactions as the alternative methods of payment

                                             3
and storage of money disappear . Such a situation, claims the Riksbank, would give Swedish
banks the opportunity to impose excessive fees upon their customers. Another reason is the
control over the M1 money supply. The Riksbank’s control over physical cash supply has
historically been a tool for controlling inflation, especially for consumer goods. Would physical
cash disappear, that tool would be obsolete, and retail banks would become the Riksbank’s sole
intermediary for control over M1.

As a repercussion, the Riksbank has announced an investigation regarding the subject of a digital

                                                                                                           45
currency fully backed by the central bank, furthermore referred to as CBDC . To guarantee the
currency’s value and safety, it is likely that a form of partially distributed ledger would be put in
place. In order to counteract the banks’ potential monopoly on deposit accounts, a suggestion
has been to allow citizens to store their money with the Riksbank. Consumers would, in a similar
fashion to banks, have direct access to the Riksbank’s balance sheet.

There are two different propositions on how to implement said digital currency: a register-based
E-krona and value-based E-krona. A register-based E-krona would be very similar to current
banking systems, with the difference that individuals as well as corporations may open a bank
account with the central bank. In principle, the central bank would then offer basic financial
services such as transactions and payment services. A value-based model would correspond more
closely to the limited use that physical cash represent today. E-kronas would be stored in a digital
wallet, and used for daily transaction of smaller size. This system would be largely replicating the
technology behind BitCoin and other cryptocurrencies.

In order to get E-kronor in your deposit account at Riksbanken or in your digital wallet, several
methods have been suggested. Deposition through ATMs, digital transactions and digital
“purchase” of E-kronor all seem like plausible solutions. Digital transactions from retail banks’
account to the central bank account would also mean that consumers would have a more

2
 Mats Dillén of Sveriges Riksbank, interview 2018-02-19

3
 Cecilia Skingsley, oral presentation, 11/4 Historiska Museet

4
 Central bank Backed Digital Currency

5
 Riksbankens E-kronaproject, 2017

                                                                                4
convenient mode of access to their “cash” as compared to withdrawing physical cash from a
retail bank office or an ATM.

There may be unintended side-effects from the introduction of CBDC’s or E-kronor. Gabriele
Camera (2017) comments in his paper on one of the possible risks – “[…] by design this
instrument would be quickly and cheaply transferable from and to intermediaries. This might
increase financial market volatility.” and later adding “In periods of uncertainty, households
might seek the safety of the central bank, thus giving rise to rapid outflows of funds from
commercial banks, as in a digital version of a bank run. This kind of volatility in funding liquidity
would naturally have implications for the way banks fund their projects and for the cost of
deposit insurance.”. It is likely that retail bank funding would become more unstable as a result of
a CBDC implementation - a topic we are going to explore further in this paper.

The possible implications on the optimal design of a deposit insurance are also interesting. Sträter
et al.’s (2008) paper show that many depositors choose to withdraw their funds from their bank in
times of financial distress, despite being aware about the deposit insurance. Some possible
reasons are that people are uncertain about the time it will take to get reimbursed, the consumers'
distrust in government authorities and/or short-term needs for liquidity. Another possible reason
is withdrawing funds being perceived as a less-risky option. For that reason, we believe it to be
particularly important to specifically monitor how deposit insurance affects consumer decisions
when new monetary technology is introduced.

The experiment we propose is intended to explore the implication of a banking system where
withdrawals from bank accounts are administered much more quickly. In the current state of
business, the withdrawal of significant amounts from a bank account, especially in times of crisis,
is a protracted affaire. This was certainly the case during the bank run at Northern Rock in the
UK (Shin, 2012). Due to sluggish withdrawals, Bank of England had time to partially or entirely
suspend convertibility of depositor assets, and the banks could in the end be saved. By
introducing a shared ledger technology where people can transfer electronic money Peer-to-Peer,
or to and from their central bank account in the matter of seconds, the speed of bank runs could
be elevated to a level never seen before – a case in which Bank of England would not have been
able to save Northern Rock.

                                                                                5
Consistent with previous experiments on bank runs, our proposed experiment is based upon the
framework created by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), henceforth referred to as DD. Almost all
modern literature on general equilibrium bank runs draws its origins from this classic article The
paper explains the origins of panics in the financial system and how it resembles a cooperation
game in game theory. General conclusions are that banks are vulnerable to the unpredictability of
deposits, but policy-making and optimal contracts can mitigate any risk of bank runs.

One of the points which Diamond and Dybvig raise is that under regular circumstances, the
necessary level of liquidity required to serve withdrawers is random and unpredictable. This is
due to the fact that the amount of people withdrawing their funds in a single time frame is
random. It is, however, mathematically improbable that a critical amount of individuals will make
withdrawals at the same point in time, since each individual withdrawal is expected to be mostly
uncorrelated under normal circumstances. Hence, banks can sell long-term loans whilst only
withholding a relatively low level of liquidity in correspondence to an expected, steady amount of
withdrawals per day.

Problems arise when depositors attempt to withdraw their funds from their bank simultaneously.
Simultaneous withdrawal may result in a liquidity crisis, as the bank’s momentary level of liquidity
falls short of the required amount to satisfy customers’ demand. In order to accommodate to
consumers’ demand for liquidity, the bank starts selling long-term assets and loans. The drawback
of selling long-term assets and loans is that it may normally only be sold at a considerable
discount. It also leads to lower returns on capital in future states. Therefore, by accommodating
to an excessive amount of withdrawers at the current point in time, the bank’s long-term
investors may take a considerable loss. As long-term savers notice that their holdings may not be
safe, they attempt to withdraw their funds at current time in spite of preferring to save for the
future. Further aggravation is caused by the fact that early runners may receive a larger amount of
the available liquidity than late runners. The reaction to withdraw from long-term investors
further deepens the crisis, which is the central finding of the DD model.

Hence, even banks with good financial stability and sufficient Tier 1 capital ratios, are susceptible
to go into bankruptcy caused by a bank run. What the DD model finds is that if a bank run is
anticipated by a depositor, the best response is to withdraw their money from the bank before
the bank has run out of liquidity. In this case, to withdraw becomes the dominating strategy. In
the extended model, including deposit insurance, DD arrives at the conclusion that optimal

                                                                                6
welfare may be achieved by a properly designed deposit insurance. The key features of the
deposit insurance are that any lost funds will be reimbursed in full, but the cost of the insurance
is carried by all depositors in the game.

DD concludes that with an efficiently implemented deposit insurance, no Nash Equilibria exists

                                                                                    6
which are bank runs. However, they propose that the existence of sunspots may allow for bank
run equilibrias. This is consistent with the research of Peck et al. (2003). In our proposed
experiment, we introduce the sunspot variable liquidity level, similarly used as in Chakravary’s
article. Liquidity level affects the risk which each player faces during a specific moment in the
experiment. The pareto-efficient equilibrium of the game is still, in line with DD, not
withdrawing funds from the bank.

In addition to the original model, we have introduced a temporal transaction cost for withdrawal
of funds into cash from the consumers bank account. The logic is that the cost of time to
withdraw any significant amount of money from the bank is a barrier to bank runs. It is most
easily proven by visualizing a scenario from the opposite direction: In a case where consumers
could freely transfer all their funds and assets from a financial institution momentarily, the
variability in amount of funds available to a bank would differ greatly across time. We believe that
in the face of financial distress, more depositors might decide to withdraw their funds from the
retail banks, would the transaction costs be lower.

Our paper contributes to both theoretical and experimental bank run literature, as well as adding
to experimental literature on co-ordination games and games with longer time horizons. In the
first case, empirical evidence on bank runs is rare due to the infrequency of bank runs. In
experiments, major topics have been correlation between fundamentals and bank runs (Calomiris
and Mason, 1997; Schumacher, 2000; Martinez Peria and Schmukler, 2001) – and bank run
contagions (Chakravarty et al., 2013; Brown et al.’s, 2012). However, there is still a lack of
empirical and experimental studies on bank runs, and we hope to add another dimension to this
issue of escalating importance.

Their conclusions have later been questioned in two major articles by Green & Lin (2003) and
Peck (2003), where both sets of authors modifies the original model to include the unmitigatable
risk of bank runs. The introduction of Peck’s article clarifies the author’s motives for his
research: “Bank runs are historical facts. If bank runs were impossible, then much of banking

6
 Exogenous factors affecting consumers propensity to withdraw

                                                                                7
policy would be directed toward a non-issue. Our goal is to put ‘runs’ back in the bank runs
literature”. By formally introducing “optimal contracts” and propensity to run triggered by
sunspots, their updated DD framework can explain bank runs emerging in equilibrium of optimal
deposit-contracts. Our model uses Peck’s intuition of sunspot variables and expands on their
effect on consumer behavior in times of financial distress.

Empirical studies by Brown et al (2012) show that bank runs are strongly contagious. In their
study they used followers and leaders to simulate the psychological effect on small bank
customers when larger investors withdraw their funds from a bank. One conclusion is that failure
of one bank often results in panic at other banks. This specific paper finds evidence for
fundamentals based contagion, i.e. the linkage of risky assets between failing and non-failing banks
leading to bank runs. In Chakravarty et al’s paper “An Experiment on the Causes of Bank Run
Contagions” (2013), the subject of bank-run contagion is further explored, in an experiment
which remains very true to the DD-model. By comparing consumer’s behavior when observing
the behavior of depositors in another, related bank, they also arrive at the conclusion that bank
runs may be fundamentally driven, but are also triggered by general “panic” observed in other
banks. They also conclude that players propensity to withdraw increases if they can observe a low
liquidity level (corresponding with high risk) in the bank of their deposits. By observing multiple
different experiment treatments, we add an opinion to both the effects of deposit insurance as
well as increased liquidity.

Gabriele Camera’s paper “A perspective on electronic alternatives to traditional currencies”
(2017) provides an essential introduction to the research and propositions about CDBC’s from
central banks across the world, as well as their possible implications on the financial system.
Particularly interesting is his findings on volatile commercial bank funds as a result of CBDC
implementation: “In periods of uncertainty, households might seek the safety of the central bank,
thus giving rise to rapid outflows of funds from commercial banks, as in a digital version of a
bank run. This kind of volatility in funding liquidity would naturally have implications for the way
banks fund their projects and for the cost of deposit insurance.” We hope that our proposed
experiment may give some empiric evidence to Camera’s statement.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the theoretical framework
of the proposed experiment. Section 3 describes the relationship between the experiment and

                                                                                8
previous theoretical models, as well as describing the experiment, the treatments and our
hypotheses. Section 4 discusses our model and hypotheses.

2 Theoretical framework

The proposed experiment is intended to aid the prediction of fund withdrawal decisions by
consumers based on the variables depicted in the model.

2.1 Cash
Historically, physical cash has been the primary place of refuge for scared consumers in times of
financial distress. Even today, when many different options for value storage exist, cash seems to
be a natural safe harbor asset for many depositors.

A few properties define the process of cash withdrawals in times of distress. To withdraw cash
from the bank is a slow process, often limited to a fairly low amount per day. In Sweden, most
banks require pre-registration for withdrawing amounts larger than 30,000 SEK at a time, and
ATM’s limit depositors to retrieving more than 10,000 SEK per day. The process of cash
withdrawal is highly surveilled and regulated by the banks. Historically when banks have face
liquidity crises, withdrawal has been suspended or “bank holidays” been introduced, limiting the
amount withdrawn and extending the window under which the central banks may react to a
threatening crisis. In the DD model this is referred to as suspension of convertibility and is a
successful method for mitigating financial distress.

To represent the time it takes to deposit large sums of money (over 10,000 SEK in Sweden) from
a bank account, cash are assumed to be “slower” to deposit than E-kronor. This is what we have

                                                                                9
and continue to refer to as the transaction cost of cash, and is largely mitigatable when
establishing new monetary technology.

2.2 E-krona
As previously mentioned, the 2017 report ”Riksbankens e-kronaprojekt” from Sveriges Riksbank
proposes different scenarios of the E-krona. The alleged most likely scenario is a register-based
system, where consumers may store E-kronor within the Riksbank. Features would be a
Riksbank account where consumers can deposit their money for E-kronor, payment and
transaction services usable 365 days a year, 24 hours per day. Riksbank accounts would initially
not carry interest, according to the report. These features are needed to achieve some level of
interchangeability with the current system with physical cash.

Key properties derived from this register-based system would are lower transaction times, and
safe storage of “digital cash”. It is obvious (and stated in the Riksbank report) that deposit and
withdrawal speed between Riksbank accounts (the electronic version of cash) and commercial
bank accounts would be much higher in comparison with withdrawal of physical cash from
commercial bank accounts. If transactions are to be executed at all hours, the currency would
also be more ‘liquid’ compared to the current digital payment system. Safer storage of cash
equivalents would also promote use of E-krona in comparison with physical cash

It is fair to assume that the speed of transaction and execution will be considerably higher and
therefore more difficult to control than under current circumstances. According to Riksbankens
report this is a concern that has been raised numerous times and confirms the validity of our
assumptions.

2.3 Speed of transactions
This variable is the outcome of the different monetary technologies – cash or e-krona. A higher
speed of transaction could change the pattern of deposits and withdrawals currently experienced
by the financial system.

Transaction speed has been a non-issue until recent developments within financial services
technology, as all players have been adhering to the same rules and use of the same technology.
However, we believe that transaction speed and it’s effect on consumer behaviour is a vital issue
to raise regarding the new technology. Earlier research has shown that for example, debit card

                                                                              10
payments increases the spending rate of consumers and other possible implications. (Runnemark
et al., 2016)

The bank run on Northern Rock displayed in practice what a contemporary bank run could look
like – but the fact is that withdrawal of funding from consumers took place over several months
and many left a significant part of their money in their accounts (Hyun Song Shin, 2012). A
reason for this is partial suspension of convertibility as discussed in the DD framework. Another
reason, we believe, is consumers depositing their funds as cash.

2.4 Relative levels liquidity in the bank
The issue of fundamentals relating to propensity to run from a bank has been widely explored by
Peck (2003) and others. A general conclusion is that both direct and indirect signs of lacking
liquidity in a bank increases the propensity to run (Chakravarty et al. 2013). We assume that this
relationship holds and a lower relative liquidity such as displayed by Chakravarty increases the
probability of a run Nash Equilibrium.

2.5 Deposit insurance
According to the DD model a deposit insurance offering full coverage will lead to a stable and
dominant Nash Equilibrium with consumer keeping deposits in their bank (Diamond and
Dybvig, 1983). The extra tax imposed on consumer as a result of bank failure is incentivizing
consumers to not trigger the insurance. Contemporary studies show that a majority of consumers
are unaware of the deposit insurance – and many of those who are aware of it would still
withdraw their funds and disregard the insurance (Bijlisma, 2015). However, it remains that
deposit insurance in many cases have been a successful way of ensuring financial stability in
practice, and is a predictor of elevated risk tolerance of an average investor.

Noteworthy is that the deposit insurance offered by central banks around the world was heavily
criticized after the 2008 financial crisis. Arguments were made that it increased the risk taking by
banks on a corporate level, and therefore destabilized the underlying financial system. The
intention with the variable is not to measure the overall risk-taking of banks, but the behavior of
the individual consumer.

                                                                              11
3 The Theoretical Model

3.1 Model Structure
The theoretical model proposed is based on the DD framework (1983) with a formalized sunspot
variable sigma as in Peck (2003). Empirical studies by Sträter et al. (2008) has inspired a small
adaptation of the deposit insurance to consider actual consumer knowledge

The Diamond-Dybvig bank run model provides the theoretical background for the proposed
experiment, specifically on the scenario where deposit insurance is implemented. The DD model
takes place over 3 periods, with an arbitrary number of consumers. In period 0 all consumers
deposit their funds 𝑌 into a bank. In period 1 all consumers are randomly given one of two
possible roles: patient or impatient, where the random variable 𝑡 represents the relative share of
impatient consumers. An impatient consumer derives utility only from consumption in period 1
and a patient consumer prefers consumption in period 2. From period 1 to 2 an interest 𝑅 ∗ 𝑌 is
endowed to patient consumers opting to keep their funds in the bank.

Due to limited liquidity in the bank, full deposits will be provided to consumers only if all patient
consumer withdraw in period 2, otherwise only partial withdrawals will be provided to depositors
in period. It also leads to significantly lower or no funds being paid out in period 2. Therefore, if
a patient consumer believes that another patient consumer is to withdraw their funds in round 1,
they would prefer to also withdraw in round 1.

                                                                              12
                                                 Picture 1
                                                  Depicting a simplified example of the DD
                                                     framework. Y is the initial endowment. R is the
                                                      interest given for holding funds in the bank. L is the
                                                       available liquidity in the bank. Impatient depositors
                                                     are excluded from this game as they do not impact
                                                        the Nash Equilibrium of the game. Pareto-efficient
                                                      Nash is both players holding their funds in the
                                                          bank. However, the risk-efficient equilibrium is both
                                                       players withdrawing. Thus, one of two possible Nash
                                                        Equilibria is depositors withdrawing their funds: a
                                                       bank run.

When more players are added to the game the pay-offs become more complex, but the general
rule of thumb remains: if another patient depositor withdraws in period 1, any given depositor
prefers to withdraw in period 1.

As the DD model unfolds there are two Nash Equilibria of the game, none of them dominant.
There is the pareto efficient Nash Equilibrium where all players choose to keep their funds
deposited in the bank. There is also the alternative of all players withdrawing their funds, which is
the risk efficient equilibrium.

3.1.1 Suspension of convertibility as a method of avoiding bank runs

                                                                                                                                   7
During the 1930’s financial crisis, the banks took “holidays” where all business was called off .
This was done to prevent further deposits and escalation of the already roaring crisis. In the DD
framework, this is called suspension of convertibility. Suspending convertibility of funds after all
impatient consumer have withdrawn their funds in period 1 would lock the game to the pareto-
efficient Nash Equilibrium as depicted in the picture above – and welfare is maximized. If the
number of impatient consumers was known this would have been the established way of
avoiding bank runs. However, suspending convertibility is associated with a net welfare loss, as
the random parameter 𝑡 is unknown – the number of impatient consumers. By suspending

7
 Saunders & Wilders, Contagious Bank Runs: Evidence from 1929-1933 Period (1996)

                                                                              13
convertibility without knowing 𝑡, there is a high probability that some players would be forced to
withdraw their funds in a period against their choice.

Deposits are relatively slow in our current financial system and financial stability is improved due
to this inefficiency. The lack of speed of deposits enables tools in the banks’ that would not
otherwise be useful. This fact is supported by empirical studies, which shows that banks holding
illiquid assets are more stable in times of financial distress in comparison with those holding

                         8
more liquid assets .

 The Northern Rock case has shown that in reality, the central bank may enforce a partial
suspension of convertibility after a crisis has been confirmed. This is done in order to gain some
time for taking decisions on how to save the bank. It is, however, not yet possible to formalize
suspension into a bank’s safety system without considerable losses of consumer value.

3.1.2 Deposit insurance
The DD-framework incorporates deposit insurance to all withdrawers within aggregate resource
constraints, meaning that any funds used to pay the deposit insurance must be drawn from within
the model. It is implied that the tax levied upon those participating in the game will be of
identical size as the total amount reimbursed by insurance. All players are assumed to know about
the tax. The negative implications of the tax in case of activated deposit insurance (and the
stabilizing implications by the fact that players’ funds are entirely insured) leads to the pareto
efficient Nash Equilibrium being the only outcome of the game, with the deposit insurance never
getting used.

As previously stated, contemporary empirical studies show that consumers have relatively limited
knowledge about deposit insurance (Sträter et al., 2008). Bijlisma (2015) also showed that among
those who are well informed about their coverage of deposit insurance many still withdraw their
funds in times of financial distress. One reason for that, according to the study, was the time
value of money. Reimbursement from deposit insurance after a bank has failed takes time.
Depositors who believed they could generate more value from withdrawing their funds and
investing it elsewhere were more prone to withdraw than others who did not consider that
option.

8
 Wolf Wagner, The liquidity of banks assets and banking stability (2007)

                                                                              14
Due to the reimbursement delay of deposit insurance, all players are utility positive in trying to
not activate the insurance.

3.1.3 Sunspots
Sunspots are mentioned in the DD framework as exogenous factors affecting players’ propensity
to run. Examples of sunspots are distress in the financial system, negative news about a specific
bank or low liquidity levels forcing banks to publicly sell assets to fire-sale prices. The
mathematical formulation of sunspots was formally introduced to the DD framework by Peck et
al. (2003). In a game where sunspot variable 𝜎 is introduced in period 1, players take decision to
deposit or not with regards to the variable 𝑠. When the random, exogenous sunspot variable 𝜎 is
smaller than 𝑠 the sub-game has a run-equilibrium and all players will choose to deposit in period
1. If 𝜎 is larger than or equal to 𝑠, the sub-game does not have a run-equilibrium and all patient
players will choose to deposit in period 2.

In the game constructed by Peck, sunspots being introduced in period 1 affects the overall
possibility of bank runs. As consumers are aware that a sunspot variable will be introduced after
they deposit, the possibility of a game with a bank run equilibrium is positive – without affecting
the period 0 deposit decision. Therefore, when sunspots are introduced, the bank run game has
multiple more possible equilibria.

In reality, sunspots are often present in the occurrence of a bank run. As earlier referred to – the
Northern Rock example showed that news about financial instability can trigger a bank run. The
independent game variable 𝑠 is impossible to determine in reality, but it is undoubtedly so that at
certain external levels of uncertainty consumers will ponder whether to make a run.

3.2 Experiment design
Our experiment is based on the DD framework but expanded by the adding of exogenous
liquidity levels of the bank and wealth accumulation across rounds for each consumer (player). A
majority of the experiment design is an extension of the Bank Run Contagion experiment
performed by Chakravarty et al. (2013) by adding the multiplayer and multi-round framework. We
are using Brown et al.’s (2012) focus on consumers classified as patient in the DD framework, as
they uniquely affect the liquidity of the bank.

                                                                              15
The experiment consists of a group of consumers in a bank. The bank has 5 depositors, all of
whom are patient. The game is played for a maximum of 10 rounds, in each of which the
participant has to make a decision: to withdraw, hold or deposit funds from their bank account.
The DD variable R is equal to 1.25, or 25% return on invested capital per round. Funds held
externally is held without cost and interest, and deposits/withdrawals are without transaction
cost. Participants are not informed on the length of the game. After each round a summary of the
actions taken by the players is presented at the table: by amount withdrawn, deposited and held.

Depending on the level of liquidity in the bank (ranging from 0.8 – 0.2 throughout the game), a
certain total amount of funding may be withdrawn during a single round. Each round, the
liquidity may change one “step” in a random direction – higher or lower. The probability of
change in either direction is 60% down and 40% up – to bias the game towards a situation where
exogenous “sunspots” induces fear of losing the players funds. Players are not aware of this
situation, and are to believe the probabilities are 50/50. If a higher amount of liquidity is
requested during a round than what is available in the bank, liquidity will be served according to

                                                                             9
sequential service agreement, as described in the DD model . Withdrawals can be actioned as long as
the bank remains solvent.

In our game, bank solvency is defined as following: if all players choosing to withdraw their
funds from the bank in any given round are endowed their full deposit, e.g. 100 in the table 1
below, the bank remains solvent. A bank run is defined as the situation where depositors choosing
to withdraw their funds are not endowed the full amount. The solvency level of the bank is
dependent on number of net withdrawers per round. Net withdrawers is defined as numbers of
withdrawers subtracted by number of depositors.

Observe the following example: Four players are fully deposited in round 𝑡. In round 𝑡 + 1, the
player with her funds fully withdrawn decides to deposit her funds into the retail bank. In addition,
one of the players with funds fully deposited decides to withdraw her funds. The net withdrawal is 0,
thus pay-offs are unaffected.

The design of the game is such that players can end the game with different amounts of funds
depending on their decisions. Therefore, the levels of liquidity in the retail bank differs between

9
 Pay-offs according to the sequential sevice agreement are specified in table 1.

                                                                              16
rounds throughout the game. However, we have decided to treat pay-offs during each round
indifferently depending on the amount deposited into the bank. Pay-offs are therefore only
determined by the fixed number of players withdrawing or depositing each round. Some level of
complexity might be lost due to this simplification, but clarity is won – as is experiment
measurement accuracy.

In the case of a bank run, the bank will be liquidized as according to the DD framework. Any
remaining funds will be distributed as according to the table below, and the game will end.

Table 1

The table depicts pay-offs in percentage (%) of funds held in the bank.

The game is divided into four different treatments across two dimensions: monetary technology
and deposit insurance. Monetary technology is a variable intended to map the difference between
physical cash deposits or equal and the described CBDC, distributed ledger with central bank
deposit accounts. Players in the CBDC treatment can withdraw or deposit their entire account
during each round of the game. Players treated with the cash scenario are limited to withdrawing

                                                                                                      10
or depositing their funds in two rounds – one “half” during each round .

10
  In the second round of withdrawal, more than half of the original funds will be deposited or
withdrawn due to interest effects.

                                                                              17
Deposit insurance is intended to map the difference between actions of the proven majority of
bank customers who are not familiar with the concept of deposit insurance, and those who are
familiar with it on a higher level. In the first treatment, no information is given regarding deposit
insurance. In the second treatment players are given the information that deposit insurance will
cover up to 100 units of currency if the bank was to fail, but the reimbursement of lost funds will
take place after a period of 3 turns.

From a strategic point of view, the pareto-efficient Nash Equilibrium is not changed between
different treatments of the experiment: the game always favours keeping your funds in the bank.
However, Chakravarty et al. has shown that many players in their treatment of the game behave
increasingly irrationally as signs of low liquidity emerge.

                                                                              18
3.2.1 Treatment 1
Treatment 1 is defined as CBDC technology and no deposit insurance. It is similar to Left Bank players standard treatment in Chakravarty’s article.
Players may deposit and withdraw their entire account during each turn. This treatment is intended to serve as a benchmark when analyzing the other
treatments.

When players do not have deposit insurance, optimal decisions for each round should follow the following function, assuming a neutral risk
preference:

    (1) 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡 = (𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝑅) − (𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 (%) ∗ 𝑝(𝐿))

where 𝑝(𝐿) is the players estimated risk of losing some of their funds caused by other players withdrawing, dependent on the level of liquidity in the
bank. As liquidity level falls in the bank, the amount lost increases for each player withdrawing their funds from the bank and players will have a higher
propensity to withdraw. Thus, 𝑝(𝐿) accommodates for both larger losses, as well as larger risk of losing funds. When 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ≥ 0, the rational
decision is to keep funds deposited in the bank.

3.2.2 Treatment 2
Treatment 2 is similar to treatment 1, with deposit insurance added as a feature. It is intended to illustrate the effect of deposit insurance on consumer
behavior in the case of CBDC. Deposit insurance lowers the amount of value at risk, thus increasing the risk tolerance for all players.

                                                                                                        𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒
    (2) 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡 = (𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝑅) − [(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 −           3 ) ∗ 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 (%) ∗ 𝑝(𝐿)]
                                                                                     (1+𝑅)

                                                                                                                         19
3.2.3 Treatment 3
Treatment 3 is defined as cash technology and no deposit insurance. While the CBDC treatments are similar to earlier experiments executed by other
researchers, this treatment is intended to illustrate the actual difference in transaction speed between the old (cash) and the new (CBDC) technology.

While the decision equation for CBDC partially holds for cash, the difference is the slower rate of withdrawal. As it takes two turns to withdraw a
players entire amount from the bank, part of their equation is the anticipation of the events of next turn. The players are not aware of the bias towards
lower bank liquidity, and if rational, will calculate the estimated benefit of their decision next turn. Both calculated outcomes of this turn and the next
will affect the decision during any round 𝑡.

    (3) 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡 =

                                                                                                                                              𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑈𝑝
                    [[(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝑅) − (𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 (%) ∗ 𝑝(𝐿))] ∗ 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡+1        ] +

                                                                                                                                             𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑛
                    [[(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝑅) − (𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠(%) ∗ 𝑝(𝐿))] ∗ 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡+1           ]

                                                                                                                         20
3.2.4 Treatment 4
Treatment 4 is similar to treatment 3, with deposit insurance added as a feature. It is intended to be used as comparison with the CBDC case, and the
implications of transaction costs on financial stability.

The equation for player decisions shows that cash is exposed towards deposit insurance to a higher degree than CBDC. Since the player may
experience a loss due to a bank run in both present time and future states, deposit insurance will affect decisions in all states. Due to the monetary
technology slowing down transactions, the players must be forwards looking and thus accommodates for the effects of bank runs in any of the future
states. Deposit insurance acts as a risk mitigator in all states and lowers the players propensity to withdraw in all states, as compared to CBDC.

    (4) 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡 =

                                                                              𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒                                                                   𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑈𝑝
     [[(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝑅) − ((𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 −              3 ) ∗ 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 (%) ∗ 𝑝(𝐿))] ∗ 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡+1        ] +
                                                    (1 + 𝑅)

                                                                         𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒                                                             𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑛
      [[(𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 ∗ 𝑅) − ((𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑠 −              3 ) ∗ 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠(%) ∗ 𝑝(𝐿))] ∗ 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑡+1          ]
                                                     (1 + 𝑅)

                                                                                                                         21
3.3 Hypotheses
The game depicted in the CBDC treatment without deposit insurance is very similar to the DD
model. There are multiple equilibria available. In some equilibria, depositors choose to hold their
funds in the bank of for each consecutive round and a bank run does not occur. In other
equilibria, patient depositors will choose to withdraw their funds in any sequence of events, and a
bank run does occur. Nash Equilibria does not exclude any relationship between liquidity level 𝐿
and the probability of a bank run. Temzelides (1997) states that lower liquidity of banks increases
the probability of a run. As previously proven a low 𝐿 should predict a higher fraction of bank
runs.

3.3.1 Hypothesis 1
The frequency of withdrawals in all treatments will be higher when the bank’s liquidity levels are low.

This hypothesis is already established in An experiment on the Causes of bank run Contagion by
Chakravarty. It is of weight, however, to re-establish this hypothesis in this new context, as it is
not explained by standard theoretical frameworks.

As previously stated, 𝑝(𝐿) is the function measuring the probability of some loss during a
specific round of the game. When 𝐿 falls, the amount lost increases in case of bank run, and
players should estimate a higher risk of losing some part of their funds. Therefore, we believe
that a lower liquidity level in the bank will lead to a higher rate of withdrawals.

Hypothesis 1 will be tested as percentage of players withdrawing at each level of liquidity level.

3.3.2 Hypothesis 2
Players in all treatments will be more prone to withdraw their funds if other players withdrew their funds in the
previous round.

This hypothesis corresponds to the ‘bank run contagion’ referred to in Chakravarty’s and
Brown’s articles. According to their research, consumers respond to their peers when taking
decisions on whether to deposit or withdraw their funds from the bank. It could also be referred
to as a momentum effect – when fear of bank failure sets in, players might believe their peers will

                                                                              22
be more prone to deposit than otherwise. If this turns out to be the case, results in subsequent
hypothesis will need to be cleared from this momentum effect.

Hypothesis 2 will be tested by running the following regression
              𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑇𝑊𝑡−1 + 𝛽2𝐿𝑡−1 + 𝛽3𝐿𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐷𝐼 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

The regressors are 𝑇𝑊𝑡−1, total number of withdrawals executed in the previous round; 𝐿𝑡,

liquidity level in the current round; 𝐿𝑡−1, liquidity level in the previous round; and 𝐷𝐼, a dummy
variable considering whether deposit insurance is active or not.

3.3.3 Hypothesis 3
Withdrawals will be more frequent at higher liquidity levels when the monetary technology is cash as opposed to
when the monetary technology is CBDC, in games with no deposit insurance.

We present physical cash as a less liquid form of assets in the proposed experiment. The point is
to hopefully demonstrate the mechanism of making plans for withdrawals. As players in
treatments where the monetary technology is cash are aware that they need two rounds to
withdraw their full deposit in event of uncertainty, we believe they will choose to withdraw at a
higher liquidity level than their CBDC counter-parts.

This is demonstrated by (3) and (4), players using cash technology will, if rational, account for the
possible events of the following turns when deciding if to withdraw, deposit or hold. The
negative effects of lower liquidity for the players are by game design larger than the positive
effects of increased liquidity.

Hypothesis 3 will be tested as a comparison between percentage of players withdrawing at
different liquidity level depending on different monetary technologies.

3.3.4 Hypothesis 4
In treatments where the players have deposit insurance; bank runs and the following liquidation of the retail bank
will happen earlier in the game when players are using CBDC monetary technology.

Physical cash is presented to players as a monetary technology with significant transaction costs,
as compared to CBDC. Therefore, when some funds are insured, we believe that players using

                                                                              23
physical cash technology will refrain from depositing to a higher degree than players using CBDC
technology, as to avoid the cost of transaction.

Comparing (2) and (4), we see that the exposure towards deposit insurance is different. Players
using CBDC monetary technology accounts for deposit insurance once, while those who use
cash monetary technology accounts for it twice. Thus, the deposit insurance has a higher impact
while using cash monetary technology. Instantaneous deposits also acts as a self-regulated deposit
insurance, meaning some players might choose to control their risk exposure instead of relying
on deposit insurance.

As according to Sträter et al (2008), withdrawals are likely to be executed when a consumer has
uninsured funds in the bank. However, when transaction fees are significant, we believe that
participating players will be more optimistic about fellow players propensity to withdraw.

Hypothesis 4 will be tested by running the following regression:
                    𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑_𝑜𝑓_𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑀𝑇 + 𝛽2𝐷𝐼 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

The regressors are 𝑀𝑇, a dummy-variable expressing what the monetary technology is; and 𝐷𝐼, a
dummy variable considering whether deposit insurance is active or not.

3.5 Experimental Procedures
Instructions are provided in Appendix A, which will inform all participants of all the features of
the game. For statistical validity, each of the four treatments of the game shall be generated 20
times. Each session shall have five participants, who has limited interaction before the game. The
participants may not talk during the game.

Optimally, the game is played via a computer terminal, which calculates the pay-offs for each
person after each round of the game. At the end of each round, participants shall be reminded of
their decision, and shall also be informed about the decisions of others (how many withdrawals
occurred during the round). They shall also be reminded what the liquidity levels were during the
round, and what liquidity level will be provided for the bank in the next round.

                                                                              24
3.5.1 Participants
The participants shall be paid their payoff from the game in full, after they have filled a socio-
demographic questionnaire. Each session is estimated to last about 60 minutes. In total, 400
participants is required for the experiment, and a wide mixture of social backgrounds are
preferred. No one shall participate in more than one session or be previously exposed to similar
experiments.

The experiment executed by Brown suffers in our opinion from sub-optimal significance levels
and fairly large standard errors on statistical results. This is likely due to the low number of
observations. In total, Brown used 264 participants across three treatments, among which 60
participated in the baseline experiment. 144 participants were corresponding with the paper’s
research question. All participants played two games, totaling 528 observations, or 288
observations relevant for the research question.

Chakravarty’s results are more robust which can be explained by the higher number of
observations. For each of the two treatments, six independent games were played. In each
independent game, 20 players part-took across 30 rounds. In total, 7200 decisions were observed
in the experiment. Of those, 25% - or 1600 - of the observations were relevant for the research
question. Chakravarty managed to achieve results on the 5% or 1% for most relevant questions.

We suggest our experiment be played with 100 participants per treatment. Each participant plays
one game, for a total of 2-10 rounds. We anticipate that the average game will last some 4-6
rounds. Our expected amount of observations is 2000, of which 500 are baseline and 1500 are
relevant for research questions. While the total number of observations is considerably lower
than in Chakravarty’s example, we believe that it is sufficient to achieve significance levels of 5%
for our main research questions.

4 Discussion

Previous literature has had it’s focal point on the behavioral aspects on bank run contagion. It’s
main questions have been concerned with the validity of the Diamond-Dybvig framework, and
the anatomy of sunspots. We owe a debt of gratitude to their research, and have tried to deepen
the understanding of the foundation of rational and irrational behavior in the context of
consumer bank runs – and what the implications would be were some of the environmental
parameters changed.

                                                                              25
Hypothesis 3 seeks to answer if a more liquidid form of money would affect the general group of
consumers’ behaviors in times of financial distress. As mentioned previously, a majority of
consumers are largely unaware about deposit insurance, and will therefore make their decision to
withdraw without information about it Sträter et al. (2008), and the case for excluding deposit
insurance in experiments have been argued for previously by Brown et al. (2012). If Hypothesis 3
is verified, it would indicate a shifting behavior caused by the introduction of new monetary
technology, and should be considered when further researching the topic of CBDC’s. The
finding would hold importance even if CBDC’s were not introduced, as the effect would also be
true in the comparison between cash and debit cards as primary form of payment. It is
undoubtedly so that payments and value storage is becoming increasingly digitized, and the result
of this fundamental change should be carefully considered.

Hypothesis 4 seeks to answer our question about the effectiveness of the deposit insurance in a
new technological environment with CBDC’s. In discussion with our supervisor, we theorized
that central bank accounts used by the public could be interpreted as a super-liquid form of
deposit insurance, as a consumer would be able to withdraw their funds from their commercial
bank instantly and at practically any time. We believe that consumers prefer to be in control of
their funds, instead of relying on the deposit insurance, would their commercial bank fail as
previously argued by Sträter. If this hypothesis turns out to be true, deposit insurance in its
current form might require thorough reconsideration.

The experiment we’ve proposed in this paper is intended to as accurately as possible test these
two main hypotheses, regarding transaction cost and deposit insurance. After duly discussing and
exploring different options, our conclusion is that transaction costs are best expressed as time –
not as money. Although money and time are closely related in the world of finance, perhaps
they’re not equally regarded in the mind of the consumer. This is especially true when consumers
are reliant on the funds in their bank account to finance expenses in the near-term.

The side effects of experimenting with time constraints on transactions is increased complexity
of the game. Previous researchers’ experiments, specifically Brown et al. (2012) and Chakravarty
et al. (2013), are fairly successful in honoring the original DD model by limiting the rounds of the
game. It produces clear results and facilitates interpretation by referral to the original model – as

                                                                              26
should a good experiment. In our take of a consumer experiment, the complexity is slightly
raised.

We are particularly concerned about two aspects of our experiment design: multiple-round games
diverging from the DD-framework and net withdrawals creating uncertainty pay-off interpretation
by the players. However, within the context of the study, we believe we are in the right to do so.
First; in order to produce results that imitates nature, one must create a nature-like environment.
Our multiple-round and interest-accumulating game imposes aspects upon the consumer that the
DD-model had previously removed.

Regarding the issue of wealth accumulation previous studies have been done. In a study
conducted by the Bank of Italy Giuseppe Calietta (2012), the conclusion was that risk-aversion
decreases as individual wealth increases, but research by Brunnermeier and Nagel (2008) and
Chiappori and Paiella (2008) concluded that no significant effect was found. In our theoretical
experiment, we have assumed players being risk-neutral, which may or may not be disputed by
the results. Thus, the issue of risk-aversion and wealth continues to be an area of discussion.
Second; net withdrawals arose as a rule of necessity rather than by inherent experiment design. It
was a necessary design decision, because otherwise, you might have found in some games that
players which remained deposited would be endowed risk-free returns as all other players had
withdrawn over several rounds of the game.

The larger question is if these two factors will in a significant way impact the results of the game.
For the first part, we believe that accumulating funds over several rounds is a viable way of
experimenting and adds a vital aspect to the game – long-term decisions. What may be discussed
is the level of interest that should be endowed depositors. In essence, our experiment likens the
bank to an investment decision with much similarity to a stock.

Our equations, calculating players optimal response show that a higher interest rate improves
risk-tolerance of players, as the pay-off for keeping funds deposited offsets the fear of losing
some or all of their funds. This is very much similar to a risk-premium of a stock. Thus, the
question arises: should the banks of the future offer risk-premium based interest rates, and are
the consumers of the future informed enough to demand it? Or should rather policy be so strict
that consumers never need to worry about the safety of their funds, whatever their size? One
might argue that, although bank runs have occurred, they are infrequent enough to be treated as

                                                                              27
anomalies in an otherwise secure system - and thus should be rewarded similarly as a risk-free
investment. Another argument would be that banks globally are continually increasing their risk
exposure, which should imply a risk-premium endowed to their investor.

The topic of interest and risk leads us to the validity of an experiment which in many ways treats
bank deposits and equity investments equally. If we would reframe the setting of our experiment
and instead present it as a study about consumers attitude to risk-reward rates in equity markets,
it would probably be accepted as such without any major arguments. The following question
becomes: is it likely that the framework our experiment uses (and to some extent Chakravarty’s
and Brown’s, too), is equally valid in equity markets as well as consumer bank deposits? Or
should perhaps consumers’ temporary storage of funds be treated as a completely separate matter
from equity investments, with independent mechanisms such as reliability, accessibility and other
benefits? If the answer of such a question is a new, intelligently designed way of researching
average consumer behavior – either through big data or experiments – the field of behavioral
finance would certainly be benefited. Whatever the conclusion, the subject of interest rates and
financial stability is an area in where further research could prove fruitful.

The robustness of the experiment is another key area. Experimenting with human behavior is an
area where results by definition are highly open for interpretation and always subject to external
noise, be it non-verbal communication, setting, emotion or any number of other disturbances. To
draw any broad conclusion we believe that the results must be clear and robust. Due to the

                                                                                                 11
complexity of our experiment (in comparison to our referral papers)  , it is especially important
to have a sufficient amount of observations. We also recognize the constraints attached to
research experiments, and have limited the number of participants to 400 – which is still a
considerably large amount. Potentially insufficient significance due to resource constraints is
therefore one of the major hurdles for this experiment.

There are multiple other areas that demands investigation to approximate the full effects of
CBDC implementation. The level of interest rates required to incentivize consumers to keep their
funds with the commercial banks is a question in need of answering, as a free and independent
alternative for value storage emerges. Capital requirements for commercial banks in relation to
potentially increased financial instability is another important question. Finally, macroeconomic

11
  Chakravarty et al. (2013) and Brown et al. (2012)

                                                                              28
effects from CBDC implementation offers many interesting topics, such as economic gain from
reduced transaction costs and improved opportunity for micro-entrepreneurs.

This field of research is young and filled with pressing matters. Our view is that academic
research may make a substantial contribution to the development of policy and technology in this
area within the next few years.

                                                                              29
5 Appendix

Note: The different treatments, monetary technology and deposit insurance, will be presented separately for the
different groups. The participants will have a common section and a treatment-specific section.

Common Section

Verbal introduction
Welcome to this experiment. Make sure you read the given instructions thoroughly. In this game,
you will take a decision every round. The decisions you make will determine your net wealth at
the end of the game. All of your accumulated wealth in the game will be rewarded to you and
paid out in SEK at the end of the game.

Initially all five players will be endowed with 100 units of currency (UoCs). The funds will be
granted in a bank, on a deposit account. In the game, you will be able to choose one of three
actions:

1. Withdraw your funds from your bank account.
2. Hold your funds where they are (inside or outside the bank)
3. Deposit funds into the bank.

All of your deposits in your deposit accounts generates interest every round. The interest is 25%,
so if you choose to hold your funds in the bank during the first round of the game, in round two
you will have 125 UoCs – 25% interest on 100 UoCs. The game will last for at most 10 rounds.

Your deposits in the bank in the bank are exposed to risk. Depending on the actions of the other
players at the table, your pay-off may be altered from the 25% interest accumulated per round.
The pay-off is also determined by the liquidity level in the bank. The pay-offs are structured in
the following way:

[Hand-out 1 to participants]

In the handout, pay-offs are expressed as percent of your current holdings. # of players
withdrawing today is expressed as number of net withdrawal. That means, if one players decides
to deposit their funds into the bank, and two players decides to withdraw, then net withdrawals
are one.

                                                                              30
As you can see – depending on how the number of net withdrawals during a round, the pay-offs
will be changed. Specifically, if you choose to hold your UoCs in your bank account when others
choose to withdraw, you are at risk of earning a lower pay-off.

These pay-offs are also determined by the liquidity level of the bank. The liquidity level starts at
0,8 and is changed every round, one step of 0,2 up or down. The maximum liquidity level is 0,8
and the minimum is 0,2. In the beginning of each round I will tell you what the liquidity level is
for the current round. Lower liquidity means lower pay-offs if players decide to withdraw.

After every round, a summary of number of withdrawals and deposits will be communicated.
You will also receive a statement of your current net worth of UoCs. You may not discuss
strategies with each other during the game. You may only signal when you have made your
decision for a particular round.

If any player receives 0 in pay-off after a round, the bank is liquidized and the game is over. At
the end of the game all players will net worth will be calculated and paid out.

Hand-out 1

                                                                              31
The following treatment information is verbally communicated to each of the four treatment groups, depending on
their treatment.

Treatment-specific Section 1: Monetary Technology CBDC

In this economy, there exists a central backed digital currency, which means that you have a
deposit account at the central bank. This means that you can deposit or withdraw all of your
UoCs during one round.

Treatment-specific Section 2: Monetary Technology Cash

In this economy, you hold your withdrawed UoCs as cash. Since it takes time to withdraw and
deposit cash, it will take you two rounds to withdraw or deposit your entire net worth. The UoCs
still kept in the bank after a first round decision to withdraw will still accumulate interest. The full
“remaining” amount will however always be available to withdraw or deposit.

In the event you hold half of your UoCs in cash and half of your UoCs in the bank, you may
choose whether you want to withdraw or deposit your funds into the bank. You may, however,
not hold half of your funds in each for of value storage, and must therefore choose one of the
decision withdraw or deposit.

Treatment-specific Section 3: Deposit Insurance

[Verbally added to either Cash or CBDC treatment information]
Furthermore, you have a deposit insurance. A deposit insurance means that 100 of your UoCs
are insured by the state. If you, after a round, fall below a net worth of 100 UoCs, the difference
will be reimbursed by the insurance company. The insured UoCs will be paid out after 3 rounds
of the game, after your claim has been processed.

Treatment-specific Section 4: No Deposit Insurance

The participants are not to be informed of a deposit insurance.

                                                                              32
6 Sources

Bijlsma, M. & Van Der Wiel, K. 2015, "Consumer perception of deposit insurance: Little
     awareness, limited effectiveness?", Applied Economics, vol. 47, no. 32, pp. 3439-3461.

Brown, M., Trautmann, S. & Vlahu, R. 2012, "Contagious bank runs: experimental evidence", .

Brunnermeier, M.K. & Nagel, S. 2008, "Do wealth fluctuations generate time-varying risk
     aversion? Micro-evidence on individuals", American Economic Review, vol. 98, no. 3, pp. 713-
     736.

Calomiris, C.W. & Mason, J.R. 2003, "Consequences of bank distress during the Great
     Depression", American Economic Review, vol. 93, no. 3, pp. 937-947.

Camera, G. 2017, "A perspective on electronic alternatives to traditional currencies", .

Camera, G., Casari, M. & Bigoni, M. 2013, "Money and trust among strangers", Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 110, no. 37, pp. 14889-14893.

Cappelletti, G. 2012, "Do wealth fluctuations generate time-varying risk aversion? Italian micro-
     evidence on household asset allocation", .

Chakravarty, S., Fonseca, M.A. & Kaplan, T.R. 2014, "An experiment on the causes of bank run
     contagions", European Economic Review, vol. 72, pp. 39-51.

Chiappori, P. & Paiella, M. 2011, "Relative risk aversion is constant: Evidence from panel data",
     Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1021-1052.

Diamond, D.W. & Dybvig, P.H. 1983, "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity", Journal of
     political economy, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401-419.

Dufwenberg, M. 2015, "Banking on experiments?", Journal of Economic Studies, vol. 42, no. 6, pp.
     943-971.

Green, E.J. & Lin, P. 2003, "Implementing efficient allocations in a model of financial
     intermediation", Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 1-23.

Martinez Peria, M.S. & Schmukler, S.L. 2001, "Do depositors punish banks for bad behavior?
     Market discipline, deposit insurance, and banking crises", The journal of finance, vol. 56, no. 3,
     pp. 1029-1051.

Peck, J. & Shell, K. 2003, "Equilibrium bank runs", Journal of political Economy, vol. 111, no. 1, pp.
     103-123.

Runnemark, E. 2012, "Experimenting with Focal Points and Monetary Policy", Lund Economic
     Studies, vol. 170.

Saunders, A. & Wilson, B. 1996, "Contagious bank runs: evidence from the 1929–1933 period",
     Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 409-423.

                                                                              33
Schumacher, L. 2000, "Bank runs and currency run in a system without a safety net: Argentina
     and thetequila’shock", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 257-277.

Shin, H.S. 2009, "Reflections on Northern Rock: The bank run that heralded the global financial
     crisis", Journal of economic perspectives, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 101-119.

Sträter, N., Cornelissen, M. & Pfingsten, A. 2008, "Deposit Insurance: An Empirical Study of
     Private Investors ‘Knowledge and Perception", Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Finanzwirtschaft, mimeo,
         .

Temzelides, T. 1997, "Are bank runs contagious?", Business Review-Federal Reserve Bank of
      Philadelphia, .

Wagner, W. 2007, "The liquidity of bank assets and banking stability", Journal of Banking &
     Finance, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 121-139.

                                                                              34