FEMALE CORPORATE LEADERS
AND FIRM FINANCIAL
PERFORMANCE

hh
A STUDY OF 152 SWEDISH PUBLIC COMPANIES DURING THE PERIOD
OF 2010-2017

ASTRID LINDQUIST
EBBA SJÖSTRAND

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2019
Female corporate leaders and firm financial performance : A study of 152 Swedish public
companies during the period of 2010-2017

Abstract:
       This  thesis  tests  whether  there  is  a  relationship  between  the  presence  of  female  corporate
       leaders  and  firm  financial  performance  in  one  of  the  most  gender  equal  countries  in  the
       world-  Sweden.  The  study  involves  a  collection  of  152  Swedish  public  companies  during  a
       time  period  of  eight  years-  from  2010  to  2017.  Firm  financial  performance  is  measured  with
       the  accounting-based  performance  measures  Return  on  Equity  (ROE),  Return  on  Assets
       (ROA),  Return  on  Capital  Employed  (ROCE),  Return  on  Operating  Capital  (ROOC),
       Operating  Margin  and  Profit  Margin.  The  presence  of  females  in  leading  positions  is
       measured  as  the  presence  of  a  female  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO),  female  Chief
       Financial  Officer  (CFO),  female  Chairman  of  the  board  of  Directors,  the  share  of  women  on
       the  board  of  directors  and  the  share  of  women  in  the  executive  management  group.  After
       controlling  for  industry,  time,  leverage,  size  and  firm  age,  the  research  findings  provide  no
       support  for  an  underperformance  on  the  part  of  female  corporate  leaders  and  some  support
       for   a  positive  effect  of  the  presence  of  female  corporate  leaders  on  firm  financial
       performance.  More  specifically,  the  relationship  seems  to  hold  solely  for  the  share  of
       females  on  corporate  boards  and  not  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  CFO,  Chairman  nor  the
       presence of a higher share of female executive management members.

Keywords:
       Females as corporate leaders, gender, financial performance, accounting-based measures

Authors:
       Astrid Lindquist (24006)
       Ebba Sjöstrand (23584)

Tutor:
       Anastasia Girshina, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:
       Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economic
© Astrid Lindquist and Ebba Sjöstrand, 2019
Table  of  contents
1. Introduction……………………………………………….…………….……………... 1
2. Literature review…………………………………………..…………………………....3
       2.1 The presence of female corporate board members and firm financial
      performance…………....…………….…………….…………….……………….. 3
       2.2 The presence of females in executive management and firm financial
      performance……....…………….…………….…………….…………………….. 4
      2.3 Our contribution…………………………………………………………….... 5
      2.4. Presentation of hypothesis………………………………………………….... 6
3. Data………………………………………..…………….…………….………………..6
      3.1. Dependent variables……………………………….……………………….... 6
      3.2. Independent variables………………………………………………………... 9
     3.3. Control variables……………………………………………………………...11
      3.4. Sample selection……………………………………………………………... 12
      3.5. Method of obtaining dataset………………………………..………………... 14
4. Method…………………………………………………………….…………………… 15
      4.1. The multiple variable regression model……………………………………... 15
      4.2. Assumptions of the multiple regression model……………………………...  18
            4.2.1 Multicollinearity…………………………………….…………….... 18
           4.2.2. Linearity……………………....…………….……………………....19
           4.2.3 Heteroscedasticity………………………….………………………..19
           4.2.4 Autocorrelation……………………………………………………... 20
           4.2.5 Normally distributed residuals………..…………….……………….20
5. Results…………………………………………………..…………….……………….. 21
      5.1. Regression 1 (ROE)…………………....…………….…………..…………... 21
      5.2. Regression 2 (ROA)…………………………………………………………. 21
      5.3. Regression 3 (ROCE)……………………….………..………..…………….. 22
     5.4. Regression 4 (ROOC)…………………….…………..………..……………..22
      5.5. Regression 5 (Operating Margin)…………………..………..………..……..  23
      5.6. Regression 6 (Profit Margin)………………..………………..………..…….. 23
      5.7. Summary of results……………………….…………….……………………. 25
6. Discussion of results…………………………....…………….………………………... 25
      6.1. Model specification………………....…………….…………………………. 26
      6.2. Reverse causality………………………....…………….……………………. 26
     6.3. Omitted variables……………………………………..……………………....27
      6.4. Further economic interpretations…………………………………………….. 27
7. Concluding remarks…………………………………….…………….………………...28
       7.1 Females as corporate leaders and firm financial
      performance……………………………...…………….…………….………….... 28
      7.2 Limitations & further research………………………..…………….……..… 29
1.  Introduction

The  question  of  gender  equality  in  a  corporate  context  has  been  intensively  discussed  during
the  past  decade.  From  a  historical  point  of  view,  organizations  all  over  the  world  has  almost
exclusively  been  led  and  controlled  by  men.  However,  we  have  begun  to  see  changes  and  an
increasing  presence  of  women  in  leading  positions.  This  has  raised  questions  regarding
whether  this  shift  has  positive  or  negative  effects.  The  consequences  of  the  shift  have  been
addressed  from  many  perspectives,  ranging  from  socio-political  consequences  to  pure
financial  ones.  While  many  can  agree  that  the  socio-political  outcomes  are  positive,  the
connection  between  the  presence  of  women  in  corporate  leading  positions  and  financial
performance  is  more  widely  debated.  The  research  findings  range  from  suggestions  that
females  in  corporate  leading  positions  are  underperforming  in  comparison  to  their  male
counterparts   to   suggestions   that   females   outperform   their   male   counterparts   (Kolev,
Geueorgui. 2012; Sharpe, Rochelle, 2000).
       Despite  major  changes,  the  fact  remains  that  the  presence  of  women  in  leading
positions  is  low  to  this  day.  The  average  share  of  women  on  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the
biggest  public  companies  is  26%  within  the  European  Union.  Meanwhile,  approximately  half
of  Europe’s  population  consists  of  women.  Even  in  Sweden,  considered  one  of  the  most
gender  equal  countries  in  the  world,  the  presence  of  women  in  leading  positions  is  low.
Again,  while  approximately  half  of  Sweden's  population  consists  of  women,  only  around  a
third  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  biggest  listed  Swedish  companies  are  female.
(Ekonomifakta,  2018).  While  the  number  of  female  corporate  board  members  represent  33%
of  all  corporate  board  members  in  Swedish  listed  companies,  the  number  of  female  chairmen
remains  even  lower.  Thus,  the  presence  of  gender  inequality  in  Swedish  board  rooms  is
apparent.  Nonetheless,  the  Board  of  Directors  ratios  outshine  executive  management  group
ratios  in  terms  of  gender  equality.  Only  4%  of  the  females  employed  by  Swedish  listed  firms
hold  a  Chief  Executive  Officer  (CEO)  position,  while  the  corresponding  number  for  men  is
17%.  In  addition  to  this,  it  has  been  found  that  there  exists  a  reluctance  to  offer  women
positions  in  which  they  are  given  direct  responsibility  of  profitability.  That  is,  there  is  a
tendency  to  dismiss  women  both  as  executive  management  members  and  board  members  on  a
more regular basis than men (AllBright, 2017).
       As  of  2018,  Sweden  was  ranked  to  be  one  of  the  most  gender  equal  countries  in  the
world.  The  annual  Global  Gender  Gap  Report  by  the  World  Economic  Forum  ranks  countries

                                                                                 1
based  on  an  index  consisting  of  four  sub-indices;  Economic  Participation  &  Opportunity,
Educational  Attainment,  Health  &  Survival  and  Political  Empowerment.  Their  most  recent
report  findings  suggest  that  the  average  distance  completed  to  gender  equality  is  82%  in
Sweden,  a  number  that  makes  Sweden  the  third  most  gender  equal  country  in  the  world
(World  Economic  Forum,  2018).  Moreover,  Sweden  is  unique  in  the  sense  that  the  share  of
women  attaining  higher  education  has  been  higher  than  the  share  of  men  for  the  last  twenty
years  (Statistics  Sweden,  2015).  This  is  exactly  what  makes  Sweden  an  interesting  object  of
study.  Given  these  statistics,  one  might  expect  that  the  gender  equality  would  be  reflected  in
the  corporate  boardrooms  and  executive  management  groups.  Yet,  the  share  of  women  in
leading  positions  remains  low  to  this  day  which  raises  the  question  if  the  low  presence  of
women  in  leading  positions  is  justifiable  by  inferior  performance  on  the  part  of  females  or  if  it
is explained by other societal factors.
       Given  this  situation  in  Sweden,  there  is  an  aspiration  to  bring  clarity  to  the  question  if
the  presence  of  women  in  leading  positions  is  associated  with  either  inferior  or  superior
financial  performance  in  comparison  to  their  male  counterparts.  The  question  will  be
approached  by  studying  152  Swedish  listed  companies  between  the  period  of  2010-2017  with
respect  to  their  presence  of  females  corporate  leaders  and  financial  performance.  The  presence
of  females  as  corporate  leaders  is  measured  as  the  presence  of  a  female  Chief  Executive
Officer  (CEO),  Chief  Financial  Officer  (CFO),  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  the  share
of  female  corporate  board  members  and  the  share  of  female  executive  management  members.
Firm  financial  performance  is  measured  with  the  accounting-based  performance  measures
Return  on  Equity  (ROE),  Return  on  Assets  (ROA),  Return  on  Capital  Employed  (ROCE),
Return  on  Operating  Capital  (ROOC),  Operating  margin  and  Profit  Margin.  The  results
indicate  that  only  the  share  of  female  corporate  board  members  matter  for  the  financial
performance of a firm.
       The  thesis  is  structured  in  the  following  way:  Section  2  begins  with  a  review  of  the
recent  literature  and  outlines  the  most  important  research  findings  within  the  field  in  order  to
give  the  reader  a  solid  background  before  outlining  the  null  hypothesis.  The  hypothesis  is
followed  by  an  outline  of  the  data  used  in  section  3  and  the  method  will  be  presented  in
section  4.  The  results  will  be  presented  in  section  5  and  a  discussion  of  the  results  in  section  6
will  follow.  Lastly,  in  section  7,  the  findings  are  concluded  and  a  foundation  for  further
research will be provided.

                                                                                 2
2.  Literature  review

2.1 The presence of female corporate board members and firm financial performance

There  are  various  studies  that  investigate  the  presence  of  female  corporate  board  members  and
its  connection  to  the  financial  performance  of  firms.  Campbell  and  Mínguez-Vera  examined
Spanish  firm  performance  using  the  market-based  performance  measure  Tobin’s  Q  and  the
fraction  of  females  in  corporate  boards.  The  authors  found  that  the  financial  market  did  not
respond  negatively  to  the  presence  of  female  corporate  board  members.  Furthermore,  they
concluded  that  diversity  in  the  boardrooms,  and  not  female  presence  per  se,  had  a  positive
effect on firm value. (Campbell & Mingues- Vera, 2008)
       With  the  same  performance  measure,  Tobin’s  Q,  economist  Niccolò  Gordini  found
that  gender  diversity  on  Italian  corporate  boards  had  a  significant  positive  impact  on  Tobin’s
Q.  Gordini  pointed  out  that  there  was  an  insignificant  relationship  between  the  presence  of
one  or  more  female  corporate  board  members,  per  se,  and  firm  performance.  Therefore  he
could  conclude  that  the  presence  of  one  woman,  for  the  sake  of  it,  did  not  have  a  positive
effect on firm performance, whereas a larger fraction of women did (Gordini, Rancati, 2016).
       A  study  conducted  by  the  research  group  Catalyst  found  that  female  corporate  board
representation  had  a  positive  relationship  to  accounting-based  performance  ratios.  Catalyst
used  Return  on  Equity  (ROE),  Return  on  Sales  (ROS)  and  Return  on  Invested  Capital  (ROIC)
and  their  respective  relationship  to  female  representation  on  corporate  boards.  The  analysis
was  conducted  by  comparing  the  highest  performing  quartile  of  the  US  Fortune  500
companies with the lowest performing quartile (Catalyst, 2007).
      Another  study  conducted  by  management  consultancy  firm  McKinsey  &  Company
investigated   the   relationship  between  female  corporate  board  members  and  financial
performance  using  both  market-based  and  accounting-based  performance  measures  such  as
Return  on  Equity,  Operating  Margin,  Earnings  Before  Interest  and  Taxes  (EBIT)  and  stock
return.  They  used  a  comparative  method  where  they  compared  listed  US  companies  with  the
best  diversity  score  in  the  corporate  boardroom  against  the  industry  average  score.  Their
findings  suggested  that  companies  with  a  high  diversity  score  also  possessed  higher  values  of
their performance ratios (McKinsey & Company, 2007).
       Professor  Mijntje  Lückerath-Rovers  conducted  a  study  which  compared  Dutch  firms
without  female  corporate  board  members  to  those  with  female  corporate  board  members  in

                                                                                 3
the  Netherlands.  Extending  the  methods  used  by  McKinsey  &  Catalyst,  that  has  been  widely
cited,  it  was  found  that  the  presence  of  female  corporate  board  members  had  a  significant
positive  effect  on  firm  performance,  in  terms  of  Return  on  Equity  (ROE)  (Lückernath-Rovers,
2011).
       However,  there  are  studies  that  show  contradicting  results.  A  study  that  investigated
all  FTSE  100  companies  during  a  period  of  five  years,  found  that  there  was  no  relationship
between  the  presence  of  female  corporate  board  members  and  accounting-based  measures
such  as  Return  on  Equity  (ROE)  and  Return  on  Assets  (ROA)  which  they  referred  to  as
objective  performance  measures.  However,  they  found  a  negative  relationship  between  the
presence  of  female  corporate  board  members  and  market-based  performance  measures  of  firm
financial  performance  which  they  referred  to  as  subjective  performance  measures.  In  short,
their  conclusion  was  that  the  findings  were  consistent  with  claims  that  women  are  perceived
to  perform  poorly  by  the  market  but  that  this  perception  was  not  aligned  with  the  underlying
realities  of  company  performance  in  terms  of  accounting-based  measures  (Haslam,  Ryan,
Kulish, Trojanowski, Atkins, 2010)
       In  2015,  Pletzer,  Nikolova,  Kedzior  and  Voelpel  found  that  female  presence  on
corporate  boards  was  neither  correlated  with  accounting-based  performance  measures  nor
market-based  performance  measures,  if  other  factors  were  taken  into  consideration.  They
conducted  a  meta-analysis  with  papers  that  had  a  correlation  coefficient,  r,  between  the
percentage  of  female  representation  on  corporate  boards  and  firm  performance  measured  as
Return  on  Equity  (ROE),  Return  on  Assets  (ROA)  and  Tobin’s  Q   (Pletzer,  Nikolova,
Kedzior, Voelpel, 2015).

2.2 The presence of females in executive management and firm financial performance

While  some  reports  have  looked  at  the  relationship  between  women  on  corporate  boards  and
firm  financial  performance,  other  researchers  have  focused  on  the  presence  of  females  in
other  leading  positions,  namely  the  presence  of  female  executive  management  members.  A
selection of these research findings are outlined below.

       Professor  of  Finance,  Marcelo  Eduardo  and  co-writer  Brooks  Poole recently  conducted
a  study  that  examined  the  relationship  between  CEO  gender  and  market  performance  in  the
US.  This  was  done  by  investigating  the  accumulated  stock  returns  for  each  year  after  the

                                                                                 4
appointment  of  a  female  CEO.  The  analysis,  conducted  on  Fortune  500  companies  listed
between  2007-2012,  resulted  in  findings  that  suggested  a  significant  positive  effect  between
female CEO’s and market performance (Eduardo, Poole 2016).
       An  American  study  that  included  S&P  1.500  companies  over  15  years,  found  that  the
presence  of  women  in  executive  management  positions  had  a  positive  effect  on  Tobin’s  Q.
However,  the  research  findings  indicated  that  this  positive  relationship  was  limited  to
companies  that  focused  on  innovation  as  a  part  of  their  corporate  strategy  (Dezsö  and  Gaddis
Ross, 2012)
       A  Swedish  study,  conducted  twenty  years  ago,  examined  the  relationship  between
growth  in  sales,  profitability  and  female  entrepreneurs.  By  running  a  regression  on  a  sample
of  4200  companies  with  less  than  20  employees  they  concluded  that  firms  where  a  woman
held  the  chief  managerial  role  had  inferior  performance  to  those  firms  in  which  a  male  held
the  chief  managerial  role.  However,  after  controlling  for  size-related  measures  they  found  that
the relationship did no longer hold (Du Rietz and Henreksson, 1999).

2.3 Our contribution
First,  to  our  knowledge,  there  are  no  topical  Swedish  research  papers  that  investigate  the
relationship  between  the  presence  of  females  in  leading  positions  and  financial  performance.
Second,  the  research  on  females  in  leading  positions  in  a  corporate  context  is  often  limited  to
either  the  presence  of  female  board  members  or  the  presence  of  female  executive  management
members.  By  taking  into  consideration  both  of  these  aspects,  a  more  holistic  understanding  of
the  effect  of  the  presence  of  women  in  leading  positions  on  firm  financial  performance  can  be
obtained.  Third,  most  reports  look  at  market-based  ratios  or  a  mix  of  market-based  and
accounting-based  ratios.  In  line  with  Haslam,  Ryan,  Kulish,  Trojanowski  and  Atkins,  it  is
conceded  that  the  inclusion  of  variables  and  ratios  that  has  a  connection  to  the  financial
markets,  such  as  stock  price  and  Tobin’s  Q  can  distort  important  findings.  Consequently,  this
report  will  focus  exclusively  on  accounting-based  ratios  with  the  reason  being  that  market-
based  ratios  can  be  coloured  by  the  preconceptions  of  investors,  information  asymmetries  and
other  market  imperfections.  As  a  consequence,  there  is  a  risk  that  market-based  performance
measures  capture  factors  such  as  prejudices  against  female  corporate  leaders.  By  excluding
market-based  ratios,  the  ambition  is  to  minimise  the  impact  of  such  factors  on  the  research
findings.

                                                                                 5
2.4 Presentation of hypothesis
With  the  outline  of  the  most  important  previous  research  findings  as  well  as  the  gender
equality  statistics  in  mind,  the  following  null  hypothesis  can  be  formulated  with  regards  to  the
effect of female corporate leaders on firm financial performance in Sweden:

         H0 : The presence of female corporate leaders, either as corporate board
         members or as members of the executive management group has neither
          a positive nor a negative effect on firm financial performance.

3.  Data

In  this  section,  the  data  used  to  test  the  null  hypothesis  will  be  described.  First,  the  choice  of
dependent  variables  used  to  measure  firm  financial  performance  will  be  presented  and
explained.  Second,  the  independent  variables  used  to  measure  the  presence  of  females  in
leading  positions  of  the  firms  will  be  presented  and  explained.  Third,  the  inclusion  of  certain
control  variables  will  be  presented  and  motivated.  Fourth,  the  sample  selection  will  be
explained and followed by an outline of the method used to obtain the sample.

3.1 Dependent variables
There  is  an  abundance  of  performance  measures  that  function  as  indicators  for  the  financial
performance  of  a  firm  and  naturally,  not  all  of  them  can  be  included.  To  ensure  robust
findings  regarding  the  effect  of  females  in  corporate  leading  positions  on  firm  financial
performance,  several  performance  measures  have  been  incorporated  in  the  analysis.  To  arrive
at  the  final  selection  of  dependent  variables  used  to  measure  firm  financial  performance,  three
criteria was used.
       First,  the  choice  of  dependent  variables  was  chosen  to  reflect  the  aim  of  analysing  the
potential  effect  of  the  presence  of  females  in  leading  positions  on  firm  financial  performance.
Because  market-based  measures  are  potentially  affected  by  investor  perceptions,  there  is  a
risk  that  research  findings  based  on  such  measures  would  be  distorted  by  factors  such  as
prejudices  of  females  in  top  positions  (Haslam,  Ryan,  Kulish,  Trojanowski,  Atkins,  2010).
Furthermore,  there  is  a  risk  that  important  findings  would  be  distorted  by  other  market
imperfections  such  as  information  asymmetries  (Ciner  and  Karagozoglu,  2008).  Taking  into

                                                                                 6
account  the  aim  of  investigating  the  potential  effect  of  females  in  leading  positions  on  firm
financial  performance  rather  than  the  investor  perception  of  females  in  leading  positions,
accounting-based ratios were regarded as superior to the aim of the paper.
       Second,  the  choice  of  performance  measures  was  guided  by  the  principle  of
comparability  which  lead  to  the  inclusion  of  performance  measures  that  has  frequently  been
used  to  compare  performance  across  industries  and/or  companies.  What  the  performance
measures  down  below  all  have  in  common  is  that  a  higher  value  of  them  indicates  better
financial  performance-  regardless  of  the  industry  or  company.  R&D  intensity,  on  the  other
hand,  is  one  example  of  a  measure  that  has  been  deliberately  excluded  from  the  analysis  since
it is only relevant for certain companies within certain industries.
       Third,  the  chosen  performance  measures  have  a  connection  to  both  the  performance  of
the  corporate  board  and  the  executive  management  group.  For  instance,  by  making  decisions
about  acquisitions  and  other  fundamental  corporate  issues,  the  corporate  board  and  executive
management can affect returns as well as profitability margins.
       These  three  criteria  led  to  a  collection  of  six  different  accounting-based  measures.  For
each  of  these  measures,  there  are  differing  opinions  of  what  is  ought  to  be  included  in  the
denominator  and  numerator  respectively.  Because  the  data  was  obtained  from  the  database
Retriever,  the  outline  of  the  dependent  variables  below  builds  on  their  definition  of  the
respective ratios (Retriever, 2019).
       Of  all  the  fundamental  ratios  that  investors  tend  to  look  at,  Return  on  Equity  (ROE),  is
perhaps  the  most  common  one.  It  is  an  accounting-based  measure  that  serves  as  an  indicator
of  profitability  and  is  often  used  to  compare  companies  operating  in  the  same  industry.  With
earnings  after  financial  income  in  the  numerator  and  shareholders  equity  in  the  denominator,
it  indicates  how  effectively  a  firm  uses  its  shareholders  equity  to  generate  earnings.  The
formula of the ratio is:

                                    EBIT  + F inancial  income
             R OE =  [                              ]
                             Shareholders  equity  +  U ntaxed  reserves•0.72

Return  on  Assets  (ROA)  is  another  accounting-based  measure  that  serves  as  an  indicator  of
firm  financial  performance.  Like  ROE,  it  gauges  the  company’s  ability  to  generate  earnings
from  its  investments.  The  main  factor  that  separates  ROA  from  ROE  is  leverage.  In  simplified

                                                                                 7
terms,  the  two  measures  will  differ  for  a  firm  only  when  it  has  debt  on  its  balance  sheet.  The
formula of the ratio is:
                                   EBIT  + F inancial  Income
                     R OA =  [                    ]
                                              T otal  Assets

Return  on  Capital  Employed  (ROCE)  is  another  accounting-based  ratio  that  is  used  to
measure  the  return  from  a  company’s  capital  employed.  It  is  a  widely  used  performance
measure  for  capital-intensive  industries  and  the  main  difference  to  ROA  is  that  the  ROCE
calculation  comprises  the  equity,  long-term  debt  and  short-term  debt  to  credit  institutions.
That is, short-term debt such as account payables is excluded. The formula of the ratio is:

                                    EBIT  + F inancial  Income
       R OCE =  [                                         ]
                      equity  +  long−term  debt  +  short−term  debt  to  credit  institutions

Return  on  Operating  capital  (ROOC)  is  a  performance  measure  used  to  describe  the
relationship  between  the  operating  profit  and  the  capital  needed  within  operations.  With
operating  profit  in  the  numerator  and  assets  excluding  short-term  investments  and  short-term
liabilities  in  the  denominator,  it  illustrates  how  efficient  the  company  is  in  generating  return
from its core business. The formula of the ratio is:

                                             Operating  prof it
   R OOC =  [                                               ]
                assets−cash  &  bank  balances  −short  term  investments−short  term  liabilities

Operating  Margin  is  a  fifth  accounting-based  performance  measure.  With  the  numerator
excluding  income  statement  items  that  are  not  related  to  the  core  operations  and  net  sales  in
the  denominator,  Operating  Margin  is  a  measure  of  how  efficient  a  firm  is  in  generating  profit
from its core operations. The formula of the performance measure is:

                                                     operating  prof it
                     O perating  M argin =  [              ]
                                                         net  sales

Finally,  Profit  Margin  is  an  accounting-based  performance  measure  that  is  used  to  measure
how  effectively  a  company  generates  profits  from  its  sales.  In  simplified  terms,  it  indicates

                                                                                 8
how  many  Swedish  Kronor  (SEK)  of  profit  a  firm  generates  for  every  100  SEK  of  sales.  The
formula of the performance measure is:
                                                        net  prof it
                          P rof it M argin =  [         ]
                                                       net  sales

3.2 Independent variables
Five  independent  variables  have  been  included  to  quantify  the  presence  of  female  corporate
leaders.  In  line  with  the  the  null  hypothesis  that  is  to  be  tested,  independent  variables  have
been  chosen  so  that  they  collectively  represent  the  presence  of  females  on  corporate  boards  as
well as the presence of females in executive management positions.
       The  first  independent  variable  included  is  the  gender  of  the  Chief  Executive  Officer
(CEO).  This  is  a  dummy-variable  that  takes  on  a  value  of  1  when  a  female  holds  the  CEO
position  and  a  value  of  0  when  a  male  holds  the  CEO  position  (see  table  1).  The  gender  of  the
CEO  for  a  particular  year  and  for  a  particular  company  was  determined  by  the  gender  of  the
person  that  held  the  position  for  the  majority  of  the  accounting  period.  For  instance,  if  a
female  was  appointed  as  CEO  the  last  two  months  of  the  accounting  period,  the  gender  of  the

                                                         1
CEO was set to be male rather than female  .
       The  second  independent  variable  included  is  the  gender  of  the  Chief  Financial  Officer
(CFO).  Like  the  CEO-variable,  it  is  a  dummy-variable  that  takes  on  a  value  of  1  when  a
female  holds  the  CFO  position  and  a  value  of  0  when  a  male  holds  the  CFO  position  (see
table  1).  If  a  female  CFO  was  appointed  during  the  accounting  period,  the  same  decision  rule
as for the CEO variable was used to determine the value of the variable.
       The  third  independent  variable  is  the  gender  of  the  Chairman  of  the  corporate  board.
Like  the  two  variables  outlined  above,  it  is  a  dummy-variable  that  takes  on  a  value  of  1  when
a  female  holds  the  Chairman  position  and  a  value  of  0  when  a  male  holds  the  Chairman
position  (see  table  1).  To  determine  the  value  of  the  variable  when  the  gender  of  the  Chairman
changed  during  the  accounting  period,  the  same  method  as  for  the  two  previous  variables  was
used.

1
 Note that the distinction between female and male assumes that a person with a female (male) name defines
herself  (himself)  as  female  (male).  No  unisex  names  have  been  encountered  in  the  data  collection.  Accordingly,
the  line  has  been  drawn  in  reference  to  sex  rather  than  gender.  For  simplification  purposes,  gender  is  used  as  a
synonym for sex in the paper.

                                                                                 9
       The  share  of  female  corporate  board  members  (SFBM)  is  the  fourth  independent
variable  included  (see  table  2).  Regarding  the  share  of  females  on  the  corporate  board,  all
corporate  board  members  except  deputy  corporate  board  members  have  been  included  in  the
denominator.  In  the  numerator,  all  female  corporate  board  members  except  deputy  corporate
board  members  that  held  their  position  for  the  majority  of  the  accounting  period  have  been
included.  The  reason  that  female  corporate  board  representation  is  included  in  percentage
form  rather  than  in  absolute  numbers  was  the  strive  of  capturing  the  influence  of  women
rather  than  the  number  of  women.  It  was  therefore  regarded  appropropriate  that  an
observation  where  two  out  of  three  (67%)  corporate  board  members  were  females  was  given  a
different  value  of  the  independent  variable  than  a  company  where  two  out  of  ten  (20%)

                                                   2
corporate board members were female  .
       The  share  of  female  executive  management  members  (SFMM)  is  the  last  independent
variable  included  (see  table  2).  This  variable  was  included  to  capture  the  potential  effect  of
females  holding  executive  management  positions  other  than  the  CEO  and  CFO  positions.  The
numerator  consists  of  the  number  of  female  executives  that  held  their  position  for  the  majority
of  the  accounting  period  while  the  denominator  consists  of  the  total  number  of  management
executives  reported  in  the  corporate  governance  reports  of  the  respective  companies.  For  the
same  reason  as  for  the  SFBM  variable,  the  presence  of  females  in  executive  management
groups  is  measured  as  a  percentage  of  the  total  executive  management  group  rather  than  as  the
number of executive management members.

Table 1.  Descriptive statistics for the three independent dummy variables in the final dataset.

                                                                  Observations

Independent variable      Type of variable   Female [% of observations]    Male [% of observations]

CEOdummy (1=female)        Dummy             89 [8.67%]              1027 [91.33%]

CFOdummy (1=female)        Dummy            255 [22.85%]              861 [77.15%]

Chairmandummy (1=female)     Dummy             44 [3.94%]                1072 [96.06]

2
 Note  that  the  board  of  directors  will  be  referred  to  as  the  board  in  the  following  sections  to  avoid  excessively
long  descriptions.

                                                                                10
Table  2.  Descriptive  statistics  for  the  two  independent  variables  measured  at  a  continuous
level in the final dataset.

 Independent variable    Type of variable       Min. value         Max. value          Mean

        SFBM            Continuous           0.000             0.667             0.259

        SFMM            Continuous           0.000             1.000             0.193

Note: The minimum values, maximum values and means are given in decimal form.

3.3 Control variables
Since the aim of the thesis is to investigate the effect of females as corporate leaders and firm
financial performance it is vital to consider the potential effect from omitted variables. If not
controlled for, there is a risk that the regression models attribute the effect of the missing
variables to the estimated effect of the independent variables. Consequently, control variables
have been included in the analysis. (Newbold, Carlson, Thorne 2013). The variables chosen
have been selected with regards to their impact on financial performance and measurability.
       First,  discontinuous  control  variables  for  the  industry  of  the  company  have  been
included.  These  control  variables  are  dummy  variables  that  take  on  a  value  of  1  if  the
company  operates  within  the  industry  in  question  and  a  value  of  0  if  not.  The  companies
included  in  the  dataset  represent  15  different  industries  (see  appendix  1).   The  reason  that
industry  is  controlled  for  is  the  belief  that  the  values  of  the  performance  ratios  vary  with  the
industries.  Therefore  it  is  appropriate  to  control  for  the  industry  when  investigating  the
potential  effect  of  the  presence  of  women  in  leading  positions  and  firm  performance.  If  not,
there  is  a  risk  that  the  findings  are  distorted  by  the  fact  that  females  generally  operate  in  more
profitable  industries  than  men  or  the  other  way  around.  The  reason  that  industry  was
controlled  for  instead  of  the  firms  of  the  observations  was  that  there  were  no  changes  in  many
of  the  independent  variables  between  2010-2017  for  several  firms  in  the  dataset.  For  instance,
many  companies  had  a  male  chairman  and  CEO  during  all  eight  years  included  in  the  data  set.
Furthermore,  the  share  of  female  board  members  (SFBM)  and  share  of  female  executive
management  members  (SFMM)  remained  the  same  for  certain  companies  during  the  eight
years  included  in  the  data  set.  Because  the  statistical  usefulness  of  a  set  of  dummy  variables
require  that  there  is  some  variation  in  the  other  independent  and  control  variables  within  the
categories  that  the  dummy  variables  represent,  the  inclusion  of  company  dummy  variables
variables was not considered appropriate.

                                                                                11
       Second,  discontinuous  control  variables  for  the  year  of  the  observation  have  been
included  for  the  reason  that  certain  years  are  generally  worse  than  other  in  terms  of  financial
performance.  For  example,  many  industries  have  a  positive  correlation  with  the  business  cycle
and  experience  a  worse  financial  performance  during  the  contraction  stage  than  they  do
during  the  expansion  stage  (Fabio  Yoshio  Suguri  Motoki.  2015).  The  dummy  variables  take
on a value of 1 if the year of the observation is 201X and 0 otherwise.
       Third,  a  continuous  control  variable  for  the  book  value  of  the  total  assets  has  been
included  since  research  has  suggested  that  it  might  impact  the  profitability  of  a  company.
Although  previous  research  findings  regarding  the  effect  of  firm  size  on  performance  are
mixed,  a  firm's  size  have  generally  been  expected  to  have  a  positive  effect  on  profitability
since  larger  companies  are  better  equipped  to  exploit  economies  of  scale  (Yazdanfar  and
Öhman, 2015).
       Fourth,  a  continuous  control  variable  for  the  debt-to-equity  ratio  of  the  companies  has
been  included  to  control  for  the  leverage  of  the  respective  companies.  The  relationship
between  debt  financing  and  firm  performance  has  been  intensively  discussed  within  the  field
of  managerial  finance  since  it  is  associated  with  a  trade-off  between  costs  and  gains.  Some
research  has  pointed  out  that  leverage  can  be  used  to  boost  Return  on  Equity  while  other
research  has  pointed  to  the  fact  that  leverage  can  affect  performance  measures  such  as  Return
on Assets negatively (Yazdanfar and Öhman, 2015).
       Fifth,  a  continuous  variable  for  the  firm  age  has  been  included  which  takes  on  a  value
equal  to  the  number  of  years  since  the  company  was  registered.  Prior  research  has  suggested
that  older  firms  are  more  likely  to  benefit  from  learning  effects,  business  experience  and
reputation  effects.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has  also  been  suggested  that  firm  age  is  negatively
correlated  with  profitability  because  of  organisational  rigidities  and  assets  that  become
obsolete (Loderer and Waelchli, 2012).

3.4 Sample selection
The  initial  dataset  consisted  of  observations  for  155  Swedish  Nasdaq-  listed  companies
between  the  period  of  2010  to  2017.  Because  the  thesis  question  concerns  the  potential  effect
that  females  in  leading  positions  have  on  financial  performance  in  Sweden,  only  Swedish
companies  have  been  included.  The  delimitation  to  public  companies  was  regarded  necessary
since  private  companies  and  public  companies  have  differing  requirements  regarding  their

                                                                                12
executive  management  group  in  Sweden.  For  instance,  private  companies  are  not  required  to
have  a  CEO  (Bolagsverket,  2018).  Moreover,  the  industry  classification  benchmark,  described
in the section below, was available exclusively for public companies.
       Taking  into  consideration  the  aim  of  investigating  the  effect  of  the  presence  of  female
corporate  leaders  and  firm  performance  in  general  and  not  within  a  specific  industry  or
category  of  companies,  a  diverse  set  of  companies  was  sought  after.  For  that  reason,  the  data
set  was  created  to  include  companies  distributed  evenly  over  large,  mid,  and  small
capitalisation  companies-  49  large  cap  companies,  52  mid  cap  companies  and  54  small  cap
companies.  In  addition,  companies  from  15  different  industries  were  included.  The  industries
represented  in  the  dataset  are  Oil  &  Gas,  Basic  Resources,  Construction  &  Materials,
Industrial  Goods  &  Services,  Automobile  &  Parts,  Food  &  Beverage,  Personal  & Household
Goods,  Health  Care,  Retail,  Media,  Travel  &  Leisure,  Telecommunications,  Real  Estate,
Financial  Services  and  Technology  (see  appendix  1).  Each  industry  included  is  represented  by
at least two companies.
       The  time  period  of  eight  years,  ranging  from  2010-2017  was  chosen  with  two  criteria
in  mind.  The  first  criteria  was  that  of  relevance  and  led  to  the  selection  of  observations  in  the

                        3
most  recent  years  .  The  second  criteria  was  to  exclude  the  years  of  the  financial  crisis  since
that  was  a  period  of  abnormal  performance  for  many  firms.  A  time  period  of  eight  years  and
155 companies gave a number of 1240 observations in the initial dataset.
       In  the  following  stages  of  the  sample  selection  process,  the  data  was  tested  for
potential  outliers  in  the  dependent  variables-  that  is  values  that  deviated  far  from  other
observations.  This  was  carried  out  to  avoid  the  influence  of  outliers  on  error  variance  and
subsequent  estimates.  From  the  histograms  of  each  dependent  variable,  it  could  be  observed
that  all  dependent  variables  had  outliers  in  the  1st  and  99th  percentiles  (see  appendix  2  and  3).
After  removing  the  1st  and  99th  percentiles  for  each  of  the  dependent  variables,  additional
outliers  were  removed  for  the  dependent  variables  ROE,  ROOC,  Operating  Margin  and  Profit
Margin  (see  appendix  4).  Descriptive  statistics  of  each  dependent  variable  in  the  initial  dataset
can be found in table 3.
       After  removing  the  outliers,  a  number  of  152  companies  remained  in  the  dataset,  with
a  total  of  1116  final  observations  (see  appendix  5).  This  was  the  sample  size  that  was  used  in

3
  The  annual  reports  for  the  year  of  2018  had  not  been  released  at  that  point  in  time

                                                                                13
the  final  regression  analysis.  A  table  of  the  descriptive  statistics  for  all  variables  can  be  found
below (see table 3).

Table 3.  Descriptive statistics for all variables in the final dataset.
Dependent variables                      Median       Mean       Std.Dev     Observations

ROE                                    0.146        0.127        0.194          1116

ROA                                   0.072        0.072        0.092          1116

ROCE                                  0.107        0.110        0.140          1116

ROOC                                  0.115        0.137        0.243          1116

Operating Margin                            0.072         0.109         0.243          1116

Profit Margin                                0.075         0.140         0.279           1116

Independent variables                     Median       Mean       Std.Dev     Observations

CEOdummy (1=female)                    N/A         N/A         N/A          1116

CFOdummy (1=female)                     N/A         N/A         N/A          1116

Chairmandummy (1=female)                  N/A         N/A         N/A          1116

SFBM                                  0.250        0.259        0.140          1116

SFMM                                 0.167        0.193        0.172          1116

Control variables                         Median       Mean       Std.Dev     Observations

Total Assets                               2.329.500     20.100.000     49.200.000        1116

DE  (Debt-to-equity  ratio)                       1.160         1.811         6.960           1116

YearsSinceRegistration                       26.000        38.971        30.769          1116

Industry dummy variables (1=industry X)         N/A          N/A          N/A           1116

Year dummy variables (1=year 201X)            N/A         N/A         N/A          1116

Note:  To  avoid  reporting  misleading  information,  no  median,  mean  or  standard  deviation  has  been  reported  for
dummy  variables  since  they  are  not  measured  at  the  continuous  level.

3.5 Method of obtaining dataset
Data  for  the  dependent  variables  (ROE,  ROA,  ROCE,  ROOC,  Operating  Margin  and  Profit
Margin)  was  obtained  from  the  database  Retriever.  Data  for  the  independent  variables,  that  is,
information  regarding  the  gender  of  the  CEO,  the  gender  of  the  CFO,  the  gender  of  the

                                                                                14
Chairman,  the  share  of  females  present  on  the  board,  and  the  share  of  females  in  the  executive
management  group  was  manually  collected  from  the  annual  reports  of  the  companies  in
question.  All  in  all,  1240  annual  reports  were  examined  to  arrive  at  the  initial  dataset  of  1240
observations.  This  was  a  time  consuming  but  necessary  stage  in  the  data  collection  process
since  there  was  no  database  that  contained  compiled  data  for  this  information  at  that  point  in
time.
       Information  on  the  control  variables  was  obtained  from  two  sources.  The  value  of  the
total  assets,  the  debt-to-equity  ratios  as  well  as  the  registration  date  was  obtained  from  the
same  database  as  the  dependent  variables  -  Retriever.  To  obtain  the  number  of  years  since
registration  for  each  observation,  the  year  of  registration  for  each  company  was  deducted
from  the  year  of  the  observation.  The  industry  classification  benchmark  (ICB)  is  developed  by
Dow  Jones  and  FTSE  and  the  categorisation  of  the  companies  was  obtained  from  Nasdaq.  The
classification  of  companies  into  large,  mid  and  small  capitalisation  companies  was  obtained
from Nasdaq as well.

4. Method

In  this  section,  the  method  used  to  test  the  null  hypothesis  will  be  presented.  The  section  will
begin  with  an  outline  of  the  multiple  variable  regression  method.  Explanations  and  tests  of  the
assumptions associated with multiple variable regression model will follow.

4.1 The multiple variable regression model
The  multiple  variable  regression  model  is  an  extended  version  of  the  single  regression  model,
meaning  that  it  has  more  than  two  independent  or  control  variables  that  is  used  to  predict  the
dependant  variable.  Besides  being  a  transparent  and  robust  method,  the  advantage  of  the
multiple  variable  regression  model  is  that  the  relationship  between  a  dependent  variable  and
several  independent  variables  can  be  included  and  tested  in  one  single  regression.  Moreover,
the  multiple  variable  regression  model  allows  for  the  inclusion  of  control  variables  which  can
prevent  overstating  the  explanatory  value  of  the  independent  variables.  The  rationale  behind
including  six  different  regressions,  with  different  performance  measures  as  the  dependent
variable,  was  to  ensure  robust  findings  regarding  the  effect  the  presence  of  female  corporate
leaders  and  firm  financial  performance.  The  general  formula  for  the  multiple  variable
regression model is as follows:

                                                                                15
Y  i  =  β0  + β 1  x1  it  +  β 2  x2  it  +  β 3  x3  it  ...  β k  xkit   +  εit

where,  ß0  is the intercept.  ß1, ß2, ß3… ßk  are the coefficients for the independent or control
variables (X1it, X2it,X3it...Xkit) and describe their respective effect on the dependant variable, Yit.
 εit  is the residual, sometimes referred to as an error term and represents the difference
                          ︿
between the predicted value of the model,  Y it , and the actual value of the observation  Yit

(Newbold, Carlson, Thorne 2013, p. 475). Six regression models have been included with the
following constituents:

Y it  =  β0  + β 1  · CEOdummyit  +  β 2  × CF Odummyit + β3  · Chairmandummyit

+  β 4  · SF BM it  +  β 5  · SF M M it +  β 6  · T otalassetsit  + β7  ·  DEit   +  β 8 · Y earssinceregistrationit

+ α(ICB) +  α(t)

where  β0 is  the  intercept  and  Yit  is  the  dependent  variable,  that  is,  the  financial  performance
measure  of  each  of  the  six  regressions.  In  the  first  regression,  the  financial  performance
measure  is  ROE,  in  the  second  regression  it  is  ROA,  in  the  third  regression  it  is  ROCE,  in  the
fourth  regression   it  is  ROOC,  in  the  fifth  regression  it  is  Operating  margin  and  in  the  sixth
regression it is Profit margin. All values are given in decimal form.
        β1 is  the  coefficient  for  CEOdummyit  which  is  an  independent  dummy  variable  that
takes  on  a  value  of  1  if  a  female  holds  the  CEO  position  of  the  specific  company  in  the
specific  year,   and  0  otherwise.   β1 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial
performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  a  female  holds  the  position  as  opposed  to
when  a  male  holds  the  position.
        β2 is  the  coefficient  for  CFOdummyit  which  is  an  independent  dummy  variable  that
takes  on  a  value  of  1  if  a  female  is  holding  the  CFO  position  of  the  specific  company  in  the
specific  year,  and  0  otherwise.  β2 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial
performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  a  female  holds  the  position  as  opposed  to
when  a  male  holds  the  position.
        β3 is  the  coefficient  for  Chairmandummyit  which  is  an  independent  dummy  variable
that  takes  on  a  value  of  1  if  a  female  zholds  the  Chairman  position  of  the  specific  company  in
the  specific  year,  and  0  otherwise.  β3 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial

                                                                                16
performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  a  female  holds  the  position  as  opposed  to
when  a  male  holds  the  position.
        β4 is  the  coefficient  for  SFBMit  which  is  an  independent  continuous  variable  that  takes
on  a  value  equal  to  the  share  of  females  on  the  board  of  the  specific  company  in  the  specific
year.  The  share  of  women  is  given  in  decimal  form.  β4 represents  the  percentage  point  change
in  the  performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  share  of  females  increases  by  100
percentage  points.  A  somewhat  more  intuitive  way  of  interpreting  the  coefficient  is  that  β4/10
represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial  performance  measure,  given  in  decimal
form,  when  the  share  of  females  increases  by  10  percentage  points.
        β5 is  the  coefficient  for  SFMMit  which  is  an  independent  continuous  variable  that  takes
on  a  value  equal  to  the  share  of  women  in  the  executive  management  group  of  the  specific
company  in  the  specific  year.  The  share  of  women  is  given  in  decimal  form.  β5 represents  the
percentage  point  change  in  the  performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  share  of
females  increases  by  100  percentage  points.  Again,  a  somewhat  more  intuitive  way  of  interpreting
the  coefficient  is  that β5/10 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial  performance
measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  share  of  females  increases  by  10  percentage  points.
        β6  is  the  coefficient  for  Totalassetsit  which  is  a  continuous  control  variable  that  takes
on  the  value  of  the  total  assets  of  the  specific  company  in  the  specific  year.  The  value  of  the
total  assets  is  given  in  Swedish  Kronor  (SEK).  β6 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the
performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  value  of  the  total  assets  increases  by  1
SEK.
        β7  is  the  coefficient  for  Yearsinceregistrationit  which  is  a  continuous  control  variable
that  takes  on  a  value  equal  to  the  number  of  years  since  the  specific  company  was  registered.
β7 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial  performance  measure,  given  in  decimal
form,  when  the  age  of  the  company  increases  by  1  year.
        β8  is  the  coefficient  for  DEit  which  is  a  continuous  control  variable  that  takes  on  a
value  equal  to  the  debt-to-equity  ratio  of  the  specific  company  in  the  specific  year.  The  value
of  the  ratio  is  given  in  decimal  form.  β8 represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the  financial
performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  debt-to-equity  ratio  increases  by  100%
percentage  points.  A  more  intuitive  way  of  interpreting  β8 is  that β8/10 represents  the  percentage
point  change  in  the  performance  measure,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  debt-to-equity  ratio
increases  by  10  percentage  points.

                                                                                17
        α(ICB) represents  the  industry  classification  benchmark  (ICB)  dummy  variables.  which
are control dummy variables representing the industry classification of the companies. These
control variables take on a value of 1 if the specific company operates in the industry that the
dummy variable represents and 0 otherwise.  α represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the
financial  performance  measure  of  the  regression,  given  in  decimal  form,  when  the  company

                                                                                                                        4
operates  in  the  industry  that  the  dummy  variable  represents  in  comparison  to  the  base  case
industry  which  is  the  technology  industry.  Information regarding which industry each dummy
variable represents can be found in appendix 1.
       α(ICB) represents  the  year  dummy  variables  which  are  control  dummy  variables  that
represent  the  year  of  the  observation.  The  variables  take  on  a  value  of  1  if  the  specific
observation  is  from  year  201X  and  0  otherwise.  α represents  the  percentage  point  change  in  the
financial  performance  measure  that  can  be  explained  by  the  year  of  the  observation,  in  comparison

                                                              5
to  the  year  of  2010  which  is  the  base  case  year  .

4.2 Assumptions of the multiple regression model
The  multiple  regression  coefficients  are  computed  by  a  mathematical  least  square  procedure.
This  method  results  in  estimators  that  can  be  used  in  the  regression  model.  (Newbold,
Carlson,  Thorne  2013  p.  481)  The  multiple  regression  model  relies  on  four  fundamental
standard  assumptions,  that  should  always  be  met  (Newbold,  Carlson,  Thorne  2013,  p  .482).
These are outlined below. A significance level of 5% has been chosen for all tests.

4.2.1. Multicollinearity
The  first  assumption  is  that  there  should  be  no  multicollinearity.  Multicollinearity  is  a  case
where  the  independent  and/or  control  variables  of  the  regression  models  are  correlated.  An
applicable  test  for  multicollinearity  is  the  variance  inflation  factor-test  (VIF-test)  which
assigns  VIF-values  for  each  variable  included  in  the  regression  (see  appendix  6).  These  are
not  to  exceed  10  in  order  for  the  assumption  to  hold  (O’Brien,  2007).  Moreover,  a  table  of
correlation  was  constructed  to  get  a  clear  overview  of  the  correlation  between  the  variables  of

4
 The  base  case  industry  refers  to  the  industry  that  has  not  been  assigned  an  industry  dummy  variable.  The  use  of
a base case industry is necessary because the number of dummy variables should be N-1, where N is the number
of  categories  (industries).
5
 The base case year refers to the year that has not been assigned an year dummy variable. The use of a base case
year is necessary because the number of dummy variables should be N-1, where N is the number of categories
(years).

                                                                                18
each  regression.  Neither  the  VIF-test  nor  the  table  of  correlation  indicated  the  presence  of
multicollinearity (see appendix 6 and 7).

4.2.2. Linearity
Second,  there  should  be  linearity  meaning  that  the  value  of  the  dependent  variables,  Y,  should
be  mirrored  as  a  linear  function  of  the  independent  variables,  X1, X2,  X3…Xk.  To  be  able  to
discern  signs  of  non-linearity  in  multiple  variable  regressions,  the  standardised  residuals  of  a
regression  model  can  be  plotted  against  the  independent  variables  (University  of  Utah,  2019)
In  the  case  where  there  is  no  discernible  pattern  of  a  non-linear  relationship  between  the
residuals,  non-linearity  is  not  an  issue.  Hence,  the  pattern  in  the  scatter  plots  should  be
random.  Scatter  plots  with  each  dependent  variable  and  each  continuous  independent  variable
and signs of non-linearity was not discernible (see appendix 8).

4.2.3. Heteroscedasticity
Third,  the  regression  models  should  display  homoscedasticity,  meaning  that  the  variance  of
the  error  terms  should  remain  constant  along  the  line  of  fitted  values  and  have  a  mean  of  0.  If

                                                                                            2
this  assumption  is  violated,  heteroscedasticity  prevails,  𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑒𝑖)  ≠  (𝜎 ).  The  consequences  of  a
heteroscedastic  model  is  the  risk  of  distorted  p-values  and  thus  the  legitimacy  of  the
regression   model   results   (Newbold,   Carlson,   Thorne,   2013).   In   order   to   test   for
heteroskedasticity,  the  two-tailed  Breusch-Pagan/  Cook-Weisberg  test  for  heteroskedasticity
was  used  which  states  that  whenever  the  calculated  p-value  exceeds  the  selected  level  of
significance,   the   presence   of   homoscedasticity   can   be   validated   (Halungaa,   Ormeb,
Yamagatac,  2014).  The  residuals  displayed  heteroscedasticity  in  all  regressions  but  regression
3,  in  which  ROCE  is  the  dependent  variable  (see  appendix  9).  The  prevalence  of
heteroscedasticity  in  these  regressions  can  further  be  observed  in  the  scatter  plots  where  the
standardised  error  terms  of  each  regression  were  plotted  against  their  predicted  values  (see
appendix  10).  In  order  to  correct  for  heteroscedasticity,  the  final  regression  was  conducted
using  robust  standard  errors.  This  operation  factors  the  prevalence  of  heteroscedasticity  and
corrects  for  it  by  modifying  the  least  square  estimation  of  the  error  terms  (Gujarati  &  Porter
2010).

                                                                                19
4.2.4. Autocorrelation
Fourth,  the  regression  models  should  be  absent  of  autocorrelation  (also  known  as  serial
correlation)  meaning  that  the  error  terms  should  not  be  correlated  with  each  other-  that  is,  a
pattern  should  not  be  discernible  in  the  error  terms  ( εi )  which  translates  to,  𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝑒𝑖  ,𝑒𝑗  )  =  0  in
statistical  terms.  Autocorrelation  is  more  common  for  time  series  data  and  panel  data  than  in
cross-sectional  data  and  the  consequences  of  an  autocorrelated  regression  model  is  similar  to
those  of  heteroscedasticity  (Newbold,  Carlson,  Thorne,  2013).  The  regression  models  were
tested  for  autocorrelation  with  the  Wooldridge  test.  The  results  indicated  that  autocorrelation
all  regression  models  except  for  regression  suffered  from  autocorrelation  (see  appendix  11).
To  correct  for  heteroscedasticity  and  autocorrelation,  clustered  standard  errors  can  be  used  in
the final regressions (Hoechle, 2007).

4.2.5. Normally distributed residuals
The  final  assumption  of  a  multiple  regression  is  the  assumption  of  normally  distributed
residuals.  In  order  to  test  for  residual  normality,  a  common  test  procedure  is  the  Shapiro-Wilk
test  which  exhibits  strong  power  and  is  suitable  for  both  small  and  large  samples.  The  null
hypothesis  of  the  test  is  that  the  residuals  are  normally  distributed.  Thus,  the  assumption  of
normally  distributed  residuals  is  rejected  if  the  p-value  is  lower  than  the  selected  level  of
significance  (Mohd  Razali,  Wah,  2011).  The  output  from  the  Shapiro-Wilk  test  showed  that
all  regressions  displayed  a  lack  of  normally  distributed  residuals  (see  appendix  12).  One
common  method  to  tackle  non-normally  distributed  residuals  is  to  construct  a  log,  square  or
box-cox  transformation  of  the  variables  (Feng,  Wang,  Lu,  Chen,  He,  Lu,  M  Tui,  2014).
However,  as  the  dependent  variables  in  the  dataset  contain  both  positive  as  well  as  negative
values,  such  a  procedure  is  not  feasible.  In  order  to  preclude  this  fully  as  an  option,  a
log-transformation  was  conducted  for  the  independent  variables  that  are  suitable  for  the
procedure-  that  is,  variables  without  negative  values  and  great  variance.  Once  again  using  the
Shapiro-Wilk  test,  it  could  be  concluded  that  these  operations  did  not  generate  any  further
statistical validity with regards to the normality of the residuals (see appendix 13).

                                                                                20
5.  Results

In  this  section,  the  result  of  each  multiple  variable  regression  will  be  presented  one  at  a  time
with  regards  to  their  statistical  and  economic  significance.  A  compilation  of  the  result  from  all
six  regressions  can  be  found  in  table  4.  Full  regression  results  for  each  regression  can  be
found in appendix 14-19.

5.1 Regression 1 (ROE)
The  share  of  female  board  members  (SFBM)  was  the  only  variable  that  displayed  statistical
significance  in  the  first  regression.  Neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a
female  CFO  nor  the  presence  of  a  higher  share  of  female  executive  management  members
displayed statistical significance (SFMM) (see table 4).
       Because   the   share   of   female   board   members  (SFBM)  displayed  a  statistical
significance  at  the  1%  level  and  a  coefficient  of  0.244,  the  economic  interpretation  is  that  a  10
percentage  point  increase  in  the  share  of  female  board  members  is  associated  with  a  2.44
percentage  point  higher  Return  on  Equity  (ROE).  The  economic  interpretation  of  the
remaining  independent  variables  is  that  neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of
a  female  CFO,  the  presence  of  a  female  Chairman  nor  a  higher  share  of  female  executive
management  members  (SFMM)  has  a  positive  nor  negative  effect  on  the  Return  on  Equity
(ROE)  of  a  firm.  More  detailed  regression  results  for  regression  1  can  be  found  in  appendix
14.

5.2 Regression 2 (ROA)
In  the  second  regression,  similarly,  the  share  of  female  board  members  (SFBM)  was  the  only
one  of  the  independent  variables  that  displayed  statistical  significance  (See  table  4).  Again,
neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a  female  CFO  nor  the  presence  of  a
higher  share  of  female  executive  management  members  (SFMM)  displayed  statistical
significance.
       Because   the   share   of   female   board   members  (SFBM)  displayed  a  statistical
significance  at  the  1%  level  and  a  coefficient  of  0.120,  the  economic  interpretation  is  that  a  10
percentage  point  increase  in  the  share  of  female  board  members  is  associated  with  a  1.20
percentage  points  higher  Return  on  Assets  (ROA).  The  economic  interpretation  of  the
remaining  independent  variables  is  that  neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of

                                                                                21
a  female  CFO,  the  presence  of  a  female  Chairman  nor  a  higher  share  of  female  executive
management  members  (SFMM)  has  a  positive  or  negative  effect  on  the  Return  on  Assets
(ROA)  of  a  firm.  More  detailed  regression  results  for  regression  2  can  be  found  in  appendix
15.

5.3 Regression 3 (ROCE)
Like  in  the  two  first  regressions,  the  share  of  female  board  members  (SFBM)  was  the  one
independent  variable  that  displayed  statistical  significance  in  the  third  regression.  Once  again,
neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a  female  CFO  nor  the  presence  of  a
higher  share  of  female  executive  management  members  (SFMM)  displayed  statistical
significance (see table 4).
       Because   the   share   of   female   board   members  (SFBM)  displayed  a  statistical
significance  at  the  1%  level  and  a  coefficient  of  0.172,  the  economic  interpretation  is  that  a  10
percentage  point  increase  in  the  share  of  female  board  members  is  associated  with  a  1.72
percentage  points  higher  Return  on  Capital  Employed  (ROCE).  The  economic  interpretation
of  the  remaining  independent  variables  is  that  neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the
presence  of  a  female  CFO,  the  presence  of  a  female  Chairman  nor  a  higher  share  of  female
executive  management  members  (SFMM)  has  positive  or  negative  effect  on  the  Return  on
Capital  Employed  (ROCE)  of  a  firm.  More  detailed  regression  results  for  regression  3  can  be
found in appendix 16.

5.4 Regression 4 (ROOC)
In  the  fourth  regression,  likewise,  the  share  of  female  board  members  (SFBM)  was  the  only
one  of  the  independent  variables  that  displayed  statistical  significance  (See  table  4).  Once
again,  neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a  female  CFO  nor  the  presence
of  a  higher  share  of  female  executive  management  members  (SFMM)  displayed  statistical
significance.
       Because   the   share   of   female   board   members  (SFBM)  displayed  a  statistical
significance  at  the  1%  level  and  a  coefficient  of  0.327,  the  economic  interpretation  is  that  a  10
percentage  point  increase  in  the  share  of  female  board  members  is  associated  with  a  3.27
percentage  points  higher  Return  on  Operating  Capital.  The  economic  interpretation  of  the
remaining  independent  variables  is  that  neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of

                                                                                22
a  female  CFO,  the  presence  of  a  female  Chairman  nor  a  higher  share  of  female  executive
management  members  (SFMM)  has  positive  or  negative  effect  on  the  Return  on  Operating
Capital  (ROOC)  of  a  firm.  More  detailed  regression  results  for  regression  4  can  be  found  in
appendix 17.

5.5 Regression 5 (Operating Margin)
In  the  fifth  regression,  again,  the  share  of  female  board  members  was  the  only  independent
variable  that  displayed  statistical  significance  (see  table  4).  Once  again,  neither  the  presence
of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a  female  CFO  nor  the  presence  of  a  higher  share  of  female
executive management members (SFMM) displayed statistical significance.
       Because   the   share   of   female   board   members  (SFBM)  displayed  a  statistical
significance  at  the  1%  level  and  a  coefficient  of  0.177,  the  economic  interpretation  is  that  a  10
percentage  point  increase  in  the  share  of  female  board  members  is  associated  with  a  1.77
percentage  points  higher  Operating  Margin.  The  economic  interpretation  of  the  remaining
independent  variables  is  that  neither  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a  female
CFO,  the  presence  of  a  female  Chairman  nor  a  higher  share  of  female  executive  management
members  (SFMM)  has  positive  or  negative  effect  on  the  Operating  Margin  of  a  firm.  More
detailed regression results for regression 5 can be found in appendix 18.

5.6 Regression 6 (Profit margin)
In  contrast  to  the  regressions  outlined  above,  the  p-value  of  0.086  of  the  share  of  female  board
members  (SFBM)  implies  that  the  SFBM  variable  neither  displayed  statistical  significance  at

                                                                  6
the  1%,  5%  nor  10%  level  in  the  sixth  regression  (see  table  4).  Likewise,  neither  the  presence
of  a  female  CEO,  the  presence  of  a  female  CFO  nor  the  presence  of  a  higher  share  of  female
executive management members (SFMM) displayed statistical significance.
       The  economic  interpretation  of  the  independent  variables  is  that  an   increase  the
presence  of  a  female  CEO,  a  female  CFO,  a  female  Chairman,  the  presence  of  female
corporate  board  members  (SFBM)  and  the  presence  of  female  executive  management
members  (SFMM)  has  a  positive  or  negative  effect  on  the  Profit  Margin  of  a  firm.  More
detailed regression results for regression 6 can be found in appendix 19.

6
 Note  that  a  significance  level  of  10%  (0.1)  requires  a  p-value  of  5%  (0.05)  in  order  for  statistical  significance  to
be  confirmed.  This  is  because  it  is  the  null-hypothesis  of  neither  a  positive  nor  negative  correlation  between  the
independent  variable  and  dependent  variables  that  is  to  be  rejected.  Hence,  the  test  is  two-tailed.

                                                                                23
Table 4.  Extracted output of all six regressions.

                                                             Regression

       Independent variables         R1(ROE)   R2(ROA)  R3(ROCE)  R4(ROOC)  R5(OM)  R6(PM)

                      Coefficient        -0.027      -0.011      -0.018       0.000     -0.047    -0.032
  CEOdummy
                        Std.  Err          [0.035]      [0.019]     [0.029]      [0.054]    [0.029]    [0.055]
   (1=female)
                       P-value          0.440       0.562      0.527       0.994     0.105     0.557

                      Coefficient         0.013       -0.005      0.009       0.013     -0.022    -0.014
  CFOdummy
                        Std.  Err          [0.023]      [0.019]     [0.019]      [0.032]    [0.015]    [0.029]
   (1=female)
                       P-value          0.569       0.646      0.645       0.681     0.141     0.637

                      Coefficient         0.009       -0.007      -0.005      -0.024     0.012     0.045
Chairmandummy
                        Std.  Err          [0.029]      [0.016]     [0.018]      [0.032]    [0.025]    [0.060]
   (1=female)
                       P-value          0.768       0.640      0.771       0.445     0.622     0.455

                      Coefficient         0.244       0.120       0.172       0.327      0.177     0.137

     SFBM            Std.  Err         [0.083]      [0.040]     [0.059]      [0.107]    [0.050]    [0.079]

                      P-value        0.004***    0.003***   0.004***    0.003***  0.000***   0.086

                      Coefficient         0.023       0.014       0.030       0.010     -0.028    -0.058

     SFMM            Std.  Err         [0.064]      [0.033]     [0.051]      [0.083]    [0.039]    [0.066]

                       P-value          0.718       0.676      0.553       0.902     0.463     0.383

       Number of observations           1116       1116      1116       1116      1116     1116

                     2
                 R                     0.111       0.077      0.093       0.071     0.370     0.463

       Industry  dummy  variables           Incl.        Incl.        Incl.        Incl.       Incl.      Incl.

         Year  dummy  variables             Incl.        Incl.        Incl.        Incl.       Incl.      Incl.

           D/E  -ratio  variables               Incl.         Incl.        Incl.         Incl.       Incl.      Incl.

    Years  since  registration  variable         Incl.         Incl.        Incl.         Incl.       Incl.      Incl.

          Total  assets  variable               Incl.         Incl.        Incl.         Incl.       Incl.      Incl.

Note:  OM  denotes Operating Margin and PM denotes Profit Margin. Std. Err denotes clustered standard errors in
R1-R4  and  R6.  In  R5,  Std.Err  denotes  robust  standard  errors.  Incl.  denotes  that  the  variable(s)  has(have)  been
included  and  Not  incl.  denotes  that  the  variable(s)  has(have)  not  been  included.  ***  Indicates  statistical
significance  at  the  1%  level,  **  denotes  statistical  significance  at  the  5%  level  and  *  indicates  statistical
significance  at  the  10%  level.  The  coefficients  are  reported  in  decimal  form.

                                                                                24
5.7  Summary of results
To  summarise  the  results  from  all  six  regressions,  the  one  independent  variable  that  displayed
statistical  significance  did  so  in  five  out  of  six  regressions.  More  specifically,  the  share  of
female  board  members  (SFBM)  displayed  a  statistical  significant  relationship  with  all
dependent  variables  but  the  Profit  Margin  which  is  the  dependent  variable  in  regression  six.
Moreover,  the  statistical  significant  relationship  between  the  share  of  female  board  members
and  the  dependent  variables  was  positive  in  all  five  regressions.  Because  all  regressions
included  control  variables  for  the  size  of  the  company  (total  assets),  age  of  the  company
(years  since  registration),  leverage  of  the  company  (D/E-ratio),  the  year  of  the  observation,
and  the  industry  of  the  company,  it  can  furthermore  be  concluded  that  the  statistically
significant  and  positive  effect  of  the  share  of  female  board  members  on  five  out  of  six
financial performance measures could not be explained by either of these control variables.
       Before  moving  on  to  the  discussion  of  the  results,  two  points  should  be  emphasized.
First,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  residuals  of  the  regressions  are  not  normally

              7
distributed  .  As  a  consequence,  the  p-values  should  be  interpreted  with  certain  caution.
Second,  when  interpreting  the  results  for  the  CEO  dummy  variable  and  the  Chairman  dummy
variable,  the  low  number  of  observations  where  a  female  held  the  position  should  be  taken

                        8
into  consideration  .  This  is  because  there  is  a  risk  that  the  low  number  of  observations  where
females  held  these  positions  were  not  sufficient  to  generate  robust  regression  results  which  in
turn could have obstructed relevant interpretations.

6.  Discussion  of  results

In  this  section,  the  results  of  the  six  regressions  will  be  discussed.  First,  the  results  will  be
discussed  in  relation  to  the  model  specification.  Second,  the  direction  of  causality  is  explored
which  is  followed  by  a  discussion  of  omitted  variables  before  further  economic  interpretations
are outlined.

7
 Demonstrated  in  section  4.2.5  Normally  distributed  residuals
8
 As demonstrated in table 1, the number of observations where a female held the position was 89 (8.67% of the
total  observations)  and  44  (3.94%  of  the  total  observations)  for  the  CFO  position  and  the  Chairman  position
respectively

                                                                                25
6.1 Model specification
One  possible  reason  that  could  explain  the  fact  that  only  the  share  of  female  board  members
(SFBM)  displayed  statistical  significance  in  the  majority  of  the  regressions  could  be  that  the
SFBM  variable  only  had  values  ranging  from  0  to  0.67,  meaning  that  the  maximum  share  of
female  board  members  in  the  boards  included  in  the  dataset  was  67%  or  two  thirds  of  the
board  (see  table  2).  Meanwhile,  the  share  of  female  executive  management  members  (SFMM)
ranged  from  0  to  1  meaning  that  the  maximum  share  of  females  in  the  executive  management
groups  included  in  the  dataset  was  100%.  An  answer  for  the  difference  in  statistical
significance  between  the  SFMM  and  the  SFBM  variables  could  therefore  lie  in  the  fact  that  it
is  gender  diversity  that  matters,  not  the  presence  of  females  per  se.  If  this  would  hold,  the
relationship  between  the  share  of  females  and  financial  performance  should  remain  positive
until  the  value  exceeds  a  certain  point,  proposedly  somewhere  around  0.5  (50%)  to  thereafter
become  negative.  Because  the  share  of  female  board  members  never  exceeded  67%  while  the
share  of  female  executive  management  members  ranged  from  0  to  100%,  it  is  possible  that  the
the  SFBM  variable  did  not  capture  the  potential  negative  effect  of  a  less  diverse  group,  where
the  gender  diversity  in  the  boardroom  would  have  been  imbalanced  to  the  disadvantage  of
men.  The  possibility  that  it  is  gender  diversity  that  affects  financial  performance  and  not  the
presence  of  females  per  se,  further  provides  an  explanation  for  the  statistical  insignificance  of
the  independent  dummy  variables  since  these  variables  simply  represented  the  gender  of  the
person holding either the CEO, CFO or Chairman position rather than gender diversity.
       This  explanation  is  related  to  a  more  general  point  that  should  be  kept  in  mind  about
the  regression  models-  that  it  is  a  linear  relationship  that  is  tested.  With  that  said,  the  lack  of
statistical  significance  for  the  SFMM  variable  is  not  equivalent  with  a  non-existing
relationship  between  the  share  of  female  executive  management  members  and  the  financial
performance  of  a  firm.  Rather,  the  results  of  the  six  regressions  indicate  that  there  is  no
statistical  significant  linear  relationship  between  the  share  of  executive  management  members
variable and the financial performance of the firm.

6.2 Reverse causality
Reverse  causality,  or  reverse  causation,  refers  to  a  direction  of  cause-and-effect  relationship
that  runs  contrary  to  common  presumption.  In  the  context  of  this  analysis,  the  possibility  of  a
reverse  causation  implies  that  it  is  important  to  not  hastily  draw  the  conclusion  that  a  higher

                                                                                26
share  of  female  board  members  lead  to  superior  financial  performance.  Thus,  the  results  that
indicated  that  firms  with  a  higher  share  of  female  board  members  are  generally  more
profitable   than   other   do   not   necessarily   imply  that  a  firm  can  boost  their  financial
performance by hiring more female board members.
       In  the  context  of  this  analysis,  reverse  causation  could  be  present  if  more  profitable
companies  have  a  tendency  to  hire  more  female  board  members.  Another  source  of  reverse
causation  could  be  that  women,  as  a  consequence  of  the  underrepresentation  of  women,  are
more  in  demand  in  the  recruitment  for  corporate  leaders  and  thus  have  a  greater  possibility
than  men  to  choose  to  work  for  more  profitable  companies.  However,  to  our  knowledge,  there
is  no  research  on  the  relationship  between  females  in  leading  positions  and  firm  performance
that  suggests  the  prevalence  of  such  a  reverse  causation.  As  a  final  point,  the  two  directions  of
causation  are  not  mutually  exclusive  since  there  is  a  possibility  of  a  two-way  causal
relationship.

6.3 Omitted variables
The  control  variables  and  the  independent  variables  included  in  the  regression  are  by  no
means  collectively  exhaustive  with  regards  to  their  effect  on  the  financial  performance  of  a
firm.  Finding  and  including  all  such  variables  in  each  of  the  regression  models  would  be
insurmountable.  Therefore,  there  is  always  a  risk  that  factors  not  captured  by  the  included
variables  could  have  an  effect  on  the  outcomes  of  the  regressions.  A  common  type  of  omitted
variable  bias  is  fixed  effects.  That  is,  time  invariant  characteristics  of  an  individual  or  a  group.
In  the  context  of  this  analysis,  that  translates  to  time  invariant  characteristics  of  a  certain
company  or  companies  within  a  certain  industry.  Having  controlled  for  the  industry  of  all
observations   and   having   excluded   company   dummy   variables  only  after  concluding

                                       9
insufficient variation in them  , that type of omitted variable bias has been minimised.

6.4 Further economic interpretations
The   fact   that   there   is   an   statistical   insignificant   relationship   between   firm   financial
performance  and  the  presence  of  a  female  CEO,  CFO,  Chairman  and  the  presence  of  a  higher
share  of  female  executive  management  members  (SFMM)  might  not  be  all  that  surprising
given  the  high  level  of  gender  equality  in  the  broader  society  in  Sweden.  In  particular,  the

9
 As  discussed  in  3.3  Control  variables

                                                                                27
gender  equality  in  educational  background  that  exists  and  has  existed  in  Sweden  for  more
than  two  decades  points  to  the  fact  that  Swedish  men  and  women  should  be  equally  well
equipped to perform well in leading positions with regards to their educational background.
       There  are  various  possible  explanations  to  why  one  of  the  independent  variables  did
show  statistical  significance  in  five  out  of  six  regressions-  that  is  the  share  of  female  board
members  (SFBM).  In  line  with  the  discussion  of  reverse  causality,  one  explanation  is  that
firms  that  are  more  profitable  hire  more  women  than  less  profitable  firms.  Another
explanation,  in  line  with  the  issue  discussed  in  the  model  specification,  is  that  more  gender
diverse  boards  perform  better  because  women  and  men  contribute  with  different  perspectives
and  therefore  complement  each  other  to  generate  a  more  solid  mix  of  competences  and  traits
which  in  turn  is  mirrored  in  the  financial  performance  of  the  firm.  As  mentioned  above,  it  is
possible  the  results  indicating  that  an  increase  in  the  share  of  female  board  members  (SFBM)
has  a  positive  effect  on  financial  performance  could  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  SFBM
variable  only  had  values  ranging  from  0  to  67%.  Hence,  it  is  possible  that  the  regression
models  did  not  capture  the  potential  negative  effects  of  an  imbalanced  board  consisting
predominantly of women.

7. Concluding remarks

7.1 Females as corporate leaders and firm financial performance
This  paper  aimed  to  investigate  the  potential  effect  the  presence  of  female  corporate  leaders
on  firm  financial  performance.  Four  out  of  five  independent  variables  measuring  the  presence
of  females  in  leading  positions  lacked  statistical  significance  in  all  six  regressions  indicating
that  they  have  a  statistically  insignificant  relationship  with  the  performance  measures  Return
on  Equity  (ROE),  Return  on  Assets  (ROA),  Return  on  Capital  Employed  (ROCE),  Return  on
Operating  Capital  (ROOC),  Operating  Margin  and  Profit  Margin  respectively.  In  contrast,  the
one  independent  variable  that  displayed  statistical  significance  did  so  in  five  out  of  six
regressions  indicating  that  a  higher  share  of  female  board  members  leads  to  superior  financial
performance.
       In  the  light  of  the  above  findings,  it  is  imperative  to  interpret  the  findings  vigilantly
and  question  suggestions  that  the  gender  of  corporate  leaders  has  a  positive  or  negative  effect
on  the  financial  performance  of  firms.  First,  no  support  was  found  for  the  notion  that  women
in  leading  positions  underperform  in  comparison  to  their  male  counterparts.  Second,  it  can  be

                                                                                28
concluded  that  the  gender  of  the  CEO,  the  CFO  or  the  Chairman  neither  has  a  positive  nor  a
negative  effect  on  firm  financial  performance.  Third,  regarding  the  share  of  female  executive
management  members,  it  can  be  said  that  a  higher  share  neither  has  a  positive  nor  negative
effect  on  the  financial  performance  of  a  firm.  Finally,  regarding  the  share  of  female  board
members,  it  can  be  said  that  a  higher  share  has  a  positive  effect  on  firm  financial
performance-  at  least  up  to  the  point  where  two  thirds  of  the  board  consists  of  women.  Thus,
the  findings  do  not  provide  any  support  for  the  notion  that  a  company  led  predominantly  or
exclusively  by  women  would  be  associated  with  better  financial  performance  than  a  company
led  predominantly  or  exclusively  by  men.  To  summarise,  the  null  hypothesis-  a  non-existing
effect  of  the  presence  of  female  corporate  leaders  on  firm  financial  performance  can  only
partially  be  rejected.  Consequently  this  paper  adds  to  the  existing  literature  of  mixed  and
complex findings regarding the impact of female corporate leaders.
       Seen  from  a  policy-maker’s  perspective,  these  findings  are  noteworthy.  Given  the
findings  suggesting  that  female  corporate  leaders  do  not  underperform  in  comparison  to  their
male  counterparts  and  the  fact  that  there  exists  about  as  many  qualified  females  as  males  in
regards  to  educational  attainment  in  Sweden,  the  low  presence  of  women  in  leading  positions
of  companies  is  seemingly  unjustified.  From  a  policy-maker’s  perspective  then,  the  findings
suggests  that  gender  quotas  could  be  enforced  without  hurting  the  financial  performance  of
Swedish firms.

7.2 Limitations & further research
Regarding  the  limitations  of  this  paper,  two  points  should  be  emphasised.  First,  that  the
relationship  between  the  presence  of  female  corporate  leaders  and  firm  financial  performance
has  only  been  tested  with  regards  to  public  companies.  This  is  important  to  highlight  since
there  is  a  possibility  that  the  findings  might  have  been  different  if  the  selection  of  companies
would  have  included  private  companies  as  well  as  public  companies  or  solely  private
companies.  One  line  of  reasoning  that  supports  such  a  possibility  could  be  that  a  person
holding  a  leading  position  has  less  direct  influence  over  the  financial  performance  of  a  public
company  than  a  private  company  since  public  companies  are  not  seldom  larger-  both  in  terms
of  assets  and  the  number  of  employees.  Another  line  of  reasoning  that  supports  such  a
possibility  is  that  public  companies  are  subject  to  greater  scrutiny  and  could  therefore,  to  a
higher  extent  than  private  companies,  be  pressured  to  hire  female  corporate  leaders.  The

                                                                                29
second  point  that  should  be  emphasised  is  that  the  relationship  between  the  presence  of
female  corporate  leaders  and  firm  financial  performance  has  only  been  tested  with  regards  to
a  limited  set  of  performance  measures.  Thus,  the  enumeration  of  the  performance  measures
that has been tested is not exhaustive.
       As  with  any  statistical  analysis,  the  results  can  be  made  more  robust  with  a  larger
sample.  A  possible  pathway  to  increase  the  sample  size  substantially  is  to  include  not  only
public  companies  but  also  private.  However,  like  we  have  experienced,  the  data  for  private
companies  is  more  inaccessible  and  would,  like  the  data  for  public  companies,  have  to  be
collected  manually-  a  time  consuming  procedure.  Furthermore,  the  issue  with  the  low  number
of  observations  containing  a  female  CEO  and/or  a  female  Chairman  can  hardly  be  mended
with  a  larger  data  set,  however,  since  it  is  not  a  feature  of  the  particular  sample  used  in  this
thesis but rather a feature of the population as a whole.
       Regarding  alternative  empirical  methods  that  could  be  used  to  complement  the  method
used  in  this  thesis,  an  ANOVA-analysis  could  be  used  to  gain  further  insight  into  the
relationship  between  females  in  leading  positions  and  firm  financial  performance.  For
instance,  given  the  results  of  the  multiple  variable  regressions  presented,  it  would  be  of
interest  to  compare  boards  that  are  comprised  of  0%-40%  females,  40-60%  females  and
60%-100%  females  and  compare  their  respective  financial  performance  measures  and  explore
the  potential  connection  between  gender  diversity  and  financial  performance.  Such  an
analysis  could  indicate  if  there  is  a  certain  gender  composition  that  is  optimal  in  terms  of
financial  performance  and  guide  policymakers  in  their  design  of  potential  gender  quota
requirements.
       Regarding  the  broader  area  of  research  on  the  relationship  between  the  composition  of
corporate  boards,  executive  management  groups  and  firm  financial  performance,  there  are
other  dimensions  of  group  compositions  than  gender  to  explore.  For  instance,  intersectional
factors  such  as  ethnicity  and  cultural  background  could  give  additional  insights.  To  further
nuanced  the  findings,  an  analysis  of  potential  differences  regarding  gender  and  performance
amongst  different  industries  could  be  an  intriguing  approach  to  generate  comparative
findings.
       Finally,  other  academic  fields  could  be  fruitful  in  the  strive  of  gaining  a  deeper
understanding  of  the  low  presence  female  corporate  leaders.  With  the  lack  of  evidence  for  the
notion  that  women  underperform  in  comparison  to  their  male  counterparts,  the  low  presence

                                                                                30
of  women  in  leading  positions  remains  perplexing.  Although  it  would  most  likely  entail
approaching  other  academic  fields,  it  would  be  interesting  to  explore  explanations  other  than
those relating to financial performance to untangle this enigmatic issue.

                                                                                31
References

Allbright.  2017.  The  Allbright  report  -  Women  CEOs  choose  gender  equality.  Allbright,
--------15-16.
Bartholdy,  Jan  and  Peare,  Paula.  (2005).  Estimation  of  expected  return:  CAPM  vs.  Fama  and
--------French.  International Review of Financial Analysis 14, 407-427.
Bolagsverket, 2018, Styrelse och vd- aktiebolag,  Bolagsverket.
Cambell,  Kevin  and  Mingues-Vera,  Antonio.  (2008).  Gender  Diversity  in  the  Boardroom  and
--------Firm Financial Performance.  Journal of Business Ethics  3, 435-451.
Catalyst,  2007,  The  bottom  line:  corporate  performance  and  women’s  representation  on
--------boards,  Catalyst Ink.
Chung,  Kee  H.  and  W.  Pruitt,  Stephen.  (1994).  A  Simple  Approximation  of  Tobin's  q.
--------Financial Management Venture Capital 3.
Ciner,  Cetin  and  Karagozoglu,  Ahmet  K.  (2008).  Information  asymmetry,  speculation  and
--------foreign  trading  activity:  Emerging  market  evidence.  International  Review  of  Financial
Analysis 3. 664–680.
Dalziel,  Thomas  and  Hillman,  Amy  I.  (2003).  Boards  of  directors  and  firm  performance:
--------integrating  agency  and  resource  dependence  perspectives.  Academy  of  Management
--------Review, 383-396.
Deszsö,  Cristian  and  Gaddis  Ross,  David.  (2012).  Does  female  representation  in  top
--------management  improve  firm  performance?  A  panel  data  investigation.  Strategic
--------Management Journal 33, 1072-1089.
Du  Rietz,  Anita  and  Henreksson,  Magnus  (1999).  Testing  the  Female  Underperformance
--------Hypothesis,  Small Business Economics 1, 1-10.
Feng,  Changyong,  Wang,  Hongyue,  Lu,  Naiji,  Chen,  Tian,  He  Hua,  Lu,  Ying  and  Tu  Xin  M.
--------(2014).   Log-transformation  and  its  implications  for  data  analysis,  Shanghai  Arch
--------Psychiatry 2, 105–109.
Gordini,  Niccolò  and  Rancati,  Elisa.  (2017).  Gender  diversity  in  the  Italian  boardroom  and
--------firm financial performance,  Management Research Review 1, 75-94
Halungaa  Andreea  ,  D.  Ormeb  Chris  and  Yamagatac  Takashi.  (2014).  A  Heteroskedasticity
--------Robust  Breusch-Pagan  Test  for  Contemporaneous  Correlation  in  Dynamic  Panel  Data
--------Models.  Journal Of Economics 2, 209-230.
Haslam,  Alexander,  Ryan,  Michelle,  Kulich,  Clara,  Trojanowski,  Grzegorz  and  Atkins,  Cate.
--------(2010).  Investing  with  Prejudice:  the  Relationship  Between  Women’s  Presence  on
--------Company  Boards  and  Objective  and  Subjective  Measures  of  Company  Performance.
--------British Journal of Management 2,  484-497.

                                                                                32
J.  Hillman  and  Dalziel,  Thomas.  (2003).  Boards  of  Directors  and  Firm  Performance:
--------Integrating  Agency  and  Resource  Dependence  Perspectives.  Academy  of  Management
--------Review 3, 383-396.
Hoechle,  Daniel.  (2007).  Robust  standard  errors  for  panel  regressions  with  cross-sectional
--------dependence,  The Stata Journal 3, 281–312
Kolev,  Gueorgui.  (2012).  Underperformance  by  female  CEOs:  A  more  powerful  test.
--------Economics Letters 2, 436-440.
Loderer, Claudio and Waelchli, Urs. (2010). Firm Age and Performance.
Lückerath-Rovers,  Mijntje.  (2013).  Women  on  boards  and  firm  performance,  Journal  of
--------Management & Governance 2, 491-509.
McKinsey  &  Company.  (2007).  Women  matter.  Gender  diversity,  a  corporate  performance
--------driver.
Missing  Pieces  Report.  (2016).  The  2016  Board  Diversity  Census  of  Women  and  Minorities
--------and Fortune 500 Boards.  Deloitte.
Mohd  Razali,  Nornadiah  and  Wah,  Yap  Bee.  (2011).  Power  comparisons  of  Shapiro-Wilk,
--------Kolmogorov-Smirnov,  Lilliefors  and  Anderson-Darling  tests.  Journal  of  Statistical
--------Modeling and Analytics 1. 21-33.
Motoki,   Fabio   and   Yoshio   Sugur.   (2015).   Firm   Performance   and  Business  Cycles:
--------Implications for Managerial Accountability.  Redfame Publishing 1.
O’Brien  M.  Robert.  (2007).  A  Caution  Regarding  Rules  of  Thumb  for  Variance  Inflation
--------Factors.  Springer 41. 673–690.
Pletzer,   Jan   Luca,  Nikolova,  Romina,  Kedzior,  Karina  Karolina,  and  Voelpel,  Sven
Constantin.  (2015).  Does  Gender  Matter?  Female  Representation  on  Corporate  Boards  and
--------Firm Financial Performance- A Meta-Analysis.  PLos One 6.
Poole,  Brooks  and  Eduardo,  Marcelo,  2016,  CEO  age  and  gender:  Subsequent  market
--------performance,  Cogent Business & Management 3.
Sharpe, Rochelle. (2000). As leaders, Women Rule,  Bloomberg LP.
University Of Utah. (2019. Checking Linearity
Voss, D. Stephen. (2004).  Multicollinearity.  University of Kentucky.
Yazdanfar,  Darush  and  Öhman,  Peter.  (2015).  Debt  Financing  and  firm  performance:  an
--------Empirical study based on Swedish data.  Journal of Risk Finance  1. 102-118.
World   Economic   Forum.  (2018).  The  Global  Gender  Gap  Report.  World  Economic
--------Forum.
Statistics Sweden. (2015). Utbildningsstatistisk årsbok 2015.  Statistics Sweden.

                                                                                33
Appendix

Appendix  1.  Name  of  all  industries  and  supersectors  included  in  the  dataset.  The  supersectors
are referred to as industries throughout the thesis.

    Name given in       NASDAQ ICB-code         Industry              Supersector
       regression
     ICBdummy1              500              Oil  & Gas              Oil & Gas
      ICBdummy2               1700              Basic Materials           Basic  resources
      ICBdummy3               2300                Industrials          Construction & Materials
      ICBdummy4               2700                Industrials         Industrial Goods & Services
     ICBdummy5              3300            Consumer goods        Automobile  & Parts
     ICBdummy6              3500            Consumer  goods         Food  & Beverage
     ICBdummy7              3700            Consumer  goods     Personal & Household Goods
      ICBdummy8               4500               Health care              Health care
      ICBdummy9              5300            Consumer  Services             Retail
     ICBdummy10              5500           Consumer  Services            Media
     ICBdummy11              5700            Consumer Services         Travel & Leisure
     ICBdummy12              6500           Telecommunications       Telecommunications
     ICBdummy13              8600               Financials               Real Estate
     ICBdummy14               8700                Financials            Financial  Services
       Base case                9500               Technology              Technology

Appendix  2.   Descriptive  statistics  for  each  of  the  dependent  variables  in  the  initial  dataset.
All values are given in decimal form. Std. deviation denotes standard deviation.

                                              Dependent Variable

                 R1(ROE)     R2(ROA)    R3(ROCE)    R4(ROOC)    R5(OM)      R6(PM)

    Min.  value        -7.270        -1.740        -3.920        -14.541       -6973.00      -5117.860

    Max. value        1.640         0.750         0.849         9.440         4.880       4962.670

   1%  percentile       -1.990        -0.710        -0.920        -4.273        -30.250       -24.530

  99% percentile       0.620         0.63         0.630         3.998         1.150         1.830

   Std. Deviation       0.534         0.18         0.290         1.929        200.530       217.240

      Mean           0.070         0.050         0.080         0.161        -8.350        -3.630

                                                                                34
Appendix  3.  Histograms  of  each  dependent  variable  including  all  observations  in  the  initial
dataset, before any trimming.

Appendix  4.  Histograms  for  each  dependent  variable  with  the  observations  remaining  after
trimming the dataset.

                                                                                35
Appendix  5.  Name  of  all  companies  included  in  the  final  regression  model  listed  in
alphabetical order.

          Company name          Company name (cont.)        Company name (cont.)           Company name (cont.)
     A3 Allmänna IT - och
  1                             39  Bulten AB              77   Holmen Aktiebolag          115   Proact IT Group AB
      Telekomaktiebolaget (publ)
  2   AAK AB (publ)             40  Bure Equity AB          78   Husqvarna Aktiebolag        116   PROBI Aktiebolag
  3   AB Sagax                41  C-Rad AB              79   ICA Gruppen Aktiebolag      117   ProfilGruppen AB
  4   ABB AB                 42  Castellum Aktiebolag      80   ICTA AB (publ)            118   Qliro Group AB (publ)
  5   Acando AB               43  Catena AB             81   Intrum AB                119   Railcare Group AB
  6   ACTIVE Biotech AB         44  CellaVision AB          82   Investor Aktiebolag          120   Ratos AB
      Addnode Group Aktiebolag                                                                      RaySearch Laboratories AB
  7                              45  Clas Ohlson Aktiebolag     83    Invisio Communications AB    121
      (publ)                                                                                                  (publ)
                                                                          RNB RETAIL AND
  8   Addtech AB               46  Cloetta AB             84   KappAhl AB (publ)          122
                                                                                    BRANDS AB (publ)
  9   Aktiebolag Fagerhult         47  Collector AB            85    Kinnevik AB               123   SAAB Aktiebolag
                                      Concordia Maritime
  10   Aktiebolaget Electrolux        48                           86    Knowit Aktiebolag (publ)      124   SAS AB
                                       Aktiebolag
  11   Aktiebolaget Industrivärden     49  Consilium Aktiebolag      87    Kungsleden Aktiebolag        125   Scandic Hotels Group AB
                                    Corem Property Group
  12  Aktiebolaget SKF           50                         88   Lammhults Design Group AB   126   SECTRA Aktiebolag
                           AB
  13   Aktiebolaget Volvo          51  CTT Systems AB         89    Lindab International AB       127   Semcon Aktiebolag
  14  Alfa Laval AB             52  Diös Fastigheter AB       90   Loomis AB                128   Sensys Gatso Group AB
                                 Dometic Group AB
  15  Anoto Group AB           53                        91   Lundin Petroleum AB        129   Skanska AB
                                         (publ)
  16  AQ Group AB             54  DORO AB             92   Magnolia Bostad AB         130   SkiStar Aktiebolag
  17  ASSA ABLOY AB          55  Duni AB               93   Medivir Aktiebolag          131   Softronic Aktiebolag
  18  Atlas Copco Aktiebolag       56  Duroc Aktiebolag         94   Mekonomen Aktiebolag       132   SSAB AB
  19   Atrium Ljungberg AB         57  Elanders AB             95    Micro Systemation AB (publ)   133   Stockwik Förvaltning AB
  20  Avanza Bank Holding AB     58  Elos Medtech AB         96   Midsona AB              134   Studsvik AB
  21   Axfood Aktiebolag           59  Empir Group AB         97   Midway Holding Aktiebolag    135   Svedbergs i Dalstorp AB
                                                                 Modern Times Group              Svenska Cellulosa
  22   Bactiguard Holding AB        60  Enea Aktiebolag          98                              136
                                                           MTG AB                     Aktiebolaget SCA
 23  BE Group AB (publ)        61  Eniro AB             99   MOMENT GROUP AB      137  SWECO AB (publ)
      Beijer Alma                     Eolus Vind
  24                           62                       100   MQ Holding AB           138  Swedish Match AB
      AB                           Aktiebolag (publ).
                                      Episurf Medical                 Mycronic
  25   Beijer Electronics Group AB    63                         101                              139   Swedol AB (publ)
                                 AB                      AB (publ)
  26   Beijer Ref AB (publ)         64  Fabege AB             102   Net Insight AB              140   Systemair Aktiebolag
     Bergman & Beving
  27                             65  Fastighets AB Balder      103   NetEnt AB (publ)            141   Tele2 AB
      Aktiebolag
      Bergs Timber                   Feelgood Svenska              NGS Group
  28                           66                        104                            142   Telia Company AB
      AB (publ)                      Aktiebolag (publ.)               Aktiebolag
  29   Besqab AB (publ)           67  Fingerprint Cards AB      105   NIBE Industrier AB          143   Tethys Oil AB
  30   Betsson AB               68  FormPipe Software AB     106   Nobia AB                 144   TradeDoubler Aktiebolag
  31   Bilia AB                  69  Getinge AB             107   Nobina AB (publ)            145   Trention Aktiebolag
      BillerudKorsnäs Aktiebolag       GHP Specialty Care AB                                        VBG GROUP
  32                           70                       108   NOTE AB (publ)           146
      (publ)                         (publ)                                                          AB (publ)
     BioGaia                      H & M Hennes &                                           Venue Retail Group
  33                           71                       109   NOVOTEK Aktiebolag       147
      AB                         Mauritz AB                                                 Aktiebolag
      BioInvent International            Haldex                                                            Vitec Software Group
  34                             72                         110   Odd Molly International AB    148
      Aktiebolag                     Aktiebolag                                                     AB (publ)
  35   Björn Borg AB             73  Hexagon Aktiebolag      111   Orexo AB                149   Wallenstam AB
  36   Boliden AB               74  HiQ International AB      112   Pandox Aktiebolag           150   Wise Group AB
  37   Bong AB                75  HMS Networks AB       113   Peab AB                151  XANO Industri AB
  38   BTS Group AB             76  Hoist Finance AB        114   Poolia AB                152   ZetaDisplay AB

                                                                                36
Appendix 6. Variance inflation factor test for all control variables except the dummy
variables for each company.
            Variable                         VIF                       1/VIF
              CEOt                           1.34                        0.743
              CFOt                           1.19                         0.839
            SFMMt                         1.59                       0.628
             SFBMt                          1.32                        0.755
             Chairmant                          1.15                          0.870
        YearSinceRegistration                       1.48                           0.675
             TotalAssets                           1.44                           0.692
               DEt                            1.12                         0.889
          ICBdummy1                       1.11                       0.901
          ICBdummy2                       1.47                       0.682
          ICBdummy3                       1.46                       0.684
          ICBdummy4                       2.29                       0.437
          ICBdummy5                       1.25                       0.800
          ICBdummy6                       1.64                       0.609
          ICBdummy7                       1.68                       0.596
          ICBdummy8                       1.14                       0.878
          ICBdummy9                       1.30                       0.7695
          ICBdummy10                       1.27                       0.785
          ICBdummy11                       1.63                       0.612
          ICBdummy12                       1.75                       0.571
          ICBdummy13                       1.13                       0.887
          ICBdummy14                       1.53                       0.652
           dummy2017                        1.89                        0.529
           dummy2016                        1.84                        0.545
           dummy2015                        1.82                        0.550
           dummy2014                        1.79                        0.558
           dummy2013                        1.79                        0.558
           dummy2012                        1.77                        0.564
           dummy2011                        1.76                        0.567
           Mean VIF                        1.52

                                                                                37
Appendix  7.  A  table  showing  the  correlation  between  each  of  the  dependent  and  independent
variables included in the final regression.

                                                                                38
Appendix 8.  The residuals of each regression plotted against the share of female board
members variable (SFBM) and the share of female executive management members variable
(SFMM). No scatterplots for the dummy independent variables have been included since they
are not measured at the continuous level.

Appendix 9.  Output from the two-tailed Breusch-Pagan/ Cook-Weisberg test for
homoscedasticity. The dependent variable of each regression is shown in the parenthesis
following the regression number. OM denotes Operating Margin and PM denotes Profit
Margin. From the fourth row, it can be understood that all regressions but R3 (ROCE)
display heteroscedasticity.

    Breusch-Pagan/
                                                       Regression
  Cook-Weisberg test

                     R1(ROE)    R2(ROA)    R3(ROCE)   R4(ROOC)    R5(OM)     R6(PM)

         Chi2            98.790        5.800        4.500       130.900      26.120       544.50

      Prob > Chi2          0.000       0.0160        0.034        0.000        0.000        0.000

    Heteroscedastic         Yes         Yes         No         Yes         Yes         Yes

                                                                                39
Appendix 10.  The residuals of each of the six regressions plotted against their fitted values.
The dependent variable is ROE in R1, ROA in R2, ROCE in R3, ROOC in R4, Operating
margin in R5, Profit margin in R6.

Appendix 11.  Output of the Wooldridge test for autocorrelation for all six regressions. The
dependent variable of each regression is shown in the parenthesis following the regression
number. OM denotes Operating Margin and PM denotes Profit Margin. From the fourth, it
can be understood that all regressions except R5(OM) suffer from autocorrelation.

    Wooldridge test                                   Regression

                   R1(ROE)    R2(ROA)    R3(ROCE)    R4(ROOC)    R5(OM)     R6(PM)

        F-value          13.673       17.910        15.697        21.345        0.149        6.640

       Prob > F          0.000       0.000         0.000         0.000        0.670        0.011

    Autocorrelation        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          No         Yes

                                                                                40
Appendix 12.  Output of the Shapiro-Wilk test for normally distributed residuals. The
dependent variable of each regression is shown in the parenthesis following the regression
number. OM denotes Operating Margin and PM denotes Profit Margin. From the sixth row, it
can be understood that all regressions display a lack of normally distributed residuals.

       Shapiro-wilk test                                  Regression

                          R1(ROE)    R2(ROA)   R3(ROCE)   R4(ROOC)   R5(OM)   R6(PM)

             W                 0.920       0.926       0.939        0.837       0.720      0.808

             V                55.502      51.837      42.752      113.832     195.507    133.869

              z                 9.991        9.821       9.341       11.777      13.123     12.181

           Prob > z              0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000

 Normally distributed residuals       No         No         No          No         No        No

Appendix  13.  Shapiro-Wilk  test  for  normally  distributed  residuals  with  log-transformed
variables.  The  dependent  variable  of  each  regression  is  shown  in  the  parenthesis  following  the
regression  number.  OM  denotes  Operating  Margin  and  PM  denotes  Profit  Margin.  From  the
sixth row, it can be understood that none of the regressions had normally distributed residuals.

       Shapiro-wilk test                                  Regression

                         R1(ROE)   R2(ROA)   R3(ROCE)   R4(ROOC)   R5(OM)   R6(PM)

             W                0.927      0.928       0.943        0.837       0.723      0.809

             V               50.950     50.025      39.785      113.279     193.230    132.821

              z                9.778      9.732       9.162        11.765      13.094     12.161

           Prob > z             0.000      0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000

 Normally distributed residuals      No        No         No          No         No        No

                                                                                41
Appendix  14.  Full  regression  results  for  regression  R1  in  which  ROE  is  the  dependent
variable. Std.Err denotes errors that are clustered on companies.
Number of obs            1116
R-squared                 0,111
Root MSE               0,185

Independent  variable         Coefficient   Std.  Err      t            P>|t|         [95%  Conf.  Interval]
ICBdummy1              0.060       0.063       0.960       0.341       -0.065      0.185
ICBdummy2              -0.051      0.051       -1.010      0.314       -0.151       0.049
ICBdummy3              0.103       0.045       2,310       0.022       0.015       0.191
ICBdummy4              0,029       0.046       0,630       0.530       -0.061      0.119
ICBdummy5              0.026       0.051       0.510       0.613       -0.075      0.126
ICBdummy6              -0.058      0.067       -0.860      0.389       -0.191       0.075
ICBdummy7              0.033       0.064       0.510       0.613       -0.095      0.160
ICBdummy8              -0.131      0.126       -1.040      0.299       -0.379       0.117
ICBdummy9              0.062       0.071       0.880       0.383       -0.078      0.203
ICBdummy10             -0.018      0.050       -0.350      0.724       -0.116      0.081
ICBdummy11             0.029       0.046       0.620       0.536       -0.063      0.120
ICBdummy12             0.029       0.055       0.520       0.601       -0.080      0.138
ICBdummy13             -0.016      0.075       -0.210      0.836       -0.165      0.133
ICBdummy14             -0.010      0.044       -0.240      0.813       -0.097      0.076
dummy2017              -0.024      0.023       -1.050      0.294       -0.070       0.021
dummy2016              -0.015      0.024       -0.620      0.537       -0.061       0.032
dummy2015              -0.032      0.023       -1.380      0.170       -0.077       0.014
dummy2014               -0.044      0.021       -2.050      0.042       -0.086       -0.002
dummy2013               -0.045      0.019       -2.370      0.019       -0.082       -0.007
dummy2012               -0.059      0.020       -2.970      0.004       -0.098       -0.020
dummy2011              0.001       0.018       0.030       0.974       -0.035      0.036
CEOdummy              -0.027      0.035       -0.770      0.440       -0.095      0.041
CFOdummy              0.013       0.023       0.570       0.569       -0.032      0.059
SFBMt                  0.244       0.083       2.940       0.004       0.080       0.408
SFMMt                  0.023       0.064       0.360       0.718       -0.104      0.150
Chairmandummy           0.009       0.029       0.300       0.768       -0.049      0.066
DEt                     0.002       0.001       2.100       0.037       0.000       0.003
Totalassets                0.000       0.990       0.324       0.000       0.000        0.000
YearsSinceregistration       0.000       0.000       0.650       0.516       0.000        0.001
Constant                  0.058       0.053       1.090       0.277       -0.047       0.163

                                                                                42
Appendix 15.  Full regression results for regression R2 in which ROA is the dependent
variable. Std.Err denotes errors that are clustered on companies.
Number of obs            1116
R-squared                 0,077
Root MSE               0,090

Independent  variable          Coefficient    Std.  Err         t           P>|t|        [95%  Conf.  Interval]
ICBdummy1                 0.065       0.049       1.33        0.187       -0.03       0.164
ICBdummy2                  -0.02       0.023       -0.98       0.328       -0.06       0.023
ICBdummy3                 0.025       0.022       1.15        0.253       -0.01       0.069
ICBdummy4                 0.002       0.022       0.12        0.907       -0.04       0.046
ICBdummy5                 0.021       0.021       1.03        0.306       -0.02       0.063
ICBdummy6                  -0.01       0.036       -0.33       0.745       -0.08       0.060
ICBdummy7                 0.014       0.031       0.48        0.633       -0.04       0.076
ICBdummy8                  -0.04       0.037       -1.14       0.258       -0.11       0.031
ICBdummy9                 0.044       0.038       1.15        0.254       -0.03       0.120
ICBdummy10                 -0.00       0.023       -0.16        0.87        -0.05       0.042
ICBdummy11                0.006       0.021       0.29        0.773       -0.03       0.048
ICBdummy12                0.007       0.024        0.3        0.765       -0.04       0.056
ICBdummy13                 -0.01       0.029       -0.58        0.56        -0.07       0.040
ICBdummy14                -0.000       0.022       -0.38       0.701       -0.05       0.035
dummy2017                  -0.01       0.011        -1.1        0.271        -0.03        0.010
dummy2016                  -0.00       0.011       -0.78        0.439       -0.03        0.013
dummy2015                  -0.00       0.010       -0.93        0.353       -0.03        0.010
dummy2014                  -0.01       0.009       -1.62        0.108       -0.03        0.003
dummy2013                  -0.02       0.009       -2.28        0.024        -0.03        -0.00
dummy2012                  -0.02       0.008       -2.31        0.023        -0.03        -0.00
dummy2011                  -0.00       0.008       -0.21        0.837       -0.01        0.015
CEOdummy                  -0.01       0.018       -0.58       0.562       -0.04       0.025
CFOdummy                  -0.00       0.011       -0.46       0.646       -0.02       0.017
SFBMt                      0.119       0.040        2.97        0.003       0.040       0.199
SFMMt                     0.013       0.033        0.42        0.676       -0.05       0.079
Chairmandummy              -0.00       0.015       -0.47        0.64        -0.03        0.023
DEt                          -0.00        0.000        -1.84        0.068        -0.00        0.000
Totalassets                    0.000        0.000        0.620        0.538        0.000        0.000
YearsSinceregistration           0.000        0.000        0.350        0.727        0,000        0.000
Constant                      0.048       0.026       1.860        0.065       -0.003       0.098

                                                                                43
Appendix 16.  Full regression results for regression R3 in which ROCE is the dependent
variable. Std.Err denotes errors that are clustered on companies.
Number of obs            1116
R-squared                 0,093
Root MSE               0,136

Independent  variable          Coefficient    Std.  Err         t           P>|t|        [95%  Conf.  Interval]
ICBdummy1                 0.052       0.060       0.870       0.386       -0.067       0.171
ICBdummy2                 -0.047       0.036       -1.290       0.200       -0.119       0.025
ICBdummy3                 0.045       0.035       1.310       0.191       -0.023       0.114
ICBdummy4                 0.004       0.035       0.120       0.905       -0.065       0.074
ICBdummy5                 0.011       0.033       0.320       0.748       -0.055       0.077
ICBdummy6                 -0.040       0.051       -0.790       0.432       -0.142       0.061
ICBdummy7                 0.018       0.048       0.390       0.701       -0.076       0.112
ICBdummy8                 -0.056       0.060       -0.940       0.350       -0.173       0.062
ICBdummy9                 0.060       0.061       0.990       0.325       -0.060       0.180
ICBdummy10                -0.021       0.035       -0.580       0.560       -0.090       0.049
ICBdummy11                -0.032       0.034       -0.940       0.351       -0.099       0.035
ICBdummy12                0.016       0.039       0.400       0.689       -0.062       0.094
ICBdummy13                -0.035       0.046       -0.760       0.451       -0.125       0.056
ICBdummy14                -0.019       0.034       -0.550       0.581       -0.086       0.049
dummy2017                  -0.028       0.018       -1.520       0.131       -0.064       0.008
dummy2016                  -0.016       0.018       -0.930       0.356       -0,051       0.018
dummy2015                  -0.022       0.017       -1.310       0.191       -0.055       0.011
dummy2014                  -0.033       0.016       -2.100       0.038       -0.064       -0.002
dummy2013                  -0.039       0.014       -2.790       0.006       -0.067       -0.012
dummy2012                  -0.042       0.013       -3.190       0.002       -0.067       -0.016
dummy2011                  0.003       0.013       0.230       0.820       -0.023       0.029
CEOdummy                 -0.018       0.029       -0.630       0.527       -0.075       0.039
CFOdummy                 0.009       0.019       0.460       0.645       -0.028       0.045
SFBMt                      0.172       0.059       2.920       0.004       0.055       0.288
SFMMt                     0.030       0,051       0.590       0.553       -0.070       0.131
Chairmandummy              -0.005       0.018       -0.290       0.771       -0.041       0.030
DEt                         0.001       0.001       2.140       0.034       0.000       0.003
Totalassets                    0.000        0.000        0.040        0.971        0.000        0.000
YearsSinceregistration           0.000        0.000        0.830        0.409        0.000        0.001
Constant                      0.073       0.040       1.830        0.070       -0.006       0.152

                                                                                44
Appendix  17.  Full  regression  results  for  regression  R4  in  which  ROOC  is  the  dependent
variable. Std.Err denotes errors that are clustered on companies.
Number of obs            1116
R-squared                 0,071
Root MSE               0,238

Independent  variable          Coefficient    Std.  Err         t           P>|t|        [95%  Conf.  Interval]
ICBdummy1                 0.034       0.082       0.410       0.679       -0.128       0.197
ICBdummy2                 -0.094       0.056       -1.690       0.093       -0.205       0.016
ICBdummy3                 0.007       0.054       0.130       0.893       -0.100       0.114
ICBdummy4                 -0.029       0.055       -0.530       0.600       -0.138       0.080
ICBdummy5                 -0.031       0.053       -0.580       0.561       -0.136       0.074
ICBdummy6                 0.039       0.104       0.370       0.709       -0.166       0.243
ICBdummy7                 -0.006       0.069       -0.090       0.927       -0.143       0.130
ICBdummy8                 -0.144       0.086       -1.680       0.095       -0.313       0.025
ICBdummy9                 0.082       0.096       0.850       0.396       -0.108       0.271
ICBdummy10                -0.062       0.051       -1.210       0.229       -0.163       0.039
ICBdummy11                -0.076       0.056       -1.350       0.181       -0.187       0.035
ICBdummy12                -0.040       0.058       -0.690       0.489       -0.155       0.075
ICBdummy13                -0.102       0.058       -1.770       0.079       -0.217       0.012
ICBdummy14                -0.067       0.054       -1.240       0.217       -0.173       0.040
dummy2017                  -0.047       0.034       -1.370       0.173       -0.115       0.021
dummy2016                  -0.022       0.032       -0.690       0.489       -0.085       0.041
dummy2015                  -0.022       0.031       -0.690       0.491       -0.084       0.040
dummy2014                  -0.031       0.030       -1.060       0.291       -0.090       0.027
dummy2013                  -0.039       0.027       -1.420       0.157       -0.093       0.015
dummy2012                  -0.064       0.026       -2.470       0.015       -0.116       -0.013
dummy2011                  0.005       0.024       0.210       0.835       -0.042       0.052
CEOdummy                 0.000       0.054       -0.010       0.994       -0.108       0.107
CFOdummy                 0.013       0.032       0.410       0.681       -0.050       0.077
SFBMt                      0.327       0.107       3.070       0.003       0.116       0.538
SFMMt                     0.010       0.083       0.120       0.902       -0.155       0.175
Chairmandummy              -0.024       0.032       -0.770       0.445       -0.087       0.038
DEt                         0.000       0.001       0.310       0.760       -0.001       0.002
Totalassets                    0.000        0.000       -0.470       0.638        0.000        0.000
YearsSinceregistration           0.000        0.000        0.820        0.412        0.000        0.001
Constant                      0.090       0.063       1.430        0.156       -0.035       0.215

                                                                                45
Appendix  18.  Full  regression  results  for  regression  R5  in  which  Operating  Margin  is  the
dependent variable. Std. error denotes robust standard errors.
Number of obs            1116
R-squared                 0,370
Root MSE               0,196

Independent  variable          Coefficient    Std.  Err         t           P>|t|        [95%  Conf.  Interval]
ICBdummy1                 0.238       0.080       2.990       0.003       0.082       0.394
ICBdummy2                 -0.005       0.015       -0.310       0.754       -0.033       0.024
ICBdummy3                 0.017       0,013       1.360       0.173       -0.008       0.042
ICBdummy4                 -0.013       0.015       -0.860       0.388       -0.041       0.016
ICBdummy5                 -0.044       0.078       -0.560       0.576       -0.197       0.110
ICBdummy6                 -0.011       0.026       -0.440       0.663       -0.063       0.040
ICBdummy7                 -0.016       0.014       -1.140       0.256       -0.044       0.012
ICBdummy8                 -0.062       0.039       -1.600       0.110       -0.138       0.014
ICBdummy9                 0.072       0.022       3.260       0.001       0.029       0.116
ICBdummy10                0.010       0.022       0.440       0.661       -0.034       0.053
ICBdummy11                0.504       0.028       18.070       0.000       0.449       0.558
ICBdummy12                0.158       0.051       3.120       0.002       0.059       0.257
ICBdummy13                -0.037       0.016       -2.300       0.022       -0.068       -0.005
ICBdummy14                0.004       0.018       0.250       0.806       -0.031       0.040
dummy2017                  0.011       0.024       0.450       0.654       -0.037       0.058
dummy2016                  -0.007       0.030       -0.240       0.809       -0.067       0.052
dummy2015                  0.011       0.023       0.450       0.651       -0.035       0.056
dummy2014                  0.011       0.025       0.440       0.657       -0.038       0.060
dummy2013                  -0.008       0.024       -0.320       0.748       -0.055       0.039
dummy2012                  -0.008       0.026       -0.300       0.761       -0.058       0.042
dummy2011                  0.002       0.030       0.060       0.951       -0.056       0.060
CEOdummy                 -0.047       0.029       -1.620       0.105       -0.104       0.010
CFOdummy                 -0.022       0.015       -1.470       0.141       -0.052       0.007
SFBMt                      0.177       0.050       3.540       0.000       0.079       0.275
SFMMt                     -0.028       0.039       -0.730       0.463       -0.104       0.047
Chairmandummy              0.012       0.025       0.490       0.622       -0.036       0.060
DEt                         0.001       0.001       1.460       0.145       0.000       0.002
Totalassets                    0.000        0.000        3.560        0.000        0.000        0.000
YearsSinceregistration           0.000       -0.930       0.354        0.000        0.000        0.000
Constant                      0.018       0.028       0.650        0.514       -0.037       0.073

                                                                                46
Appendix  19.  Full  regression  results  for  regression  R6  in  which  Profit  Margin  is  the
dependent variable. Std.Err denotes errors that are clustered on companies.

Number of obs                   1116
R-squared                       0,463
Root MSE                     0,207

    Independent  variable      Coefficient    Std.  Err         t           P>|t|         [95%  Conf.  Interval]
       ICBdummy1           0.254       0.157       1.620       0.107       -0.056        0.565
       ICBdummy2          -0.016       0.030       -0.520       0.602       -0.075        0.044
       ICBdummy3           0.009       0.028       0.330       0.743       -0.046        0.065
       ICBdummy4          -0.012       0.028       -1.410       0.679       -0.067        0.044
       ICBdummy5           0.066       0.041       1.600       0.111       -0.015        0.146
       ICBdummy6           0.001       0.051       0.010       0.990       -0.101        0.102
       ICBdummy7          -0.014       0.027       -0.530       0.600       -0.067        0.039
       ICBdummy8          -0.044       0.043       -1.010       0.316       -0.129        0.042
       ICBdummy9           0.073       0.053       1.390       0.166       -0.031        0.178
       ICBdummy10          -0.026       0.063       -0.420       0.677       -0.150        0.098
       ICBdummy11          0.634       0.075       8.410       0.000       0.485        0.783
       ICBdummy12          0.270       0.081       3.340       0.001       0.110        0.429
       ICBdummy13          -0.039       0.026       -1.520       0.131       -0.089        0.012
       ICBdummy14          -0.002       0.033       -0.050       0.963       -0.066        0.063
        dummy2017           -0.033       0.022       -1.510       0.134       -0.076        0.010
        dummy2016           -0.037       0.027       -1.370       0.173       -0.091        0.016
        dummy2015           -0.038       0.020       -1.910       0.058       -0.078        0.001
        dummy2014           -0.037       0.023       -1.580       0.116       -0.083        0.009
        dummy2013           -0.054       0.021       -2.560       0.011       -0.095        -0.012
        dummy2012           -0.033       0.025       -1.300       0.195       -0.083        0.017
        dummy2011           -0.040       0.024       -1.690       0.094       -0.087        0.007
        CEOdummy           -0.032       0.055       -0.590       0.557       -0.141        0.076
        CFOdummy           -0.014       0.029       -0.470       0.637       -0.070        0.043
          SFBMt             0.137       0.079       1.730       0.086       -0.020        0.293
          SFMMt             -0.058       0.066       -0.880       0.383       -0.187        0.072
      Chairmandummy         0.045       0.060       0.750       0.455       -0.074        0.164
            DEt              -0.001       0.001       -0.490       0.628       -0.003        0.002
         Totalassets            0.000        0.000        1.680        0.095        0.000        0.000
    Yearssinceregistration        0.000        0.000       -0.340       0.735       -0.001        0.001
          Constant             0.068       0.040       1.720        0.087       -0.010        0.147

                                                                                47