CHASING SUSTAINABLE
STOCKS: A SUPERIOR
INVESTMENT DECISION?

AN ESG INVESTMENT STUDY

SEBASTIAN JOHANSSON
GUSTAV NILSSON

Bachelor Thesis in Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
15 May 2019
Chasing Sustainable Stocks: A Superior Investment Decision? - An ESG Investment Study

Abstract:
Sustainable investing is trending, amounting to $30 trillion in assets under management world-
wide in 2018 and it is predicted to grow even larger in the years to come. This thesis studies ESG
portfolio performance of three comparable portfolios, a Sustainable, a Good Enough and an
Unsustainable portfolio constructed using ESG-score in relation to their Global Industrial
Classification Standard (GICS), between 2004 – 2018 in the U.S market. The annual beta
coefficients are examined between 2004-2013 to observe differences in exposure to systematic
risk. Based on the observations, six trading strategies are constructed for the period 2014 – 2018
by combining the three portfolios in times of high and low market volatility. The market
volatility level is determined using a relative measure of the CBOE VIX index. Focusing solely
on ESG and comparing three portfolios based on GICS and ESG-scores as opposed to only
comparing the two extremes, sustainable against unsustainable stocks, distances this study from
previous research, thereby contributing with new testing methodology to this field. Furthermore,
using an augmented version of the Fama-French five factor model and extending it with the
Carhart (1997) momentum factor and later adding two liquidity factors from Pástor and
Stambaugh (2003), contrasts this thesis from previous research. The results show that the
Unsustainable portfolio generates the highest significant abnormal return of 8.26 % annually,
followed by the Good Enough portfolio with 5.51 % and the Sustainable portfolio with 5.17 % in
annual abnormal returns, over the period 2004-2018. This finding contradicts the belief that
sustainable companies generate superior returns. Nonetheless, the Sustainable portfolio is a
profitable investment as it generates positive abnormal returns. Further, using Trading Strategy
1, combining the Sustainable and Good Enough portfolio between 2014-2018, investors can
generate significant yearly abnormal return of 3.4% while conforming to their sustainability
preferences.

Keywords: ESG, Socially Responsible Investing, Trading Strategy, Portfolio Performance

Authors:
                                   1
Sebastian Johansson (23933)
                             2
Gustav Nilsson (23831)

Tutor:
Jungsuk Han, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:
Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis in Finance
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Sebastian Johansson and Gustav Nilsson, 2019

1
 E-mail: 23933@student.hhs.se
2
 E-mail: 23831@student.hhs.se
Table of Contents
1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................4
2. RELATED LITERATURE .................................................................................8
   2.1 Corporate Social Responsibility and ESG ........................................................................ 8
  2.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Stock Performance ............................................... 9
   2.3 Efficient Market Hypothesis ............................................................................................ 11
   2.4 Contribution ...................................................................................................................... 12
3. DATA ..................................................................................................................14
  3.1 Initial Data and Screening ................................................................................................ 14
   3.2 Portfolio Construction ...................................................................................................... 15
   3.3 Sample Selection Bias and Data Limitations .................................................................. 16
4. METHODOLOGY.............................................................................................17
   4.1 Overview ............................................................................................................................ 17
   4.2 Regression Specifications.................................................................................................. 18
   4.3 Heteroskedasticity ............................................................................................................. 21
   4.4 Multicollinearity and Normality ...................................................................................... 22
  4.5 Methodological Procedure for the Result Sections ........................................................ 23
5. EMPIRICAL RESULTS ...................................................................................25
  5.1 Portfolios Characteristics between 2004 - 2018 .............................................................. 25
  5.2 Portfolio Performance between 2004 - 2013 ................................................................... 28
  5.3 Trading Strategies between 2014 - 2018 .......................................................................... 33
  5.4 Portfolio Characteristics on a Monthly Basis and Including Liquidity Factors ......... 38
6. DISCUSSION .....................................................................................................42
7. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH .......46
   7.1 Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 46
   7.2. Implications for Future Research ................................................................................... 47
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................ 49
APPENDIX .................................................................................................................................. 52
1. Introduction

Draughts, floods and social crises such as wars on a regional and civil level have a correlation
with climate change according to Johan Rockström, professor in environmental science with
emphasis on water resources and global sustainability at Stockholm University. However, the
threat of climate change is not a new phenomenon. In fact, as far back as in 1896 the Swedish
scientist Svante Arrhenius discovered the climate effects of burning coal (National Geographic,
2018). Also, the article “Warmer Climate in the Earth May Be Due To More Carbon Dioxide in
the Air” by Waldemar Kaempffert (1956) in the New York Times discussed the effects of carbon
dioxide on the climate. But it took until 2015 until the world could reach a consensus with the
Paris Agreement about that we have to do something now before a state of climate irreversibility
kicks in. The world is at a tipping point and the focus on climate and social causes fortunately
enough was incorporated into financial investors’ minds before world leaders reached an
agreement. There has been a tremendous increase in sustainable investing over the years, which
amounted to $30 trillion dollars in 2018. The biggest market is Europe in 2018 with $14.1 trillion
in assets under management followed by the US with $12 trillion (Greenbiz, 2018).

  Figure 1: Sustainable and Responsible Investing in the United States between 1995 - 2018

     Source: US SIF Foundation

                                                                             4
It is interesting to see an upgoing trend driven by the belief that Sustainable Investing is
profitable from a long-term perspective (Deutsche Bank, 2012). Investors stick with the belief
that sustainable investing is superior to conventional even when there is no consensus in
academia. Previous studies are subject to methodological differences, geographical differences,
sorting procedures, different regression models and time horizons. Nevertheless, it is important
to note that there are differences between the US and the European market. In the EU there exists
mandatory sustainability reporting rules whereas it is absent in the US market (European Union,
2014), (CPA Journal, 2018). In the US it is optional to conform to these standards. This could
explain why US is far behind in terms of assets under management. Hence, because of the
differences between markets and studies it is interesting to investigate how ESG (Environmental,
Social, Governance) affects the US financial market. To the best of our knowledge no study has
focused on aggregate ESG in the US market, only on the separate factors in isolation. Perhaps
there does not exist any mandatory regulation for a reason. The Americans might not share the
common belief that ESG is positively correlated with stock performance as suggested by
Statman & Glushkov (2009) and Kempf & Osthoff (2007). Based on their research within the
area of socially responsible investments we have formed the following hypothesis: Companies
with high ESG ratings deliver higher value and generate higher stock returns for shareholders
as opposed to comparable companies with low or average ESG ratings, thereby impacting the
intrinsic value of the stock. This creates divergence in stock performance characteristics between
sustainable, good enough and unsustainable companies across industries and over time,
allowing investors to exploit abnormal returns using thematic investing. To test the hypothesis
the following research questions have been formulated:
    1) Do Sustainable portfolios outperform Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolios?
    2) Are there portfolio characteristics that allow investors to obtain abnormal returns
        through trading strategies in times of low and high market volatility?
    In order to test the research questions and hypothesis, we have conducted a performance
study using an augmented version of the Fama-French five factor model not previously used in
sustainability literature, the model adds the Carhart momentum factor to the traditional Fama-
French five factor model. A common methodology is to benchmark best in class stocks in terms
of ESG performance against the underperformers. However, research has not paid any attention
to the average “good enough” stocks in terms of ESG performance, only to the two extremes.

                                                                             5
Thus, we add an additional Good Enough portfolio when comparing the performance of three
portfolios with different ESG scores, distancing us from the binary testing of Sustainable
portfolios against Unsustainable portfolios. The portfolios used in this study are divided based on
their ESG scores in relation to their Global Industrial Classification Standard (GICS) category,
resulting in a Sustainable, a Good Enough and an Unsustainable portfolio diversified across
industries. The results indicate that the Unsustainable portfolio generates the highest abnormal
return of 8.26 % annually, significant at the 1 % level, which contrasts the belief and the trend of
investing in sustainable stocks to achieve higher returns. However, after studying the portfolio
characteristics we noticed interesting differences between the portfolios’ sensitivity to market
fluctuations, expressed by their market betas. The Sustainable and Good Enough stocks have
higher exposure to systematic risk than the Unsustainable stocks. Furthermore, there exists a
demand for sustainable investing, therefore by taking advantage of the demand and the
correlation of the Sustainable, Good Enough and Unsustainable stocks with the market, trading
strategies exploiting these characteristics are constructed. Consequently, six trading strategies are
formed by combining the three portfolios in times of high and low market volatility. The
strategies use the VIX index as a proxy for the market sentiment and as a trigger for switching
portfolios in times of high and low volatility in order to exploit the portfolios’ exposure to the
market. Interestingly, the best thing for an investor to do during the period 2014-2018 is to
refrain from using any of the trading strategies and instead only hold the Unsustainable portfolio.
However, investors wanting to make sustainable investments for ethical reasons can generate
higher abnormal returns from combining the Sustainable and Good Enough portfolio, than
holding any of these portfolios in isolation. Trading strategy 1, which involves longing the
Sustainable portfolio in times of low volatility and longing the Good Enough portfolio in times
of high volatility generates 3.4% in annual abnormal return.
     In the final result section, the robustness of the result is tested using model variation tests
and time frequency sensitivity. This section uses monthly data instead of daily data and adds the
traded liquidity factor and innovations in aggregate liquidity non-traded factor from Pástor and
Stambaugh (2003). The tests show that the traded liquidity factor is significant at the 1 % level
for the Sustainable portfolios while it remains insignificant for the other two portfolios. In
addition, the innovations in aggregate liquidity non-traded factor is significant at the 10 % level
for the Sustainable portfolio, but not for the other portfolios. This indicates that Sustainable

                                                                             6
stocks have higher than average liquidity, therefore reducing the expected returns of the
Sustainable portfolio compared to the other two portfolios.
     In conclusion, against the common belief that Sustainable portfolios contain the best
performing stocks, our study shows that the Unsustainable portfolio outperforms its Sustainable
and Good Enough peers. Nonetheless, investors seeking to make sustainable investments can still
generate significant abnormal returns while conforming to their sustainability preferences by
using Trading Strategy 1.

                                                                             7
2. Related Literature

2.1 Corporate Social Responsibility and ESG
Bénabou and Tirole (2009) try to disentangle the highly contested concept of Corporate Social
Responsibility. In their paper, they lay out the common perception of the definition of CSR.
Defined by a regular person, CSR captures all kinds of activities, for instance firms’ willingness
to take care of their employees and a company’s contribution to solving environmental issues by
reducing its environmental footprint. CSR also urges companies to be ethical towards the
community by funding good causes. CSR was perceived to entail profit sacrificing. In an effort
to clarify the concept they discuss three visions of CSR:
    1) “Win-win vision”. The vision tackles the problem of short-termism, inferring that the
        short-term way is not necessarily the most profitable one e.g. if a company cuts wages in
        order to reduce costs it might have problems recruiting ambitious talent in the future.
        Instead, companies should focus on long term activities because they benefit the society
       and simultaneously enhance the company’s competitive position.
   2) “Delegated philanthropy”. Companies work as an extension of consumer demand and
        wishes. People want to engage in philanthropic activities but for varying reasons are
       unable to do so. Thus, companies should engage in philanthropic activities on behalf of
       the customers, for instance, by providing decent working conditions or stop polluting the
       environment. Firms can engage in “profit sacrificing” activates by taking sometimes
        costly actions, but they will recoup the costs by passing them through to the costumers or
       by increasing the demand of their products. For example, Starbucks increased the demand
        for their products by buying fair trade coffee and tea.
    3) Insider-initiated corporate philanthropy. From this perspective companies’ social
       commitments do not stem from consumers demand, instead they emerge from the
       managers or board members wishes to engage in such activities. For example, companies
        often donate to good causes, as a consequence, sacrificing profit to positively impact the
        society.
    CSR has been a widely contested concept, especially the third vison has met severe critique.
The famous quote “The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits” by Milton
Freidman represents another view of CSR (Friedman, 1970). The bottom line is that corporate
managers should only maximize profits and refrain from donating to charitable causes, because

                                                                             8
these activities drain the shareholders’ money. Spending money on these causes is equivalent to
spending shareholders’ money on activities not demanded by them. The CEO should only care
about the owners’ interest and neglect other stakeholders’ demand. If managers desire to engage
in CSR activities, they should do so in their private time using their own money.
        However, fast-forwarding ten years, the institutional landscape has a different perspective
on social activities. It is more or less expected that corporations take their responsibility. The
corporate responsibility has become so important that there exist rating institutes scoring
companies sustainability commitments. Today CSR is a clearer concept, consisting of
Environmental (E), Social (S), and Governance (G) factors. Bundled together, ESG define
corporations’ sustainable activities. E-factors include activities aiming to tackle climate change
through reduced gas emissions and increased energy efficiency. S-factors refer to guaranteeing
human and labor rights, workplace health and safety and community engagement. The G-factors
cover the rules and principles regulating the corporate activities, including board independence
and internal auditing (Shrivastava and Addas, 2014). In other words, the G-factors determine
how successful a company will be in fulfilling its environmental and social commitments and in
its obligation to meet stakeholders’ demands through the implementation of these ideas in its
business.

2.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Stock Performance
In the wake of the highly discussed concept of CSR, nowadays ESG, a lot of papers have
attempted to assess the impact of sustainability on stock performance. However, the results
remain inconclusive as studies conducted in this area have mixed results and different
methodological approaches. Researchers have tried to desiccate if engaging in ESG has a neutral,
positive or negative impact on stock performance.
        In a paper by Bauer et al. (2005), the authors try to clarify if ethical and social portfolios
deliver lower, neutral or higher risk-adjusted returns than conventional portfolios. The study
examines 103 German, UK and US ethical funds screened through Morningstar (US), EIRIS
(UK) and Ecoreporter (Germany). The study matches ethical funds against funds with no ethical
criteria. The authors use the Carhart four factor model as the regression model for portfolio
performance. Their findings indicate no significant discrepancies in risk-adjusted returns
between ethical and conventional mutual funds during the period 1990 to 2001.

                                                                             9
       In another study by Kempf and Osthoff (2007) they test if incorporating socially
responsible screens increases the performance of their stock portfolio. Three different portfolios
are formed: a portfolio excluding companies engaging in tobacco, gambling and fire arms.
Portfolio two which does not exclude such companies but instead rate them on factors such as
diversity, environment and human rights. Finally, a third portfolio using best in class screening
which follows the same criteria as the second portfolio but is diversified across industries. In
order to test the performance, the authors form a trading strategy based on ratings from KLD
Research & Analytics. The trading strategy involves longing stocks with high social
responsibility ratings and shorting stocks with low social responsibility ratings. This study finds
a positive abnormal return of 8.7 % per annum using the Carhart four factor model, the highest
returns are obtained when investing in stocks that have best in class ratings.
       Additionally, Ibikunle and Steffen (2015) conducted a comparative analysis of the
performance of green, black and conventional European mutual funds, where the black fund is
defined as a fund that invests in carbon intensive activities and exploitation of natural resources.
By using a dataset consisting of 175 green, 259 black and 976 conventional mutual funds
between 1991 and 2015, using the CAPM and Carhart four factor model they found that green
mutual funds significantly underperformed relative to conventional funds, whereas no significant
risk-adjusted performance existed between green and black mutual funds. However, they find
that green funds succeeded to catch up against conventional mutual funds to that extent that no
significant difference in performance could be identified during 2012-2014. On top of that, the
green funds outperformed the black ones during the time period 2012-2014.
       Focusing on ESG, a recent report by Nordea Equity Research (2017) investigated the
relative performance of top and bottom ESG score performers during the period 2012 to 2015.
They found that ESG has an impact on operational metrics, since companies with top ESG scores
have higher ROE, ROCE and lower Net Debt to EBITDA than the market average. ESG affects
stock performance as well, they identified a relative performance difference for European stocks
of 40% between those having top and bottom ESG scores during 2012-2015.
        In similar fashion, Shrivastava and Addas (2014) investigate what affects sustainability
scores by looking at the relationship between corporate governance and sustainability using the
Bloomberg Environmental, Social and Governance database. They find that environmental
disclosure scores and ESG scores are strongly influenced by governance disclosure scores.

                                                                            10
Important governance factors influencing the score and sustainability performance are, for
instance, board meeting attendance percentage. Furthermore, boards with higher share of
independent directors also have higher disclosure scores and are more prone to have imposed a
climate change and environmental supply chain policy.
       The sustainability research gives mixed results; thus, researchers have tried to aggregate
several studies, in order to disentangle the facts we know to date. Revelli and Viviani (2015) try
to determine whether or not including social responsibility criteria into portfolio selection
enhances or decreases the performance of the portfolio. The study is conducted by aggregating
190 international experiments. They find that on a global level there are no costs or benefits to
engage in socially responsible investing (SRI), rather the performance of the portfolios depends
on the methods used by researchers when assessing SRI fund managers’ ability to generate
returns. In addition, Sjöström (2015) conducted a compiled study on the performance of SRI
funds and indices and compared them to conventional funds or indices. Sjöström found that out
of 21 reports, seven showed neutral results, five studies indicate that SRI funds outperform their
conventional counterparts. Moreover, two studies claimed that SRI funds underperformed,
whereas seven reports displayed mixed results. Hence, there is still ambiguity surrounding the
impact SRI on stock, fund and portfolio performance.

2.3 Efficient Market Hypothesis
The fundamental theory underpinning financial frameworks and asset pricing models is the
Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) developed by Eugene Fama (1970). A market is considered
efficient when asset prices fully reflect all currently available information, as such, the market
absorbs new information into asset prices instantly. Hence, the asset will always trade at its fair
value. As a result, there would be no arbitrage opportunities and impossible to outperform the
market portfolio.
        The efficient market is based on three conditions that have to hold in order to fulfill such
a claim, namely a market where:
    1) there are no market frictions i.e. no transaction costs or taxes,
    2) all available information is costlessly available to all market participants,
    3) all market participants homogeneously interpret the implications of available information,
       leading to identical expectations about the security’s future price and performance.

                                                                            11
       In such a setting, the prevailing price of an asset is the fair price, which undoubtedly
reflects all available information, both public and private. Consequently, an investor would not
have any informational advantage and is therefore unable to generate abnormal returns from
trading.
        Fama (1970) identifies three market efficiency settings, weak, semi-strong and strong
form. In the weak version of the EMH, historical prices reflect all information, which should not
be predictive of future performance according to the random walk research. When this finding
gained general confirmation, new settings were studied. In the semi-strong version, the research
is primarily concerned with the speed of price adjustments to new publicly available information,
for example, annual reports and stock splits. Lastly, the strong setting aims to determine if prices
reflect that investors or groups of investors have access not only to publicly available
information, but also private information. In other words, if inside information as well as
publicly available information is incorporated into the asset price. Regarding ESG, the efficient
market hypothesis still holds. In the weak and strong setting all information about ESG
engagements should be reflected by the trading prices. The stock should not experience abnormal
return in this setting either. The semi-strong setting is also unchanged, for example if a company
enhances its governance activates it would on the one hand follow that the companies would
perhaps become more transparent which would reflect the intrinsic value of the stock to a larger
extent, but this G-factors effect would instantly adjust in prices, eliminating any abnormal
returns.

2.4 Contribution
The research field of sustainability’s impact on stock performance is mixed, and most studies
concentrate on the “old” ambiguous CSR framework. To the best of our knowledge, a study
focusing on ESG and stock performance including a trading strategy in the US market has not
yet been made. The only time ESG has been used in this context is in the Nordea report looking
at the European market, a report which has not been through a peer review process, which in
addition, is using a binary testing methodology. Many studies have a binary testing method,
comparing sustainable against unsustainable, top performers against underperformers. Thus, it
would be interesting to examine how Good Enough portfolios using well-established ESG scores
would perform against best in class and below average rated stocks. We are contributing to this

                                                                            12
research field in at least four ways. Firstly, a clear focus on ESG distinguishes this study from
the ambiguous CSR framework. Secondly, trading strategies using a relative CBOE volatility
index for market sentiments outlined in section 4.5, equation 7 with respect to ESG investing.
Thirdly, constructing three portfolios consisting of stocks with Thomson Reuters’ ESG score,
and then matching the stocks with their peers based on GICS (Global Industry Classification
Standard) distances us from the binary testing method and contributes to a new testing
methodology. Lastly, using a more accurate model for estimating predicted returns by extending
the Carhart four-factor model to include two more variables from the Fama-French five-factor
model, and later adding two liquidity factors from Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) contrasts our
research from previous research in the field. These model specifications have not been used in
previous ESG literature.

                                                                            13
3. Data

3.1 Initial Data and Screening
Our sample data are collected from Thomson Reuters Eikon, CRSP, WRDS, CBOE and the
Kenneth French Data Library. This study examines the portfolio performance of Sustainable,
Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolios between Jan 2004 and Dec 2018 on the NYSE and
NASDAQ exchange. Limiting the study to these two exchanges causes a focus on liquid stocks
where investors are free to reallocate their capital. The VIX index used to construct the relative
market volatility in equation 7, section 4.5, is obtained from CBOE.
       We gathered company names, tickers, Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS)
codes and the most recently available ESG score from Thomson Reuters Eikon.
       The Thomson Reuters ESG rating is an updated version of the ASSET4 rating, instead of
the previous equally weighted category rating, the new enhanced rating used in this thesis is a
category weighted measure with respect to three areas: environmental, social and governance

        3
factors . Category weighted means that issues are grouped according to their material impact on
the company, categories with more issues have more weight. The new rating is built upon 400
KPI measures and datapoints. The rating later utilizes the 178 most relevant KPI data for each
industry before grouping the KPIs into 10 categories and used to compute the final company
aggregate ESG score, which assumes a value between 0 and 100 (Thomson Reuters, 2017).
        Furthermore, daily stock returns, numbers of shares outstanding, ticker, close price,
exchange code and permanent security identification number (PERMNO) for the period 2004-
2018 are collected from CRSP Daily Stock File.
        The Kenneth French Data Library contains U.S firm data for the Fama-French five-factor
model, including the momentum variable on a daily and monthly basis from 1926 to the end of
2018.
       The Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factors are fetched from WRDS’ Fama-
French Portfolios and Factors under the Pástor-Stambaugh section, the non-traded innovations in
aggregate liquidity variable and traded liquidity variable are collected from this source.
       We do not limit the study by excluding companies that have been recently listed as these
companies are assigned to our portfolio over time, thereby giving a more representative picture

3
 Examples of Environmental Factors include: Resource Usage & Emissions, Social Factors include: Workforce &
Human Rights, and Governance Factors include: Management & Shareholders (Thomson Reuters, 2017).
                                                                            14
of the development in the industry. Also, we do not exclude companies that have gone bankrupt
or been delisted from our sample if they have an ESG rating. Including these companies in the
sample prohibits survivorship bias, thereby mitigating sample selection bias and ensuring that the
results are not skewed by only including successful companies in the sample.
       To be assigned to a portfolio the companies are required to have an active ESG rating,
therefore companies without ESG ratings are excluded from the sample. The initial data sample
contained 3170 companies with ESG ratings, missing values were set to 0 before eliminating
them from our sample, leading to 2386 eligible companies with active ESG ratings, after sorting
the stock into portfolios based on their ESG quintile, there are 1430 companies left that are used
in this study. The initial stock data contained all available data in the U.S from Jan 2004 to Dec
2018, after cleaning the data for missing values and negative stock prices, there are 4,469,738
daily stock return observations in the final sample.

3.2 Portfolio Construction
Three equally weighted portfolios are constructed based on the Thomson Reuters combined ESG
score, an equally weighted portfolio approach causes the returns of the portfolios to be equal to
the mean of the returns of the stocks that belong to that portfolio on a certain date. This ensure
that stocks with large market caps do not disproportionately influence the returns of the portfolio,
which would be the case if we had used a value-weighted portfolio. Further, the ESG score is
compared to the peer group of companies within the same Global Industry Classification
Standard (GICS) group, this ensures that the relative ESG performance of each industry is
compared within the same industry, giving an apples-to-apples comparison of ESG performance.
This ensures that the three portfolios are diversified across GICS industries.
       After cleaning the data, the companies are assigned into an ESG quintile based on their
performance in relation to their GICS group. Thereafter, the companies are sorted into portfolios
formed using the quintile scores (1-5) they were assigned. The Sustainable portfolio contains the
companies with top 20 % highest ESG score in relation to their respective industry group
(quintile 5), the Good Enough portfolio consists of companies hoovering around the average
rating in the industry (40 % - 60 % ESG score in relation to peers; quintile 3), and the
Unsustainable portfolio consists of the companies with the lowest 20 % ESG score in their
industry group (quintile 1). The Sustainable portfolio includes 473 companies, the Good Enough
portfolio comprises 476 companies and the Unsustainable portfolio contains 481 companies.

                                                                            15
3.3 Sample Selection Bias and Data Limitations
Since the study is limited by the availability of ESG data on the Thomson Reuters Eikon
platform, there is the issue of sample selection bias, as it cannot be regarded as a randomized
sample. Usually, the largest companies in each exchange have active ESG ratings, thereby
skewing the sample toward large cap stocks which are more actively covered by analysts and to a
larger degree, exposed to ESG coverage. Nonetheless, the study uses 1,430 companies out of the
total population of 6,530 firms listed on the NYSE and NASDAQ. Approximately 22 % of the
total population is obtained using the available ESG data provided by Thomson Reuters. Using
another database such as Sustainalytics would have allowed a larger sample, however, the
database was not available for this study. Cash (2019) expresses concerns about heterogeneity
amongst sustainability ratings due to the reliance on divergent criteria when assessing ESG
performance. This has been observed when scrutinizing how the indices are calculated when
conducting this study, for reference, the Thomson Reuters ESG index relies on different criteria
than the Sustainalytics and Morningstar indices, as they are free to define the rating scales and
inclusion criteria themselves. Also, Cash (2019) points towards agency conflicts that arises when
investors pays the rating agencies generously to obtain favourable rankings, thereby distorting
the actual ESG efforts of the companies through the misalignment of economic incentives in
rating agencies and the financial markets addiction to different types of ratings. As a result,
investors relying on another index would obtain different results than this study.
        Another issue with the sample is that in the results section, all the portfolios generate
positive alpha, the sample does not reflect the fact that alpha should be a zero-sum game where
some investors hold positive alpha portfolios and others hold negative alpha portfolios. Hence,
this thesis compares the relative differences between portfolio characteristics to provide valid
insight into the topic of sustainable investing.

                                                                            16
4. Methodology

4.1 Overview
This thesis is a performance study which objective is to study the performance of portfolios with
different ESG characteristics, constructed using stocks listed on NYSE and Nasdaq. In this case,
the stock’s performance is evaluated and sorted into portfolios based on its current ESG score.
This study aims to assess the performance of Sustainable, Good Enough, and Unsustainable
portfolios in the United States on the NYSE and Nasdaq exchange between 2004 and 2018. The
study commences in 2004 in order to eliminate the macroeconomic influence of the “dot-com
bubble” (i.e Information Technology bubble), another reason for starting the study in 2004 is to

                                                                                              4
cope with the change in the measurement of the CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) . The study is
divided into four parts:
       (1) We regress the portfolios performance based on daily data during the entire time
horizon, thereby acquiring total portfolio performance and characteristics over the time period
2004-2018.
       (2) We compare the annual performance and the regression variables of our portfolios
during 2004-2013, thereby enabling us to evaluate the performance of our portfolios during the
financial crisis and over time for each individual year.
       (3) As we have three portfolios, we are able to construct six trading strategies where we
can only go long in the portfolios; we do not allow shorting in our strategies due to market
limitations to shorting. Another motivation for only going long is the potential co-movement
between portfolios due to similarities in portfolio characteristics, hence going short in one
portfolio would likely reduce the returns of the trading strategies. To decide whether or not we
should exit one portfolio and enter another we use a relative measure of CBOE Volatility Index
(VIX), the VIX index is frequently used as the stock market’s expected implied volatility derived
from the S&P 500 index options (CBOE, n.d). The relative measure will assume a value greater
than one during periods of high market volatility and lower than one in times of lower volatility,
which are the triggers for switching between portfolios. The performance of the trading strategies
and portfolios are examined during the period 2014-2018 to see if any of these investment
strategies generate positive or negative abnormal returns.

4
  VIX prior to 2004 is calculated using the 30-day volatility implied by at-the-money S&P 100 Index option prices.
After 2004, it is calculated using the midpoints of S&P 500 Index option bid/ask quotes (CBOE, n.d.)
                                                                            17
       (4) We regress the total portfolio performance in section 5.4 during the entire time
horizon (2004-2018), using monthly data instead of daily data. Thereafter, we reduce the
measurement horizon to 2004-2017 to match the portfolio monthly return data with Pástor and
Stambaugh’s (2003) liquidity factors, for which monthly data is only available until the end of
2017. Then, we regress the portfolio performance during the period 2004-2017, once without
Pástor and Stambaugh’s traded liquidity factor and innovations in aggregate liquidity non-traded
factor, and once including these variables to assess the impact of liquidity on the portfolio
returns. This is done to check the robustness of our results by adding more variables to the
regression, a model variation test. Furthermore, the results are tested for sensitivity in
measurement horizon and measurement frequency.

4.2 Regression Specifications
To assess and explain portfolio performance it is necessary to use a regression model to
determine the portfolio characteristics that are driving the results. The most basic model used for
this purpose is the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) (Sharpe, 1964). CAPM measures the
return of a security (𝑟𝑖,𝑡) based on the risk-free rate ( 𝑟𝑓), and the stocks responsiveness to the
market measured by (𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹). The risk premium is defined as the excess market return, which is
computed as (𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓). The residual variable (𝜀𝑖) has the same function in the extended
versions of the CAPM model as for the CAPM model itself, the residual captures the model’s
shortcoming when measuring the relationship between the independent variables and the
dependent variable. The CAPM regression specification for excess stock returns is:
                              𝑟𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹,𝑖(𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝜀𝑖                          (1)
       However, in the light of Bernard and Thomas’ (1989) critique against the CAPM model’s
failure to properly adjust for risk, alternative augmented versions of the CAPM model have been
introduced to incorporate differences in risk and reduce the likelihood of observing significant
results due to misspecifications of the CAPM model. One of these models is the Fama-French
three-factor model which adds two variables to the traditional CAPM model, the High Minus
Low (HML) variable and the Small Minus Big (SMB) variable. Fama-French (1992) regress the
excess market returns using to the follow specification:
         𝑟𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹,𝑖(𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝜀𝑖             (2)

                                                                            18
       HML captures the historical excess returns of stocks with high-book-to-price ratio over
low book-to-price ratio. (𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖) measures the correlation between the specific firm and the
HML factor. SMB measures the historical excess returns of small companies over large
companies.(𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖) measures the relationship between the specific firm and the SMB factor.
        Carhart (1997) extended the traditional Fama-French three factor model by introducing a
momentum variable (UMD) that is constructed using the equally weighted average returns of the
two highest performing portfolios subtracted by the equally weighted average returns of the two
lowest performing portfolios, lagged by one month (Carhart, 1997). (𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷,𝑖) explains the
interaction between a specific firm and the UMD factor. The Carhart four factor model is
presented below:
𝑟𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹,𝑖(𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷,𝑖𝑈𝑀𝐷 + 𝜀𝑖   (3)
        In 2015, Fama-French extended their three-factor model by adding two new factors,
namely the Robust Minus Weak (RMW) and Conservative Minus Aggressive (CMA) variables.
RMW illustrates the difference in returns of diversified stock portfolios with strong and weak
profitability. (𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊,𝑖) shows the relationship between the specific firm and the RMW factor. The
CMA factor depicts the returns on diversified portfolios of firms that invests carefully minus
firms that invest heavily. (𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴,𝑖) shows the interrelationship between the specific firm and the
CMA factor. The Fama-French five factor model is presented below:
       𝑟𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹,𝑖(𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊,𝑖𝑅𝑀𝑊
                                                                                                (4)
                                           +𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴,𝑖 𝐶𝑀𝐴 + 𝜀𝑖
        In this thesis, however, in order to mitigate the issue of model misspecifications and to
enhance the precision of regression results, an augmented version of the Fama-French five-factor
model (Fama and French, 2015) is used. The augmented Fama-French five-factor model adds
Carhart’s (1997) momentum variable to increase the explanatory effect of the regression, which
produces more accurate results and provide implications for the drivers of the results. Hence, the
following regression specification used in this thesis:
     𝑟𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹,𝑖(𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊,𝑖𝑅𝑀𝑊 +
                                                                                                (5)
                                    𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴,𝑖 𝐶𝑀𝐴 + 𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷,𝑖𝑈𝑀𝐷 + 𝜀𝑖
        The market excess return coefficient (𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹 ) captures the security’s exposure to
systematic risk, in conjunction to the market risk premium, a larger beta implies that the security
generates larger expected excess return due to its exposure to market risk.

                                                                            19
       As previously mentioned, Fama-French (1992) introduced two additional variables to the
CAPM equation. The HML (high book-to-market) factor distinguishes between high-value (high
book-to-market) stocks and growth (low-book-to-market) stocks, the historical trend is that value
stocks outperform growth stocks. In instances where the HML coefficient (𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿) is greater than
zero (𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿 > 0), the security or the portfolio is characterized as a value stock/value portfolio,
whereas a HML coefficient below zero (𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿 < 0) implies that the stock or portfolio is a growth
stock/growth portfolio.
       The additional variable in the Fama-French three factor model (1992) is the SMB (small
minus big) factor. Fama-French (1992) found that large-cap stocks are outperformed by small-
cap stocks, this finding indicates that stocks or portfolios with a SMB coefficient (𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵) greater
than zero (𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵 > 0) have similar characteristics to small-cap stocks or portfolios, if the SMB
coefficient is smaller than zero (𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵 < 0) the stock or portfolio resembles large-cap stocks or
portfolios.
       Regarding the (𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷), if it is greater than zero (𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷 > 0), the returns of the two equally
top performing portfolios performance are positively related to prior returns. On the other hand,
if it is below zero (𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷 < 0), the returns are negatively correlated with prior returns.
         The coefficient (𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊) captures the difference in operating profitability of highly and
weakly profitable firms. That is, if the 𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊 > 0 the portfolio consists of more exceptionally
profitable firms than weakly profitable firms. If 𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊 < 0, the reverse is true.
         Concerning the (𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴) coefficient, it illustrates the difference in investment behaviour of
firms. If 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴 > 0, the portfolio consists of more conservatively investing firms than firms that
invest aggressively. Hence, if 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴 < 0 the opposite is true.
        The difference between the actual returns of a stock and the estimated returns of a stock
is referred to as abnormal returns. Abnormal returns can be zero, positive or negative, it is a
measure of how the actual returns compare to the returns predicted by the augmented Fama-
French five factor model. Under the efficient market hypothesis (Fama, 1970), all market
information should be reflected in the prices and the expected value of abnormal returns should
be zero as the estimation model correctly predicts the actual outcome. The constant alpha (𝛼𝑖)
captures deviations from the returns explained by the augmented Fama-French regression model,
therefore, alpha is abnormal returns that should not appear in an efficient market.

                                                                            20
       Lastly, to assess the impact of liquidity on the portfolio performance, we add two
additional liquidity variables to the augmented Fama-French five factor model. The Traded
Liquidity Factor (TLF/TRADEDLIQ) and Innovations in Aggregate Liquidity Factor
(ILF/INNOVLIQ) are obtained from Pástor and Stambaugh (2003). TLF captures the historical
excess returns of stocks with high liquidity (top decile) over low liquidity (bottom decile) using
decile portfolios ranked according to stock liquidity. (𝛽𝑇𝐿𝐹,𝑖) measures the correlation between
an individual stock and the TLF factor. The other factor ILF, captures a stocks sensitivity to
innovations in aggregate liquidity which is a non-traded factor, it measures whether there exists a
liquidity premium for a given stock. As such, (𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖) measures the correlation between stock
returns of a specific firm and the innovations in aggregate market liquidity factor.
        If 𝛽𝑇𝐿𝐹,𝑖 > 0 the portfolio contains liquid stocks, while 𝛽𝑇𝐿𝐹,𝑖 < 0 implies that the
portfolio is constructed using illiquid stocks. If the innovations in aggregate liquidity factor 𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖
assumes a value greater than 0 (𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖 > 0) , the asset has positive co-movement with
innovations in aggregate liquidity, which indicates the presence of a liquidity risk premium.
Stocks exhibiting positive significant 𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖 have higher expected returns to compensate for
liquidity risk. On the other hand, if the stock has negative co-movement with innovations in
aggregate liquidity, that is a 𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖 less than 0 (𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖 < 0), the stock has lower expected returns
because the stock can be traded quickly without assuming any liquidity risk. In other words,
investors holding stocks with negative innovations in aggregate liquidity betas are willing to
forego expected returns in favour of holding stocks that can be traded quickly. All the previous
regression variables together with the new liquidity variables lead to the following regression
specification:
       𝑟𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹,𝑖(𝑟𝑚𝑘𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿,𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵,𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀𝑊,𝑖𝑅𝑀𝑊
                                                                                                (6)
                        + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐴,𝑖 𝐶𝑀𝐴 + 𝛽𝑈𝑀𝐷,𝑖𝑈𝑀𝐷 + 𝛽𝑇𝐿𝐹,𝑖𝑇𝐿𝐹 + 𝛽𝐼𝐿𝐹,𝑖ILF + 𝜀𝑖

4.3 Heteroskedasticity
The main regression used in this thesis, the augmented Fama-French five factor model, is applied
to three separate portfolios. To control for the presence of heteroskedasticity, meaning that the
variance of the error term is not constant over time; which would result in inaccurate results due
to biased coefficients, a Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg (B-P/C-W) test for heteroskedasticity is
performed. Under the null hypothesis of the B-P/C-W test, the variance of the error terms are

                                                                            21
equal and constant over time, which means that the model is homoskedastic. Under the
alternative hypothesis, the error term’s variance is a dependent function of the regression
variables and not constant over time (Wooldridge, 2013). The B-P/C-W test for
heteroskedasticity is run on the regression for the three separate portfolios for each individual
year over the time horizon 2004-2018. The results of the test, presented in Table A1 in
Appendix, displays the presence of heteroskedasticity for multiple years as the null hypothesis of
constant error terms over time can be rejected for multiple years. With respect to this finding, we
employ robust regressions for all results presented in this thesis. This prevents the results from
being influenced by biased standard errors for the coefficients and ensures compatibility with the
Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regression assumptions.

4.4 Multicollinearity and Normality
Multicollinearity occurs when there are simultaneous changes in the independent variables in a
multiple regression model, indicating that the independent variables are closely correlated with
each other. This means that the predictors in the model can be linearly predicted using the
independent variables in the regression model. In other words, the independent variables can be
used to explain one another, thereby distorting the results. Multicollinearity makes it impossible
to isolate the effect of a separate independent variable on the dependent variable (Newbold et al,
2013). To assess if the augmented Fama-French five factor model experiences multicollinearity,
we use the Variance Inflation Factor (VIF). A common rule of thumb used by researchers in this
context is the rule of 10, if the independent regression variables have a VIF below 10,
multicollinearity is not an issue (O’Brien, 2007). The VIF test shows that the augmented Fama-
French five factor model does not exhibit multicollinearity as all independent variables have a
VIF below 2, for results, see Appendix Table A2.
       An additional assumption of a multivariate regression model is that the residuals of the
regression models are normally distributed. The assumption of normality is graphically examined
for the Sustainable, Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio in Appendix Figure A2, A3 and
A4, respectively. The results indicate that the residuals are normally distributed for all portfolios.
Able 5

                                                                            22
4.5 Methodological Procedure for the Result Sections
Part 1 of the study outlined in section 4.1 compares the annual performance of Unsustainable,
Good Enough and Sustainable portfolios, thereby acquiring the average characteristics of the
different portfolios over the time frame 2004-2018. The portfolios are equally weighted, which
means that the portfolio return is the mean return of all stocks belonging to that portfolio on that
particular day, without respect to market capitalization. The daily excess portfolio returns are
used to compute the total average daily performance of the portfolio over the entire period
(2004-2018). The regression coefficients are obtained using the augmented Fama-French five
factor model introduced in section 4.2, equation 5. Furthermore, we test for the difference of the
monthly regression coefficients being equal against being unequal using a Kruskal-Wallis test for
equality of medians between three population.
        In the second part of the study, the three portfolios are regressed on an annual basis from
2004 to 2013 to assess the performance of the portfolios during the financial crisis and before
formulating the trading strategies. After obtaining the annual regression coefficients, they are
examined to see the behaviour of the Sustainable, Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolios
over time. Comparing the annual performance enables the examination of the development in the
three portfolios characteristics, which lays the foundation for the trading strategies introduced in
the third section.
        In the third part of the study, six trading strategies are constructed using the three
portfolios. The performance of these strategies is tested in conjunction to the individual
portfolios during the five-year investment horizon, 2014-2018. The strategies are used to assess
whether or not the different characteristics in portfolio can be combined in times of high and low
market volatility to maximize an investor’s returns, as opposed to only holding one portfolio
during the entire time horizon (2014-2018). If a combination of portfolio investments (strategies)
generates larger abnormal returns than only holding a portfolio in isolation, the results would
imply that investors can exploit abnormal returns in the stock market through the usage of
thematic investing. The strategies are presented in the results section 5.3.
       The augmented Fama-French five factor model is chosen to explain as much of the
variation in portfolio returns as possible for all parts of the study, in order to explain portfolio
performance and characteristics as exhaustively as possible.
       The relative volatility index mentioned in section 4.1 which assumes a value greater than

                                                                            23
1 in times of high volatility and lower than 1 in times of low volatility is constructed using the
closing price of yesterday’s VIX index (𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡−1 ) divided by the average volatility level over the

                                                           𝑡−2
                                                            Σ𝑡−1−252×3𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡
last three years, with 252 trading days per year (             ). The rationale for using a three-
                                                252×3
year average is that short-run macroeconomic shocks are expected to last for a minimum of two
years. Macroeconomic shocks cause deviations from expected long-run growth and cause
different expectations about the development of macroeconomic variables and causes stickiness
in factor adjustments, hence market expectation will be influenced by recent developments
(Jones, 2018). The expression for the relative measure is expressed mathematically as:
                                                                          𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡−1
                𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝐶𝐵𝑂𝐸 𝑉𝐼𝑋 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 (𝑅𝑉𝐼𝑋) =                                (7)
                                                               𝑡−2
                                                            Σ𝑖 = 𝑡−1−252×3𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑖
                                       (             )
                                                 252 × 3

                                          𝑡−2
                                         Σ𝑡−1−252×3𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡
        If 𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡−1 is greater than (              ), the relative measure has a value greater than 1,
                                  252×3
meaning high volatility levels. In cases where 𝑉𝐼𝑋𝑡−1 is smaller, the relative measure has a value
below 1, indicating low volatility levels. As previously mentioned, these are the triggers for
going long and exiting portfolios during the trading strategies during the time period 2014-2018.
A visual representation of the relative volatility index (RVIX) is presented in Appendix figure 1
for the time period 2007-2019.
        In the fourth and final section, the augmented Fama-French model is regressed using
monthly data for the time period 2004-2018 to examine if monthly frequencies would alter the
results, note that the regression will produce a monthly alpha, instead of a daily alpha.
Thereafter, as explained in section 4.1, the measurement horizon is reduced to 2004-2017,
whereby the augmented Fama-French five factor model is regressed, first excluding the liquidity
factors and then including the liquidity factors.

                                                                            24
5. Empirical Results

5.1 Portfolios Characteristics Between 2004 - 2018
The equally weighted portfolio returns are regressed from 2004-2018 using the augmented
Fama-French five factor model, during this timeframe there are 3775 trading days and
observations used to generate the following portfolio characteristics.

Table 1: Daily Descriptive Characteristics of the Three Thematic Portfolios between 2004 - 2018
Portfolios Sustainable Portfolio Good Enough Portfolio Unsustainable Portfolio
Variables ret ret ret

MKTRF 1.060*** 1.047*** 0.990***
                          (0.00553) (0.00727) (0.00546)
SMB 0.422*** 0.570*** 0.727***
                          (0.00979) (0.00990) (0.00857)
HML 0.148*** 0.194*** 0.172***
                           (0.0116) (0.0135) (0.0102)
UMD -0.118*** -0.103*** -0.0805***
                          (0.00642) (0.00595) (0.00599)
RMW -0.0284** -0.00573 -0.0413***
                           (0.0139) (0.0127) (0.0122)
CMA -0.0469** -0.0836*** -0.120***
                           (0.0187) (0.0216) (0.0150)
CONSTANT 0.0200*** 0.0213*** 0.0315***
                          (0.00313) (0.00274) (0.00302)

Observations 3,775 3,775 3,775
R-squared 0.981 0.985 0.982
Adjusted R-squared 0.981 0.985 0.982
 Note: ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectively. Robust standard
 errors are reported in parentheses. The table displays the robust regression results for equally weighted daily
 portfolio returns for the Sustainable portfolio, the Good Enough portfolio and the Unsustainable portfolio, over the
 entire sample period 2004-2018. The dependent variable is daily portfolio returns. The independent variables are
 fetched from the augmented Fama-French five factor model presented in equation 5. Observations are the number
 of trading days between 2004 and 2018. The regression uses robust standard errors, since the Breusch-Pagan/Cook-
 Weisberg test rejected the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity for several years, hence the regressions are adjusted
 for heteroskedasticity.

                                                                            25
The results showcase that the MKTRF, SMB, HML, UMD and the CONSTANT variables are
significant at the 1 % level for all three portfolios. The RMW variable does not exhibit
significant results for the Good Enough portfolio, therefore, the variable is not meaningful in
explaining the regression results for that portfolio. The Sustainable portfolio has a CMA variable
that is significant at the 5 % level compared to the other portfolios that have a significant CMA
at the 1 % level. This indicates that the variables have divergent explanatory power for the
different portfolios. The adjusted R-squared explains over 98 % of the returns of all portfolios.
Interestingly, the Unsustainable portfolio has a MKTRF below 1, making it less exposed to
systematic risk than the other portfolios. Also, the Unsustainable portfolio consists of a larger
portion of shares with small stock characteristics (SMB) with lower operating profitability
(RMW) than the two other portfolios. The HML variable shows that Good Enough portfolio
consists of more high book-to-market stocks than the Unsustainable and Sustainable portfolio. It
entails that the Good Enough portfolio contains more value stocks than growth stocks. A
significantly larger negative CMA variable indicates that the firms in the Unsustainable portfolio
have more aggressive investing strategies than the firms in the other portfolios. The difference
between the actual and predicted return by the model gives the alpha (CONSTANT) which is the
abnormal return. Noteworthy, is how the Unsustainable portfolio has an abnormal daily return of

                    5                                                                6
0.0315% per day , resulting in a yearly abnormal return of about 8.26% . However, it is
insufficient to observe a beta coefficient’s value to say that the portfolio characteristics differ
from each other. To ensure that there are significant differences in portfolio characteristics, a
Kruskal-Wallis test for equality of medians between the three portfolio betas is employed using
monthly regression variables. The results displayed in Table 2 shows that there is a significance
difference between the Sustainable-, Good Enough- and Unsustainable portfolio for MKTRF,
SMB, HML and CMA. MKTRF, SMB, HML, and CMA are significant at the 1 % level, while
CONSTANT (CONS) is significant at the 5 % level. The differences in alpha between portfolios
is rejected at the 5 % level, consequently, there is a significant difference in abnormal returns
between the portfolios. In addition, the RMW and UMD variables are not rejected, thus, the three
portfolios have similar profitability and the prior year’s returns have similar impact on the
portfolio performance over time.

5
 The CONSTANTS are expressed in percentages.
6
 The daily abnormal returns compounded by 252 trading days generate annual abnormal returns.
                                                                            26
            Table 2: Kruskal-Wallis Test of Equality of Medians between Portfolios
                       VAR χ2 (2) Obs Prob.>
                      CONS 6.111 180 0.0471
                     MKTRF 26.755 180 0.0001
                      SMB 351.17 180 0.0001
                      HML 31.377 180 0.0001
                      UMD 2.286 180 0.3189
                     RMW 1.418 180 0.4921
                      CMA 24.878 180 0.0001

    Note: A Kruskal-Wallis test is performed for median monthly coefficient differences between the Sustainable,
    Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio. The null hypothesis of equality of median beta coefficients between
    portfolio is tested against the alternative hypothesis of unequal beta coefficients. The χ2 (2) test statistic implies
    that the test uses two degrees of freedom, since there are three groups tested. Obs is the number of monthly
    coefficient observations within each portfolio between 2004-2018. Prob>0.10, Prob>0.05, and Prob>0.01
    indicates statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 % and 1 % level, respectively.
As there are differences between portfolio medians for several factors, it is interesting to
examine which of the portfolios that have dissimilar characteristics. The Kruskal-Wallis test fails
to explain which of the medians diverge from each other, thus, a Dunn’s test with Bonferroni
correction is conducted to see for which pairwise comparison the null hypothesis of equality of
medians is rejected.

          Table 3: Dunn’s Test with Bonferroni Corrections for Pairwise Comparison
         COMB S & G S & U G & U
          VAR Z Prob.> Z Prob.> Z Prob.>
           CONS 0.84 0.6002 2.43 0.0224 1.59 0.1670
          MKTRF -1.43 0.2283 -5.02 0.0000 -3.59 0.0005
           SMB 9.63 0.0000 18.74 0.0000 9.10 0.0000
           HML 4.70 0.0000 4.99 0.0000 0.28 1.0000
           UMD 0.46 0.9653 1.48 0.2092 1.02 0.4651
           RMW 1.07 0.4275 0.08 1.0000 -0.99 0.4840
           CMA -2.99 0.0042 -4.95 0.0000 -1.97 0.0737

    Note: A Dunn's test with Bonferroni correction is used as post-hoc analysis to the Kruskal-Wallis test in order
    to reduce the family-wise error rate for multiple hypotheses tests. Dunn's post-hoc test identifies which medians
    significantly differ from each other under the Kruskal-Wallis test. The augmented Fama-French beta
    coefficients are compared in pairwise portfolio combinations, Sustainable and Good Enough (S&G),
    Sustainable and Unsustainable (S&U), Good Enough and Unsustainable (G&U). The Z-statistic and the
    significance level Prob.> is displayed for each pairwise comparison of monthly beta coefficients. Prob>0.10,
    Prob>0.05, and Prob>0.01 indicates statistical significance at the 10 %, 5 % and 1 % level, respectively.

                                                                            27
The post-hoc test shows that the null hypothesis of equality of medians for MKTRF is rejected
for the combination Sustainable and Unsustainable portfolio at the 1 % level. MKTRF is also
significant for the Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio at the 1 % level. The SMB factor is
rejected at the 1 % level for each portfolio comparison. The null hypothesis is accepted for the
HML factor for the Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio, the remaining combinations are
accepted at the 1 % level, implying differences in value and growth stock in the portfolio
composition. The null hypothesis for the CMA variable is rejected for all combination of
portfolio combinations, the Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio is statistically significant
at the 10 % level, while the other two combinations are significant at the 1 % level. The null
hypothesis of equal medians for alpha is rejected for the combination Sustainable and
Unsustainable at the 5 % level, consequently, there is a difference in abnormal returns between
the Sustainable and the Good Enough portfolio, implying that the Unsustainable portfolio
outperforms the Sustainable portfolio. The remaining factors, UMD and RMW remain
insignificant when conducting multiple pairwise comparisons. For the variables that are not
significant at the 10%, 5% or 1% significance level, it is infeasible to conclude with statistical
methods if the variables contrast each other.
        However, as the augmented Fama-French five factor model demonstrate, a majority of
the variables are significant on a daily basis, and the percentage difference is even larger on a
yearly basis. For instance, the annual abnormal return is 5.17%, 5.51% and 8.26% for the
Sustainable, Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio respectively, whereas on a daily basis it
is 0.020%, 0.0213% and 0.0315%, respectively during the period 2004 to 2018.

5.2 Portfolio Performance between 2004 - 2013
By looking at Table 4, Table 5 and Table 6 and Figure 2 below it is evident that the portfolio
betas changes over time. All portfolios’ HML, UMD, RMW and CMA variables experience
changes in significance ranging from 1%, 5% to 10% over time. The MKTRF and SMB
variables remain significant at the 1 % level for all portfolios during the whole period between
2004 – 2013. The Sustainable and Good Enough portfolio are exposed to more systematic risk in
relation to the Unsustainable portfolio, displayed by higher MKTRF. More interesting is how the
portfolios react differently during the Great Recession. The Sustainable portfolio’s MKTRF
jumps from a level below one to 1.057 in 2007 and has since then remained above one. However,

                                                                            28
it dips to 1.053 in 2008 compared to 1.057 in 2007 and 1.098 in 2009. The Good Enough
portfolio’s MKTRF rises following the crisis and it also remains above one. In contrast to the
Sustainable portfolio’s MKTRF, which slumps in 2008, the Good Enough portfolio’s spikes,
reaching 1.089 compared to 1.045 in 2007 and 1.072 in 2009. The Unsustainable portfolio’s
pattern is similar to the Sustainable portfolio during the crises. It also bounces from a MKTRF
level below one in 2006 to above one on average in the recession. It also declines in 2008 to
0.981 compared to 1.035 in 2007 and 1.022 in 2009. In contrast to the other portfolios, the
MKTRF returns to a level below one once the crisis settles. It implies that the Unsustainable
portfolio during normal market conditions is less affected by systematic risk. Additionally, the
abnormal returns differ across the portfolios. All portfolios’ CONSTANT (alpha) dips in the
crisis. In spite of that, the abnormal return is higher during 2008 for all portfolios. It implies that
the actual return is greater than predicted returns by the augmented Fama-French model.
Noteworthy is how the Sustainable portfolio does not experience a jump as large as the Good
Enough and Unsustainable portfolio during 2008. The Sustainable portfolio’s alpha goes from
0.0233 in 2007 to 0.0504 in 2008 and 0.0376 in 2009. The Unsustainable portfolio’s alpha
reaches 0.0680 in 2008 compared to 0.0331 in 2007 and 0.0497 in 2009. The Good Enough
portfolio has the largest increase in alpha, from 0.0232 in 2007 to 0.0750 in 2008 and down to
0.0478 in 2009. This pattern of jumps and slumps is more severe for the Sustainable and Good
Enough portfolio since the alpha goes from a level of 0.03 to hover around 0.017 on average
after the crises. As for the Unsustainable portfolio, the alpha drops after the crises from an
average level of 0.038 to an average level of 0.033. In short, the crisis strongly affects the yearly
abnormal returns for all portfolios.

                                                                            29
                                                                                                -

    2013ret                                             252
                       0.0222                           0.9800.980
             1.047***(0.0153)0.383***(0.0193)(0.0344)(0.0235)-0.132***(0.0388)0.165***(0.0426)-0.00599(0.00727)           2013. The
                             -0.0988***


                                                            since the Breusch
    2012ret                                             250
                                                            0.9820.981           roskedasticity.
             1.029***(0.0137)0.371***(0.0218)-0.0800**(0.0344)-0.146***(0.0191)-0.109**(0.0459)0.160***(0.0498)0.0163*(0.00866)



2013
 -
    2011ret                                           252
                        0.0118           -0.0709          0.9930.993
             1.053***(0.0142)0.401***(0.0234)(0.0422)(0.0223)-0.104**(0.0453)(0.0469)0.00304(0.00996)
                             -0.0904***                             each year between 2004 and
2004




    2010ret                                              252            French five factor model presented in equation
                                                              0.9910.991      -
             1.012***(0.0122)0.371***(0.0198)0.118***(0.0257)(0.0207)-0.0599*(0.0335)0.0738*(0.0416)0.0155*(0.00879)
between                 0.0646***




        ret                                                                Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. The
    2009                                               2520.9900.990 .
Portfolio   1.098***(0.0174)0.434***(0.0240)0.150***(0.0240)(0.0169)-0.0412(0.0499)-0.0374(0.0503)0.0376**(0.0153)         y
                              -0.168***
                                                                       013. The regression uses robust standard errors,




    2008ret                                             253
                        0.0278     -0.0611                0.9870.987
             1.053***(0.0192)0.431***(0.0362)(0.0332)-0.164***(0.0296)(0.0723)-0.261***(0.0801)0.0504**(0.0205)
Sustainable


the


of  2007ret                                           251
                                       -0.0492          0.9810.980
             1.057***(0.0112)0.379***(0.0291)0.172***(0.0540)0.0558**(0.0281)-0.106**(0.0456)(0.0478)0.0233**(0.0113)




    2006ret                                             251
                                   -0.0729-0.0410          0.9750.974
             0.981***(0.0194)0.426***(0.0247)0.00976(0.0454)0.0888***(0.0230)(0.0451)(0.0485)0.0365***(0.00895)
Performance                                               at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectivel



                                                  cance
    2005ret                                             252
                                        0.0942           0.9720.971
             0.971***(0.0148)0.424***(0.0247)0.162***(0.0422)0.0743***(0.0220)-0.101***(0.0362)(0.0632)0.0273***(0.00847)
: Portfolio
 4                                      returns. The independent variables are fetched from the augmented Fama



    2004ret                                             252
Table                      -0.0364    0.0202          0.9660.965
             0.963***(0.0162)0.450***(0.0290)0.208***(0.0401)(0.0240)-0.00166(0.0455)(0.0593)0.0369***(0.0104)



                                                          Weisberg test rejected the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity for several years, hence the regressions are adjusted for hete
                                                                -




   YearVariablesMKTRFSMB HML UMD RMW CMA CONSTANTObservationsR-squaredAdjusted R-squaredNote: ***,**, and * indicates statistical signifitable displays the robust regression results for equally weighted daily portfolio returns for the Sustainable portfolio, fordependent variable is daily portfolio5. Observations are the number of trading days for each individual year between 2004 and 2Pagan/Cook

                                                                           30
                                                                                                -

    2013ret                                             252
                        0.0367                           0.9850.984
             1.021***(0.0141)0.558***(0.0179)(0.0339)-0.0615**(0.0242)-0.105***(0.0378)0.103***(0.0361)0.0119*(0.00675)                   ity.

                                        ted in equation


    2012ret                                             250
                                        0.0564           0.9880.988
             1.023***(0.0105)0.579***(0.0186)0.114***(0.0265)(0.0169)(0.0340)(0.0376)0.0220***(0.00731)       in parentheses. The table
                            -0.0627***-0.0941***

 2013
 -
    2011ret                                             252
                                                          0.9960.996
             1.038***(0.00915)0.587***(0.0177)0.201***(0.0336)-0.0557**(0.0231)-0.00246(0.0472)-0.0776*(0.0426)0.0144*(0.00862)




        ret                                                  252             French five factor model presen-
    2010                                               0.9940.994
between 20041.018***(0.0110)0.563***(0.0149)0.175***(0.0222)(0.0189)-0.0458(0.0297)-0.00893(0.0331)0.0166**(0.00715)
                           -0.0573***
                                            portfolio, for each year between 2004 and 2013. The



Portfolio2009ret                                            252
                                                          0.9900.989
             1.072***(0.0172)0.589***(0.0247)0.220***(0.0259)(0.0161)-0.101**(0.0502)-0.197***(0.0605)0.0478***(0.0156)
                              -0.0941***




Enough                                                          al years, hence the regressions are adjusted for heteroskedastic
    2008ret                                           253
                        0.0512           -0.178*          0.9900.990
             1.089***(0.0193)0.597***(0.0295)(0.0365)-0.112***(0.0272)-0.153***(0.0565)(0.0906)0.0750***(0.0206)
Good


he
t
    2007ret                                           251
                             0.02080.0367-0.0404          0.9900.989
             1.045***(0.00802)0.599***(0.0199)0.222***(0.0318)(0.0166)(0.0379)(0.0356)0.0232***(0.00778)




    2006ret                                             251
                                   0.0393                0.9810.981
             0.939***(0.0160)0.527***(0.0215)0.121***(0.0390)0.0535***(0.0198)(0.0418)-0.127***(0.0422)0.0343***(0.00755)
Performance of

                                          or each individual year between 2004 and 2013. The regression uses robust standard errors, since the Breusch


    2005ret                                             252
                                         -0.0310          0.9800.979
             0.948***(0.0147)0.503***(0.0235)0.169***(0.0348)0.0586***(0.0194)-0.0612*(0.0312)(0.0529)0.0273***(0.00714)
                                                                        or equally weighted daily portfolio returns for the Good Enough




Table 5: Portfolio2004ret                                            252
                                         -0.0223          0.9700.969
             0.935***(0.0178)0.561***(0.0275)0.221***(0.0371)-0.00263(0.0254)0.0947**(0.0430)(0.0485)0.0298***(0.00978)



                                                               Weisberg test rejected the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity for sever-
                                                                         *, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectively. Robust standard errors are reported





    YearVariablesMKTRFSMB HML UMD RMW CMA CONSTANTObservationsR-squaredAdjusted R-squaredNote: ***,*displays the robust regression results fdependent variable is daily portfolio returns. The independent variables are fetched from the augmented Fama5. Observations are the number of trading days fPagan/Cook

                                                                           31
                                                                                               -

    2013ret                                             252
                                    -0.0776-0.0142          0.9810.980
             0.981***(0.0137)0.734***(0.0215)0.136***(0.0323)-0.00743(0.0258)(0.0472)(0.0392)0.0358***(0.00767)
                                                                                                 icity.




    2012ret                                             250
                              -0.0141                      0.9780.977
             0.990***(0.0155)0.734***(0.0285)0.108***(0.0319)(0.0271)-0.158***(0.0606)0.0934*(0.0520)0.0245**(0.00973)
                                                               in parentheses. The table
 2013
-


    2011ret                                             252
                             -0.0443-0.0440                0.9930.993     factor model presented in equation
             0.959***(0.0116)0.769***(0.0230)0.216***(0.0390)(0.0287)(0.0553)-0.166***(0.0559)0.0273**(0.0106)




    2010ret                                                252            French five-
                              -0.0343                      0.9890.989
             0.942***(0.0158)0.728***(0.0229)0.201***(0.0278)(0.0227)-0.0911**(0.0435)-0.145***(0.0528)0.0299***(0.00985)


                                              e portfolio, for each year between 2004 and 2013. The

    2009ret                                              252              The regression uses robust standard errors, since the Breusch
                                                       0.9850.984
             1.022***(0.0194)0.726***(0.0291)0.154***(0.0283)(0.0151)-0.100*(0.0575)-0.140**(0.0564)(0.0177)
                             -0.0873***       0.0497***




    2008ret                                             253
                                                          0.9890.989
             0.981***(0.0138)0.713***(0.0249)0.0636**(0.0285)-0.122***(0.0263)-0.128**(0.0562)-0.210***(0.0622)0.0680***(0.0180)
he Unsustainable Portfolio between 2004
t


    2007ret                                             251
                                    -0.0604-0.0170          0.9820.981
             1.035***(0.0110)0.769***(0.0252)0.201***(0.0396)0.0647***(0.0206)(0.0644)(0.0492)0.0331***(0.00999)
                                                                                    edasticity for several years, hence the regressions are adjusted for heteroskedast




    2006ret                                             251
                              0.0198-0.0359                0.9610.960
Performance of0.929***(0.0340)0.692***(0.0377)0.160***(0.0538)(0.0301)(0.0581)-0.234***(0.0646)0.0445***(0.0116)



                                                    for each individual year between 2004 and 2013.

    2005ret                                             252
                                    -0.0549-0.0365          0.9610.960
             0.917***(0.0166)0.709***(0.0288)0.232***(0.0523)-0.000860(0.0316)(0.0454)(0.0781)0.0269**(0.0104)




Table 6: Portfolioret
    2004                                            2520.9610.960
             0.906***(0.0185)0.711***(0.0360)0.284***(0.0441)0.00729(0.0274)0.0333(0.0498)-0.113*(0.0679)(0.0115)
                                             0.0458***

                                                                           gression results for equally weighted daily portfolio returns for the Unsustainabl


                                                              Weisberg test rejected the null hypothesis of homosk-
                                                *, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectively. Robust standard errors are reported




    YearVariablesMKTRFSMB HML UMD RMW CMA CONSTANTObservationsR-squaredAdjusted R-squaredNote: ***,*displays the robust redependent variable is daily portfolio returns. The independent variables are fetched from the augmented Fama5. Observations are the number of trading daysPagan/Cook

                                                                           32
         Figure 2: Visual Representation of Portfolio MKTRF Betas between 2004 - 2013

5.3 Trading Strategies between 2014 - 2018
Based on the interesting findings regarding MKTRF betas (the market betas) in section 5.2,
displayed in Figure 2, it is possible to construct a trading strategy. The Sustainable and Good
Enough portfolio experience higher exposure to systematic risk than the Unsustainable portfolio
as their market betas are higher in recession. Furthermore, the Sustainable and Good Enough
portfolio went from a level below one to a stable level above one after the crisis. It is also
important to mention that the beta for the Good Enough portfolio increased when the crises was
the most striking. The Sustainable and Unsustainable portfolio on the other hand demonstrated
another behaviour in relation to the market. Their betas also jumped to a level above one around
the crisis but when the crisis was at its worst, their betas declined. On top of that, once the crisis
had calmed down the MKTRF for the Unsustainable portfolio was once again on its normal
levels below one. The Sustainable and Good Enough portfolios’ market beta and the
Unsustainable portfolio’s market beta display different behaviour. For that reason, we will
construct a trading strategy based on the behaviour with respect to the market sentiments. The
CBOE Volatility Index (VIX) will be used as a proxy for the market sentiment. It is often used as
the stock markets expected implied volatility. In other words, it can be regarded as an indicator
of forward-looking systematic risk. It is based on the implied volatility of 30-day options on the

                                                                            33
S&P 500. As outlined in section 4.5, equation 7, a relative measure of the VIX index (RVIX)
will be used, based on the current level of volatility in relation to the average of the past three
years. The relative measure will assume a value above one in times of high market volatility and
a value below one in periods of lower volatility. This measure will work as trigger for switching
between portfolios.
        Based on the three portfolios, the following six trading strategies can be created:
        1. Trading strategy 1 involves going long in the Sustainable portfolio in times of low
           market volatility i.e. when the relative VIX is below one (RVIX < 1) and go long in
            the Good Enough portfolio in times of high market volatility (RVIX > 1).
        2. Trading Strategy 2 involves going long in the Sustainable portfolio in times of high
           market volatility (RVIX>1) and long in the Good Enough portfolio in times of low
             market volatility (RVIX<1).
       3. Trading Strategy 3 involves going long in the Sustainable portfolio in times of high
           market volatility (RVIX>1) and long in the Unsustainable portfolio in times of low
             market volatility (RVIX<1).
       4. Trading Strategy 4 involves going long in the Sustainable portfolio in times of low
           market volatility (RVIX<1) and long in the Unsustainable portfolio in times of high
             market volatility (RVIX>1).
       5. Trading Strategy 5 involves going long in the Good Enough portfolio in times of high
           market volatility (RVIX>1) and long in the Unsustainable portfolio in times of low
             market volatility (RVIX<1).
       6. Trading Strategy 6 involves going long in the Good Enough portfolio in times of low
           market volatility (RVIX<1) and long in the Unsustainable portfolio in times of high
             market volatility (RVIX>1).

       Applying these trading strategies over the period 2014-2018 generates the output in Table
7 below. The MKTRF, SMB, HML, UMD and RMW variables are all significant at the 1% level
for all portfolios and trading strategies. The CMA variable is insignificant for Trading Strategy 3
and 5 and for the Unsustainable portfolio. The trading strategies’ CONSTANT are significant at
the 1% level except for Trading Strategy 2 which is insignificant. Over the period, the yearly
abnormal returns are 2.7%, 2.4% and 4.6% for the Sustainable, Good Enough and Unsustainable
portfolio, respectively. Of the trading strategies, strategy 5, generates the highest annual

                                                                            34
abnormal return of 4.1%. The results indicate that a profit maximizing investor should hold the
Unsustainable portfolio and disregard any of the trading strategies. Investors nowadays,
however, invest more frequently based on values than solely on returns, i.e. they are willing to
sacrifice returns for holding sustainable portfolios (Riedl and Smeets, 2017). Hence, investors
seeking to limit their exposure towards Unsustainable stocks can combine it with Good Enough
stocks and still generate annual abnormal returns of 4.1%. Furthermore, investors that have
stronger preferences for sustainability could use Trading Strategy 1, focusing solely on
Sustainable and Good Enough stocks and obtain an abnormal return of 3.4% per year. This is
higher than holding the Sustainable or Good Enough portfolio in isolation as the portfolios
generate an alpha of 2.7%, and 2.4%, respectively. To summarize, there are abnormal returns to
collect using the devised trading strategies, regardless of investors’ sustainability preferences.

                                                                            35
                                                                             e

         ret
                                                            1,2580.9780.978
              0.995***(0.00637)0.741***(0.00900)0.0938***(0.0119)(0.00737)(0.0152)0.00164(0.0201)0.0180***(0.00424)
                                -0.0937***-0.0768***

                                                                in parentheses. The




        ret                                                                    nough portfolio and
                                                    1,2580.9810.981   E
              1.009***(0.00507)0.584***(0.00819)0.111***(0.0117)(0.00665)(0.0143)0.0684***(0.0178)0.00934**(0.00375)               s of the three portfolios during
                                -0.0989***-0.0618***
                                                                   ood  . High market volatility is defined as
                                                 G
2018                                                        34
 -




                                                  e portfolio,
         ret                                                                                      thesis of homoskedasticity for several years, hence
                                                            1,2580.9750.975
              1.016***(0.00660)0.405***(0.00959)0.0471***(0.0127)-0.115***(0.00788)(0.0159)0.109***(0.0200)0.0106**(0.00424)
                                       -0.0698***
     Sustainable Portfolio Good Enough Portfolio Unsustainable Portfolio
                              nsustainabl
                                      U


         ret
                                                            1,2580.9770.977
     Strategy 6 0.993***(0.00655)0.640***(0.00977)0.0990***(0.0129)-0.109***(0.00766)(0.0146)0.0472**(0.0195)0.0112***(0.00420)
                                       -0.0603***




         ret
                                            0.0228         1,2580.9780.978
     Strategy 5 1.011***(0.00538)0.685***(0.00935)0.106***(0.0120)(0.00712)(0.0157)(0.0196)0.0161***(0.00414)
                                -0.0833***-0.0783***
                                                   Weisberg test rejected the null hypo
of Trading Strategies between 2014                                        -

                                                             7. The dependent variable is daily portfolio returns. The independent variables are fetched
         ret
                                                            1,2580.9690.969
     Strategy 4 0.989***(0.00725)0.531***(0.0124)0.0448***(0.0140)-0.134***(0.00861)(0.0156)0.0720***(0.0212)0.0152***(0.00475)
                                       -0.0709***
                                                                same manner as the portfolios and are presented on page
                                             Pagan/Cook
                                                               -

         ret
                                            0.0382         1,2580.9700.970
     Strategy 3 1.022***(0.00783)0.615***(0.0133)0.0962***(0.0142)(0.00883)(0.0190)(0.0239)0.0134***(0.00492)
                                -0.0740***-0.0757***




         ret
                                                            1,2580.9760.976
     Strategy 2 1.020***(0.00687)0.514***(0.0104)0.101***(0.0131)(0.00808)(0.0169)0.0838***(0.0207)0.00655(0.00424)
                                -0.0897***-0.0592***


Table 7: Descriptive Statistics

        ret                                                                                 French five factor model presented in equation 5. Observations are the total number of trading days between 2014 and 2018. Th
                                                              1,2580.9760.976               -
     Strategy 1 1.005***(0.00565)0.475***(0.00980)0.0567***(0.0119)-0.124***(0.00703)(0.0145)0.0931***(0.0190)0.0134***(0.00411)
                                       -0.0724***


                                                             e robust regression results for equally weighted daily portfolio returns for the

                                                         *, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectively. Robust standard errors are reportedses robust standard errors, since the Breusch




                                                                              ustainable portfolio aggregated for the time period 2014 to 2018. In additional, the six trading strategies are combination
    Strategy from 2014-2018VariablesMKTRFSMB  HML  UMD RMW CMA  CONSTANTObservationsR-squaredAdjusted R-squaredNote: ***,*table displays thS times of high and low market volatility are presented in thea relative VIX>1 and low market volatility is VIX<1, see equationfrom the augmented Famaregression uthe regressions are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.

                                                                           36
 2018
 -

etween 2014
b


trategies

: Raw Returns of Portfolios and Trading S
 3

Figure

                                                                             37
 As a sanity check, Figure 3 demonstrates the raw returns of buy and hold strategies for the
  different portfolios and for Trading Strategy 1 and 5. It supports the regressions results, i.e. that
  the Unsustainable portfolio performs best. It also shows that Trading Strategy 5, containing the
  Unsustainable and Good Enough stocks performs better than Trading strategy 1, including
  Sustainable and Good Enough stocks.

 5.4 Portfolio Characteristics on a Monthly Basis and Including Liquidity Factors
  As opposed to the previous sections, this section uses monthly data instead of daily data to make
  the data compatible with the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factors. The same portfolio
  characteristics as in section 5.1 are regressed on a monthly basis between 2004-2018, instead of
  on a daily basis. During this time horizon, the following characteristics are observed.
Table 8: Monthly Descriptive Characteristics of the Three Thematic Portfolios between 2004 - 2018
      Portfolios Sustainable Portfolio Good Enough Portfolio Unsustainable Portfolio
      Variables ret ret ret

     MKTRF 1.059*** 1.046*** 0.959***
                              (0.0215) (0.0118) (0.0177)
     SMB 0.495*** 0.567*** 0.744***
                              (0.0462) (0.0238) (0.0342)
     HML 0.0603* 0.124*** 0.0586*
                              (0.0343) (0.0309) (0.0334)
     UMD -0.184*** -0.112*** -0.101***
                              (0.0543) (0.0155) (0.0185)
     RMW -0.0346 -0.0709* -0.124***
                              (0.0623) (0.0376) (0.0474)
     CMA -0.0658 -0.121** -0.184***
                              (0.0607) (0.0530) (0.0579)
     CONSTANT 0.356*** 0.388*** 0.611***
                              (0.0770) (0.0484) (0.0620)

     Observations 180 180 180
     R-squared 0.968 0.985 0.977
     Adjusted R-squared 0.967 0.984 0.976

  Note: ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectively. Robust standard
   errors are reported in parentheses. The table displays the robust regression results for equally weighted monthly
   portfolio returns for the sustainable portfolio, the good enough portfolio and the unsustainable portfolio, over the
  entire sample period 2004-2018. The dependent variable is monthly portfolio returns. The independent variables
   are fetched from the augmented Fama-French five factor model presented in equation 5. Observations are the
   number of months between 2004 and 2018. The regression uses robust standard errors, since the Breusch-
  Pagan/Cook-Weisberg test rejected the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity for several years, hence the regressions
   are adjusted for heteroskedasticity.
                                                                             38
The MKTRF and SMB variables exhibit similar statistics to Table 1 in Section 5.1, which is
regressed using daily data. However, the monthly HML variables decrease for all portfolios and
drop in significance levels for the Sustainable and Unsustainable portfolio but remain on the
same significance level for the Good Enough portfolio.
       The UMD monthly variable is similar to the daily UMD variable for the Unsustainable
and the Good Enough portfolio, but for the Sustainable portfolio, there is almost a 0.06
difference between the daily data and the monthly data. The monthly data indicates a smaller
negative impact of the UMD variable on portfolio returns. The monthly RMW variables becomes
significant for the Good Enough and insignificant for the Sustainable portfolio. Moreover, the
monthly CMA variable becomes insignificant for the Sustainable and drops in significance to the
5% level for the Good Enough portfolio.
       In short, due to compounding frequency and number of observations, the regression
results differ, which is not unique to this study. For instance, Yan (2008) found differences in
returns for SMB portfolios based on the measurement frequency of the Fama-French factors.
This points towards the results being sensitive to the time horizon and number of observations.
       Now, we reduce the span of the regression from 2004-2018 to 2004-2017, in order to
make the Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) liquidity data compatible with our findings, since the
Pástor and Stambaugh data on WRDS has not been updated to include the liquidity variables for
2018. Looking at the findings in Table 8, compared to the 2004-2017 regression without the
liquidity factors in Table 9, omitting the final year 2018 from the regression, slightly alters the
results with respect to the HML factor for the sustainable portfolio which is not significant at the
10 % level for the 2004-2017 regression, but is significant at this level for the 2004-2018
regression. Overall, the years exhibit similar portfolio characteristics, therefore, the impact of the
liquidity factor should be the same regardless of whether 2018 is included in the regression or
not. The innovations in aggregate liquidity non-traded factor (INNOVLIQ) is statistically
negatively significant at the 10 % level only for the sustainable portfolio. This means that the
equities composing the Sustainable portfolio have negative liquidity betas, implying that the
stocks have above average liquidity, thereby reducing the expected returns of the portfolio.
Simultaneously, the traded liquidity factor (TRADEDLIQ) is significantly positive at the 1 %
level, meaning that the portfolio is constructed using more liquid stocks than illiquid stocks, as
opposed to the other portfolios which do not have significant liquidity variables on any level.

                                                                            39
This finding suggests that the Sustainable portfolio has lower expected returns and higher
liquidity compared to the Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolios, therefore, liquidity serves
a role in explaining why the Sustainable portfolio generates lower abnormal returns compared to
the other portfolios.

                                                                            40
                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                         sch

 2017                                                                              roskedasticity.
 -

                                                                                       nough portfolio and the
2004                                                           E

                                                                       ood
                                                           G
                                                                             are reported in parentheses. The
 between

                                                                                                      s robust standard errors, since the Breu
Portfolios

atic                                                                                   ustainable portfolio, the
                                                                     S
                                                                                e
Them


Three

the

of


Characteristics                                                                  eighted monthly portfolio returns for th
                                                                                         2017. The dependent variable is monthly portfolio returns. The independent variables are fetched from-

riptive                                                                                    l presented in equation 5, and the independent variables for the statistics including the liquidity factors are

Desc


Monthly
 :
 9
                                                                                              . Observations are the number of months between 2004 and 2017. The regression use
                                                                                 French five factor mode 6
                                                                                                                   -
Table
                                                                                                                 Weisberg test rejected the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity for several years, hence the regressions are adjusted for hete-

                                                                                    nsustainable portfolio, over the sample period 2004e augmented Fama
                                                                          Note: ***, **, and * indicates statistical significance at the 1 %, 5 % and 10 % level, respectively. Robust standard errorstable displays the robust regression results for equally wU th presented in equationPagan/Cook

                                                                            41
6. Discussion

The result section finds that the Unsustainable portfolio generates the highest yearly abnormal
returns of 8.26% over the period 2004-2018. In second place is the Good Enough portfolio with
abnormal returns of 5.51% and last is the Sustainable portfolio with 5.17%. Trading Strategy 5,
which includes the Good Enough and Unsustainable portfolio delivers the highest abnormal
returns amongst the trading strategies, with an annual abnormal return of 4.1%. Nevertheless, all
portfolios and trading strategies produce positive abnormal returns. Regarding portfolio
characteristics, there is a spread between the portfolio characteristics over time that is supported
both by section 5.1 and section 5.2. The annual regression coefficients for the Unsustainable
portfolio bear smaller resemblance to the Sustainable and the Good Enough portfolio. The Good
Enough portfolio has similar regression characteristics compared to the Sustainable portfolio.
        This thesis adds to the existing literature through the finding that liquidity plays a role in
explaining the returns of the Sustainable portfolio. The innovation in aggregate liquidity variable
is significant at the 10 % level and the traded liquidity factor is significant at the 1 % level for the
Sustainable portfolio, but not for the other two portfolios. Although the results in this thesis
indicates that Unsustainable stocks and portfolios outperform Good Enough and Sustainable
portfolios, there is no consensus in SRI literature.
       Previous studies are subject to methodological differences, geographical differences,
sorting procedures, regression models and time horizons. Because of these differences,
specifically in relation to portfolio composition and construction, the results of the studies differ.
The portfolios used in this study are based on GICS codes as opposed to other studies that
compare established ethical/sustainable funds against conventional funds. In addition,
measurement horizons and number of observations cause divergent results, addressing this issue
would be of interest for future research. Moreover, the focus on the US market which has less
sustainability regulation than the European market might explain why the Unsustainable
portfolio in the US market delivers the highest abnormal returns. In another capital market
setting, the Sustainable portfolio might deliver higher returns as observed in Europe by Nordea
Equity Research in 2017.
       Another reason to why the Unsustainable portfolio outperforms the Good Enough and
Sustainable portfolio might be attributable to the ESG score system itself. Perhaps the ESG index
promotes the wrong efforts, thus firms that are perceived as sustainable are anticipated to

                                                                            42
generate higher returns and fail to meet analyst consensus, because they are in fact only
Sustainable due to a malfunctioning ESG score. The bottom line is that the firms that are
perceived as Unsustainable according to the Thomson Reuters index might be Good Enough or
Sustainable according to Sustainalytics, thus the hypothesis that Sustainable and Good Enough
firms generate higher returns will be fulfilled using the “correct” index. This issue regarding
heterogenous rating indices has been expressed by Cash (2019).
       Moreover, potential issue with previous results is reverse causality, that already
profitable, financially healthy companies engage in ESG activities and generate higher results.
This study finds that the Sustainable portfolio underperforms the Good Enough portfolio, these
results might be driven by overinvestment in ESG activities by the Sustainable companies,
thereby deteriorating profits. This is consistent with the idea of insider-initiated corporate
philanthropy (Bénabaou and Tirole, 2009).
        As we are able to generate positive alpha the assumption of market efficiency is not true.
Because in a perfect capital market setting the stock’s value is the true value and no abnormal
returns should exist, hence alpha should be zero (Eugene Fama, 1970). However, given that the
stock market is inefficient then companies’ different activities affect the stock price and, in the
end, abnormal return. Consequently, the reason why the Unsustainable portfolio outperforms
Sustainable and Good Enough portfolios might be because of governance and corporate
governance factors. Shrivastava and Addas (2014) found that governance factors such as board
meeting attendance percentage influences sustainability policies. Therefore, the case might be
that the Sustainable and Good Enough firms might have boards that conform to structures that
result in more ESG activities. On the other hand their boards fail to correlate it with stock
performance. On the contrary, Unsustainable firms’ board might have different attitudes toward
ESG commitments but manage to convert existing resources to a higher stock price. Maybe this
is because they are better in working with operational metrics such as ROE and ROCE, which
are correlated with the stock price and in the end abnormal return.
       Another reason for why the Unsustainable portfolio outperforms Sustainable and Good
Enough portfolios might be because of the preferences and mind sets of investors. The US
market might lack sustainability regulation for a reason. It might be the case that the CSR
heritage, that CSR entails wasting money, has affected a lot of investors (Bénabaou and Tirole,
2009). Therefore, they might shy away from Sustainable and Good Enough stocks to a greater

                                                                            43
extent in times of low volatility i.e. stable markets. Instead they trade Unsustainable stocks that
do not engage in this “wasteful” behaviour. As demand increases it leads to higher trading
volume and higher stock return. That might explain why Trading Strategy 5, which means
longing Good Enough Stocks during high volatility and longing Unsustainable stocks during low
volatility delivers the highest abnormal return amongst the trading strategies. And when doing
the reverse, when holding Trading Strategy 6, that longs Unsustainable in times of high market
volatility and longs Good Enough in periods of low market volatility the abnormal return is the
second lowest amongst the trading strategies.
        Lately capital allocation towards sustainable investments has been on the rise. In 2018
$30 trillion in assets where managed around the world (Greenbiz, 2018). This is interesting since
there does not exist consensus in academia that sustainable stocks are superior. Perhaps, herding
behaviour towards ESG investments might increase the demand for sustainable stocks or as
suggested by Reidl and Smeets (2017), people invest in sustainable stocks for social reasons.
This might be the case for markets which has come further in their sustainability development
        However, the price of the company and the stock return is then driven by increase in
demand resulting from shift in capital allocation rather than reflecting an increased intrinsic
value of the stock as consequence of operational performance. The US market might be more
efficient in impounding this fact into prices. Thus, the Unsustainable portfolio might deliver
higher return than the Sustainable and Good Enough portfolios. This also leads to the question of
endogeneity. Performance could be driven by something else rather than ESG or capital
allocation. That might explain why Unsustainable firms perform the best, because their lack of
ESG activities is not the sole determinant for their stock performance.
       Finally, a crucial event to comment on is the existence of positive alphas only for all
portfolios, which according to theory should not exist because alpha is assumed to net to zero.
This because all investors make up the universe, and for someone to win there must be someone
that loses (Sharpe, 1991). However, as our study is limited by the availability of ESG data on the
Thomson Reuters Eikon index there is the issue of sample selection bias. In this study there
might be the case that all stocks in our sample simply have positive alpha. Usually, the largest
companies in each exchange have active ESG ratings, thereby skewing the sample towards large
cap stocks which have greater exposure to ESG coverage. Using another database such
as Sustainalytics would have allowed a larger sample, however, as mentioned in the Data

                                                                            44
Chapter the database was not available for this study. Nonetheless, it is still interesting to focus
on, as we have done, on the relative differences across portfolios. It is undoubtedly interesting to
note that in these times of sustainability focus, the stocks generating the highest abnormal returns
are the unsustainable ones. The reason for this can be explained by Frazzini and Pedersen (2013).
They present a model with leverage and margin limitations explaining that constrained investors
chase high-beta assets in order to find positive alphas. A result of all investors wanting high-beta
assets is that the alpha is lower for those assets. On the other hand, as low-beta assets get
neglected they experience higher alphas. This behaviour of betting against beta could explain
why the Unsustainable portfolio has the highest alpha. Since, the trend today is to invest in
Sustainable stocks, because the belief is that they generate higher returns. Consequently, as
everyone is chasing Sustainable stocks it simultaneously benefits Unsustainable stocks since they
become the new low-beta assets with higher alphas.

                                                                            45
7. Conclusion and Implications for Future Research

7.1 Conclusion
Sustainable investing is on an all-time high, amounting $30 trillion dollars in 2018. The topic is
highly relevant in today’s market environment with shifting capital allocation and increased
demand for sustainable funds. The data indicates that investors perceive sustainable investing as
a superior alternative to conventional investing even though there is no consensus in academia.
However, this thesis finds that investing in sustainable stocks might not justify this increase in
sustainable investing as the Unsustainable portfolio outperforms the Sustainable portfolio, which
points towards market irrationality. One explanation is that investors are willing to forego returns
in favour of holding stocks that are aligned with their social values, as suggested by Reidl and
Smeets (2017). Another explanation is that the increased demand for sustainable stocks causes
lower alphas (Frazzini and Pedersen, 2013). What distinguishes this thesis from previous studies
in the field of ESG investing is our methodology and sorting procedure through portfolio
construction by using GICS and ESG score. We stand out from previous research since none has
paid any attention to Good Enough stocks in terms of ESG activity, only to the two extremes.
Thus, we are comparing the performance of three portfolios with different ESG scores,
distancing us from the binary testing of Sustainable portfolios against Unsustainable portfolios.
        Connecting the results to the hypothesis, the study finds differences in portfolio
characteristics that can be used to devise trading strategies over the period 2014-2018. Trading
Strategy 1, solely focusing on Sustainable and Good Enough stocks generates annual abnormal
returns of 3.4%, which is larger than holding the Sustainable portfolio or Good Enough in
isolation which generates 2.7% and 2.4% annual abnormal returns, respectively. Thereby, the
study confirms the hypothesis that investors can use thematic portfolio characteristics to generate
abnormal returns. Nonetheless, for profit maximizing investors the best thing is to refrain from
using any of the trading strategies and instead only hold the Unsustainable portfolio. In contrast
to the hypothesis that the Sustainable portfolio will outperform the Good Enough and
Unsustainable portfolios, this thesis finds that the Unsustainable portfolio delivers higher returns
over the period 2004 to 2018. The results show that the Unsustainable portfolio generates the
highest abnormal return of 8.26 % annually, followed by the Good Enough portfolio with 5.51 %
and the Sustainable portfolio with 5.17 % in annual abnormal returns.
       To summarize, against the common belief that Sustainable portfolios include the best

                                                                            46
performing stocks, our study shows that the Unsustainable portfolio outperforms its Sustainable
and Good Enough peers. Nevertheless, investors wanting to make sustainable investments can
still generate significant abnormal returns while conforming to their ethical preferences by using
Trading Strategy 1.

7.2. Implications for Future Research
This study contributes to the field of ESG investing by shedding light on the performance of
portfolios with divergent ESG characteristics over time and addresses how portfolio
characteristics can be used to construct trading strategies with respect to volatility levels. This
was achieved through the study’s unique portfolio construction, benchmarking model and
different capital market setting in an ESG context.
       However, this study has just scratched the surface of ESG investing and acknowledges its
limitations. Future studies within the field of ESG investing could extend the scope of this study
by examining the role of corporate finance variables in relation to ESG performance. It could be
the case that companies within the ESG portfolios have different attitudes towards financial
leverage and R&D activity that could help the companies compete for efficiently. Therefore, it
would be interesting to examine the role of innovation and leverage with respect to ESG
performance.
       Another interesting topic to study would be analysts’ performance expectations on the
companies within the ESG portfolios. For instance, an analyst might have lower expectations on
companies with limited ESG commitment and bad ESG scores. This causes the unsustainable
firms to beat consensus estimates more regularly than sustainable firms for whom analysts have
higher expectations.
       As explained in the data and discussion section, there is no standardized ESG screening
process due to heterogeneity in index construction. Nevertheless, using another sustainability
index together with a more data and dynamically rebalance the ESG portfolios based on ESG
downgrades and upgrades would enable future studies to enhance our understanding about the
performance of actively managed ESG portfolios. In this context, it would be interesting to
examine the social preferences of fund managers and investors, as examined by Reidl and
Smeets (2017).
        Also, it would be interesting to examine if fund managers are constrained in their
investing and include a variable to measure assets under management to see if the demand for

                                                                            47
sustainable funds/portfolios has increased and consequently capital allocation. Tying back to our
results, the Unsustainable portfolio generates higher alpha than the Sustainable portfolio, this
could be a function of fund managers chasing Sustainable stocks, driving down abnormal
returns. The theoretical foundation for the lower alpha following higher demand is outlined by
Frazzini and Pedersen (2013) in the article “Betting against beta”. Hence, future research should
examine ESG investing with respect to capital allocation and investor sentiments.
        Lastly, due to data limitations, this study has focused on the relative differences in ESG
portfolio characteristics, more data would allow for further digging into the topic and determine
the magnitude of ESG’s impact on portfolio performance. The suggestions for future research
would allow us to decipher the source of ESG portfolio performance and draw more general
conclusions about ESG investing.

                                                                            48
References

Bauer, Rob. Koedijk, Kees. Otten, Rogér. (2005). International evidence on ethical mutual fund
performance and investment style. Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 29, Issue 7, 1751 – 1767.
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2004.06.035

Bénabou, Roland. Tirole, Jean. (2010). Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility.
Economica, Vol. 77, Issue 304, 1-19. doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1573694

Bernard, Victor L. Thomas, Jacob K. (1989). Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift: Delayed Price
Response or Risk Premium? Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 27, 1-36. doi:
10.2307/2491062

Carhart, Mark M. (1997). On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. The Journal of Finance,
Vol. 52, No. 1, 57 -82. doi:10.2307/2329556

Cash, Daniel. (2018). Sustainable finance ratings as the latest symptom of ‘rating addiction’.
Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment, 8:3, 242 – 258.
doi.org/10.1080/20430795.2018.1437996

CBOE. VIX Index & Volatility. Retrieved April 17 from http://www.cboe.com/products/vix-
index-volatility

D’Aquila, Jill M. (2018). The Current State of Sustainability Reporting A Work in Progress. The
CPA Journal. July 1. Retrieved 2019 April 25 from https://www.cpajournal.com/2018/07/30/the-
current-state-of-sustainability-reporting/

Deutsche Bank Group. (2012). Establishing Long-Term Value and Performance. Retrieved 2019
April 17 from https://www.db.com/cr/en/docs/Sustainable_Investing_2012.pdf

Holder, Michael. (2019). Global sustainable investing assets surged to $30 trillion in 2018.
Greenbiz. Retrieved 2019 April 17 from https://www.greenbiz.com/article/global-sustainable-
investing-assets-surged-30-trillion-2018

Kaempffert, Waldemar. (1956). Warmer Climate on the Earth May Be Due To More Carbon
Dioxide in the Air. New York Times, Oct 28. Retrieved 2019 April 17 from
https://static01.nyt.com/packages/pdf/weekinreview/warm1956.pdf

Kempf, Alexander. Osthoff, Peer. (2007). The Effect of Socially Responsible Investing on
Portfolio Performance. European Financial Management, Vol. 13, No. 5, 908 – 922.
doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-036X.2007.00402.x

Ibikunle, Gbenga. Steffen, Tom. (2015). European Green Mutual Fund Performance: A
Comparative Analysis with their Conventional and Black peers. Journal of Business Ethics, Vol.
145, No. 2, 337-355. doi: 10.1007/s10551-015-2850-7

                                                                            49
Fama, Eugene F. (1970) Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.
Journal of Finance, Vol. 25, No. 2, 383 – 417. doi: 10.2307/2325486

Fama, Eugene F. French, Kenneth R. (1992). The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns. The
Journal of Finance, Vol. 47, No. 2, 427 – 465. doi: 10.2307/2329112

Fama, Eugene F. French, Kenneth R. (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 116, Issue 1, 1 – 22. doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.10.010

Frazzini, Andrea. Pedersen Lasse Heje. (2014). Betting against beta. Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol. 111, Issue 1, 1 – 25. doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.10.005

Friedman, Milton. (1970, September 13). The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its
Profits. New York Times Magazine. p.17. Retrieved 2019 April 17 from
https://www.nytimes.com/1970/09/13/archives/a-friedman-doctrine-the-social-responsibility-of-
business-is-to.html

Jones, Charles I. (2016). Macroeconomics. Fourth Edition. Stanford University, Graduate
School of Business: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN:978-0-39-361533-3.

Newbold, Paul. Carlson, William. Throne, Betty. (2013). Statistics for Business and Economics.
Eighth Edition. Pearson. IBSN: 978-0-13-274565-9.

Nordea Equity Research. (2017). Cracking the ESG Code. Nordic Ideas.

O’brien, Robert M. (2007). A Caution Regarding Rules of Thumb for Variance Inflation Factors.
Quality & Quantity, Vol. 41, Issue 5, 673 – 690. doi: 10.1007/s11135-006-9018-6

Pástor, Lubos. Stambaugh, Robert F. (2003). Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns.
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 111, No. 3, 642 – 685. doi: 10.1086/374184

Revelli, Christophe. Viviani, Jean-Laurent. (2015). Financial performance of socially responsible
investing (SRI): what have we learned? A meta-analysis. Business Ethics: A European Review,
Vol. 24, Issue. 2, 158 -181. doi: 10.1111/beer.12076

Revkin, Andrew. (2018). Climate Change First Became News 30 Years Ago. Why Haven’t We
Fixed It? National Geographic. July. Retrieved 2019 April 17 from
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2018/07/embark-essay-climate-change-pollution-
revkin/

Riedl, Arno. Smeets, Paul. (2017). Why Do Investors Hold Socially Responsible Mutual funds?
The Journal of Finance, Vol. 72, Issue. 6, 2505 – 2550. doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2318987

Sharpe, William F. (1991). The Arithmetic of Active Management. Financial Analysts Journal,
Vol. 47, Issue 1, 7-9. doi.org/10.2469/faj.v47.n1.7

                                                                            50
Sharpe, William F. (1964). Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under
Conditions of Risk. The Journal of Finance, Vol. 19, No. 3, 425 – 442. doi: 10.2307/2977928

Shrivastava, Paul. Addas, Amr. (2014). The Impact of Corporate Governance on Sustainability
Performance. Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment, Vol. 4, Issue. 1, 21-
37. doi: 10.1080/20430795.2014.887346

Sjöström, Emma. (2015). The performance of socially responsible investment. Sjunde AP-fonden
(AP7). Retrieved 2019 March 29 from https://www.ap7.se/app/uploads/2017/06/AP7_The-
Performance-of-socially-responsible-investment.pdf

Statman, Meir. Glushkov, Denys. (2009). The Wages of Social Responsibility. Financial
Analysts Journal, Vol. 65, Issue. 4, 33 – 46. doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1372848

The European Union. (2014). Directive 2013/34/EU as regards disclosure of non-financial and
diversity information by certain large undertakings and groups. Retrieved 2019 April 25 from
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/doc/srv?l=EN&f=PE%2047%202014%20INIT

Thomson Reuters. (2017). Thomson Reuters ESG Scores. Retrieved 2019 April 19 from
https://www.esade.edu/itemsweb/biblioteca/bbdd/inbbdd/archivos/Thomson_Reuters_ESG_Scor
es.pdf

US SIF. (2018). Report on US Sustainable, Responsible and Impact Investing Trends. Retrieved
2019 April 17 from https://www.ussif.org/sribasics

Whaley, Robert E. (1993). Derivatives on Market Volatility: Hedging Tools Long Overdue. The
Journal of Derivatives, Vol. 1, Issue 1, 71 -84. doi.org/10.3905/jod.1993.407868

                                                                                                                         th
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. (2013). Introductory econometrics: A modern approach (5 ed.). Mason,
OH: South-Western, Cengage Learning.

Yan, Yuxing. (2008). On the Consistency between the Fama-French Daily and Monthly Factors.
SSRN Electronic Journal. doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1108636

                                                                            51
Appendix     Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg Heteroskedasticity Test
               Table A1: Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg Heteroskedasticity Test
            Sustainable Portfolio Good Enough Portfolio Unsustainable Portfolio
Year χ2 (6) Prob.> χ2 (6) Prob.> χ2 (6) Prob.>
2004 9.63 0.1411 6.55 0.3648 4.13 0.6587
2005 6.79 0.3403 4.62 0.5934 14.44 0.0251
2006 6.63 0.1956 5.33 0.5017 7.24 0.2994
2007 20.83 0.0020 13.01 0.0429 10.07 0.1216
2008 77.10 0.0000 135.31 0.0000 42.09 0.0000
2009 10.53 0.104 16.85 0.0098 6.28 0.3929
2010 8.24 0.2209 7.56 0.2721 10.41 0.1083
2011 42.92 0.0000 80.62 0.0000 96.16 0.0000
2012 3.58 0.7335 4.57 0.6005 7.44 0.2824
2013 2.78 0.8357 1.10 0.9815 2.53 0.8656
2014 8.85 0.1821 4.46 0.6151 12.53 0.0511
2015 3.98 0.6796 5.81 0.4453 1.76 0.9401
2016 6.40 0.3801 13.72 0.0329 1.95 0.9245
2017 5.30 0.5057 3.19 0.7850 6.47 0.3727
2018 36.32 0.0000 9.76 0.1352 3.32 0.7680
 Note: A Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg (B-P/C-W) heteroskedasticity test is performed for all portfolios for each
 individual year during the time horizon 2004-2018. The null hypothesis of equal error variances
 (homoskedasticity) is tested against the alternative hypothesis of unequal error variances (heteroskedasticity). The
 χ2 (6) test statistic means that the test uses six degrees of freedom, which are attributable to the number of
 independent variables in the non-robust augmented Fama-French five factor model (equation 5). Prob. shows the
 significance level for the B-P/C-W test for each individual year and portfolio over the sample period 2004-2018.
 Prob>0.1 indicates statistical significance at the 10 % level, Prob>0.05 at the 5 % level, and Prob>0.01 at the 1 %
 level.

                           Table A2: Multicollinearity Test Using VIF

       Note: Multicollinearity test using variance influence factor (VIF) for the augmented Fama-French five
       factor model, if VIF is below 10, the rule of thumb states that there is no presence of multicollinearity.

                                                                            52
                   Figure A1: Relative CBOE Index Over TimeRVIX Over Time

     4.5
      4
     3.5
      3
     2.5
   RVIX2
     1.5
                                                                                                   RVIX
      1
     0.5
      0

                                         Date
Note: Figure 1 shows the development of the relative CBOE volatility index introduced in equation 7, over
time during the time horizon 2007 – 2019. The relative index volatility index (RVIX) displayed on the y-
axis is only available for this time period as constructing the measure requires the three-year average for the
CBOE volatility index. The x-axis displays the date in MM/DD/YY format.

           Figure A2: Distributional Graph of Residuals for the Sustainable Portfolio

                                                                           53
Figure A3: Distributional Graph of Residuals for the Good Enough Portfolio

Figure A4: Distributional Graph of Residuals for the Unsustainable Portfolio

                                                                 54