A RIGGED PATH TO SUCCESS?

A STUDY OF GENDER BIAS IN VENTURE FUNDING

JACOB CEDERBERG

HANNA LOUISE FORSMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of  Economics

2019
A Rigged Path to Success? – A Study of Gender Bias in Venture Funding

Abstract:

   In order for a startup to grow and prosper, access to venture funding is crucial.
   Throughout recent years, it has become evident that male-led ventures receive a
   significantly larger share of the total amount of capital allocated to startups than
   female-led ventures. Since the quality and potential of business ideas  vary markedly
   between different ventures, it has been difficult to determine why female
   entrepreneurs are  at a disadvantage in raising capital. In this thesis, an experiment
   has been conducted  to control  for the quality of the startup.  Two  identical pitch decks
   have been put together,  but  one is presented by  a male team and  the other by  a
   female team,  in order  to  investigate whether investors are gender biased or not.  The
   results show that investors are biased in their investment decisions, and that the
   entrepreneurs’ gender affect  how much capital the startup raises. Unlike previous
   research,  this  study  suggests  that investors are not biased in favour of male
   entrepreneurs. Instead, the investors funded the female team more frequently than the
   male team, and the female team raised more capital on average. Furthermore,  the
   results indicate that female investors are more gender biased than male investors. We
   argue that the female entrepreneurs’ sudden success in raising capital can be
   explained by overcompensation as the investors are not investing real money, but
   also that the Swedish venture funding landscape  might be changing for the better,
   with equal opportunities to succeed, regardless of gender.

Keywords: Venture Capital, Startup Funding, Gender Bias, Gender Stereotypes

Authors:  Jacob Cederberg  (23961)  and  Hanna  Louise Forsman  (23919)

Tutors:  Anastasia  Girshina,  Postdoctoral Researcher,  Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:  Adrien d’Avernas,  Assistant  Professor  of Finance,  Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:  Anastasia Girshina for her valuable support and feedback, Julia
Delin for her insightful input  and  help in making this experiment possible, Mark
Alexander Conley and Ted Elvhage for their thoughts and expertise, and last but not
least, all the investors for taking the time to participate in our study.

Bachelor Thesis in Finance
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jacob Cederberg and Hanna Louise Forsman, 2019

                                   1
Contents

1.        INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND ....................................................................... 3

2.        PREVIOUS LITERATURE ............................................................................................... 5

3.        THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK .................................................................................... 7
3.1.       The Concept of Venture Capital and Angel Investing ..................................................... 7
3.2.       Gender Stereotypes ............................................................................................................. 8
3.3.       The Concept of Gender Bias .............................................................................................. 9

4.        HYPOTHESES .................................................................................................................. 11
4.1.       Hypothesis 1 ....................................................................................................................... 11
4.2.       Hypothesis 2 ....................................................................................................................... 11
4.3.       Hypothesis 3 ....................................................................................................................... 12

5.        DATA AND METHODOLOGY ...................................................................................... 13
5.1.       Empirical Method ............................................................................................................. 13
5.1.1.     Conducting the Experiment................................................................................................. 13
5.1.2.     Participants .......................................................................................................................... 14
5.1.3.     Execution of the Experiment ............................................................................................... 15
5.1.4.     Survey Design ..................................................................................................................... 15
5.2.       Data..................................................................................................................................... 16
5.2.1.      Statistical Method................................................................................................................ 16
5.2.2.     Variables  ............................................................................................................................. 17
5.2.3.     Limitations in the Data ........................................................................................................ 18

6.        RESULTS AND ANALYSIS ............................................................................................ 19
6.1.       Results: Hypothesis 1 ........................................................................................................ 19
6.2.       Analysis: So Why Does the Female Team Raise More Capital?  .................................. 22
6.3.       Results: Hypothesis 2 ........................................................................................................ 23
6.4.       Analysis: In-Group Bias and Gender of Investor .......................................................... 25
6.5.       Results: Hypothesis 3 ........................................................................................................ 25
6.6.      Analysis: Why is Instant Tutor a More Attractive Startup When it is Run by
          Women?  ............................................................................................................................. 27

7.        IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION ......................................................................... 29
7.1.       Implications of the Findings ............................................................................................. 29
7.2.       Future Research ................................................................................................................ 29
7.3.       Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 30

8.         REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 32

9.         APPENDICES ................................................................................................................... 34

                                   2
1.    Introduction and Background

“Life is not fair” is a saying often told to children when they experience something in
life as unfair. This quote is to a great extent applicable to the  concept of venture
funding, where male entrepreneurs raise significantly more startup capital than female
entrepreneurs. Female-led companies only received 2,2% of the total amount of capital
allocated to startups in the United States in 2018, which is $10  billion less than one
single male-led e-cigarette company, Juul, raised on its own (Hinchliffe, 2019). So why
do women raise less capital than men, are all female business ideas worse, or are
investors gender biased? It is challenging to answers this question since most studies
within the field have compared different teams with different business ideas. This study
aims to solve this problem through conducting an experiment with one, identical,
business idea, presented by two teams, one male and one female, in order to investigate
the causal effect that the gender of the entrepreneurs has on the amount of  capital raised
by the startup.

We live in a world with substantial inequalities, where men and women are treated
differently with contrasting privileges;  wage gaps, career disadvantages, and gender
norms that are not only descriptive but also prescriptive as to how a man or a woman
should behave. As a result, this has influenced the  Finance  Industry in general, and the
venture funding environment in particular.

A startup, a newly established business, is in many cases in need of external funding in
order to achieve growth, expansion and stable cash flows to reach break-even. Angel or
venture funding can eventually be the determinant of a  startup’s  success  story or
shutting the idea  down. However, it might not only be the potential of  the  startup that
determines whether it will receive funding or not, the gender of the entrepreneurs
behind the startup also seem to have been playing a major role in recent years’  capital
raises. According to a study conducted in the US, investors prefer venture pitches
presented  by men (Brooks, A.W. et al, 2014). In the study, investors were presented
with identical recorded business ideas, pitched by either a man or a woman. The  startup
presented by a male voice was funded by 69% of the participants  in the study, and only
31% of the participants chose to invest in the venture pitched by a woman. In addition,
the pitch presented by a male voice was perceived as more logical, fact-based and
persuasive than the exact same pitch narrated by a female voice.

Moreover, it is not only the amount of  capital allocated to startups that is subject to
gender bias, also the type of questions that are asked to the entrepreneurs are
significantly  different  for male versus female founders. As Dana Kanze et al. (2017)
state, the Venture Capital firms tend to ask soft ball questions to men and more hostile
questions to women. As a result, it becomes a rigged game with larger obstacles for

                                   3
female founders to overcome, and a rougher path towards creating a successful
business.

Some may argue that the uneven distribution of capital depends on the ratio of female-
to-male entrepreneurs. However, in 2017, one third of all Swedish startups were led by
women, but in the same year, female-led startups only received 13% of the total capital
allocated to startups (Malmström et al, 2017).

Women seem to be at a systematic disadvantage in many aspects of their professional
lives, and this is also the case in venture funding. Therefore, we find it of utmost
importance to further investigate the potential impact  gender bias has on the venture
funding landscape and access to startup funding in Sweden. As proven earlier, quite an
extensive  amount of research has been  put into the field, mostly focusing on the US and
the gender of the entrepreneur, but more can be done, especially in the Nordic  countries.
More specifically, almost no studies have investigated how the gender of the individual
investor affects the allocation  of capital to startups either managed by men or women. In
order to create a greater depth and understanding, this study takes into consideration the
potential difference in gender of the investor as well as examine  whether gender
stereotypes  affects investment decisions.

By shedding light on this current issue in venture funding,  we believe that we can be a
small catalyst to change in the right direction. This thesis will investigate the potential
difference today in  venture funding for male-  and female-led startups in Sweden. It will
be done through an experiment using two identical pitch decks for a theoretical venture
called Instant Tutor, but where the team of entrepreneurs is either solely male or solely
female.  Since the participating investors will  evaluate the exact same business idea, but
with two different teams, it will be possible to examine how the gender of the
entrepreneurs affect the amount of capital raised accurately.  Hence, other factors that
could influence the investment decision, such  as the quality of different business ideas,
are eliminated. As a  result, we will analyse the difference in amount of funding the two
projects receive, and also look into  whether  there is a difference in the amount of capital
male and female investors allocate to the two different, but still identical, startups. Thus,
this study is aiming to answer the following research questions:

Is access to venture funding in Sweden affected by gender bias in favour of male
entrepreneurs?  Are male and female investors  equally biased?

                                   4
2.    Previous Literature

Several  studies have been carried out within the topic of venture funding. Throughout
the following section, the previous research which is found to be  the most applicable to
this study is covered and discussed in order  to lay the groundwork for the analysis.

Firstly, in  order to investigate whether a potential gender bias exists in venture funding,
it is important to understand the origin for the bias  -  gender discrimination and  gender
stereotypes. This is covered by Hebert (2018) in her paper “Mind the Gap: Gender
Stereotypes and Entrepreneurs’  Financing”, where she investigates whether female
founders are systematically at a disadvantage when it comes to raising startup capital.
According to Hebert, in France, 90%  of  the venture capitalists are men, and female
entrepreneurs are 25-35% less likely to receive external funding than male
entrepreneurs. However, the context and industry have to be taken into  consideration as
this difference does not exist in a female dominated industry, for instance the Beauty
Industry. In this  case, female entrepreneurs in female-dominated sectors are 8% more
likely to receive funding than male entrepreneurs. Moreover, men are significantly more
likely  to receive funding than female entrepreneurs in male-dominated industries. This
proves that both male and female entrepreneurs benefit from operating in an industry
which fits their gender, which results in  context-dependent  stereotypes.

Secondly, adding  to the theory of female founders systematically being at a
disadvantage can be done through analysing another paper on how male and female
entrepreneurs are asked different types of questions  by  investors  (Kanze et al, 2017).
The paper examines question-and-answer sessions during the TechCrunch Disrupt in
New York City between 2010 and 2016. The study was able  to conclude that male
entrepreneurs are asked to win and women not to lose. This is done by asking male
founders promotional questions  and female founders more hostile questions. For
instance, a male entrepreneur might be asked how much revenue his company is
expected to generate in the next three years, while a female entrepreneur might get a
question regarding how she intends to keep her customer base. As a result, founders that
get asked promotion-focused questions raise  more capital than founders  that get asked
prevention-  and hostile-focused questions.  Hence,  prevention-focused questions
significantly hinder  the entrepreneur from receiving funding.

Thirdly,  it is not only the type  of  questions asked to the entrepreneurs during a pitching
event that  affects whether a startup receives funding  or not, also, the entrepreneur’s
physical appearance is taken into consideration (Brooks et al, 2014). This study was
able to conclude that men  who were seen as attractive  raised more capital. However, the
opposite pattern was spotted for female founders. In this case, female entrepreneurs  who
were  perceived as less attractive  were able to raise a slightly higher amount of money in
comparison to  the  more attractive female founders.

                                   5
Moreover, another aspect which brings useful insight into the investors’ decision-
making process is covered by Lee and Huang (2018), focusing on the impact of the
mission that  the startup is looking to fulfil. Their study  evaluated how investment
decisions are affected by business pitches with  a social mission. The results showed that
women receive a larger amount of  capital  when they have a social mission incorporated
in their  startup in comparison to when they do not.  However, including a clear social
mission does not affect how much  funding  a  man receives. The authors refer this
behaviour to social norms. Gender norms state  that women are supposed to be kind and
sympathetic,  where a social mission fulfils this expectation, resulting in a  greater
amount of  capital being allocated to female startups with a social mission.

Lastly, the  future performance of a startup also depends on the gender of the investor. A
paper by Raina (2017) examined the performance gap between male-  and female-led
startups  and  was able to conclude that the gender performance gap is greater among
startups financed by Venture Capital firms with male general partners than with female
general partners. Furthermore, this  gender  performance  gap can be explained through
male and female investors’  different abilities to evaluate and contribute to the
development of female-led startups. Similar results were presented by Ewens and
Townsend (2017), which concluded  that female-led ventures end up being more
successful with female investors than with male  investors. These results conclude that
the industry is either in need of more female investors and female General Partners, or
an improved  ability of men evaluating  women-led startups, in order to reduce the gender
performance gap.

This paper aims to contribute to previous research through broadening the
understanding of the venture funding landscape in Sweden.  Furthermore, it aims to
investigate whether there is  gender  bias in favour  of male or female entrepreneurs and
how the gender of the investor impacts the allocation of capital. Only focusing on the
amount of capital that men and women receive is a quite extensively covered topic, but
not  as much in Sweden, and most importantly, no previous studies have controlled for
the quality of the business ideas or background of the entrepreneurs. Moreover, no
earlier studies have evaluated the potential impact of male to male, female to male, male
to female or female to female investments  and their impact on the overall distribution of
capital.

                                   6
3.    Theoretical  Framework

3.1.    The Concept of Venture Capital and Angel Investing

The Venture Capital  Industry is seen as the engine to economic growth throughout the
world (Cremades, 2018). It is the muscle  behind innovation, as venture capitalists work
to support startups to grow,  and eventually exit through, for instance, an Initial Public
Offering (IPO). There are different stages at which  Venture Capital firms can  choose to
be involved and invest capital (Deeb, 2016). The earliest is the Seed Round, where the
startup has limited traction and the Venture Capital firm contributes to get the business
off the ground. The second stage is the Early Stage, where the company has proven its
business model to be successful and the Venture Capital Firm helps to, for instance,
increase the  sales and marketing effort. The third stage is  the Growth Stage where the
Venture Capital firm “pours  kerosene on  a company that is already  on fire”  (Deeb,
2016). Venture Capital investments are the riskiest types of investments as the Venture
Capital firm invests in the management and their idea. Venture Capital firms make
money through something called carried interest, which is a percentage of sales of  the
startup. However, the Venture Capital firm’s best opportunity to make large profits and
cash out, is through an exit, meaning that the venture is either sold to  another
corporation or made available to the open market through an IPO. The average length of
reaching an exit is five to seven years.

When an entrepreneur receives external funding from a Venture Capital firm, it is
usually in exchange for a stake in the company. Even if the venture capitalists want to
receive the largest  stake possible in order to  make the greatest return, it is still important
to leave the entrepreneurs with enough incentive to make the venture as successful as
possible.

Another type of  investor is an Angel Investor, which is a high net worth individual  that
is seeking to invest  their capital in startups (Cremades 2018). The Angel Investor
typically invests in the early rounds in order to be able to capture a larger stake in the
startup.  In later rounds it is less common with angel investments as the valuation of the
startup is usually higher, and therefore requires more capital to capture the same share
in the company. The main difference between a Venture Capital firm and an Angel
Investor is the size of their available investment fund.

From a startup’s  perspective, the entrepreneur starts to seek funding when the venture is
in need of expanding  in order to reach the next stage. It can be in the form of developing
a new product, increasing their marketing efforts, or improving their infrastructure.
Furthermore, even if receiving external funding usually  results in losing a stake in the
company, it still brings additional advantages as it can attract talented people to get on
board on the lottery ride (Zider, 2014).

                                   7
3.2.    Gender Stereotypes

Stereotypes exist in all social and  professional contexts. The Cambridge  Dictionary
defines a stereotype as “a fixed idea that people have about what someone or something
is like, especially an idea that is wrong”.  Stereotypes are often based on
representativeness, meaning that the most representative attributes of a group  come to
mind first and are too heavily emphasised when forming an opinion about a group of
people (Bordalo et al. 2015). Examples of such representativeness-based stereotypes are
that all Swedes  are blond, and that the majority of Florida’s residents are elderly, both
of which are incorrect. Bordalo et al. claims that representativeness generates rather
accurate stereotypes. However, their research  amplifies that stereotypes are context-
dependent,  meaning that stereotypes depend on the specific reference group  that the
target group is compared to. Moreover, stereotypes highlight differences between
groups and portray  unproportional differences between groups that are in fact quite
similar to each  other.

Stereotypes are especially visible when it comes to gender. Perceptions about male and
female attributes are widespread and widely shared. Women are characterised as
sympathetic, kind and concerned  about others while men are portrayed as decisive,
forceful and aggressive. Male and female gender stereotypes are often oppositional,
which means that men are perceived as lacking the attributes that are the most
prevailing in women,  and vice versa (Heilman 2001). However, gender stereotypes are
not only descriptive of how men and women behave, but they are also prescriptive,
meaning that they define norms about how men and women should behave. These
norms depict “dos” and “don’ts” for male and female behaviour. For instance, women
should be kind and men should be forceful. But when  looking at the “don’ts”, the
normative prescription prevents behaviour that is associated with the opposite gender.
That is, the attributes that men are valued for, such as being  decisive, are prohibited for
women.

How an entrepreneur is perceived by investors is a critical component when  trying to
raise capital, and gender stereotypes play a great part in how entrepreneurs are
evaluated. A study by Malmström, Johansson and Wincent (2017) describes how
differently venture  capitalists talk about male and female entrepreneurs. In the study,
conversations held by venture capitalists  evaluating different startups  in Sweden were
recorded and analysed. The results of the study showed that the investors questioned the
knowledge, experience and trustworthiness  of the female entrepreneurs and produced  a
stereotypical image of female entrepreneurs as having the opposite attributes of those
considered to be needed to be a good entrepreneur. When evaluating the male
entrepreneurs on the other hand, the venture capitalists described them as having all  the
qualities needed to be a good entrepreneur. The venture capitalists highlighted the
entrepreneurial potential of the men, while the potential  of the female entrepreneurs was

                                   8
diminished. While male entrepreneurs were described as “young and promising”, the
women were described as “young, but inexperienced”. Gender stereotypes have proven
to affect if and how much funding an entrepreneur receives,  and female entrepreneurs
seem to be at a systematic  disadvantage.

3.3.    The Concept  of  Gender Bias

A consequence of gender stereotypes is the “glass ceiling” that most women encounter
at some point in their career. This barrier hinders women from accelerating to the higher
levels of an organisation. Gender stereotypes create expectations about how women
should behave and what qualities they should possess, and they result in gender bias in
social and professional evaluation contexts (Heilman, 2001).  Hence, being competent
does not ensure that a woman will rise to the  same professional level as  an equally
qualified man. The “glass ceiling” can to a large extent be explained by the fact that
most executive and management positions are considered to require what is seen as
male attributes,  such as decisiveness and a goal-oriented aggressiveness. There is a lot
of empirical evidence that support this view,  where  consistent studies  have  concluded
that a good manager is described mainly by male attributes. Heilman’s (2001) study
concludes that the scarcity of women at higher organisational levels is due to gender
bias in evaluations  and to the fact that gender stereotypes result in devaluation of female
performance.

In the article “Women & the Leadership Labyrinth Heidi vs Howard”, Maria Katsarou
(2019) writes about a woman who became the  subject of a Columbia Business School
case study. Her name is Heidi Roizen and she is a successful venture capitalist in
Silicon Valley. Half of the students in the study received the case study with Heidi’s
name on it, and the other half received an identical case study except for  one detail, the
gender of the venture capitalist  was now a male called Howard. Heidi and Howard were
rated as equally competent by the business students, but the students  preferred  Howard
over  Heidi. In fact, they perceived Heidi as selfish and less worthy of being hired than
Howard. The study found that the more decisive Heidi was perceived as, the more the
students rejected her. To conclude, the case study found a negative relationship for
women between power and success. For men, this correlation is  positive. The
fundamental problem lies in gender stereotypes and gender bias, where qualities that are
consistent with being a good leader are seen as unattractive when found in women.

As previously seen, consistent findings show that men are favoured in leadership and
executive positions. Such results imply that men in leadership positions prefer to
promote and hire other men. However, women’s in-group bias is proven to be stronger
than men’s (Rudman & Goodwin, 2004). In-group bias is a concept where people of
one homogenous  group prefer  other people of that same group over others. In all aspects
of society, people who belong to the more socially valued groups automatically prefer

                                   9
and favour their own peers. The only exception is gender, where automatic in-group
bias is stronger for women  than for men. Women strongly prefer the female gender
while men seem to be relatively gender-neutral.

                                  10
4.    Hypotheses

When referring to capital in this study, it is hypothetical capital within the context and
purpose of  this experiment. Based on  previous studies, research papers and literature,
we expect to see a significantly larger amount of capital being invested in  the startup
consisting of only men in comparison to the one with only women. Furthermore, we
expect the  participating investors to  see greater potential in the business idea and also
the entrepreneurs when given the male pitch deck. As a result, the following hypotheses
have been formulated:

4.1.    Hypothesis 1

Previous research shows that investors consistently  favour male entrepreneurs  over
female entrepreneurs in investment decisions. As such, this study is expected to
generate a similar result where the male pitch deck will raise more capital than the
female one, and the investors will  fund the male team more frequently.

      H1:  The startup  with an all-male team will on  average raise more capital
      than the all-female team,  and the probability of receiving funding will be
      greater for the all-male team than for the all-female team.

4.2.    Hypothesis 2

Homogenous groups have an automatic in-group bias,  meaning that they favour
members of their own group over  others. Female in-group bias has been proven to be
stronger than male in-group bias. Hence, female investors are expected to invest more
capital in the all-female team than the male investors. However, even if we predict the
female investors to invest relatively more than male investors in the female
entrepreneurs, we still believe that overall, both the male and female investors will
invest more in the male team.

     H2:  The female investors will on  average allocate a relatively larger
      amount of capital  to the female entrepreneurs than male investors.
      However, both men and women will invest a larger amount of capital on
      average in the male entrepreneurs.

                                  11
4.3.    Hypothesis 3

Investors’ decisions are influenced  by gender norms and stereotypes  which create biases
in evaluation situations. A good entrepreneur is, according to gender stereotypes,
someone who possesses male attributes. Thus, the participants in this study are expected
to rate the male team as more  competent than the female team.

     H3: Both the male and female investors will see larger potential in Instant
      Tutor and its team when the entrepreneurs are male than when they are
      female.

If these three hypotheses are true, it means that female entrepreneurs are at a systematic
disadvantage in  raising startup capital.

                                  12
5.    Data and Methodology

5.1.    Empirical Method

In the conducted experiment, professional investors were asked to evaluate the pitch
decks of two identical startups, where one startup is run by men and  the other by
women. The material received by the participating investors emphasised that the pitch
decks were created solely for the purpose of the study. Also, whether an investor
received the male or female pitch deck was randomised. The purpose of the  study was
to investigate whether or not a gender bias exists in startup funding in Sweden. It is
difficult to measure the causal effect that the entrepreneurs’ gender has on the amount of
capital raised by a startup  in the real world as the quality of the  business ideas and
experience  of the entrepreneurs differs among companies. However, through this
experiment, it was made possible to control for the quality and experience, and compare
two identical startups, with the exact same business idea, where the only  difference  was
the gender of  the entrepreneurs.

5.1.1.    Conducting the Experiment

In the experiment, the respondents were presented with one of the two versions of a
pitch deck from a company called Instant Tutor. The business idea was put together to
replicate  an  average company in the Swedish startup landscape, and thus only exists in
the context of this experiment. The only difference between the two pitch decks was the
“Meet the team” slide, see Appendix  7, where either a team of only men or a team of
only women was presented.

The names and pictures of the three male and female founders were carefully chosen to
resemble each other in order to eliminate the risk of bias in regard to age, nationality or
ethnicity. Also, the background and education of the entrepreneurs were identical for the
male and female version of the pitch deck.

Instant Tutor is an app for home tutoring that connects students with a suitable tutor, see
Appendix  7. The  Digital  Education  Industry was chosen when designing the pitch deck
as  it  is  considered to be a relatively gender-neutral industry. This was done in order to
avoid male-  or female-dominated industries, such as the Fintech or Beauty Industry,
influencing the survey responses.

The most important  aspect of the experiment was to find a subtle way to make the
investor notice the gender of the entrepreneur when evaluating the pitch deck, without
making the purpose behind the experiment too obvious. The initial idea was to  record
one male and one female voice pitching Instant Tutor  in  order to remind the investor of
the gender of the entrepreneurs throughout the pitch. However, after consideration and
feedback from several investors pointing out the inconvenience of having  to open a

                                  13
pitch deck containing a background voice, it was decided to use pictures of three
women and three men of the same age and ethnic background instead. Furthermore, the
names of the corresponding team members were mentioned twice in the survey in order
to once again subtly remind the investor of the gender of the  entrepreneurs. As a result
of only using the names and pictures rather than a background voice, it contributed to
eliminate  the risk of having the investors being influenced in their decision by the
accent, pitch or level of engagement of  either the  male or female voice.  A test round
where 20 investors were contacted was conducted to test the pitch decks and survey
questions. After reviewing the investors’ feedback and making a few minor changes  to
the material, the experiment was sent to all final participants.

After having examined the pitch deck, the participating investors were asked to evaluate
the business idea, the entrepreneurs and to fill out a questionnaire. The first three
questions in the questionnaire addressed  how likely the investor was  to  fund Instant
Tutor and the amount the respondent would be willing to invest. These questions were
formulated to test hypotheses number one and two. The following four questions in the
questionnaire were formulated to test hypothesis three and asked the  investor to grade
Instant Tutor and its team of entrepreneurs.

5.1.2.    Participants

In total, 394 investors were asked to take part in the experiment out of which 81
respondents chose to participate. Regarding the number of participants, the aim was to
contact every Venture Capital  firm in Sweden, and also a Sweden based Angel Investor
network, to receive the largest possible sample in order to gain statistical power.
Through personalised emails and follow-up reminders, a response rate  of 20% was
reached. The 81  responses were manually analysed in order to only include relevant
data. In total, four responses were excluded from the analysis as a result of not meeting
the criteria for participation. These were  responses where the participant did not actually
work with  investments or when the respondent indicated that Instant Tutor was a startup
too small to suit his or her employer’s investment fund. Consequently, there were 77
answers left, with  all remaining participants being professional investors who work as
either  a  venture capitalist or  an Angel Investor,  in Sweden. The distribution of the
participants was the following:  60 men and 17 women. The  investors live and work all
over  Sweden and their ages range from 20 to 70 years in order to give an accurate
representation of the Swedish venture funding landscape. The ratio of participating
women is rather low but is yet a fair representation of the venture funding landscape,
which is  still a male-dominated industry.

                                  14
5.1.3.    Execution of the Experiment

The participants received the pitch deck  and survey via email and completed the
experiment at a time and place most convenient to them. Each participant received one
of the two versions of the pitch deck and were neither told the motive behind the
experiment, nor did they know  that there was another version of the pitch deck. In total,
41 investors completed the female version of the pitch deck and 36 investors reviewed
the male pitch deck and  completed the corresponding  survey. Clear instructions about
the experiment were included in the email, see Appendix  6,  and the participants were
asked to only use the information provided in the pitch deck when answering the
questions in the survey. The participants were  also instructed to disregard  personal
economic constraints when answering the question about how much  they would be
willing to invest in the startup Instant Tutor. This was done in order to exclude the
factor of the investors’ current financial situations,  and capital already tied up in  other
projects,  influencing the responses.

5.1.4.    Survey Design

The survey was divided into two parts, see Appendix  5. The first part consisted of seven
questions where each investor was asked how likely he or she would be to invest in the
startup, how much he or  she would be willing to invest and  then to evaluate the
potential of the business idea  and the team of entrepreneurs. The first question in the
survey was “How likely are you to invest in Instant Tutor?”, followed by the amount  the
investor  would be willing to invest. This was done in order  to  receive an honest answer
from the participants before they started to elaborate regarding the hidden purpose of
the experiment. The investor rated the pitch decks using a Likert Scale ranging from 1
to 7, where 1 was the lowest score and 7 was the highest.

In the second part of the survey,  the investor  was asked to answer some personal
questions regarding age, gender and experience in startup funding. This was done in
order to divide the participants into groups used to  compare their decisions.

                                  15
5.2.    Data

After  having collected the data through the study described  above, the data was divided
into subgroups and  statistical tests were run in order to test the hypotheses and answer
the research questions. The statistical  tests  and analysis  were carried out using  the
statistical tools SPSS and STATA. The statistical method  is described further in the
section below.

5.2.1.    Statistical Method

A sample size of 77 participants was used in this study. The sample was divided into
subgroups based on the male and female pitch deck  as well as the gender of the
investor, either male or female. This was done in  order to compare the differences
between female to female, female to male, male to female and male to male
investments.

Five  linear regressions were run in order to analyse  how  the invested amounts were
affected by both the gender of the team of entrepreneurs  as well as  the gender of the
investor.  The first  linear regression was run to compare how much  capital  the all-male
and all-female team raised  on average.  The  second  linear  regression was  used to
compare whether  Instant Tutor’s probability of being funded increased or decreased
when the team was all-male  instead of all-female.  The third  linear regression  that  was
run  excluded  the projects that  had  received zero funding,  in order to  analyse  if the  male
and female projects that were financed raised different amounts of capital.  Finally, two
separate regressions were  set up  for the male and female team,  to  examine  by  how much
the invested amounts  varied  depending on whether the investors were male or female.

Furthermore, in order  to analyse the differences between female to female, female to
male, male to female and male to male investments, a Mann-Whitney U  test was  used.
The Mann-Whitney U  test was  selected  as  a result  of the small samples in the four
subgroups and  since  normally distributed data could not be assumed, see distribution of
responses in Appendix  4. The Mann-Whitney U test was done on all dependent
variables, see Appendix  3, on the 1%, 5%, 10% and 20%, level of  significance. This test
was run using the following null hypothesis:

     H0:  There is no statistically significant difference in median scores between
      the male and female pitch deck when the investor is either a male or a
     female

      H1:  There is a statistically significant difference in median scores between
      the male and female pitch deck when the investor is either a male or a
     female

                                  16
Lastly, a qualitative analysis was done in order to further investigate the  difference in
perception of the male and female team by  the investors. This was done using the  only
qualitative response, question 3, where the investors could freely motivate  the rationale
behind  their investment decision. The frequency of different factors,  such as comments
about diversity, risk, and experience, was  gathered and compared between the two
teams.

5.2.2.    Variables

Dependent Variables

The following dependent variables were measured in this experiment:

1)   Likelihood to invest in Instant Tutor

2)   Amount invested in Instant Tutor in SEK

3)   Perceived persuasiveness of the entrepreneurs

4)   Potential seen in the entrepreneurs

5)   Potential seen in the business idea

6)   Perceived logic and intuitiveness of the pitch deck

The variable “Amount invested in Instant Tutor in SEK” was the most important
variable in this experiment since it compares how successful the all-male and all-female
team were  in raising capital. This dependent variable was also of the highest importance
when examining and understanding whether male and female investors  are  equally
biased. The dependent variables focusing on persuasiveness, potential and logic were
used to find  explanations for a potential  difference in how successful the two teams
were in raising capital.

Treatment Variable

The treatment variable in this experiment was:

1)   If the founders of Instant Tutor were an all-male or all-female team

Covariate Variable

The covariate variable in this experiment was:

1)  If the investor was a man or a woman

A covariate is the characteristics of the participants of a study that can affect the
dependent variables, in this case gender (Fan, 2012). Since the gender  of the
participating investors were not randomly assigned, the gender of the investor becomes
a covariate instead of a treatment variable in this study.

                                  17
Dummy Variables

The following dummy variables  were created and used when analysing the data:

   1)  Financed

   2)  GenderTeam

    3)  GenderInvestor

The dummy variable Financed takes the value of 0 if 0 SEK was invested in Instant
Tutor and 1 if the investor chose to invest any amount greater than 0 SEK. GenderTeam
is  0 for the  all-female team and 1 for the all-male team and GenderInvestor is 0 if the
investor is a  woman and 1 if the investor is a man.

5.2.3.    Limitations in the Data

There are four main limitations in the collected data,  which  possibly  influences the
results in  this study. Firstly, in absolute terms, a sample of 77 participants is rather
small, which could  affect the statistical power of the results of the study. Moreover,
roughly 25% of the respondents were women,  which potentially affects how significant
the results  are when  comparing male and female investor  decisions. With more time at
hand, a larger sample could have been collected through an increased response rate.
However,  since  Venture Capital is a male-dominated industry, it would still have been
difficult to increase the ratio  of female-to-male investors.

Secondly, even though the respondents were asked to fill out  the survey independently
and only consider the information received together with the pitch  deck, many of the
participants work for Venture  Capital firms and their responses might have been
influenced by their companies’  investment guidelines.

Thirdly, the knowledge and experience of the investors within the sample differs quite
drastically. For instance, the experience ranged from two months  up to more than 30
years. Also, the position within the Venture Capital firm varied between a first-year
associate up to  CEO and Partners. This could also have had an impact on the outcome
as investors with different length of  experience observe risk as well as opportunities
differently. Yet,  it is still representable for the Swedish venture funding landscape.

Lastly, the pitch deck and survey were sent out via email, and the investors could freely
choose  when and  where  to complete the experiment.  Hence,  they might have been
disturbed or stressed out  when completing the study and not have  been able  to  examine
the opportunity as thoroughly as they usually do.

                                  18
6.    Results and  Analysis

As previously mentioned in the Statistical Method  section, there were a total  of 81
participants, whereof 77 answers were applicable  after having excluded the answers that
did not meet the criteria to participate. The dependent variables in the survey were
based on the 7-step Likert scale, except amount  invested which ranged from 0  to
1 000 000 SEK, with 100 000 SEK intervals. On the Likert scale, a score of 1 was the
lowest and least positive, and a 7 was the highest and most positive. In this section, the
data has been divided into different types of subgroups, either  based on  the gender of
the entrepreneur, the gender of the investor,  or both, in order to test the different
hypotheses. The Mann-Whitney U  test  has  been tested on four different levels of
significance, 1%, 5%, 10% and 20%.

6.1.    Results:  Hypothesis 1

H1: The  startup with an all-male team will on average raise more capital than the all-
female team,  and the probability of receiving funding will be greater for the all-male
team than for the all-female team.

         Figure 1: Average Amount Invested in the Different Pitch Decks

The following figure examines the average amount invested in the  female  pitch  deck and
             the  male  pitch  deck, regardless of the gender of the investor.

The figure above clearly proves  part of  the first hypothesis wrong, as the all-female
team behind Instant Tutor raised a significantly larger amount of capital on average than
the identical pitch deck with all-male entrepreneurs. To be more precise, the female
team received an average investment of 495 122 SEK, while the male team only raised
355 556 SEK on average, and this difference  of 139  566  SEK  is statistically significant
at the  20% level, see  Appendix  1.

                                  19
In order to examine  this phenomenon in greater depth, the following table, which
analyses the distribution of capital among the male and female team of entrepreneurs
and the number of projects that have been financed, is used.

                    Table 1: Frequencies of Financed Projects

 The table shows the percentage  of projects that were financed for the male and female
team, where Financed is a dummy variable where 0=0 SEK and 1= investment > 0 SEK
    and GenderTeam is a dummy variable where 0=female team and 1=male team.

Looking at the number of projects that received zero funding, it  becomes  evident that
47% of the investors  decided  not to finance the male team while only 24% of the
investors chose not to finance the female team. Thus, the probability of receiving
funding is greater for the female team than for the male team. The regression below
looks further into the male and female teams’ probability of  being financed.

     Table 2: Regression of Projects Financed and Gender of Entrepreneurs

        Linear regression of dummy variables Financed, where  0=0 SEK and
  1= investment  >  0 SEK, and GenderTeam, where 0=female team and 1=male team.

Table 2 shows a linear regression of the dummy variables Financed (0=0 SEK and
1= investment >  0 SEK) and GenderTeam (0=female team and 1=male team). The
constant 0,756 indicates that  almost 76% of the investors that received the female pitch
deck  decided  to invest an amount between 100 000 SEK and 1 000 000 SEK. The
coefficient for GenderTeam  of  -0,228  means  that,  when the team is all-male, the
proportion of projects  that are financed  is  reduced by 0,228,  and thus only about 53% of
the investors  that received the male pitch deck chose to invest an amount between
100 000 SEK and 1 000 000 SEK. Hence, the  probability of being financed is 22,8
percentage points lower for  the male team than for the female team and this difference
is statistically  significant at the  5% level.

                                  20
As previously observed, the female team is more likely to be financed  than the male
team. In the figure below, all projects that were  denied funding have been  excluded
from the analysis in order to analyse  whether  the projects  that  did receive funding have
raised equal amounts of capital or not.

           Figure 2: Average Amount Invested  in the Financed Projects

   The following figure examines the average amount invested in the male and female
                              projects that did receive  funding.

Looking  at the figure above, it can be observed that when the projects that did not
receive financing  are excluded from the analysis, the difference in capital raised
between the male and female team is reduced. Out of the projects that did receive
funding, the male team received slightly more capital on average than the female team.
In the regression below, the difference in capital raised by the financed projects is
analysed further.

    Table 3:  Regression of Amount Invested and Gender of Entrepreneurs for
                             Financed Projects

    Linear regression of amount invested and dummy variable GenderTeam, where
      0=female team and 1=male team, for the projects that did receive funding.

                                  21
In the regression in  Table 3, the projects, both male and female, that did not receive any
funding  has been excluded.  As  a result,  the sample now consists of  50 projects that have
received an amount between 100  000 SEK and 1 000 000 SEK. When the team is all-
female, the project  receives  an average of  654 839 SEK in funding. When the team is
all-male, the project receives 18 846 SEK more, which is equal to 2,9% more funding
than the female team. However, this difference is not  statistically significant. Hence, the
projects that are in fact  financed have received an  almost equal amount of capital on
average regardless of gender.

In conclusion, hypothesis 1 is false. This is partly  due to  the  female entrepreneurs
having  raised  a larger amount of capital on average,  as observed in  Figure 1, and partly
a result of  the probability of receiving funding  being  22,8 percentage points higher for
the female team than the male team, as  analysed in Table 2. However, the  absolute
difference  in amount of capital raised  depends on the probability of getting funded,
rather than a difference in amount of capital  received  when funded.

6.2.    Analysis:  So  Why Does the Female Team Raise  More
      Capital?

According to the theory of Traditional Finance, investors are rational and should not
show  any sort of bias in their  decision-making process. With this in mind, both teams
should in theory raise an equal amount of capital. However,  this is not  the case. The
results show that female entrepreneurs raise more  capital on average  than male
entrepreneurs,  as they are more likely to receive funding.  In fact, the gender of the team
explains 4,4%  of the variance in the projects’ probability of being financed,  see  Table  2.
This value  of adjusted R-Squared is quite high in the context, as  both the adjusted R-
Squared and  coefficient  should be zero in the absence of gender bias.

Venture funding  is seen as the engine to economic growth, and all entrepreneurs should
have an equal chance of succeeding, regardless of gender. However, this is not the case.
Previous  studies have shown that investors are biased in favour of male entrepreneurs
who  raise  significantly  larger  amounts of capital than female entrepreneurs. This
experiment also sheds light on gender bias, but in the opposite direction. So, why this
sudden change in subject of gender bias?

When analysing this phenomenon, several recent  events  could potentially have had an
impact on the investors’ final decision. In late 2017, the Metoo movement shed light on
gender bias in general and sexual harassment and assault in the workplace in particular.
In the aftermath of this movement, both the media  and large corporations have
emphasised how prevalent the issue of gender bias and gender discrimination is.
Sweden in particular has tried to adjust and change for the  better, which could
potentially  have resulted in overcompensation, and in this context,  it  refers to  investing
more  frequently  in female entrepreneurs.

                                  22
Furthermore, would the findings be the same if it was real capital from the investors’
own pockets rather than hypothetical capital? For instance, take the refugee crisis,
where a majority of the Swedish population wanted  to help the people in need, act
responsibly and help the less fortunate. However, once  it became a reality and refugee
homes and shelters were built next door, some people completely turned and changed
their mind. Could a similar example explain this sudden change in gender bias, where
the investors publicly support the female entrepreneurs, but when it comes down to  a
real money investment, it may show similar results to the previous studies, where the
male entrepreneurs receive significantly more capital.

In addition, Sweden is a more  gender equal country than the  United States, where many
of the previous studies have been carried out, which  could  explain  why female
entrepreneurs are doing better in Sweden than in the  US in general. Moreover, even if
these recent events and the usage of hypothetical capital could explain  female
entrepreneurs’ sudden success in raising capital, the ideal outcome and explanation
would be  that Sweden,  as a country,  is changing for the better, eliminating gender bias
in the long-run.

6.3.    Results: Hypothesis 2

H2: The female investors will  on average allocate a relatively larger amount of capital
to the female entrepreneurs than male investors. However, both men and women will
invest a larger amount of capital on average in the male entrepreneurs.

In section 6.1, it was observed that the female entrepreneurs on average raised  more
capital than the male entrepreneurs. In this section, the analysis focuses on if, and how,
male and female investors  invest differently.

       Figure 3: Average Respondent Scores for Male and Female Investors

   The figure  below shows the average respondent scores to the question “How much
                            would you be willing to invest?”.

                                  23
Figure 3  partly supports the statement in  hypothesis  2. Female investors have on
average allocated a larger amount of capital to the all-female team of entrepreneurs than
male investors. However, the figure also shows that both male and female investors
have invested more capital in the female team than  in the male team. Consequently, the
second part of the hypothesis is false. Not only  have the female investors  allocated a
larger amount of capital to the female entrepreneurs than the male investors, the female
investors have also allocated a larger amount of capital to the all-male team than the
male investors. Hence, the female investors have on average invested  larger amounts of
capital than the male investors.

The linear regressions  in Table 4  further investigate female to female, male to female,
female to male and male to male  investments.

 Table 4: Regression of Amount Invested and  Gender of Investor for the Male and
                            Female Team

    Linear regressions for amount invested and gender of investor,  if dummy variable
   GenderTeam=0  (left table)  and GenderTeam=1  (right table). GenderInvestor is a
           dummy variable where 0= female investor and 1= male investor.

The linear regressions above show how the gender of the investor affects the amount
invested in the male and female team. The average female to female  investment  is
557 143 SEK. For male to female  investments, this amount decreases by 74 790 SEK to
482 353 SEK as seen in the first  regression above.  Consequently, the first part of the
hypothesis  is  true,  as  female investors do invest more in female entrepreneurs than male
investors  do. The average female to male investment is 450 000 SEK and the average
male to male  investment is 319 231 SEK, which is 130 769 SEK less, as seen in the
second regression above. Hence, as previously mentioned, the second part of the
hypothesis is false as both  male and female  investors have invested more in the all-
female team than in the  all-male team. Even though  both the male and female investors
have invested numerically more in the all-female team, these differences in  invested
amounts are not statistically significant. A larger sample of participating investors,
especially more female investors, would be necessary  to find statistically significant
differences  between  male and female  investment decisions.

                                  24
6.4.    Analysis: In-Group Bias and Gender of Investor

The study has so  far  concluded that  the female investors  have  invested a larger amount
of capital in the female entrepreneurs than the male investors  have. In addition, the
female to female investment was on average 557 143 SEK while the male to male
investment was on average 319 231 SEK. Hence, this result is in accordance with
Rudman and Goodwin’s (2004) findings that women’s in-group bias is stronger than
men’s in-group bias.

Furthermore,  female investors not only invest more in female entrepreneurs than male
investors, but they also invest more in the male entrepreneurs, despite the fact that
women are seen  as more risk averse than men.  An interpretation of this is that female
investors are more positive,  and  male investors are more pessimistic  and reluctant to
invest. This investor behaviour is to some extent  in line with classical gender
stereotypes,  where women are perceived as kind  and men are perceived as aggressive.

6.5.    Results: Hypothesis 3

H3: Both  the  male and female investors will see larger potential in Instant Tutor and its
team when the entrepreneurs are male than when they are female.

As previously mentioned, both male and female investor have invested more capital in
the all-female team than in the all-male team. In this section, the possible explanations
to why the female team has raised more capital than the male team will be further
analysed.

Table 5: Median Data for Differences for Female to Female, Female to Male, Male
                     to Female and Male to Male Investments

  The table contains median data for the respondents’ answers to the survey questions.
  Statistical significance of Mann-Whitney  U  test is at 1% (****), 5% (***), 10% (**)
           and 20% (*) significance levels for no difference in median score.

Table 5 first examines the difference in median  scores between investments made by the
female investors for both  pitch decks, followed by the same comparison for the male
investor in the three last columns. However, since the median does not tell the whole

                                  25
truth, the  mean differences between female  to female, female to male, male to female
and male to male investments are presented  in Appendix  2, in order to give a fairer
representation, and  provide a point of reference,  for  the differences in all gender groups.
The median table is presented in order to be able to run the Mann-Whitney  U  test and
investigate whether the differences in  scores are of statistical significance or  not, see
Appendix  3.

First of all, examining the female  investors, they saw a higher potential  in the
entrepreneurs when they were solely female in comparison to  when they were solely
male. However, the opposite was observed when looking at the potential  in the business
idea, where the female investors preferred the male business idea, and the difference in
preference was statistically significant at the  10% level  according to the Mann-Whitney
U  test. This proves part of the hypothesis to be true as the female investor see higher
potential in the business idea  when the team consists of only men.

Second of all, looking at the male investors, it can be observed that,  on average, they
ranked the potential in the entrepreneurs as well as a potential in the business idea
higher when the team was solely female. The mean difference was 0,59 and 0,94
respectively in advantage  of  the female team, see Appendix  2. The median  showed
similar results with a higher score for the  female team in both the potential in the
entrepreneurs and business idea, with a higher score of 1,5 and 1 respectively. The
median difference of 1,5 was statistically significant at the  5% level and the difference
of 1 for the potential in the business idea at a level of  10%. Hence, the null hypothesis
that there will be no statistically significant  difference in median scores for the potential
seen in the entrepreneurs and the business idea can be rejected at the  5% and  10% level
respectively. However,  this proves part of the hypothesis wrong as  it predicted that male
investors would see a higher overall potential in Instant Tutor when the entrepreneurs
were male.

In order to further investigate the difference in perception of the male and female team,
the qualitative responses completed by all the investors as part of the survey are
examined in the  following table.

                         Table 6: Qualitative Responses

   The table contains data for all investors’  qualitative survey answers.  The far-right
       column shows the difference in qualitative responses in percentage points.

                                  26
The table above contains qualitative  responses regarding the male  and female pitch
decks. When the founding team consisted of only  men,  5,56% of the respondents made
a comment about the  lack of diversity in the team. However, not one single investor
made a comment regarding  diversity for the all-female team.

In general, investors were more negatively inclined towards the male  team than the
female team. More comments about risk were made when the founders were male, and
the male team also received more comments about lacking relevant experience as well
as negative comments about the business idea than the female team. Looking at the
positive comments about the male and female  team, the investors were  more positive
when evaluating the female pitch deck than when commenting on the male pitch deck.
The investors were more positively inclined towards the experience of the female team
members and the female team’s business idea than they were towards the male team,
even though  the entrepreneurs’ backgrounds as well as the business idea were identical
in the two pitch decks.

To conclude, both the Mann-Whitney  U test and the qualitative responses indicate that
the investors,  regardless  of gender, saw  higher potential in the female  team, with  one
exception being that the female investors preferred the business idea when the team was
all-male.  Hence, hypothesis 3 is  partially not supported.

6.6.    Analysis: Why is Instant Tutor  a More Attractive Startup
      When it is Run by Women?

Instant Tutor, the solution for quick access tutoring just when you need it, is a business
idea put together with two different teams behind it,  who  are  perceived very differently
by the investors. The entire startup,  and pitch deck  that  the investors received,  is exactly
the same, except for the first name and  picture of the three entrepreneurs. How is it then
possible that the two startups and teams  are perceived so differently by the investors?

According to Malmström,  Johansson and Wincent (2017), Swedish venture capitalists
have produced a stereotypical image of female entrepreneurs as having the opposite
characteristics than those required to be  a good entrepreneur. Furthermore, the venture
capitalists  rated male entrepreneurs as promising and with  great  potential, while the
female entrepreneurs were perceived as inexperienced, and  with less  potential. Two
years later, this experiment has generated the exact opposite result, where the
participating venture capitalists and Angel Investors have rated the female team of
entrepreneurs significantly higher than the male team.

Instant Tutor is  an education and tech company. The combination of education and tech
was chosen  because this industry is considered to be rather  gender neutral. However,
because of the focus on education, there is still a risk that the participating investors
have perceived the  industry as female-dominated, which could explain why the female

                                  27
entrepreneurs were preferred over the male entrepreneurs.  This is in line with Hebert’s
(2018) findings, where female entrepreneurs raise more capital than male entrepreneurs
in an industry dominated by female-led ventures.

Another study that contradicts the results in this thesis, is the Columbia Business School
Case Study Heidi vs. Howard. In the study,  students strongly preferred Howard  over
Heidi even though  they had rated them as equally competent. In our conducted
experiment, both the male and female  investors rated the female team higher than the
male team even though they had identical backgrounds and experience. What can
explain this sudden  change in investor preference? As discussed in section 6.2, one
possible explanation is that  investors are becoming more and more aware of the uneven
distribution of capital between male-  and female-led startups, and  as a result, investors
react more positively towards female entrepreneurs. For instance, in the experiment, it
was only the male  team that received comments about lack of diversity in the team even
though the female team was as homogenous as the male  one. Investors might be looking
for investment opportunities where the team is different from the predominate all-male
team, which could explain why the female team was more successful.

                Figure 4: The Two Teams Behind Instant Tutor

 The figure shows the two different teams presented on slide 3 in the pitch decks. These
  pictures and first names are the only difference between the two, 11 slides long, pitch
         decks. The full versions of the pitch decks can be found in Appendix  7.

Above is a visual representation of the only difference between the two pitch decks. The
names and  pictures have been chosen to reduce the risk of the investors being
influenced by any kind of bias except  gender bias. However, there is still a risk that the
pictures might have influenced the outcome  of the study. Even if the age and ethnicity
are  very similar between the two teams, one explanation to why the teams are perceived
differently by the investors could be the difference in apparel. In the female team, it  is
only Sarah that wears a suit, but  it is not too evident. In the male team, both Eric and
Carl wear a suit, along with a tie. A  more casual dress code is sometimes preferred by
venture capitalists as it shows that the entrepreneurs do not hide behind their fancy
clothes, which could also explain why the male team received more negative comments,
for instance, they were called “Wantrepreneurs” by one investor. A more casual way of
dressing could further express a  more entrepreneurial spirit, take for instance Steve Jobs
launching the iPhone  back in 2007.

                                  28
7.    Implications and Conclusion

7.1.    Implications of the Findings

According to the results from this study, female entrepreneurs raise more capital than
male entrepreneurs, and investors rate  female entrepreneurs as having more potential
than  male entrepreneurs.  As previously mentioned, these results point in a different
direction than the consistent findings of previous studies and reports, where male
entrepreneurs are favoured. In other words, the results of this study do not comply with
what the industry  has looked like in the past. There are two  possible explanations for
our findings. The  first explanation being that investors are overcompensating and
investing more capital in the female entrepreneurs than they would  do in a real-life
scenario where they would  be investing real money. The second explanation being that
the results  of this study are an indication of the future of the Swedish venture funding
landscape. If the latter is true, this means that gender bias in startup  funding  is  not as
prevalent today as it has been in the past. This is something for investors to constantly
keep in mind, to not overcompensate for previous wrongdoing and biased decision
making, but rather work towards a fairer funding landscape with equal opportunities to
succeed, regardless of gender.

7.2.    Future Research

This study has examined whether  gender bias  exists  in favour of male entrepreneurs  in
Swedish  venture funding. Furthermore, it has investigated the potential impact the
gender of the investor has on  the allocation of capital between  ventures. With more time
at hand, it would have been possible to collect data from a larger sample of investors.
The outcome of a larger study could have resulted  in greater explanatory effect as to
why investors favour female entrepreneurs,  and the results would to a larger extent be
representative of the Swedish venture funding landscape. Moreover, it would be
interesting to conduct a similar experiment focusing  on a different industry or sector to
further investigate whether gender bias is  more prevalent in specific industries  that are
male-  or female-dominated.

Furthermore, future studies could have the investor evaluate more than just one pitch
deck. For instance, one pitch deck with an all-male team, one with a mixed team and
one with an  all-female team,  to see how the investors allocate capital among several
projects. However, it would then be important to take into consideration the danger of
having the investor realise the motive behind the experiment. Though, being able to
conduct such  a study would result in an even clearer picture  of how the investors rank
investment opportunities  in regards  to  the gender of the entrepreneur.

                                  29
Lastly, it would be highly interesting to conduct research where the factor of using
hypothetical capital is eliminated. Would it be possible to  have the investor believe that
it was an actual investment  with  real capital? If so, it might produce an even more
accurate picture of  what the current venture funding landscape in Sweden looks like,
and,  at the same time,  exclude the  possible overcompensation effect.

7.3.    Conclusion

Access to venture funding is essential for  startups  in order to grow and prosper.
Research shows that the allocation of  startup capital  is significantly skewed in favour of
male entrepreneurs. “Life is not fair”  as discussed in the introduction of this  thesis,  has
been highly applicable to the venture funding landscape in Sweden. Female
entrepreneurs have constantly been at a disadvantage, and only received a small portion
of the total capital allocated to startups. Neither Traditional Finance theories,  nor the
quality of the business idea or superior performance,  can  accurately  explain the uneven
distribution of startup capital. Instead, it seems  like investors’ bias is the answer to why
the allocation of capital is skewed.  According to previous studies, gender stereotypes
have  influenced investors to see  female entrepreneurs  as less qualified than male
entrepreneurs, as women are perceived as lacking the most relevant qualities needed in
order to succeed  as an  entrepreneur.  A  significant amount of attention has been paid to
gender inequalities in the last couple of years, which has shed light on female
entrepreneurs’ disadvantage in raising startup capital.

To investigate  what the venture funding landscape looks like today in Sweden, and
whether entrepreneurs struggle with gender bias, we asked the  following research
questions in the beginning of this thesis:

Is access to venture funding in Sweden affected by gender bias in favour of male
entrepreneurs? Are male and female investors equally biased?

The results of this study show that there  is no gender bias in Swedish venture funding
that is  in favour of male entrepreneurs. Instead, the outcome of this experiment indicates
that investors are biased in favour of women. The female team of entrepreneurs was
more successful in raising capital than the male team as they raised more capital on
average, where the difference between the two teams was statistically significant at the
20% level.  The reason why the female team raised more capital was because they had  a
22,8 percentage points higher probability of being funded  in the first place.  In addition,
both the male and female investors preferred the female  team over the male team.
However, just  like the  theory of in-group gender bias states, the female investors had a
stronger preference for the female team than the male investors had for the male team.
Thus, female investors seem to be more gender biased than male investors. However,
due to the  small sample of female respondents, this result is not statistically significant.

                                  30
Moreover, it is important to remember that the participants in this study were investing
hypothetical capital.

In conclusion, even though our study contradicts previous research, gender bias still
appears to exist in the Swedish venture funding landscape. This is something for
investors to constantly keep in  mind when making investment decisions.  To not
overcompensate for previous gender bias favouring men,  but instead  work towards  a
fairer funding landscape with equal opportunities to succeed, regardless of gender.

                                  31
8.    References

Bordalo, P.  et al.  (2016)  Stereotypes.  The Quarterly Journal of Economics,  1753–1794.
   http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/shleifer/files/stereotypes_bcgs_dec12.pdf?m=145011
  7659
Brooks, A. W.  et al.  (2014)  Investors Prefer Entrepreneurial Ventures Pitched by
   Attractive Men.  PNAS, National Academy of Sciences,
   https://www.pnas.org/content/111/12/4427
Cambridge Dictionary, Stereotype,  Retrieved  2019-03-26  from
   https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/stereotype
Cremades, A.  (2018,  Sep 25)  How Angel Investors  and Angel Groups Work.  Forbes,
   Forbes Magazine,  www.forbes.com/sites/alejandrocremades/2018/09/25/how-angel-
   investors-and-angel-groups-work/#2fa0824076dc
Deeb, G.  (2016,  July 18)  What Exactly Is Venture Capital?  Forbes, Forbes Magazine,
   www.forbes.com/sites/georgedeeb/2016/07/18/what-exactly-is-venture-
   capital/#2e2e5ccb2501
Fan, S.  (2012)  Covariate,  Encyclopedia of Research Design  285-287. Thousand Oaks.
Ewens, M.  and Townsend, R.  Are Early Stage Investors Biased Against Women?
   (2018).  Journal of Financial Economics (JFE),  Forthcoming.
   https://ssrn.com/abstract=2953011
Heilman, M.  E.  (2001)  Description and Prescription: How Gender Stereotypes Prevent
   Women’s Ascent Up  the Organizational Ladder.  Journal of Social Issues  657-674
   Vol 57, No 4.
   http://www.business.uwm.edu/gdrive/Ragins_B/Diversity%20Course%20BUSADM
  %20441/Readings/Heilman,%202001%20Gender%20Stereotypes%20(Grads).pdf
Hebert, C.  (2018)  Mind the Gap: Gender Stereotypes and Entrepreneurs’  Financing
Hinchliffe, E.  (2019, Jan 28).  In 2018, All Female Founders Put Together Got $10
   Billion Less Than Juul.  Fortune, Fortune.  http://fortune.com/2019/01/28/funding-
   female-founders-2018/
Kanze, D.  et al.  (2017, Sept 20)  Male and Female Entrepreneurs Get Asked Different
   Questions by VCs  -  and It Affects How Much Funding They Get.  Harvard Business
   Review.  https://hbr.org/2017/06/male-and-female-entrepreneurs-get-asked-different-
   questions-by-vcs-and-it-affects-how-much-funding-they-get
Katsarou, M.  (2019, Feb 20)  Women & the Leadership Labyrinth Heidi vs Howard.
    Leadership Psychology Institute.
   http://www.leadershippsychologyinstitute.com/women-the-leadership-labyrinth-
   howard-vs-heidi/
Lee, M.  and Huang,  L.  (2018)  Gender Bias, Social Impact Framing, and Evaluation of
   Entrepreneurial Ventures.  Organization Science  29, no. 1
Malmström,  M.  Johansson  J.  &  Wincent, J.  (2017, May 17)  We Recorded VCs’
   Conversations and Analyzed How Differently They Talked About Female

                                  32
   Entrepreneurs.  Harvard Business Review.  https://hbr.org/2017/05/we-recorded-vcs-
   conversations-and-analyzed-how-differently-they-talk-about-female-entrepreneurs
Rudman, L. A.& Goodwin, S. A. (2004). Gender Differences in Automatic In-Group
   Bias:  Why Do Women  Like Women More Than Men Like Men?  Journal of
   Personality and Social Psychology,  87(4), 494-509.
   https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2c44/14cde6b6a011e9f4910e6389d658278e3a7a.pdf
Zider, B.  (2014,  Aug 1)  How Venture Capital Works.  Harvard Business Review,
   https://hbr.org/1998/11/how-venture-capital-works

                                  33
9.    Appendices

Appendix 1: Linear Regression

      Linear Regression of Amount Invested and Gender of Entrepreneurs

   Linear regression of amount invested and GenderTeam, where 0=female team and
                                1=male team.

Appendix 2: Mean Differences for Female to Female, Female to Male, Male to
Female and Male to Male Investments

 Mean Data for Differences for Female to Female, Female to Male, Male to Female
                        and Male to Male Investments

The table contains mean data for the respondents’ answers to the survey questions, used
for comparison and reference to  the median scores in the Mann-Whitney U  test in Table
                                      5  in  the thesis.

                                  34
Appendix  3: Mann-Whitney U  tests

Below is the SPSS output for the Mann-Whitney U tests for all dependent variables.

Table 1: Amount Invested               Table 2: Persuasiveness of Entrepreneurs

Table 3: Likelihood to Invest               Table  4:  Potential  in Business Idea

                                  35
Table 5: Logic and Intuitiveness         Table 6:  Potential of  Entrepreneurs

Appendix 4: Frequency of Responses for Dependent Variables

                          Figure 1: Likelihood to Invest

  The figure contains the frequencies for the  investors’ likelihood to invest in the male
  and female pitch deck.  The X-axis shows the respondents’  score on the 7-step Likert
          scale, and the Y-axis shows the number of  responses for  each score.

                                  36
                          Figure 2: Amount Invested

The figure contains the frequencies for the amount invested in the male and female pitch
 deck. The X-axis shows the respondents’  investment, and the Y-axis shows the number
                      of responses for each 100  000 SEK interval.

                  Figure 3:  Persuasiveness of the Entrepreneurs

 The figure contains the  frequencies for the investors’ perception of the persuasiveness
   of the entrepreneurs behind  the male and female pitch deck.  The X-axis shows the
   respondents’  score  on the 7-step  Likert scale, and the Y-axis shows the number of
                               responses for each score.

                                  37
                     Figure 4: Potential of the Entrepreneurs

 The figure contains the frequencies for the  investors’ perception of the potential of the
      entrepreneurs behind  the male and female pitch deck.  The X-axis shows the
   respondents’  score on the 7-step Likert scale, and the Y-axis shows the number of
                              responses for each score.

                       Figure 5: Potential of  Business Idea

 The figure contains the frequencies for the investors’ perception  of the potential of the
  business idea in the male and female pitch deck.  The X-axis shows the respondents’
score on the 7-step Likert scale, and the Y-axis shows the number of  responses for each
                                        score.

                                  38
                  Figure 6: Logic and Intuitiveness of Pitch Deck

    The  figure contains the frequencies for the investors’ perception of the logic and
intuitiveness of the male and female pitch deck.  The X-axis shows the respondens’  score
on the 7-step Likert scale, and the Y-axis shows the number of responses for each score.

                                  39
Appendix 5: Survey Questions

The instructions and questions below were included in  the questionnaire sent out to all
participating investors. In questions 2 and 5  in Part 1 of the questionnaire the names of
the entrepreneurs depended on which  version of the pitch deck, male or female, the
respondent had received.

Instructions:

§   We understand that you normally base your  investment decisions on more
   information than  just the company pitch deck, but remember that this is just an
   experiment

§   Only  base your answers to the questionnaire on the information included in the pitch
   deck

§   Assume that you  have no  personal  economic  constraints  keeping you  from  investing
   in Instant Tutor

Part 1:

1)   How likely are you to invest in Instant Tutor? (Likert Scale 1-7)

2)   Martin, Erik and  Carl (Moa, Sarah and Pauline) at Instant Tutor are looking to raise
    3 MSEK, of which 2 MSEK has been raised so far. How much would you be
    willing to invest? (0  -  1 000 000 SEK  with 100 000 SEK intervals)

3)   What did you base your answer on in the previous question? (Free  text)

4)   How persuasive did you find the entrepreneurs to be? (Likert Scale 1-7)

5)   How much  potential do you  see in the entrepreneurs Martin, Erik and Carl (Moa,
    Sarah  and Pauline)? (Likert Scale 1-7)

6)   How much potential do you see in the business  idea? (Likert  Scale 1-7)

7)   How logic and intuitive did you find the pitch deck to be? (Likert Scale 1-7)

Part 2:

1)  How old are you? (20 years old to +70 years old in  ten-year  intervals)

2)   Are you a man or a woman? (Man/Woman/Other)

3)   For how long have you been investing in startups  and/or private companies? (Free
    Text)

                                  40
Appendix  6: Email Template  (in Swedish)

The following  email was sent out to all participants that were asked to participate in the
experiment,  along with the pitch deck and questionnaire. In the email,  we emphasised
that the pitch deck was put together for the purpose of the experiment.

Hej,

Vi är två studenter på Handelshögskolan i Stockholm som skriver vår kandidatuppsats
inom finans. Inom ramen för vårt arbete kommer vi att genomföra ett experiment  för att
undersöka hur tillgången till startkapital för entreprenörer ser ut i Sverige. Mer detaljer
kan vi tyvärr inte ge för att undvika att avslöja syftet med experimentet.

Anledningen till att vi kontaktar dig är för på bästa sätt lyckas återskapa det  svenska
investerarlandskapet. Vi hoppas att du vill delta i vår undersökning och hjälpa till  att
skapa en tydligare bild av svenska startups tillgång till extern finansiering.  Vi skulle
verkligen uppskatta din hjälp.

Undersökningen består av ett Pitch Deck  och ett frågeformulär med 10 frågor. Det tar
4–5  minuter att delta i undersökningen. Då det  här är ett experiment är beslutsunderlaget
för dig som investerare komprimerat till  endast en Pitch, och vi hoppas att du har
överseende för detta.

Du hittar vår  Pitch Deck bifogad som PDF. När du har gått igenom underlaget följer du
länken nedan för att besvara frågorna i det korta formuläret:

Om du är nyfiken på syftet med vår undersökning så kan du som sista del i formuläret
fylla i din mailadress för att få ta  del av resultatet senare i vår. Stort tack för all din hjälp
och att du tar dig tid!

Hoppas du får en  fortsatt härlig dag!

Med vänliga hälsningar,

Jacob Cederberg och Hanna Louise Forsman

                                  41
Appendix 7: Instant Tutor Pitch Deck

The following pitch deck was sent out  to the participating investors. There are two
different  versions of slide 3 of the pitch deck containing one male and one female team
of entrepreneurs.

 Above are the two different versions of slide three  which show the two different teams
                                 behind Instant Tutor.

                                  42
43