The Attitude Behind the Decisions:
    Sustainability within Asset Management

                                               1 2
                      Laurén, Elin and Norberg, Ellen

                               Stockholm School of Economics
                                     May 2019

                            ABSTRACT
  The aim of this study was to investigate how mutual fund managers view sustainability and what factors
 affect that view. By compiling a new dataset consisting of responses from 33 asset managers, the attitude
 toward sustainability was found to be affected by nine variables: Work history, Employees, Sustainability
       rating, Type of investors, The common people’s opinion, Female employees, Internationality,
  Competitors’ stance and Pressure from competitors. A larger share of the asset managers believed that
  their fund avoids negative publicity, rather than gains positive publicity, by incorporating sustainability
  into its operations. Furthermore, it was most common to use a positive or negative screening strategy to
  work sustainably, even though the asset managers themselves believed Engagement to have the largest
                                              potential impact.

                           Keywords: Sustainability, CSR, ESG, SRI
        ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Acknowledgments:
       We would like to thank our tutor Marcus Opp at the Department of Finance at the Stockholm
         School of Economics for his guidance during the process of writing this thesis. We would
                      also like to thank our tutor Lingyi Lu at Söderberg and Partners.

        1
       23875@student.hhs.se
        2
       23783@student.hhs.se
Table of contents

1. Introduction 2

2. Previous literature 4
   2.1 Theoretical framework 4
       2.1.1 The definition and view of sustainability 4
       2.1.2 Sustainable and responsible investments 5
       2.1.3 The human psyche 6
   2.2 Previous research findings and hypothesis development 7
       2.2.1 Hypotheses development 9

3. Data and methodology 11
   3.1 Sample collection 11
       3.1.1 Sample selection bias 11
   3.2 Methodology 12
   3.3 Dependent and independent variables 12
   3.4 Descriptive statistics 13

4. Results 15
   4.1 Regression results 15
   4.2 Different views of sustainability 18
   4.3 The disparity between opinions and operations 19

5. Implications and conclusion 21
   5.1 Limitations and future research 24

6. References 25

7. Appendix 27
   7.1 Survey Questionnaire 27
   7.2 Other tables from the regression analysis 33

                                    1
1. Introduction

The last couple of years sustainability has gained more and more attention, especially in
Sweden, which is one of the highest rated countries when it comes to taking responsibility for
its impact on the rest of the world (Yale 2018). Since the operation of different organizations
often has a significant effect on society as a whole, Environmental, social and governance
(ESG) and Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) have also become more popular concepts
lately. ESG specifically concerns sustainability within the asset management industry, while
CSR concerns the sustainability work of companies that funds can invest in.

Most previous research has focused on the CSR-ratings of businesses, something which is
much more tangible than the definition of the concept or the underlying attitude toward it.
This is especially true within the asset management field where the return is one of the most
influential measurements of success and ESG is barely mentioned on its own. This study,
therefore, focuses on the attitude behind the decisions to incorporate sustainability within the
field of asset management. It is, after all, humans that make these decisions. Thus, the
guiding research question is: How do mutual fund managers, offering their services to
Swedish clients, view sustainability and what factors affect that view?

Like previously mentioned, not much research has been conducted within this specific area.
To fulfill the aim of the study, a new dataset, which was based on a survey distributed to asset
managers, had to be compiled. In total, 92 funds were identified to fulfill the criteria set for
the study. The survey was sent out by e-mail to the responsible asset manager for each mutual
fund with the promise of complete anonymity in exchange for honest answers.

To determine the attitude toward sustainability, several statistical tests were performed. A
regression analysis, in accordance with Liang and Renneboog's study from 2016, determined
that attitude was affected by nine different variables: Work history, Employees, Sustainability
rating, Type of investors, The common people's opinion, Female employees, Internationality,
Competitors' stance and Pressure from competitors (see section 3.3 for a more extensive
description).

                                    2
The beta values of the standardized coefficients showed that the previous work history of the
asset manager (whether he or she had previously worked with sustainability in any way) had
the biggest effect on his or her attitude. The empirical evidence also showed that the extent to
which the asset manager believed that the common people cared about sustainability and how
international the fund was also had a significant effect on the attitude. If he or she thought
that the public cared more about sustainability, he or she found sustainability to be more
important. The same was also true for the extent of internationality.

Furthermore, descriptive statistics showed that a larger share of the asset managers believed
that by incorporating sustainability, they avoid negative consequences, rather than gain
positive benefits. The reason for this can be that the traditional view of CSR, which interprets
the concept as philanthropic rather than value creating, might still dominate.

Additionally, there was also a disparity between the operation of the funds and what strategy
the asset managers believed was best in regards to sustainability. An Engagement strategy
was thought to be best, but most of the funds in practice used either a Positive screening
strategy or an Exclusion strategy. The reason for this could be that it takes more resources to
be an active owner and change a firm from within, rather than just choosing to invest in
organizations that already score high on ESG characteristics, or simply avoid investing in
those with low scores. Asset managers might also state that an Engagement strategy is best
since this, in reality, means that they can keep firms that perform financially well but
underdeliver in regards to ESG in their portfolio by claiming that they are in the process of
changing them.

                                    3
2. Previous literature

2.1 Theoretical framework

2.1.1 The definition and view of sustainability

The aim of this study is, as previously mentioned, to investigate how asset managers view
sustainability and what factors affect that view. Within the asset management industry,
sustainability is more commonly referred to as Environmental, social and governance (ESG).
This is not the only subcategory of sustainability that is relevant to bring forward, however.
Since mutual funds invest in “ordinary” companies, it is also important to talk about
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) (UNPRI, 2005; Chen 2019). Fundamentally, though,
the two abbreviations refer to the same notion e.g. taking responsibility for environmental-,
social- and governance aspects when conducting business. Therefore, the understanding
behind the two concepts will be used relatively interchangeably in this thesis, meaning that
the knowledge is transcendent.

The more traditional view of CSR is Milton Friedman's Shareholder Value Approach which
states that firms should only be held responsible for profit maximization (Friedman, 1970).
Per this view, managers should only incorporate CSR activities if it increases value for
investors, but the choice should be made by the shareholders. Moreover, the Shareholder
Value Approach suggests that CSR-active firms perform economically worse than other
firms. Thus, CSR is viewed as being completely philanthropic (Friedman, 1970).

The opposing perspective is the Stakeholder Value Approach by Edward Freeman, stating
that organizations must create value for all stakeholders to be successful. Freeman argues that
firms can increase return and performance by incorporating sustainability and thereby having
a long-term perspective (Freeman, 1984). Thus, Friedman's theory can be seen as short-term
profit-maximizing and Freeman’s long-term profit-maximizing (Barley, 2015).

                                    4
To complement these two more traditional perspectives, Bénabou and Tirole published a
paper in 2009 assessing the delimitation between individual- and corporate social
responsibility. According to them, there are three different perspectives on the matter: an
insider initiated perspective, a delegated philanthropic perspective, and a win-win
perspective. The first one suggests that CSR reflects management's own desire, not the
shareholders', and sustainability is therefore seen as profit diminishing. The second argues
that organizations incorporate CSR, even though it is profit diminishing since it is on behalf
of stakeholders. The third claims that organizations can gain both economic benefits and
please their stakeholders by the incorporation of sustainability (Bénabou & Tirole, 2009).

The information provided in this section is useful to get a better understanding of the attitude
toward sustainability, but it does not provide any knowledge on how mutual funds can work
with the concept. Therefore, the next section will investigate this further.

2.1.2 Sustainable and responsible investments

An even more narrow subcategory of sustainability, which in turn also relates to ESG, is
Sustainable and responsible investment (SRI). When an asset manager follows an
SRI-approach, he or she puts an emphasis on ESG-aspects during the whole investment
process. By doing this, they hope to ensure a long-term return for their clients, while at the
same time contribute to society by influencing portfolio companies to be more sustainable
(Eurosif, 2003).

There are several different SRI strategies, but the most common one is Exclusion which is a
form of Negative screening (Eurosif SRI Study, 2016). When an asset manager uses an
Exclusion strategy, he or she chooses to not invest in industries or organizations considered
to be "bad" e.g. firms that produce weapons or drill oil. Funds that use this strategy typically
assess investment opportunities against a range of ESG-criteria to decide whether to invest or
not (Hockerts and Moir 2004).

                                    5
Other commonly used SRI strategies are Positive screening and Engagement. When an asset
manager uses Positive screening, he or she invests in the best industry or the best company
based on certain ESG aspects (Eurosif SRI Study, 2016). Engagement, on the other hand, is
an SRI strategy where the investor uses active ownership (primarily dialogue, voting and
other forms of responsible shareholder activities) to make the portfolio company more
sustainable (Hockerts and Moir 2004).

2.1.3 The human psyche

Since this study investigates the attitude toward sustainability and how that attitude is
affected, it is of interest to look closer at this area within psychology. An attitude can be
described in many different ways. Eagly and Chaiken (1998) define the concept as "a
psychological tendency that is expressed by evaluating a particular entity with some degree
of favor or disfavor" (Eagly, Alice H., and Shelly Chaiken, 1998). A person's attitude can
affect not only how he or she views a certain object, but also how much attention he or she
gives the object (Vogel, T., Bohner, G., & Wanke, M., 2014).

Most of the attitudes that we hold can be derived from our learning. Most of us have learned
how to perceive and act towards specific ideas or objects (Doob, L. W., 1947). This insight
can be linked to different theories about conditioning, such as classical conditioning,
instrumental conditioning and social learning (Pavlov, I. P., 1927; (B.F. Skinner, 1938;
Bandura, A., 1971). If one, for example, sees that someone else thinks negatively of
sustainability, one might very well start doing the same.

Although personality can affect a person's attitude, the two concepts should not be confused
with one another. Personality doesn't change while experience often changes a person's
attitude. The more a person is exposed to a specific thing, the more the attitude can be
expected to be affected and this is called the Mere-Exposure Effect. People tend to prefer
things that they are familiar with (Zajonc, R.B., 2001). If one constantly hears positive things
about sustainability, one is more likely to agree with the notion.

                                    6
Furthermore, research (Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D.
2001; Fredrickson, B 2009) has shown that humans put greater psychological weight on bad
experiences than on good ones and this is called Negativity bias. If one has both good and bad
experiences of sustainability, one will be more affected by the negative (Grossmann, T.,
Vaish, A., Woodward, A., 2008).

Another interesting concept to look at in regards to this is the Bystander effect. It implies that
people are less likely to act in the case of an emergency when there are other people present
(Darley, J. M. & Latané, B., 1968). This theory can be applied to sustainability as well. If
everyone on the planet is responsible for its well-being, a single individual does not feel as
personally responsible. The same is true for organizations, more employees mean less
personal responsibility for each member of the workforce for the end result.

2.2 Previous research findings and hypothesis development

Since most previous research concerning sustainability and finance is focused on explaining
the relationship between return and the incorporation of sustainability, there isn't much
empirical evidence on how the attitude toward sustainability is affected. One can, however,
assume that if a company has a high CSR-rating it puts a higher emphasis on sustainability
and therefore has a more positive attitude toward the concept. Thus, the evidence that there
are factors which affect the CSR-rating of a company will be discussed in this section.

For example, there seems to be a connection between a firm’s country of legal origin and its
CSR rating. Liang and Renneboog (2016) even show that the correlation outweighs firm and
country characteristics like political institutions and ownership concentration and that it also
has a stronger explanatory value than "doing good by doing well" factors. Which country the
funds have their offices in must, therefore, be an aspect that can influence the asset manager’s
attitude toward sustainability. The study in question also seems to conclude that civil law
countries, and especially Scandinavian countries, have higher CSR-ratings. Hence, closeness
to Sweden might also be important.

                                    7
Other factors that can affect a company’s CSR-rating are the political opinion of the
managers and the region which the firm operates in and whether the CEO of the organization
has a daughter or not. When firms have Democratic founders, CEOs or directors, they
generally have a higher rating and when the CEO has a daughter, the CSR-rating is also
substantially higher (Di Guili & Kostovetsky, 2014; .Cronqvist & Yu, 2017).

This study will not investigate the political ideology of the asset managers or what gender
their children have, but it is interesting to note that unexpected external factors can have an
effect on the sustainability rating of the organization. It, therefore, seems that not only things
such as size or return affect the attitude of asset managers (how much importance they choose
to put on sustainability), more psychological aspects also appear to be essential.

Another aspect that drives the environmental and social (E&S) performance of firms is
whether the organization has institutional investors or not. If they do, they generally perform
better. Dyck, Lins, Roth, and Wagner (2018) also conclude that both social and financial
returns motivate institutions to incorporate sustainability. When investors come from
countries with a strong community belief in sustainability issues, the organizations also
increase their performance. These findings prove the effect that investors have on the funds'
work with and view of sustainability.

Moreover, Nofsinger and Varma (2014) terminate that socially responsible mutual funds
outperform mutual funds that aren't socially responsible during times of crises, especially
those that focus on positive screening. If this is common knowledge, it might influence the
attitudes of the asset managers toward sustainability.

                                    8
2.2.1 Hypotheses development

On the back of the theoretical framework and previous research findings, three hypotheses
have been developed.

Since Yale ranked Sweden as number five in regards to sustainability according to their
Environmental Performance Index (EPI) year 2018 (Yale 2018), as well as the fact that
Sweden is a civil law country, sustainability can be assumed to be of great importance for
funds providing their services to Swedish clients (Liang and Renneboog 2016). Additionally,
based on Cronqvist and Yu’s findings (2017), women seem to have a positive effect on the
attitude toward sustainability. The Bystander effect also indirectly states that asset managers
from organizations with many employees can be expected to care less about sustainability
since each asset manager do not feel as personally responsible (Darley, J. M. & Latané, B.,
1968).

Hypothesis 1: Attitude towards sustainability, in regards to importance, will be most affected
by the number of employees, percentage of women and whether the fund’s offices are
geographically centralized to Sweden.

As previously mentioned, there exist different opinions on how the return is affected by the
incorporation of sustainability. Based on the findings by Nofsinger and Varma (2014),
socially responsible funds can be expected to perform better than funds that aren't socially
responsible when it is needed the most, and if this is common knowledge, asset managers
should feel that they gain positive benefits from incorporating sustainability.

Hypothesis 2: Mutual fund managers believe that they gain positive benefits, rather than
avoid negative consequences, by incorporating sustainability.

                                    9
As stated before, sustainability can be pursued in many different ways and which way a fund
chooses to do so shows what attitude that fund has toward sustainability. If a fund, for
example, uses an Engagement strategy that could indicate that it views sustainability as more
important. It is fair to assume, however, that most of the mutual funds will use either Positive
screening or Negative screening (in the form of an Exclusion strategy) since these are two of
the most commonly used strategies (Eurosif SRI Study, 2016).

Hypothesis 3: Most mutual funds work sustainably by using screening strategies.

                                    10
3. Data and methodology

3.1 Sample collection

The aim of this study is to analyze fund managers’ view on CSR. As earlier mentioned, since
no existing data on the topic could be found, a new dataset was comprised based on a survey
targeting asset managers. In order to prevent the same person from responding several times
and thus affecting the results, only one response per IP-address could be logged. A total of 92
funds were identified to fulfill the research criteria.

The survey was initially sent out February 15th and a reminder was sent out on the 22nd.
After three weeks, the data collection was completed. In total, 33 full responses were
successfully recorded, representing 35.87% of the initial sample. The response rate is
considered to be satisfactory since it is above the common research standard (Baruch and
Holtom, 2008).

3.1.1 Sample selection bias
When one collects data through a survey, there is a risk of endogeneity problems. The asset
managers got to report their answers themselves, which might imply a certain bias. It is, after
all, more likely that you answer a survey concerning sustainability if you think sustainability
is important. Thereby, the respondents’ propensity for participating in the study might be
correlated with the topic studied, and this would then implicate self-selection bias in the
resulting data.

Furthermore, the selection of topic and questions may influence potential respondents’
willingness to participate since the respondents might not want to reveal their true perception
of sustainability.

To deal with these potential biases, the political sensitivity of the questionnaire was tested on
several professional asset managers before the survey was distributed. They confirmed that
the questionnaire should not pose any threat. However, even though preventive measures
were taken, the risk of bias cannot be completely ignored.

                                    11
3.2 Methodology

In accordance with Liang and Renneboog’s study (2016), the statistical methodology for this
study is regression analysis. The regression is of a linear kind since this suits the study best.
A more extensive description of the analysis can be found in the sections below.

3.3 Dependent and independent variables

The dependent variable in the regression analysis is the attitude toward sustainability. This
variable is comprised by answers to several different questions, there among what importance
the asset manager gives sustainability, how he or she believes that the return and assets under
management are affected by the fund’s work with sustainability and how much the
employees within the fund care about sustainability. Together, all of these responses have a
Cronbach's alpha of 0.728 which makes it possible to compute them into one variable
(Cronbach, 1951).

Furthermore, nine independent variables are used. The first one is called Work history and it
measures whether the asset manager has previously worked with sustainability or not. The
second variable is Employees which measures the number of employees at the Stockholm
office working within asset management (not including administration personnel). The
Sustainability rating variable instead examines whether the fund is rated according to any
sustainability rating system.

There’s also an independent variable called Type of investors which measures to what extent
the fund has sovereign wealth funds as clients. The fifth independent variable is the
perception of the common people’s opinion regarding funds and sustainability. Female
employees measures the percentage of female employees. The seventh variable,
Internationality, measures how international the fund is (whether their offices are
geographically centralized or not).

                                    12
Moreover, Competitors’ stance examines to what extent the fund believes that other funds
work with sustainability and the final variable Pressure from competitors investigates to what
extent the fund (or asset manager) feels pressure to work with sustainability due to
competitors work with sustainability. The constant is denoted by c.

Equation 1. The regression equation.

     A ttitude = β (1 W ork history) + β (2 Employees) + β3 (Sustainability rating) +
     β (4 T ype of investors) + β5 (T he common people s′  opinion) + β6 (F emale employees) +
     β7 (Internationality) + β8 (Competitors′  stance) + β9 (P ressure f rom competitors) + c

3.4 Descriptive statistics

Table 1. Descriptive statistics over the variables.

 Variable N Minimum Maximum Mean Std. deviation

 Attitude 33 2.14 3.86 3.2035 .40725

 Work history* 33 1 2 1.55 .506

 Employees 33 1 100 15.42 20.559

 Sustainability       33 1 2 1.33 .479
 rating*

 Type of investors 33 0 20 2.1212 4.61491

 The common       33 1 4.5 3.1364 .86848
 people’s opinion**

 Female employees 33 0 61 22.6667 17.62219

 Internationality*** 33 1 4 2.06 1.116

 Competitors’       33 2 4 3.24 .663
 stance**

 Pressure from       33 1 3 1.64 .859
 competitors**

* where 1 indicates a positive answer and 2 a negative answer
** where 1 indicates the lowest amount and 5 indicates the highest
*** how international the fund is, where 1 is the lowest amount (only Stockholm) and 4 the highest (Europe and other
locations globally)

                                    13
In the table above, one can see that many of the different variables used in the regression
analysis have quite different units of measurement. This also affects their minimum and
maximum values. From this, the conclusion can be drawn that It is important to compute
standardized coefficients beta values when conducting the regression analysis so that the
impact of the various independent variables on attitude can be compared.

                                    14
4. Results

The following section discusses the obtained empirical results in relation to the hypotheses
stated in section 2.2.1. The results from the regression analysis are presented in section 4.1. In
section 4.2 different views of sustainability are discussed. The disparity between how funds
work versus what is considered to be the most effective way of operating sustainably is
investigated in section 4.3.

4.1 Regression results

Table 2. Correlation between the dependent and independent variables.

                              Pearson correlation N

 Work history -.296 33

 Employees -.411 33

 Sustainability rating -.359 33

 Type of investors -.346 33

 The common people’s opinion .594 33

 Female employees .041 33

 Internationality .110 33

 Competitors’ stance .275 33

 Pressure from competitors .205 33

This table illustrates the Pearson correlation between the dependent variable, Attitude, and independent variables.

As one can see in the table above, there is a strong correlation between the dependent and
independent variables and this lays the foundation for the rest of the tests. However, this test
is not technically part of the regression analysis, it only fills the function of illustrating the
underlying conditions for the analysis.

                                    15
Table 3. Model summary.*

    R R Square Adjusted R Square Std. Error of the EStimate Durbin-Watson

   .789 .623 .475 .29512 1.924

*where the dependent variable is Attitude and the independent variables are Work history, Employees, Sustainability rating,
Type of investors, The common people’s opinion, Female employees, Internationality, Competitors’ stance and Pressure
from competitors.

From the R square value, one can understand that the model has an explanatory value of
62.3%. This is considered to be satisfactory due to previously mentioned guidelines.
Furthermore, the Durbin Watson value indicates that there is a low risk of autocorrelation in
the sample.

Table 4. ANOVA.

              Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Sig.

 Regression 3.304 9 .367 4.215 .003

 Residual 2.003 23 .087

 Total 5.307 32

This table illustrates the Sum of Squares, df, Mean Square, F and Significance for the Regression and the Residual.

The regression model is significant since the p-value is below 5% (>1%) and the results are
therefore considered to be robust. Since the regression is of a linear variety, and no external
assumptions are made, no additional robustness checks will be conducted (Lu & White,
2014).

                                    16
Table 5. Coefficients.

                     Unstandard   Coefficients      Standardized         t Sig.
                       ized B       Std. Error     Coefficients Beta

 (Constant) 2.688 .484 5.556 .000

 Work history -.330 .207 -.410 -1.595 .124

 Employees -.005 .003 -.251 -1.569 .130

 Sustainability         -.109 .135 -.128 -.807 .428
 rating

 Type of investors -.006 .014 -.072 -.453 .655

 The common         .167 .072 .356 2.314 .030
 people’s opinion

 Female               -.003 .004 -.120 -.649 .523
 employees

 Internationality .100 .074 .273 1.354 .189

 Competitors’          .161 .103 .263 1.561 .132
 stance

 Pressure from         .044 .071 .093 .617 .543
 competitors

This table illustrates the Unstandardized B, Coefficients Standard Error, Standard Coefficients Beta, t, and Significance for
the variables used in the Regression.

From the table above one can see the explanatory value of each independent variable in
relation to the dependent variable. What is interesting to note is that Work history seems to
explain the attitude toward sustainability the most when one disregards the unit of
measurement (standardized coefficients beta). After Work history, The common people’s
opinion and Internationality seem to have the largest effect on attitude. What is also
interesting to note is that a higher percentage of female employees seem to have a negative
effect on attitude. These results will be discussed further in section 5.

                                    17
Table 6. Residuals Statistics.

              Minimum Maximum Mean Std Deviation N

 Predicted         2.3197 3.8569 3.2035 .32133 33
 value

 Residual -.51427 .58998 .00000 .25020 33

 Std.              -2.750 2.034 .000 1.0000 33
 Predicted
 Value

 Std. Residual -1.743 1.999 .000 .848 33

This table illustrates the Minimum, Maximum, Mean, Std. Deviation and N for the Predicted value, Residual, Std. Predicted
value and the Std. Residual.

As one can see in the table above, the predicted value for the attitude has a minimum of circa
2.3 and a maximum of circa 3.9. None of the asset managers/mutual funds, therefore,
consider sustainability to have no importance at all or to be extremely important. On average,
the asset managers believed that sustainability was relatively important. The collinearity
diagnostics table can be found in the appendix.

4.2 Different views of sustainability

Table 7. Do you think that your fund avoids negative publicity by incorporating
sustainability into your operations?

                                      Frequency Percent

 Yes 28 84.8

 No 5 15.2

 Total 33 100

The table above shows that a majority of the asset managers believe that their fund avoids
negative publicity by incorporating sustainability into their operations.

                                    18
Table 8. Do you think that your fund gains positive publicity by incorporating sustainability
into your operations?

                                      Frequency Percent

 Yes 21 63.6

 No 12 36.4

 Total 33 100

Similarly to Table 7, Table 8 shows that a majority believe that their fund gains positive
publicity from incorporating sustainability. This majority is, however, smaller than the
majority that believes that their fund avoids negative publicity by incorporating sustainability
into their operations. This matter will be further discussed in section 5.

4.3 The disparity between opinions and operations

Diagram 1. The distribution of strategies mutual funds use to work sustainably.

As one can see in the diagram above, a larger share of the asset managers answered that their
fund works sustainably by not investing in firms that score low on ESG characteristics, rather
than by changing the behavior of unsustainable firms.

                                    19
Diagram 2. The distribution of strategies asset managers believe are the best.

When the asset managers instead had to answer the question which strategy they thought was
best in regards to sustainability, a majority said that trying to change the behavior of
unsustainable firms is better than to not invest in firms that score low on ESG characteristics.
It, therefore, seems to be a disparity between the operation of mutual funds and the opinions
of the asset managers that work for the funds. This matter will be further discussed in section
5.

                                    20
5. Implications and conclusion

The aim of this study was to find out how mutual fund managers view sustainability and what
factors affect that view. The empirical results support the third- and (partly) the first
hypothesis. The second hypothesis was falsified.

Before the study was conducted, it was believed that attitude toward sustainability would be
most affected by the number of employees, the percentage of female employees and whether
the fund’s offices are geographically centralized to Sweden. As it turns out, attitude is indeed
affected by all of these factors, but they are not the variables that affect the attitude the most.
From table 5 it can be concluded that previous work history of the asset manager explains
attitude the most since its standardized coefficients beta value is -.410. This means that, if the
asset manager has previously worked with sustainability, he or she is more likely to consider
sustainability to be important. This finding is in line with the Mere-Exposure Effect (Zajonc,
R.B., 2001).

The common people's opinion also influences attitude. If the asset manager believes that the
common people care a lot about sustainability within the asset management industry, and
particularly if his or her fund works sustainably or not, it is more likely that he or she
considers sustainability to be important. This can be connected to Liang and Renneboog’s
study (2016) and Di Guili & Kostovetsky’s study (2014) which both prove that the political
environment which an organization operates in can affect the attitude of the employees of that
organization. Politics is, after all, opinions.

Internationality, on the other hand, seems to have an opposite effect compared to what was
initially believed. The more international a fund is, the less centralized to Sweden its offices
are, the more the asset manager working for the fund believes that sustainability is important.
This result is not in line with Liang and Renneboog’s study (2016) and this relationship
should thus be investigated further in future research.

In accordance with Dyck, Lins, Roth, and Wagner’s study (2018), attitude is also affected by
the type of investors the mutual fund has.

                                    21
Moreover, it was believed that fund managers themselves would consider the incorporation
of sustainability to give their fund positive benefits, rather than helping their fund to avoid
negative consequences. This hypothesis is not supported by the empirical findings. A larger
share of the asset managers responded that they avoid negative publicity, rather than gaining
positive publicity, by incorporating sustainability. This could be explained by the general
view on sustainability, where Friedman's Shareholder Value Approach (1970) is still a
popular reference point. The more modern theories on sustainability, like Bénabou and
Tirole’s win-win perspective (2009), hasn't gained as much traction yet.

The third hypothesis was that most funds work sustainably by using screening strategies. This
hypothesis is supported by the empirical findings. As one can see in Diagram 1, 62.5% of the
asset managers said that they do not invest in firms that score low on ESG characteristics
rather than taking an active part in in the development of a firm (using an Engagement
strategy). However, not investing in firms that score low on ESG characteristics could mean
that the asset manager uses either Positive screening or Negative screening (Exclusion). From
the results, it is hard to know which one, and this should, therefore, be investigated further in
the future.

Another interesting thing to note is that there seems to be a disparity between which strategy
asset managers use, and which strategy they themselves believe to be the best one (in regards
to sustainability). In Diagram 2, it is apparent that most of the respondents believe
Engagement is the best strategy, but in Diagram 3 one can easily see that Positive screening
or Exclusion are the strategies most commonly used.

The reason why this gap exists could be because it is often less costly to use screening
strategies, rather than an Engagement strategy. If one operates in accordance with the latter, a
lot more resources must be invested in the project since a plan has to be formulated and then
executed. Screening, on the other hand, is relatively easy in comparison. When using that
kind of strategy, one only needs to look at the already decided upon criteria and then avoid
the companies that are actually in most need of a sustainable influence.

                                    22
From another perspective, there might be other reasons as to why the asset managers
responded that they think Engagement is the best strategy. By using that strategy, they can
keep bad firms in their portfolio claiming that they work hard to make them more sustainable,
while in reality, they do not. The motivations behind the use of different SRI strategies
would, therefore, be interesting to investigate further.

The conclusions that can be drawn from this study have practical implications when it comes
to improving mutual funds in regards to sustainability. Since the work history of the asset
manager, for example, has a significant effect on attitude, making asset managers actively
work with sustainability in any way will not only affect how they work right now but also
how they work in the future.

Moreover, implementing changes like this might also lead to a shift in attitude toward
sustainability. Instead of viewing sustainability as a necessary evil one takes part in to avoid
negative consequences, asset managers will perhaps start to think of it as something that
helps them gain positive benefits. As previously mentioned, the more someone is exposed to
a certain idea, the more familiar he or she will be with that notion. By exposing the asset
managers to sustainability, they will possibly get a more positive outlook on the concept.

Mutual funds might also be able to achieve a larger impact if they start using the strategies
that the asset managers themselves believe to be most effective. Engagement is, according to
the findings from this study, considered to be the best strategy in regards to sustainability
and, hence, mutual funds should perhaps use this strategy instead of Screening. One should
be careful, though, since the motivations behind the different opinions are not yet made clear.

                                    23
5.1 Limitations and future research

One methodological limitation regarding the research is the sample size. One could argue that
the nonresponse bias makes the final sample size too small to draw any generalized
conclusions from the data. Self-selection bias, as previously mentioned, might also be a
problem. Furthermore, there is a risk that some of the questions in the survey were
misinterpreted by the respondents, and this gives rise to response bias. Social desirability
bias could potentially be a problem as well since one is viewed as being a better person if one
has a more favorable attitude toward sustainability.

Future research could, therefore, base its analysis on a larger sample to be able to draw more
generalized conclusions. Some of the limitations could also be overcome by making
participation in the new study compulsory, thereby ensuring that not only those with an
already positive attitude participates in the study. The social desirability bias is hard to
overcome since this is a much deeper rooted problem.

As discussed in the previous section, it would be interesting to look closer at what effect
internationality versus geographic centralization has on the attitude of asset managers.
Moreover, finding evidence for which type of screening strategy that is the most common
could illustrate the research topic further. Finally, the motivations behind different SRI
strategies could be investigated more closely.

                                    24
6. References

Bandura, A. (1971). Social learning theory. General Learning Press.

Barley, S. (2015). Assess the appropriateness of Stakeholder and Shareholder views in
relation to the 21st century corporation. Trinidad: Arthur Lok Jack GSB.

Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad Is Stronger
Than Good. Review of General Psychology, 5(4), 323-370.
https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.5.4.323

Bénabou, R., Tirole, J. (2009). Individual and Corporate Social Responsibility. TSE Working
Papers, 09-109: Toulouse School of Economics (TSE).

B.F. Skinner (1938). The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: B.F. Skinner Foundation.

Chen, J. (2019). What is Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). Retrieved March 19, 2019,
from https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/corp-social-responsibility.asp.

Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika,
16, 297-334.

Cronqvist, H., Yu, F. (2017). Shaped by Their Daughters: Executives, Female Socialization,
and Corporate Social Responsibility. Journal of Financial Economics.

Di, G. A., Kostovetsky, L. (2012). Are Red or Blue Companies More Likely to Go Green?
Politics and Corporate Social Responsibility. Journal of Financial Economics.

Darley, J. M., Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of
responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.

Doob, L. W. (1947). The behavior of attitudes. Psychological Review, 54(3), 135-156.

Dyck, A., Karl V., L., Roth, L., Wagner, F. H. (2017). Do Institutional Investors Drive
Corporate Social Responsibility? International Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics.

Eagly, A.H., Chaiken, S. (1998). Attitude , Structure and Function. In. D.T. Gilbert, Fiske,
S.T., Lindsey, G. Handbook of Social Psychology, 2(5), 269-322. New York: McGowan-Hill.

Eurosif. About us. (2003). Retrieved March 16, 2019, from http://www.eurosif.org/about-us/.

                                    25
Eurosif. Mission (2003). Retrieved March 16, 2019, from http://www.eurosif.org/mission/.

Fredrickson, B. (2009). Positivity: Groundbreaking research reveals how to embrace the
hidden strength of positive emotions, overcome negativity, and thrive. New York, NY, US:
Crown Publishers/Random House.

Freeman R.E. (1984). Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach. Boston, US: Pitman
Publishing.

Friedman, M. (1970). The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profit. The New
York Times Magazine, 13, 32-33.

Grossmann, T., Vaish, A., Woodward, A. (2008). Not All Emotions Are Created Equal: The
Negativity Bias in Social-Emotional Development. Psychological Bulletin, 134(3), 383–403.
DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.134.3.383.

Hockerts K., L. Moir (2004). Communicating Corporate Responsibility to Investors: The
Changing Role of The Investor Relations Function. Journal of Business Ethics, 52(1), 85–98.

Liang, H., Renneboog, L. (2016). On the Foundations of Corporate Social Responsibility.
The Journal of Finance.

Lu, X., White, H. (2014). Robustness checks and robustness tests in applied economics.
Journal of Econometrics.

Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned reflexes: an investigation of the physiological activity of the
cerebral cortex. Oxford, England: Oxford Univ. Press.

Abhishek, V., Nofsinger, J. R. (2012). Socially Responsible Funds and Market Crises.
Journal of Banking and Finance.

UNPRI. (2005). What are environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors? Retrieved
March 16, 2019, from https://www.unpri.org/pri/what-is-responsible-investment.

Vogel, T., Bohner, G., Wanke, M. (2014). Attitudes and attitude change. Psychology Press.

Zajonc, R.B. (2001). Mere Exposure: A Gateway to the Subliminal. Current Directions in
Psychological Science. 10(6), 224.

Yale University (2018). 2018 EPI Results. Retrieved March 19, 2019, from
https://epi.envirocenter.yale.edu/epi-topline?country=Sweden.

                                    26
7. Appendix

7.1 Survey Questionnaire

7.1.1 Personal questions

1.1 Gender
  ❏ Male
  ❏ Female
  ❏ Other

1.2 Year of birth
  ❏ Select a year

1.3 Do you live in Sweden?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

1.4 How long have you been working at the fund that you currently work at?
  ❏ Select a number of years

1.5 Have you previously, on a personal level, worked with sustainability in any way?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

1.6 How important do you consider sustainability to be?

7.1.2 General questions regarding the fund

2.1 What are the fund’s assets under management (roughly in SEK)?
  ❏ Insert a number

2.2 How many employees work at the Stockholm office (roughly within asset management
and not including office personnel)?
  ❏ Select a number

                                    27
2.3 What is the average age of employees (roughly)?
  ❏ Select a number

2.4 What percentage of the employees are women? (roughly and not including office
personnel)?

2.5 Where does your fund have offices?
  ❏ Only in Stockholm
  ❏ Only in Stockholm and other locations in Sweden
  ❏ Only in Sweden and other locations in Europe
  ❏ Europe and other locations globally

7.1.3 General questions regarding the fund’s work with sustainability

3.1a Does your fund work with sustainability in any way?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

3.1b If yes, since when? (This question will only be displayed if answering yes on 3.1a)
  ❏ Select a year

3.2 How much do you think employees within your fund care about sustainability?

3.3a Does your fund face any legal or regulatory requirements regarding sustainability?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

3.3b If yes, which? (This question will only be displayed if answering yes on 3.3a)
  ❏ Fill in an answer

                                    28
3.4a Is your fund rated according to any sustainability rating system?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

3.4b If yes, which? (This question will only be displayed if answering yes on 3.4a)
  ❏ Fill in an answer

3.5 Do you think that your fund avoids negative publicity by incorporating sustainability in
your operations?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

3.6 Do you think that your fund gains positive publicity by incorporating sustainability in
your operations?
  ❏ Yes
  ❏ No

3.7 How do you think that your work with sustainability affects your return?

3.8 How much return are you willing to sacrifice to ensure that the fund works sustainably?
  ❏ None
  ❏ <1%
  ❏ 1%-2%
  ❏ 2%-3%
  ❏ 3%<

                                    29
7.1.4 Questions regarding the fund’s clients

4.1 What kind of clients/investors does your fund have? (insert rough percentages, you need
to move all sliders.)

4.2 Where are your investors mainly based?
  ❏ Sweden
  ❏ Other European country
  ❏ Other country outside of Europe

4.3 How much capital does the average client invest in the fund (roughly in SEK)?
  ❏ Fill in a number

                                    30
7.1.5 General questions regarding investors and sustainability

5.1 To what extent do you think that your investors’ return is affected by your work with
sustainability?

5.2 How much do you think that your investors care about your fund’s work with
sustainability?

5.3 Do you believe that your fund’s work with sustainability increases or decreases the
amount of assets under management?
  ❏ Increases
  ❏ Decreases

5.4 How do you believe that your average investor thinks that their return is affected by your
fund’s work with sustainability?
   ❏ I believe that they think that their return is decreased
   ❏ I believe that they think that their return is unaffected
   ❏ I believe that they think that their return is increased

5.5 How much return do you believe that your average investor would be willing to sacrifice
in order for you to work sustainably?
  ❏ None
  ❏ <1%
  ❏ 1%-2%
  ❏ 2%-3%
  ❏ 3%<

                                    31
7.1.6 General questions regarding sustainability

6.1 Please select a number.

6.3 What is most true when it comes to your fund? Please finish the sentence: My fund works
sustainably by… (This question will only be displayed if answering yes on 3.1a)
  ❏ … not investing in firms that score low on ESG characteristics.
  ❏ … changing the behavior of firms (by for example voting on changed policies).

6.4 What is most true when it comes to you personally? Please finish the sentence: I believe
that it’s better to…
  ❏ … not investing in firms that score low on ESG characteristics.
  ❏ … changing the behavior of firms (by for example voting on changed policies).

6.5 How do you define CSR/sustainability?
  ❏ Fill in an answer

                                    32
7.2 Other tables from the regression analysis

Table 9. Collinearity diagnostics.

 Dimension Eigenvalue Condition index

 1 7.600 1.000

 2 .855 2.982

 3 .732 3.223

 4 .286 5.152

 5 .218 5.904

 6 .145 7.234

 7 .099 8.766

 8 .042 13.379

 9 .013 23.994

 10 .009 29.053

This table illustrates the Eigenvalue and Condition index over the 10 dimensions that the regression model consists of.

                                    33