    Primary market green bond pricing

 Is there a difference in issue price between green bonds and non-green bonds
                       in the primary bond market?

Jakob Ahlgren

Matthias Karthäuser

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2019
Primary market green bond pricing - Is there a difference in issue price between green
bonds and non-green bonds in the primary bond market?

Abstract:

In this paper we examine if labelled green bonds are issued at a different issue price relative to
par compared to conventional non-green bonds. We use a matching method and estimate the
differences in issue price between a set of green bonds and otherwise similar conventional bonds.
The result suggests that green bonds tend to be issued at a similar issue price relative to par
compared to conventional bonds. This result can however not be interpreted as indicating the
non-existence of a green premium, except under a list of strong assumptions which we are not
able to control for in this paper. Our study restricts itself to Eurobonds denominated in EUR,
USD and SEK, and issued during the time period 2015 to 2019.

Keywords:

Green bonds, primary market, issue price, sustainable finance

Authors:

Jakob Ahlgren (23692)

Matthias Karthäuser (23872)

Tutors:

Håkan Thorsell, Visiting Teacher, Department of Accounting.

Examiner:

Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor of Finance, Department of Finance. Finance

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business & Economics

Stockholm School of Economics

© Jakob Ahlgren and Matthias Karthäuser, 2019

                                                                           1
Acknowledgements

First and foremost, we would like to extend our sincere gratitude to our tutor Håkan Thorsell for
his helpful input during the project. Further, we thank Mats Andersson, vice chairman of Global
Challenges Foundation and former CEO at AP4, Peter Lööw at Alecta and Johan Edin at DnB
for their comments. Lastly we would like to thank Alexander Helling, CEO at Baseload Capital,
for sharing his knowledge about green bond standards and second opinions, and August
Botsford, technical director at Chromaway, for sharing his expertise on how green use of
proceeds can be securely verified.

Contents

1. Is there a difference in issue price between green bonds and non-green bonds in the primary
bond market? ……………………………………………………………………………………. 3
1.1. Introduction ……………………………………………………………………………….. 3
1.2. Literature review ………………………………………………………………………........ 6
1.3. Theoretical framework ……………………………………………………………………... 8
   1.3.1. Pricing of coupon bonds - required yield compensates for risk ……………………….. 8
   1.3.2. Type of risks being assessed in the fixed income market ……………………………... 8
   1.3.3. The process of issuing and pricing a bond …………………………………………….. 9
   1.3.4. Green bond frameworks, second opinions and impact reporting…………………….... 12
 1.3.5. Eurobonds …………………………………………………………………………….. 12
1.4. Research methodology …………………………………………………………………….. 13
  1.4.1. Matching method ………………………………………………………………………13
  1.4.2. List of available variables in dataset ... ………………………………………………. 15
 1.4.3. Test method …………………………………………………………………………… 17
1.5. Data sources and sample characteristics …………………………………………………... 18
1.6. Empirical results …………………………………………………………………………... 22
1.7. Limitations of research…………………………………………………………………….. 25
1.8. Discussion………………………………………………………………………………….. 27
1.9. Conclusions ………………………………………………………………………………... 31
2. References ………………………………………………………………………………….... 32
3. Appendix …………………………………………………………………………………….. 35

                                                                           2
1. Is there a difference in issue price between green bonds and non-green bonds in the
primary bond market?

1.1. Introduction

In this paper we study if green bonds are issued at a different issue price compared to otherwise
similar conventional bonds in the primary market for Eurobonds. There has been reporting of
anecdotal evidence of green bonds being heavily oversubscribed and pricing tighter than

             1
expected. While not testing directly if the issue spread is different for green compared to
conventional bonds, this paper explores data to empirically test whether the the issue price is
different for green bonds or not.

The bond market has long been an important source of capital for sovereigns, municipalities,
banks and corporations for the funding of different operations and investments and has grown to
become a plus 100 Trillion dollar market. To put that in perspective the global equities market is

                                                                              2
valued at about 85 Trillion dollars in market capitalization and total global debt is estimated to

                                  3
be at 233 Trillion dollars.

The market for labelled green bonds is a relatively new phenomenon in the bond market but the
use of bonds to finance or refinance sustainable investments is not new in itself or necessarily
restricted to labelled green bonds. A conventional bond can in principal also be issued with the
purpose of financing sustainable investments. And financially, a conventional and a green bond
are the same type of debt instruments with the same type of inherent risks. The difference
between a green and conventional bond is, in essence, that the issuer of a green bond promises to
use the proceeds for green investments, projects or assets and to show how it does this in a
transparent manner. This commitment includes presenting additional information compared to in
a non green issue. Firstly in the form of a green bond framework which lays forward how the
proceeds will be invested and motivates why the use of proceeds is considered green. Secondly,
a third party with acknowledged sustainability expertise may be hired to provide an external

1
 https://www.climatebonds.net/files/files/Greenbond_Pricing_Jan_16-March_17.pdf
2
 https://www.sifma.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/US-Fact-Book-2018-SIFMA.pdf
3
 https://images.magnetmail.net/images/clients/IIF_2/attach/GDM_Jan4_vf.pdf

                                                                           3
review on the green bond framework and the different sustainability aspects related to the issue
and issuer. Lastly, starting a period after issuance, the issuer may regularly report on the green
impact of the investments. The type of impact reporting varies depending on the type of
investments and what metrics are feasible to measure, one example of one of multiple possible
metrics that may be reported on is how many tons of CO2 emissions that are avoided because of
the investments. Green projects include, but are not limited to; clean energy, sustainable

                                                                              4
buildings, water, waste, land-use and sustainable transport. There is no single universal method
of determining if a bond is green, rather it is self-labelled as green by the issuer, and can be
considered green by an external reviewer such as Sustainalytics or tagged as green by a financial
data provider such as Bloomberg. However, harmonised green bond standards are being

                                                                        5
developed by for example the European Commission. And the green bond principles by the
International Capital Markets Association, which are voluntary process guidelines, provide

                                                                  6
widely adopted guidance for market practitioners.

The green bond market has grown rapidly since its inception just over 10 years ago but is still a
niche market compared to the broader bond market. Three per cent of 2018 bond issuances were
labelled green and in September 2018 the universe of green bonds amounted to close to 400
Billion dollars in outstanding volume, representing less than one per cent of the overall bond
market. The broader universe of climate-aligned bonds, defined as bonds where issuers generate
over 75% of revenues from climate-aligned and green business lines, is identified to be close to
1,5 Trillion dollars in outstanding volume. The first labeled green bond was issued by the
European Investment Bank in 2007 and other examples of issuers include sovereign nations such
as France, financial firms such as commercial banks and non-financials such as Unilever and

        7 8
Apple. S&P forecasts total labelled green bond issuances of USD 180 Billion in 2019.

4
 https://www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi_sotm_2018_final_01k-web.pdf
5
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/fisma/item-detail.cfm?item_id=645336&utm_source=fisma_newsroom&ut
m_medium=Website&utm_campaign=fisma&utm_content=Green%20bonds%20&lang=en
6
 https://www.icmagroup.org/green-social-and-sustainability-bonds/green-bond-principles-gbp/
7
 https://www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi_sotm_2018_final_01k-web.pdf
8
https://uk.reuters.com/article/greenbonds-issuance/sp-global-ratings-forecasts-green-bond-issua
nce-at-180-bln-this-year-idUKL5N1ZT63P

                                                                           4
On the demand side green bonds provide investors with an instrument for environmentally
sustainable fixed income investments. In a green bond issue standardized information about the
sustainability aspects of the issue are made available for investors to analyse. However, a bond
does not necessarily need to be labelled as green in order for it to meet the sustainability criteria
investors need to meet to comply with law, internal investment policies or other commitments. In
principal, conventional bonds can also meet these standards, given that the issue and issuer
comply with the relevant sustainability criteria used by the investor in their due diligence
process. In a conventional bond issue, however, the issuer does not need to disclose how
proceeds will be invested in the same way as in a green bond issue.

Global sustainable investment exceeded 30 Trillion dollars by 2018, an increase of 34 percent
since 2016. This includes a number of sustainable investment standards and strategies across
different asset classes. There are different methods for determining whether an investment is
sustainable, including negative screening and sustainability themed investing, and not all can be

                                          9
considered equally sustainable. For an investor there may be different motivations for analyzing
sustainability aspects of potential investments. For example, a number of institutional investors

                                                                                                                  10
have identified climate change as posing significant value at risk to long term wealth. Some
investors have direct mandates to invest sustainably and ethically. Others, with a total of tens of
Trillions in assets under management, have made voluntary commitments to take sustainability

                                                                                 11
criteria into consideration in their decision making processes and to measure, disclose and

                                                               12
reduce the carbon footprints of their portfolios. Furthermore, the Bank for International
Settlements´ Financial Stability Board has initiated the Task Force on Climate-related Financial
Disclosures which is supported by 8 of the 10 largest asset managers and develops voluntary

                                                              13
climate-related financial disclosure guidelines. There are also examples of regulatory
requirements on investors to disclose information about portfolio sustainability metrics. For
example in France where a law was passed in 2015 making it mandatory for institutional

9
 http://www.gsi-alliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/GSIR_Review2018.3.28.pdf
10
  https://eiuperspectives.economist.com/sites/default/files/The%20cost%20of%20inaction_0.pdf
11
  https://www.unpri.org/about-the-pri
12
  https://montrealpledge.org/
13
  https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/

                                                                           5
investors to disclose how sustainability aspects such as variables connected to climate change are

                                                                                                     14
incorporated into investment policies and, in some cases, risk management.

In light of the growth of the green bond market and the, to the best knowledge of the authors of
this paper, limited previous research on the topic of green bond pricing in the primary market we
in this paper specifically study the primary market for Eurobonds. We herein compare the issue
price of labelled green bonds with otherwise similar/matched conventional bonds. Our sample
includes bond issues in EUR, USD and SEK for the time period 2015 to 2019. We restrict our
study to the pricing on the primary market because of its more direct implications for the issuers
debt cost of capital.

In addition we discuss difference between green and conventional bonds with interviewees who
are professionally involved in the green bond market, including people working for a bank and
an institutional investor. The interviews however are not a qualitative test or part of our
quantitative test. Rather, comments from the some of the interviewees are actualized in the
discussion of our results.

The remainder of our paper is structured as follows. We first present previous literature on the
topic and explain the theoretical framework. We thereafter lay forward the data and method used
for our quantitative test before presenting our results whereafter we critically reflect and discuss
upon these. We use the terms conventional, non-green and grey bonds interchangeably for the
remainder of this paper.

1.2. Literature review

To the best of the knowledge of the authors of this paper there is no previous study that
specifically examines the issue price for green bonds compared to non-green bonds. And the
previous literature on the topic of primary market green bond pricing is relatively limited.

                                                                                                              15
Jeffrey Wurgler, George Serafeim, Daniel Bergstresser and Malcolm Baker (2018) show that

14
https://www.frenchsif.org/isr-esg/wp-content/uploads/Understanding_article173-French_SIF_Handbook.p
df
15
  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3275327

                                                                           6
green bonds are issued at a premium to otherwise similar conventional bonds. Their results also
support that green bonds are more closely held by investors than conventional bonds i.e. a buy
and hold strategy is more common. Furthermore, they show that both these results are more
pronounced for issues that are externally certified as green.

                                                                                                         16
There are also studies on the secondary market for green bonds. Zerbib (2018) finds that the
yield of a green bond in the secondary market is, on average, 2 bps lower than the yield of a
conventional bond, using a matching method and two-step regression procedure. His study
covers bonds issued between July 2013 and December 2017. The study furthermore shows that
the premium is larger for financial issuer types and lower rated bonds.

The broader research on the primary market for bonds in general is somewhat more extensive.
After examining existing literature on similar subjects to ours we find a relevant study, which
serves as the most important guideline for our research on the primary market. Giampaolo Gabbi

                                17
& Andrea Sironi (2005) empirically show the relevance of different factors in determining
corporate bonds‘ issuance spreads in the primary market. As there is no theoretical model that is
assumed to lie behind bond pricing Giampaolo Gabbi & Andrea Sironi take an agnostic
approach, and the empirical analysis investigates which factors affect bond issuance spreads
rather than testing any theoretical model. They examine corporate Eurobonds spreads based on

                       18
five main factors.

Gabbi et al. find that credit ratings given by credit rating institutions Moody’s and S&P is the
most important factor affecting the spreads between the yield to maturity of corporate bonds
compared to a benchmark risk-free rate. Indeed, they find that a model using only rating

                                                                                          2
variables as explanatory variables for explaining the spread has an adjusted R   of 0,790
(statistically significant at the 1% level). They also find that the primary market efciency and
the expected secondary market liquidity has low explanatory power in explaining the spread. The
work of Gabbi et al. is valuable for this paper since one of the core elements of this study is to

16
https://www.chaireeconomieduclimat.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Newsletter-juin-GB-Premium-OD-Z
erbib.pdf
17
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422
18
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422

                                                                           7
identify and match bonds on variables that affect the required issue yield and thus in extension

                                               19
can affect the issue price of a bond.

1.3. Theoretical framework

1.3.1. Pricing of coupon bonds - required yield compensates for risk.

When a bond is issued its fair price is determined by summing up its future cash flows,
discounted with the required yield for each respective cash flow. The yield to maturity at
issuance, or just issue yield, is the weighted average of the required yields for the respective cash
flows. The yield equals the expected return of a bond only if it is held to maturity and all
promised cash flows are received in full. For non risk free bonds, the expected return is therefore
lower than the yield. The yield curve for a given level of risk plots the required yield for different
maturities. The spread between the yield curve for a given level of risk and the risk free rate with
the same maturity is a measure of the risk premium demanded for that given level of risk. The
risk premium compensates for the additional risk of holding the bond compared to holding a risk
free investment. The yield of for example the US 10 year treasury is frequently used as a proxy
for the risk-free rate, this can serve as a benchmark for market practitioners when pricing bonds.
Corporate coupon bonds are typically priced against the swaprate, this rate reflects the markets´
beliefs about future interest rates. If for example the 5 year swaprate for 3 month London
Interbank Offering Rate (LIBOR) is 2 percent and the 3 month LIBOR is .5 percent, then the
current belief is that a rolling 5 year investment in 3 month LIBOR will give an annual return of
2 percent over 5 years. The swaprate then serves as a sort of baseline above which riskier

                                   20
investments can be priced.

1.3.2. Type of risks being assessed in the fixed income market.

The pay-off profile for fixed income instruments naturally makes the downside risk of not
receiving repayment extra critical. Credit risk is the risk that the issuer might not make promised
payments in full, meet other obligations, or even go bankrupt. Investors typically seek guidance

19
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422
20
  https://www.regeringen.se/rattsliga-dokument/statens-offentliga-utredningar/2018/01/sou-2017115/

                                                                           8
from credit rating agencies such as S&P or Moody´s when assessing the credit risk of a bond.
Credit gradings do not give explicit probabilities of default or explicit probabilities of loss in
case of default, but they provide investors with an assessment of an issuers long term payment

                                                                              21
capabilities, which can be used as proxy for the credit risk.

Another risk for bond holders is inflation risk. This is the risk that inflation turns out to be higher
than currently expected, leading to a reduction in real return of investment. When inflation rises
the yield curve shift upwards as the market requires higher rates in order to be compensated for
the higher inflation.

If economic growth is expected to accelerate going forward, the yield curve has a tendency to
become steeper because the market will expect future rates to be higher than presently expected.
There is an inverse relationship between bond prices and yields, when yields rise the price
decreases. Interest rate risk comes from the uncertainty about how market interest rates will
evolve in the future. If market interest rates rise already outstanding bonds with lower yields
become less attractive and the price of these bonds therefore decreases. The level of interest rate
risk may vary depending on whether the coupon payments are based on a fixed rate or an
adjustable rate linked to a reference rate such as LIBOR. And all else equal, a bond with a larger
portion of cash flows further out in the future will, due to compounding over longer time periods,
be more sensitive to changes in interest rates. This level of interest rate risk sensitivity can be
expressed by the modified duration of a bond.

When holding a bond there is also liquidity risk which is the risk that the bond cannot be sold
quickly enough at a high enough price, for example because the market is not deep enough. The
market liquidity is considered to be good if large volumes of a bond can be sold quickly at a low
transaction cost without considerably impacting the market price. The liquidity risk is especially

                                                                                        22
relevant for an investor who might sell the bond before it matures.

1.3.3. The process of issuing and pricing a bond.

21
  Jonathan Berk & Peter DeMarzo. Corporate Finance. Global Edition. 4th edition. Chapter 6.
22
  https://www.regeringen.se/rattsliga-dokument/statens-offentliga-utredningar/2018/01/sou-2017115/

                                                                           9
A bond issue can be placed in the market in a few different ways. When an entity decides to
issue a bond it typically hires an investment bank to act as an intermediary between the issuer
and the investors. One investment bank or a syndicate of banks led by a lead manager may
underwrite the bonds, meaning that they bare the risk of the bonds and then resell the bonds to
investors. In other cases, the investment bank may simply market the issue without underwriting
it, in that case receiving a commission on the bonds sold instead of an underwriting spread.
There is a conflict of interest for involved intermediating banks since they on the one hand have
the obligation to secure the most beneficial pricing for the issuer, while on the other hand they
need to get an as high as possible return from the intermediation.

In the case that the issuer hires a lead manager to intermediate the issue they first discuss the size
of the issue and a target for the coupon rate and price. This is provisional and can change before
the issue is closed. The issue and its specifics are then formally announced to the market.
Between the announcement date until the bonds are formally issued they trade in the so called
grey market, this activity gives the lead manager information about how large the interest is from
investors to invest in the bond and at what price. Assuming that the grey market works
efficiently it reflects the yield required by the market for the bond. During this period the coupon
rate can be adjusted. The next key date is the pricing day when the subscription period ends and
the final conditions for the issue are agreed on between the issuer and intermediating parties.
Depending on how market conditions have evolved between the announcement and the pricing
day some of the specifics such as the coupon rate can be adjusted and otherwise a change in the
bonds´ issue price relative to par takes care of the final pricing adjustments being required by
market participants. The next day is the offering day and this is when the final specifications of
the issue are agreed upon, committing the underwriters to buy the bonds from the issuer at the
price agreed upon during pricing day. And a short time later, typically two weeks, is the closing
day when the bonds are paid for. After the bonds start trading in the secondary market the lead
manager may also have the job of stabilizing the price for a short period.

In a bought deal procedure the lead manager or a group of banks instead present the borrower
with a bid that specifies the issue price and other specifics. The issuer then has a few hours to

                                                                          10
consider the bid and if it accepts the offer the lead manager buys the entire issue before
distributing it to investors alone or together with other banks.

And in some issues a fixed price re-offer scheme may be applied meaning that syndicate banks
agree not to resell the bonds at a lower price than the initial offer price until the issuance has
been completed.

Some of the more experienced and high quality bond issuers such as the U.S government can
avoid fees related to the issuing process by instead selling the issue directly to investors through
an auction where investors bid directly.

Bond issue prices are quoted as a percentage of par i.e. expressed as the present value of its cash
flows divided over the face value, multiplied by 100. The discount rate used for this is the yield
to maturity at issuance. Price quotes are stated net of accrued interest which makes quotes for
different bonds comparable. Price quotes for bonds are in other words expressed as a percentage
of par value converted to point scale. Par value 100 represents 100 per cent of a bond's face
value. If a bond trades at 101 and has a face value of USD 1000 this means that the cost of
buying each bond is USD 1010. How the coupon rate relates to the yield to maturity at issuance
determines if the bond is issued at, below or above par. In other words, after the coupon rate has
been set it is changes in the required issue yield that drives changes in the issue price. For a bond
that is issued at par, the coupon rate equals the required yield to maturity at issuance. A bond
issued at a discount has a coupon rate that is lower than the issue yield and therefore an issue
price below 100 and vice versa for a bond issued at a premium.

When intermediating banks structure the issue they set the coupon rate to be equal to the required
yield at the time of issuance i.e. at a level that sets the issue price equal to par. The reason behind
this is that investors generally prefer to pay par or slightly under for a new issue, typically in the
range 99,00 to 100,00.

In accounting terms, if a bond is issued at a premium, the amount received minus the bond's face
value (and any accrued interest) is the premium, or premium on bonds payable. This premium on
bonds payable is then amortized to interest expenses over the lifetime of the bond, thus reducing

                                                                          11
                                                                                                                          23
the interest expenses for the issuer. The opposite happens when a bond is sold at a discount.

1.3.4. Green bond frameworks, second opinions and impact reporting.

In contrast to in a conventional bond issue, two additional sources of information are made
available in a green bond issue. A green bond framework is to be prepared by the issuer to
credibly show how the proceeds will be invested for purposes that are aligned with a sustainable
development, something the criteria in the green bond principles for example can be used for.
The green bond principles further recommend the issue and green bond framework to be
reviewed by a third party with acknowledged expertise in the area. In the case where the issuer
hires an intermediating bank it is this bank that hires the second opinion provider. The second
opinion statement provides investors with a credible audit of the green aspects of the issue. Once
the green bond has been issued, and if it is deemed feasible, the issuer will also give regular
reporting on how the investments from the bond perform from a sustainability perspective. For
example, such reports may include information about how many kWh of clean electricity that

                                                                                                            24
have been generated or how many tons of CO2 emissions that have been avoided. However,
information from impact reports is of course not available to investors during the issuing process.

1.3.5. Eurobonds

Eurobonds are international bonds issued in another currency than the native currency of the
issuer, the name does not refer to Europe or the currency Euro itself. For example, a Brazilian
company issuing a USD denominated bond and selling it in the UK would be a Eurobond. This is
different from foreign bonds which are issued within and regulated by a particular nation’s
legislation, for example a Swedish company issuing a GBP denominated bond in the UK.
Interest payments from Eurobonds are made gross, free of withholding and other taxes. And
Eurobonds are typically in bearer form. They are often registered on an exchange to enable
certain institutional investors to invest in them and trading of eurobonds is usually done directly

                      25
over the counter. The term Eurobond as defined in this paper is not to be mistaken to be

23
  Moorad Choudhry. Bond & Money Markets - Strategy, Trading, Analysis. Chapters 3.4.1. and 18.
24
  https://www.icmagroup.org/green-social-and-sustainability-bonds/green-bond-principles-gbp/
25
  Moorad Choudhry. Bond & Money Markets - Strategy, Trading, Analysis. Chapter 18.

                                                                          12
                                                                                                              26
connected to the proposal for several Euro area countries to issue a common bond.

1.4. Research Methodology

1.4.1. Matching method

The primary method used in previous literature on bond pricing is based on linear regression
models which use the issue spread or issue yield as dependent variable. These methods are based
on examining how an as exhaustive as possible list of relevant independent variables affect the

                                                                                           27
bond spread while doing tests to ensure the robustness of the model. This could be an
appropriate model to incorporate for comparing green and conventional bond pricing since a
variable could be added to the model to examine an eventual effect from the green label. A
classification algorithm, such as the logistic regression model, could also be feasible to apply for
studying an eventual difference between two classes of bonds. By using this method one could
test whether the issue yield or spread has predictive power in classifying a bond as green or
conventional.

However, we lack access to a data source that provides information about the bond spread at
issuance, this information is only available for the secondary market. Instead we are restricted to
examine an eventual difference between green and conventional bonds by looking at the variable
issue price. Such a test will not be able to show directly if there is an eventual green premium.
Instead, if the issue price is shown to be different for the green bond sample compared to the
conventional one it simply means that the coupon rate in relation to the required yield at
issuance, on average, is different for that sample. It may be noted however that if the bonds in
each pair being examined are identical in all other variables than the green variable, and under
the assumption that the bonds have been issued under identical market conditions our test can
indicate if green bonds are priced differently.

The very procedure under which bonds are issued in the primary market place can differ to a
certain degree from issue to issue and be affected by variables, both rational and more irrational,

26
  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-11-820_en.htm
27
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422

                                                                          13
which are difficult to observe. This makes it practically impossible to observe two bonds that are
identical except for in the green variable and that have been issued under identical conditions. In
a real counterfactual framework we would observe each bond priced in both the conventional
state and the green-labelled state and this is, of course, not possible.

Instead, we match each green bond in our sample with a non-green bond that is as identical as
possible in all aspects except for the specific property of interest, in our case the green bond
label. This matching method is known as a direct or model-free approach. To do this we must
first identify variables that affect the issue price.

Variables that have been identified to affect the issue price of plain vanilla bonds include the
credit quality of the borrower, maturity of the issue, total nominal value, the presence of any

                                                                                                     28
option feature, and the prevailing level and volatility of market interest rate.

Gabbi et al. show that there are five main factors which affect primary market spreads for

                      29
corporate bonds:

(1) the bond issuer default risk

(2) the bond’s expected recovery rate in case of default;

(3) the expected liquidity of the secondary market of the bond issue;

(4) the expected tax treatment to which investors will be subject;

(5) the bond’s primary market efficiency conditions.

These five factors are used in the following model used by Gabbi et al. to regress the spread:

SPREADi = f(DEFAULTi,RECOVERYi,LIQUIDITYi,TAXi,EFFICIENCYi)+εi

Gabbi et al. assign different variables to the 5 different factors used in their model to regress the
yield spread for corporate euro bonds. We use this list of variables in combination with the
variables identified by Moorad et al. to construct a set of matched pairs of bonds.

28
  Moorad Choudhry. Bond & Money Markets - Strategy, Trading, Analysis. Chapter 18.5.3.
29
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422

                                                                          14
However, we do not have access to all of the variables Giampaolo Gabbi & Andrea Sironi
collected and tested. All of Giampaolo Gabbi & Andrea Sironi’s independent variables can be
found in figure A.1. in the appendix of this paper.

We set up a database with the purpose of matching pairs of green and conventional bonds that
are as identical as possible in the variables that have been identified to impact the required yield
and in extension the issue price. In addition to this, and in order to determine the eventual impact
from a green label on the issue price, we also include a variable that states if the bond is labelled
as green. A complete list of variables included in our dataset is presented in the section below.

1.4.2. List of available variables in dataset

Issue price (nummerical): Defined as the present value of the bond's cash flows divided over its
face value, multiplied by 100. The yield to maturity at issuance is used as discount rate.

Green bond (binary): Yes/No-variable that returns a “yes” if the bond is labelled as green
according to Thomson Reuters´ definition of green bond.

Instrument (factor): Whether the instrument is a bond or a note. Notes and bonds are, to the
best knowledge of the authors of this paper, the same type of debt instruments from a financial

               30
standpoint.

Coupon type (factor): States the bonds´ type of coupon payment, for example plain vanilla
fixed coupon.

Coupon frequency (factor): States at what time intervals coupon payments are made, for
example quarterly, semiannually or annually.

Coupon (numeric): Expresses the coupon rate in percent.

Amount issued (numeric): The nominal value of the bond as measured in USD.

30
  Moorad Choudhry. Bond & Money Markets - Strategy, Trading, Analysis. Chapter 1.5.2. outlines that there is in
practice no real financial difference between Treasury notes and bonds. And to the best knowledge of the authors of
this paper there is no financial difference between bonds and notes for other issuer types either.

                                                                          15
Country of Issue (factor): The market in which the security is issued, for example Germany,
the United States or the Eurobond market.

Issuer type (factor): Informs if the issuer is an agency, corporation or
government/supranational.

Principal currency (factor): The principal currency of the bond issue, for example US dollar or
Euro.

Private placement (binary): Yes/No-variable informing whether the bond has been issued to
the broader public market or directly to a selected number of investors in a private placement.

Eligible For EU Tax Savings (binary): Yes/No-variable. EIKON does not provide a clear
definition of this variable, nor are we able to find another source that to the best of our
knowledge provides a clear and explicit explanation of what type of EU tax directive and type of
EU tax savings eligibility this variable refers to.

Callable (binary): Yes/No-variable stating whether the issuer has the right, but not the
obligation, to redeem the bond prior to maturity.

Putable (binary): Yes/No-variable stating whether the investors have the right, but not the
obligation, to demand early repayment of the principle at specified dates.

Seniority (factor): A bond´s seniority determines the level of priority a bond holder has in
claiming an issuer's assets in the case of default. One example of such a level is senior
unsecured.

Rating (factor): This variable is Standard and Poor's (S&P´s) long term issue credit rating.

Tenor (numerical): The tenor of a bond is the time between issuance and maturity and is
expressed in years.

Guaranteed (binary): Yes/No-variable that informs if a third party guarantees the cash flow
streams from the bonod under the eventuality of the issuer defaulting on obligations.

                                                                          16
Issue date: Expresses the date for when the bond was issued.

1.4.3. Test method

We examine the possible discrepancy in issue price using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. The
Wilcoxon signed rank test is a nonparametric test which can be used for testing a random sample
of matched pairs of data. The sample of matched pairs of data is ranked in ascending order
according to the absolute differences in “issue price”, i.e. the variable we study to examine
potential discrepancies. The test assumes that the population distribution for the differences in
issue price is centered around 0, implying no difference in issue price. The different ranks are
then assigned to negative and positive differences in the issue price which are used to determine

                                                      31
the Wilcoxon signed rank test statistic T. Where:

T + = Sum of the positive ranks

T − = Sum of the negative ranks

Due to the central limit theorem we can approximate the binomial distribution of the differences
with the normal distribution. This allows the test to use a z-value test statistic. Since our sample

                                    32
size is large enough (n>20) we can test the data with the Wilcoxon signed rank test for large
samples. Our test is executed in matlab using the “singrank” function. The “signrank” function in
matlab allows us to test the null hypothesis that the differences in issue price between the bonds
in the pairs follows a distribution with a median of zero against a two sided alternative. Matlab

                                                                                33
uses the following test statistic for Wilcoxon large samples.

      (T +−n·(n+1)/4)
Z =  n(n+1)·(2n+1)−tiedj

    √ 24

 n = the sample size of the difference x-y

To deal with differences that are equal to zero in a two-sample test, matlab uses

31
  Newbold with others, Statistics for Business and Economics, p. 622-625
32
  Newbold with others, Statistics for Business and Economics, p. 622-625
33
  https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/signrank.html

                                                                          17
                                                                                                                              34
“[tie_rank,tieadj] = tiedrank(abs(diffxy),0,0,epsdiff) to obtain the tie adjustment value tieadj”.
As we test for a general discrepancy in issue price, the test is conducted against a two-sided
alternative. The significance level is set to 5 %, the same as the default significance level applied

                                        35
by Matlab for this type of test.

α = 0,  05

Null hypothesis, h 0 = the paired differences, x-y, have a distribution with a median equal to 0

Alternative hypothesis, h 1 = the paired differences, x-y, have a distribution with a median not
equal to 0

Green bond = x

Grey bond = y

Using the test for large samples enables matlab to obtain a z-value for the z test statistic as well
as a value for the signed rank test statistic. This then enables matlab to calculate a p-value for the
test.

The Wilcoxon signed rank test is well suited for this study since it allows to test for differences
in issue price using a relatively small data set and without having to make any assumptions about
the type of distribution of the issue price for the population.

1.5. Data sources and sample characteristics

We collected our data samples from the Thomson Reuters database EIKON. We restricted our
study to examine notes because at the time of collecting our data the Eikon universe of green
notes was considerably larger than the list of green bonds. At the time of data collection the
database had data points on a total of 1 859 849 notes. 115 146 of these had a credit rating and
issue price attached and of these a total of 356 were green notes.

After restricting the sample to only include eurobonds that are eligible for EU-tax savings, have

34
  https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/signrank.html
35
  https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/signrank.html

                                                                          18
the issue credit grade AAA and coupon type plain vanilla fixed coupon bonds, which was the by
far most frequent coupon type, the sample contained 35 green bonds and 262 non-green bonds.
We downloaded these and set up the following rules for the matching procedure, where the
bonds in the matched pairs should;

    - Have the same tenor and coupon frequency,
    - Be issued no more than 12 months apart,
    - Have the same binary values for the variables guaranteed, callable, putable and private
       placement,
    - Be senior unsecured and of the same currency.

20 of the green bonds from the sample were matchable with conventional bonds in accordance
with the matching rules set out above. We filtered grey bonds according to the matching rules
and in cases where multiple grey bonds where matchable with a green bond we placed these

                                                     36
separably and applied an excel function to randomly assign one of the applicable conventional
bonds to each respective green bond. After this procedure we had a complete list of 20 pairs of
bonds, matched in accordance with the rules set out in this paper. Each grey bond was only
allowed to be included once i.e. the same grey bond does not appear in multiple pairs.

We then obtained descriptive statistics for the issue prices of the respective bonds in each pair. A
complete list of these is presented in Table 1. Moreover we present the differences in issue price
between green and conventional bonds as illustrated with a boxplot in figure 2. The absolute
differences are shown with similar fashion in figure 3.

36
  Function of the form: =INDEX($A:$A;RANDBETWEEN(1;COUNTA($A:$A));1) where column “A” represents
a variable where each observation has a unique value, in our case “issuer name”. In cases where multiple of the
applicable grey bonds have the same issuer name we add a unique number at the end of each in order for the
function to be able to distinguish them.

                                                                          19
Table 1: A 20x3 table showing the respective issue prices for the green and grey bond in each
pair of bonds.

                                                                          20
Figure 2: Boxplot showing the differences in issue price between the pairs of green and grey
bonds in the test sample. The median difference is 0,0365 and is marked by the red line in the
boxplot.

                                                                          21
Figure 3: Boxplot showing the absolute differences in issue price between the green and grey
bonds in each pair in the test sample. The median absolute difference is 0,2435 and is marked by
the red line in the boxplot.

1.6. Empirical work/Analysis/findings

The test we conducted shows that green bonds tend to have a similar issue price relative to par
compared to conventional bonds. The null hypothesis was not rejected.

We tested the following hypothesis with the wilcoxon signed rank test for large samples:

Null hypothesis: h 0 = the paired differences, (x-y) have a distribution with a median = 0

Alternative hypothesis: h 1 = the paired differences, (x-y) have a distribution with a median
=/ 0

Significance level: α = 0,  05

The null hypothesis ( h 0 ) cannot be rejected at the 5% significance level in favor of the
alternative hypothesis ( h 1 ). The test yielded a Z-value from the z-test statistic of -0,1089 and
wilcoxon signed rank test statistic value of 83. The calculated p-value associated with the
z-value was 91,33%. The results from the empirical test supports the null hypothesis that the
population distribution of differences in issue price between green (x) and grey (y) bonds does
have a median of 0.

                                                                          22
Table 4: This table illustrates the raw test results as outputted by matlab using the “signrank”
test for large samples. Matlab did not reject the null hypothesis at a p-value of 0,9133.

To further visualize the absolute differences for the test result, the data was plotted in a
cumulative distribution function of the absolute differences as seen in figure 6, showing that
there is a difference between the pairs, however the data of the numerical values of the absolute
differences is concentrated within the 0-0,5 absolute difference range. The probability of finding
an absolute difference between 0-0,5 is approximately 80%. The plot also shows that the
probability of finding an absolute difference of 0 is approximately 10%. The numerical
differences are also plotted in a histogram in figure 7 which illustrates that the differences in
issue price are centered around zero which is consistent with the empirical test result from the
wilcoxon test.

                                                                          23
Figure 6: CDF (cumulative distribution function) with the cumulative probability for the
absolute differences in issue price between the pairs of bonds on the y-axis. And the absolute
difference in issue price on the x-axis.

                                                                          24
Figure 7: Histogram of the numerical differences in issue price for the test data. The differences
are centered around 0, which is consistent with the wilcoxon test result.

1.7. Limitations of research

Since the test in this study only includes a sample of the total green bond universe there is risk of
sampling error being present. The sample in this study is not perfectly representative for the
population of Eurobonds, for example the frequency of different variables such as the currencies
included differs between the sample and the population. Our result is not necessarily
representative for the broader population of bonds.

The sample size in our test is relatively small and this also poses a limitation to our study. One
advantage of the Wilcoxon signed rank test however is that it is non-parametric and can be
performed using a relatively small sample size compared to other statistical methods such as a
logistic regression. A larger sample size is nevertheless preferable.

The quality of this study depends much on the quality of the data source used. While we

                                                                          25
recognize the possibility of errors being present in the raw data we hold this as most unlikely
since all raw data has been exported directly from the EIKON database which is a highly
regarded source of financial data.

Different aspects related to the matching procedure pose further limitations to this study. First
there can be issuer-specific variables impacting the issue price which we are not able to match.
Second, an overrepresentation of a certain issuer type such as agency or corporate issuers in one
of the groups of bonds examined may distort the matching quality and therefore the result of this
paper. In this study for example a corporate bond can be matched with an agency bond and these
issuer types may differ in variables that have not been matched on in this study but are
nonetheless relevant for the issue price. We recognize this source of uncertainty as a major
limitation to this study. And in the cases in this study where a corporate bond is matched with a
corporate bond we do not match the bonds on their economic sector. This is yet another

                                                        37
limitation. Previous studies by Gabbi et al show that industry dummy variables have
statistically significant coefficients even though credit ratings are expected to capture economic
outlooks of different sectors. Matching all corporate bonds included in the sample with other
corporate bonds in the same economic sector could improve the quality of the matching
procedure.

Applying a matching rule for the variable issue amount could also be a way to improve this
study. A closer match on the variable issue amount was not feasible due to the limited amount of
conventional bonds that fulfilled the other matching criteria and could be matched with the
respective green bond. A tighter match on this variable than applied in this study might be
preferable. And although, to the best of our knowledge, we have matched pairs of bonds being
subject to identical tax treatment we recognize that other factors relating to the taxation rules for
Eurobonds can be potential sources of error.

Finally, to compare bonds from the same issuers, in cases where an issuer has issued both green
and conventional bonds, could be another way to improve the study since this could better
control for idiosyncratic factors.

37
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422

                                                                          26
It is also possible that the difference in issue price stems from variables related to the issue
procedure which we are not able to match the pairs of bonds in our study on. For example, in a
bond issue, once the coupon rate has been set, any eventual final price adjustments are driven by
the required yield which in turn drives the issue price. Thus, how long it takes from that the
coupon rate is set until the bond is finally issued and how volatile market interest rates are during
this period impacts the issue price. A closer match on the variable issue date than applied in this
study would be preferable.

Furthermore, it is possible that a bond issued in a simple underwriting procedure is matched with
a bond that has been issued using a different issuing procedure such as an auction, for example.
This in turn can affect the process under which the coupon rate is set and how long it takes from
that the coupon rate is set until the bonds are issued, and thus it would affect the process during
which the issue price is determined. We identify the fact that we are not able to match bonds on
variables related to the issuing procedure as another major limitation to this study.

1.8. Discussion

Our result supports that green bonds tend to, on average and all else equal, have a similar issue
price relative to par compared to conventional bonds. The result in this paper concerning the
non-difference in issue price can have potential implications and be of interest for market
participants such as intermediating banks since they generally aim to set the issue price equal to
or slightly under par.

Under the assumption that the bonds in the pairs have been issued in an identical issuing
procedure the result in this study indicates that the required issue yield for green bonds develops
in a similar way as for grey bonds from the time point in the issuing procedure when the coupon
rate is set until the bonds are issued. In addition this would indicate that any factors related to the
green label with an eventual impact on the required yield at issuance are taken into account prior
to when in the issuing procedure the coupon rate is decided on and fixed. Since the coupon rate
from the bond announcement is provisional and may be changed up until the pricing day to
reflect the markets´ required yield for the bond, if any such green label factors have an impact on

                                                                          27
the required yield this may already have been taken into account by a change in the coupon rate.
In which case, this study would not be able to catch an eventual effect from a green label since
the coupon rate has already been modified to reflect any eventual green factor effect on the
required yield at issuance. As discussed in the previous section however we are not able to
control for the above mentioned assumption of identical issuing procedures. This is because we
do not have access to data points and variables related to the issuing procedure and therefore no
such direct conclusions about an eventual impact on bond pricing from the green label can be
drawn from this study.

Importantly, the result in this study does not by itself indicate whether there is a green premium
or not in the primary market. For any such conclusions to be drawn a set of further assumptions
would need to hold and to test for these assumptions is outside of the scope of this study. To
explain however, we again recall that once in the bond issuing procedure when the coupon rate
has been decided, any eventual final pricing adjustments before issuance take place by a change
in the required yield. A change in required yield, given that the coupon rate has already been
fixed, drives a change in the issue price. For example a reduction in required yield would drive
up the issue price in this situation. Under the assumptions that; 1) a green label affects the
required yield and that not all of this has been taken into account by a change in the coupon rate
relative to the coupon rate at announcement date, 2) the bonds in each pair are identical except
for in the green label and 3) that they have been issued under identical conditions, the result in
this paper indicates a similar change in required yield for green bonds and grey bonds from the
time that the coupon rate is set until the time of issuance i.e. indicating that a green premium
does not exist. This would be contrary to results from recent studies on the topic which have,
although not unanimously, indicated the existence of a green premium. For example a study by

                  38
Wurgler et al . A similar issue price does not however indicate the absence of a green premium
by itself. In this study we are not able to control for these three assumptions mentioned above
that need to hold for our result to be interpreted as such. Therefore no such direct conclusions
about the pricing of green bonds can be drawn from this study.

38
  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3275327

                                                                          28
Instead, what can be concluded from this study is that the distribution around par is similar for
green bonds compared to conventional bonds at the time of issuance.

For future research this study may be useful as a sort of rough framework for examining if and
how a green label impacts bond pricing. For example, the authors of this paper identify research
methods that can examine if there is green premium in the primary market as interesting for
future studies. We identify such a test using the option adjusted spread as target variable in
combination with reducing some of the uncertainties and limitations discussed in the previous
section as an interesting method for future research. Such a test could yield more directly
interpretable results about green bond pricing and add to the relatively limited research on
eventual differences between the pricing of green and conventional bonds. Other methods such
as regression models or classification algorithms may also be feasible methods for analysing that
research question.

Furthermore, we reason that for such future research two factors related to the green label can be
hypothesized as variables with potential impact on the required yield. First, the additional
information being available in a green bond issue compared to in a conventional issue could be
thought of as having an impact on an investors risk assessment capabilities which in turn could
affect the required yield at issuance. Second, the level of demand for green issues could be
different than the demand for conventional issues which could affect the issue yield deemed as
acceptable by some investors, this could in turn affect the final issue price. While we identify
these hypotheses as interesting for future research we do however not test these hypotheses
empirically in this paper.

Lastly, and to familiarise ourselves in green bond related questions for future research, we briefly
discuss comments on differences between green bonds and conventional bonds from three
interviewees who are all professionally involved in the green bond market.

Peter Lööw, head of responsible investments at swedish pension fund Alecta, comments that an
improved understanding of sustainability aspects can be helpful for risk assessment. He adds that
it is important for Alecta as a long term investor to consider all types of risks and risks connected

                                                                          29
to for example climate change can be significant, especially in the long run. A lower required
yield must however be compensated by lower risk, whether the difference stems from a green
label or something else. He also comments that the sometimes relatively higher demand for

                                                                                                                           39
green bonds seems to enable pricing some of these issues a few basis points under the curve.

Johan Edin, fixed income origination at DNB Markets, comments that while investors are
increasingly taking sustainability aspects into account and show growing interest for green
investments it is the credit risk of the issuer up until time of maturity that the market focuses
primarily on in their risk analyses. He also adds that the likelihood of risks connected to
sustainability materializing up until maturity can differ substantially depending on the

                                                                 40
maturity/tenor of the bond and the type of issuer.

Mats Andersson, former CEO of Swedish pension fund AP4 and lead author of an investigation
about green bonds commissioned by the Swedish government, comments that there is a general
conception of a green premium existing and that this seems to be largely explainable by a
relatively higher demand for green bonds. He adds that although oversubscription is common for
conventional bonds as well, green bonds tend to be relatively more oversubscribed and this can

                                                                                41
enable green bonds to be priced under the curve more often.

Given the comments from the interviewees we are not able to draw any further conclusions about
the reason for the non-difference in issue price observed in this study. Their comments however
help us in identifying more concrete questions for future studies connected to green bonds. First,
it could be of academic interest to examine which factors can be used to explain what drives
investor demand for green bonds in particular, and other types of green debt instruments more
generally. An increased understanding of the factors driving demand for green bonds could also
be of direct interest to market participants. Second, it can be of academic interest to study to
what extent risks related to sustainability and climate are incorporated in the credit risk models
used by rating agencies and investors. If such risks are not fully understood or taken into account
by investors an improved understanding of this could also be of interest to a range of market

39
  Phone interview 11 april 2019
40
  Interview, 29 april 2019, Stockholm.
41
  Interview, 15 april 2019, Stockholm.

                                                                          30
participants.

1.9. Conclusions

This study supports that green bonds do not have a statistically significant different issue price
relative to par compared to conventional bonds. This indicates that green Eurobonds, compared
to conventional Eurobonds, tend to have a similar relation between their required yield and
coupon rate at the time of issuance. Importantly, this result cannot by itself be interpreted as
showing the non-existence of a green premium, nor can it be interpreted as showing how or if a
green bond label affects the required yield of bonds.

                                                                          31
2. References

Baker, Malcolm P. and Bergstresser, Daniel B. and Serafeim, George and Wurgler, Jeffrey A.,
Financing the Response to Climate Change: The Pricing and Ownership of U.S. Green Bonds
(October 12, 2018). https://ssrn.com/abstract=3275327. Retrieved 2019-02-27.

Climate Bonds Initiative. Bonds and climate change, the state of the market. 2018.
https://www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi_sotm_2018_final_01k-web.pdf. Retrieved
2019-02-10.

Climate Bonds Initiative and the International Finance Corporation. Green bond pricing in the
primary market: January 2016 - March 2017.
https://www.climatebonds.net/files/files/Greenbond_Pricing_Jan_16-March_17.pdf. Retrieved
2019-03-02.

European Commission. Banking and Finance, Newsletter, Green bonds. 2019-02-28.
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/fisma/item-detail.cfm?item_id=645336&utm_source=fisma_new
sroom&utm_medium=Website&utm_campaign=fisma&utm_content=Green%20bonds%20&lan
g=en. Retrieved 2019-03-10.

European Commission. Press release. Green Paper on the feasibility of introducing Stability
Bonds. 2011-11-23. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-11-820_en.htm. Retrieved
2019-04-24.

Finansdepartementet. SOU 2017:115. Att främja gröna obligationer. Betänkande av utredningen
om gröna obligationer.
https://www.regeringen.se/rattsliga-dokument/statens-offentliga-utredningar/2018/01/sou-20171
15/. Retrieved 2019-02-10.

Forum pour l'Investissement Responsable. Article 173-VI: Understanding the French regulation
on investor climate reporting. 2016-10.
https://www.frenchsif.org/isr-esg/wp-content/uploads/Understanding_article173-French_SIF_Ha
ndbook.pdf. Retrieved 2019-04-13.

                                                                          32
Giampaolo Gabbi and Andrea Sironi. Which factors affect corporate bonds pricing? Empirical
evidence from eurobonds primary market spreads. The European Journal of Finance. Volume
11, 2005 -issue 1: Pages 59-74 | Published online: 2007-02-17. DOI:
10.1080/1351847032000143422.

Global Sustainable Investment Alliance. 2018 Global sustainable investment review.
http://www.gsi-alliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/GSIR_Review2018.3.28.pdf. Retrieved
2019-04-13.

Institute of international Finance. Global Debt Monitor Hidden vulnerabilities. 2018-01-04.
https://images.magnetmail.net/images/clients/IIF_2/attach/GDM_Jan4_vf.pdf. Retrieved
2019-04-15.

International Capital Market Association. Green bond principles. 2018-06.
https://www.icmagroup.org/green-social-and-sustainability-bonds/green-bond-principles-gbp/.
Retrieved 2019-02-27.
Jonathan Berk & Peter DeMarzo. Corporate Finance. Global Edition. 4th edition. Pearson. 2017.

Moorad Choudhry. The Bond and Money Markets: Strategy, Trading, Analysis.
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2001.

Montreal pledge. 2014. https://montrealpledge.org/. Retrieved 2019-04-13.

Oliver David Zerbib. Is There a Green Bond Premium? The yield differential between green and
conventional bonds. 2018-05-30.
https://www.chaireeconomieduclimat.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Newsletter-juin-GB-Prem
ium-OD-Zerbib.pdf. Retrieved 2019-02-10.

Paul Newbold, William Carlson and Betty Thorne. Statistics for Business and Economics:
Global Edition. 8th edition. Pearson Education limited, 2012-02.

Principles for responsible investment. About the PRI. https://www.unpri.org/about-the-pri.
Retrieved 2019-04-13.

                                                                          33
Reuters. S&P Global Ratings forecasts green bond issuance at $180 bln this year. 2019-01-29.
https://uk.reuters.com/article/greenbonds-issuance/sp-global-ratings-forecasts-green-bond-issuan
ce-at-180-bln-this-year-idUKL5N1ZT63P. Retrieved 2019-02-27.

Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association. SIFMA Fact Book 2018.
https://www.sifma.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/US-Fact-Book-2018-SIFMA.pdf. Retrieved
2019-04-15.

Task Force on Climate related Financial Disclosures. About the task force.
https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/. Retrieved 2019-04-13.

The Economist. The cost of inaction: recognising the value at risk from climate change. 2015.
https://eiuperspectives.economist.com/sites/default/files/The%20cost%20of%20inaction_0.pdf.
Retrieved 2019-04-13.

The Mathworks inc. Signrank. https://se.mathworks.com/help/stats/signrank.html (retrieved
2019-04-20)

                                                                          34
3. Appendix

                                                                              42
Figure A.1. Complete list of variables used by Gabbi et.al.

42
  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/1351847032000143422

                                                                          35