DRY POWDER IN PRIVATE
EQUITY

HOW DOES IT RELATE TO PERFORMANCE AND WHAT ARE
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR  INVESTORS?

ADAM LARSFELT

SANNAMARI BÖLENIUS

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2019
Dry Powder in Private  Equity:  How Does  It  Relate to  Performance and What Are
the  Implications  for  Investors?
Abstract:

Although average returns are decreasing in the PE  industry, fund sizes are increasing
more than ever, as more and more capital is poured into the industry. The amount of
uncalled capital, known as dry powder, has recently hit record-high levels. This paper
aims to invest how the return of PE funds correlates with the amount of dry powder left
at liquidation. The hypothesis is that there may be a tendency among managers of the
fast-growing PE funds to invest close to all committed capital either by pursuing extra
projects or by spending it on trying to save  failing ones  -  even though it may have been
optimal to do neither one of them. Using an OLS-regression test, we test how the IRR to
limited partners correlates with dry powder left at liquidation. We also test how
different strategies for deploying dry powder could affect the return. Our results show
that the final IRR to limited partners correlates positively with the amount of dry
powder left at funds’ liquidation.  Furthermore, we find no correlation between the IRR
and the number of investments pursued.  Results are significant on a 0.1% level when
controlling for size, industry, strategy, and year. The results show that funds with more
dry powder left at liquidation have had a stronger performance than those with less and
that the number of investments does not affect return to investors. This indicates that
funds who have deployed all committed capital may have done so either by paying too
much in acquisitions or by trying to save failing investments, resulting in a lower IRR.

Key words:

   Private Equity,  Dry Powder,  IRR,  Fundraising, Cost of equity

Authors:

   Adam Larsfelt (23819)
   SannaMari Bölenius  (23972)

Tutor:

   Ran Guo,  Assistant Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Stockholm School of Economics

Bachelor  Thesis
Bachelor Program  in  Business and Economics
Stockholm  School of Economics
© SannaMari Bölenius and Adam Larsfelt, 2019

                                   1
Contents

1.        INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 4
1.1.      An overlook of the private equity industry .................................................... 4
1.2.      Research Focus and Delimitations .................................................................. 4
1.3.      Definitions .......................................................................................................... 6

2.       BACKGROUND ............................................................................................... 7
2.1.      Features of the PE industry ............................................................................. 7
2.2.      The Cyclicality of PE and its impact on cash flows ....................................... 8
2.3.      Costs of the PE asset class ................................................................................ 8
2.3.1.    The History of Dry Powder  -  Is it an Overlooked Driver of Cost? .................... 9
2.4.      Differences between Buyout and Venture Funds  ........................................ 10
2.5.      Differences Across Industry Specializations ................................................ 10
2.6.      The Size-Performance Relationship in PE ................................................... 10
2.6.1.    Disadvantages with large funds ........................................................................ 10
2.6.2.    Advantages with large funds  ............................................................................ 11
2.7.      Agency Conflicts in PE ................................................................................... 11
2.8.      Literature overview ........................................................................................ 13

3.        HYPOTHESIS ................................................................................................ 14

4.        DATA ............................................................................................................... 16
4.1.      Descriptive  Statistics....................................................................................... 17
4.2.      IRR, dry powder and fund size over the years  ............................................ 18

5.        METHOD ........................................................................................................ 20
5.1.      Variable selection ............................................................................................ 20
5.2.      OLS-regression and control variables .......................................................... 20

6.        RESULTS ........................................................................................................ 22
6.1.      Net Internal Rate of Return and its relationship with dry powder and the
          number of deals pursued ................................................................................ 22
6.2.      Robustness of the models  ............................................................................... 23

7.        ANALYSIS ...................................................................................................... 24
7.1.      Dry powder and fund return ......................................................................... 24
7.2.     Buyout and Venture Capital Dry Powder .................................................... 24

                                   2
7.3.      Number of investments................................................................................... 25
7.4.      The cyclicality of PE return ........................................................................... 26

8.       IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................... 27

9.       SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH ........................................ 28

10.      REFERENCES  ............................................................................................... 29

11.       APPENDIX ...................................................................................................... 31

                                   3
   1.  Introduction

   1.1.    An overlook of the  private equity industry

The return to limited partners investing in private equity funds has been decreasing
compared to benchmarks over the last 20 years (Appelbaum and Batt 2016). Despite
this, rapidly increasing amounts of capital are being committed to private equity funds,
with former peak years being the years before the financial crisis between 2003 and
2007. These years are known as “the golden age of private equity.” Loose credit
markets and enhanced risk-taking drove the vast increase in fundraising during these
years (Rizzi 2009), leading up to the PE industry later suffering from a significant
downturn during the financial crisis in 2008 when the PE bubble burst. The industry
became smaller, and firms with substantial portfolio legacy problems had trouble
raising new funds and had to be liquidated (Rizzi 2009).

Today it seems as if the PE industry has forgotten about the hard downturn, considering
the present global economic environment, which is, to some extent, comparable to the
one leading up to the crisis. Today the  credit markets are favorable, and there is
enhanced risk-taking by investors, and fundraising has once again reached record levels.
Furthermore, the amount of uninvested capital in PE funds, known as dry powder,
reached an all-time high in 2017 and seems  to be concentrated in the largest funds (Bain
Global Private Equity Report, 2018). While the average fund size has been increasing,
average returns to private equity have steadily decreased.

Prior research on the size-performance relationship of Private Equity is extensive but
inconclusive. Several studies have shown a negative or concave correlation between
size and return, while others have indicated the relationship is insignificant or that a
positive relationship between the two exists. In conclusion,  there is an obvious need for
additional research on the field.

Our research aims to dig deeper into the increasing average sizes of funds, the
decreasing returns, and the increased amounts of dry powder in the PE industry. The
goal is to examine how dry powder and the net return to investors are correlated, and
whether the strategy of pursuing more investments to deploy capital is correlated with
return to investors.

   1.2.     Research Focus and Delimitations

We suggest that the increasing amounts of capital in conjunction with greater
competition has driven fund managers to either invest more capital than predicted,
invest in more companies, or a combination of the two in order to deploy more of the

                                   4
committed capital. The rationale behind this theory is that the increasing fund sizes and
stiffer competition are making it hard to find suitable investments, and at the same time,
maintain a manageable number of investments. Therefore, we should see that successful
funds have left money uninvested, having decided not to  invest all the available capital.
The less successful funds should then tend to either invest more in their planned
acquisitions or turn to additional investments. This could partly explain the decreasing
returns to investors.

Consequently, this study aims  to examine the relationship between the uninvested
capital’s share of the total capitalization and the funds’ return to investors, and thereby
answer the following research questions:

      •  Is there a correlation between a fund’s performance and its share of
      committed capital that  remains  uninvested?

      •  Is there a correlation between private equity funds’ performance and the
      investment choices made by managers  regarding the number of investments
     pursued?

To narrow the scope of our study,  we make delimitations as below:

§   We limit our data to a sample of US funds between 1990-2007.

§   We focus our research on  venture  capital  and buyout funds.

§   We limit the “investment choices” to the more specific variable “number of
   acquisitions pursued.” We argue it is one of the  most relevant parameters since it
   captures decisions that fund managers need to make when faced with increased
   amounts of committed capital. Should they engage in more investments and risk that
   they are suboptimal in order to deploy all capital (optimize capital utilization), or
   should they leave some capital uninvested and use their resources as efficiently as
   possible (optimize resource utilization).

                                   5
   1.3.     Definitions

Buyout fund (BO):  A type of private equity fund  strategy  that uses investors’  capital
and leverage to acquire other companies, often with the intention of improving their
operations and later selling them.

Committed capital:  The amount of capital invested in the fund by the limited partners
and general partners.

Deployment rate: The share of committed capital that is invested by managers,
expressed as a percentage of the total commitments.

Dry powder:  The committed capital or cash equivalents in a fund that has not been
invested.

General Partner (GP):  The firm managing the private  equity fund. It usually also has
the highest share of money invested in the fund. Makes all the decisions for the fund,
including the number of investments pursued.

Gross Internal Rate of Return (Gross IRR) to LPs:  The  return on investment  before
fees to  GPs are deducted.

Limited Partner (LP):  Investors who commit capital to a private equity fund. Together
they have committed a majority of the total committed capital, they are however passive
when it comes to decision-making.  Common examples of LPs are pension funds and
insurance companies.

Merger and acquisition (M&A):  The consolidation of companies. Mergers are
usually the consolidation of two companies into one, while an acquisition implies one
company taking over another.

Net Internal  Rate of Return (Net IRR) to LPs:  The return limited partners get from
the PE fund when fees to GPs are deducted.  These fees  are usually a  management fee of
2% of total committed capital and  a  performance fee of 20% of the fund’s profits.

PE fund:  Unlisted  fund  that is  usually active for a period of 10-12 years.

Return spread:  The difference between gross IRR and net IRR. Often used as a way to
measure costs in private equity investing.

Venture capital fund (VC): A private equity fund that mainly targets  and invests in
start-ups with high growth potential and high risk.

                                   6
2.    Background

   2.1.     Features of the PE industry

The private equity industry consists of funds investing in equity securities and  private
companies. When speaking about the business model of private  equity, the term is used
to describe the operation of taking a company into ownership for reconstructions, in
order to later sell it with a profit. There are many different kinds of PE funds, but the
investment is typically accomplished by a BO fund, a VC  firm, or a real estate fund. Of
these, the most common are BO and VC funds. Each fund belongs to a specific firm,
which can have multiple funds operating simultaneously.

The PE funds are established by investors who have invested their money. These are
known as limited partners (LPs) and general partners (GPs). General partners normally
have several years of experience from other PE firms and the banking or consulting
industries before starting a fund. This is of importance since GPs are responsible for the
overall management and administration of the firm, which means their knowledge helps
them understand the process of value creation and operations improvement in
companies. In addition, they usually have an extensive network that can aid them in
raising funds and finding attractive targets. GPs typically commit 1-5 percent of the
fund’s entire equity. The rest of the equity is committed by LPs, who are not involved
with the fund management. GPs are usually compensated for their work by a fixed
management fee of 2%, of the fund’s total capital committed, along with a performance
fee that is around 20% of profits, known as carried interest.

The limited partners usually consist of institutional investors, including corporate and
public pension funds, endowments, and insurance companies, as well as wealthy
individuals (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009).

The investments are typically made with an investment horizon of five to ten years but
can be extended for up to three additional years. A PE firm typically has up to  five years
to invest the fund’s capital into companies, and then an additional five to eight years to
return the capital to its investors (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009).

The industry is to a great extent cyclical, with returns and the ability to fundraise  being
deeply dependent on market conditions. In times when interest rates are unusually low
relative to fundamentals, firms tend to increase borrowing, and when equity markets are
overvalued firms tend to raise more equity (Gompers, Kaplan and Mukharlyamov,
2016). With the low-interest rates in today’s market, investors are thus relying
increasingly on equity, hoping for better returns. As a result, the average PE fund size is
increasing, implying increased competition for investments. Also, global dry powder
has reached record levels.

                                   7
   2.2.     The Cyclicality of PE and its impact on cash flows

According to Robinson and Sensoy (2011), fluctuations in public and private equity
markets move together. For example, the VC boom and bust in the late 1990s and early
2000s  was accompanied by the rise  of the high-tech internet era, and the buyout boom
of the mid-2000s corresponded with high public equity valuations and  low-cost debt
financing. The implications of this co-cyclicality for PE cash flows and fundraising has
been  investigated by many. For instance, Kaplan and Strömberg (2009), find evidence
for counter-cyclicality in fundraising and performance. According to them, the IRR of
buyout funds raised in boom eras is worse than the IRR of funds raised in bust periods.
Robinson and Sensoy (2011) found the same result, that  high private equity fundraising
could forecast low private equity cash flows and low market returns. Hence, they
suggest a positive correlation between private equity net cash flows and public equity
valuations.

The implication from this is that dry powder may be a significant asset for PE funds,
especially in bust periods, where it can be used to make profitable investments.

   2.3.     Costs of the PE asset class

Braun and Stoff (2016) argue that there are three  main drivers of the cost of PE
investing, affecting the return spread between LPs and GPs. These costs are partly
interacting, being: fund terms, fund gross performance, and GP investment behavior.
The most obvious of these being fund terms since that is the main determinant for GP
compensation in terms of fees. Normally, these are about 2% per year in management
fees and 20% in carried interest in excessive fund profits beyond a preferred return to
LPs (Braun and Stoff, 2016). Fund terms interact with the  second driver of PE
investment costs  -  gross fund performance. This, as fund terms determine the level of
minimum gross return before GPs receive carried interest. To illustrate, consider a fund
where the minimum return is reached. For this fund, elevated  gross returns will imply
higher performance-based compensation for GPs and consequently higher costs for LPs.

The third driver is GP investment behavior, generally expressed as a fund’s deployment
rate, which is the committed capital invested by managers,  expressed as a percentage of
the total committed capital. The relevance of GP investment behavior becomes evident
when considering funds with different deployment rates, and how they affect the fees
LPs pay to GPs in relation to the amount of capital the GPs actually invest, known as
the  effective  management fee.

                                   8
Braun and Stoff (2016), illustrate the cost of GP investment behavior with a simple
example:

“Assume a USD 100 million fund with a 2% management fee for a five-year investment period, which
consequently receives USD 10 million in fees for this period. If the GP is able to also invest USD 100
million (equivalent to a gross deployment rate of 100%), the return spread of USD 10 million fees
amounts to 0.1xMM (USD 10 million/USD 50 million). Effectively, a deployment rate of only half the
committed capital implies a doubling of the effective management fee percentage to 5% for the capital
employed.”

Concluded, in absolute numbers the management fee to general partners is the same in
both cases. However, for the limited partners, the cost in comparison to how much
capital they get invested varies a lot.

2.3.1.    The History of Dry Powder  -  Is it an Overlooked Driver of Cost?
Dry powder has become an increasingly important issue, particularly since 2006 due  to
the extensive fundraising that occurred in the PE industry the years prior to the financial
crisis. These raised funds then faced low M&A activity the following years in the
recovering market. As a result, dry powder increased excessively on a global scale from
USD 796 billion in 2006 to USD 1,318 trillion in June 2015 (Braun, Stoff 2014). The
increased amounts of dry powder signal a reduction of good investment opportunities
increased uncertainty and LPs that are eager to invest money. Consequently, the PE
industry experiences higher competition for investment opportunities, resulting in a
significant price increase for new investment opportunities.

The enhanced level of competition in the industry has resulted in GPs wanting to keep
cash reserves in order to be able to act fast in the event of a sudden investment
opportunity appearing. Consequently, an increased search time for GP:s for potential
targets has been shown (Ljungqvist and Richardson, 2003; Inderst and Mueller, 2003),
which increases the amounts of dry powder even further. For LPs, the increased time
from fundraising to investment naturally results in lower gross returns, as they have
committed capital that is uninvested, and that they cannot invest in other opportunities.

Braun and Stoff (2016) argue that dry powder is a vastly overlooked driver of cost in
the PE asset class, as they find that costs when controlling for gross fund returns (lower
performance-based fees) have actually increased between the years of 1983 and 2007.
This, in contrast with what should be expected, which is lower costs as the PE industry
has reached increased market maturity.

Finally, research within dry powder is limited, since there are several difficulties in
obtaining data. One reason is that the amount of dry powder is to a large extent self-
reported, which implies a certain level of ambiguity in the numbers provided.

                                   9
   2.4.     Differences between Buyout and Venture Funds

The main differences between the two forms of investing within Private Equity are the
stage in which  it is chosen to invest. While buyout funds invest mainly in mature
companies that are already established, venture capital funds invest in early-stage
companies that are usually associated with higher  risk. Additionally, buyout funds
usually acquire a majority stake in their investments, with the goal of being in total
control of the firm after the buyout. Venture capital firms instead tend to invest in a
smaller part of the equity, aiding firms with financing while being provided with a
significant  upside  if the  acquired  firm proves successful. Due to the high risk in venture
capital, they tend to prefer to spread their risk over many different projects. Naturally,
BO funds thus tend to pursue larger companies, and VC funds smaller. According to
Metrick and Yasuda (2010), the BO business model is also a more scalable one than the
VC, which results in that also the sizes of the funds themselves tend to differ.

Bertoni, Ferrer, and Marti (2013) also concluded that VC funds on average perform
better, as they  tend to invest in smaller and riskier firms with higher growth rates.
Although there are significant differences between the two industries, Phalippou and
Zollo (2005) find a significant overlap between the two. In their research, they show BO
funds invest  up to 18% in VC, and correspondingly that VC funds invest 11% in BO.

   2.5.     Differences Across Industry Specializations

In the early stages of PE, funds typically invested in a large variety of sectors, not
specializing in any specific industry. As the PE market matured, however, more and
more funds have realized the advantages with industry specialization and chosen to act
accordingly. Research has further shown that PE funds specializing tend to outperform
generalists (Zweig, Auerbach and Tabares, 2014; Gompers, Kovner and Lerner, 2009).
The different industry focuses, excluding generalists, tend to be quite similar in many
ways, although some funds  are unique. Bitsch, Buchner, and Kaserer (2010) find that
funds specializing in infrastructure on average are larger, as their investments tend to
require a lot of capital. Their deals usually also require longer time horizons, as the life
of their assets on average is longer than for other specializations.

   2.6.     The Size-Performance Relationship in PE

2.6.1.    Disadvantages with  large funds

Many studies have investigated the size-performance relationship in the PE industry,
and a concave relationship has repeatedly been observed. However, the theories as to
why such a relationship exists are many, and research has not been conclusive. What is
known, however, is that with increased capitalization, funds tend to engage in at least

                                  10
one out of two strategies. They either pursue a higher number of investments or invest
in larger companies.

In the case of investing in more companies, the GPs available resources for each
investment will  usually  decrease. If PE firms add value by undertaking investments that
require attention and resources by the GP, then smaller PE firms could potentially have
an advantage (Lopez-de-Silanes et al., 2013). It has also been shown that as PE funds
grow, their number of skilled GPs do not grow proportionally (Cumming, Siegel and
Wright, 2007), further supporting the argument.  Although one could assume that larger
funds would have several advantages due to the  more extensive knowledge pool,
research indicates larger companies imply stricter hierarchy than smaller companies do,
and more often disadvantages are emerging from communication difficulties (Lopez-de-
Silanes et al. (2013)

The other strategy available for PE funds is to invest  in larger companies. Supporting
the argument, Robinson and Sensoy (2015) found that the size of a BO fund and the size
of its portfolio companies are highly correlated. Following Humphrey-Jenner (2012),
this a preferable strategy,  since large BO-funds are better equipped to transform larger
companies, while small funds should pursue small. Furthermore, funds tend to pursue
companies in which they can centralize processes and improve administration (Bertoni
et al.,  2013). Large funds  have demonstrated  difficulties observing all divisions at once
(Taymaz, 2005) and  managing  radical innovation (Leifer O'Connor and Rice (2001).

To conclude, both strategies to  deploy  capital entail disadvantages. The most significant
being that more investments lead to fewer resources per professional as human capital
does not increase proportionally, ineffective communication due to hierarchy and
having a hard time to manage radical innovation.

2.6.2.    Advantages with large funds
Although research indicates that  large funds may earn lower returns than small ones,
large funds do have plenty of advantages. First of all, they have superior connections
with essential institutions such as investment banks, which may aid them in signing
better deal terms (Hochberg, Ljungqvist and Lu, 2007; Hellman, Lindsey, and Puri,
2008; Hege, Palomino and Schwienbacher, 2009; Demiroglu and James, 2010). Second,
they have a better chance of diversifying internationally (Cumming and Dai, 2010b).
Since every country offers its favorable  investment environments (Hege, Palomino, and
Schwienbacher, 2009; Cumming and Walz, 2010), there is an excellent advantage in
large PE-funds being able to select their investment environment to a  greater  extent.

   2.7.     Agency Conflicts in PE

With the increased  competition in the PE industry, it has been more and more
challenging to generate outstanding fund returns. Naturally, LPs, who invest money into

                                  11
the PE funds, have been increasingly critical towards the GPs, who are responsible for
finding and investing the LPs money in the best possible deals. The criticism has been
noticed by academic literature, that has started to investigate the compensation structure
between GPs and LPs (Litvak 2009), and the distribution between fixed and variable
compensation (Metrick and Yasuda 2010), as well as the connection between the
costliness of fund terms and net performance (Robinson and Sensoy 2013).

Since GPs usually receive a management fee of 2% on all committed capital from LPs,
there is a clear incentive to raise as  much capital as possible. Also, GPs have evident
incentives to maintain low deployment rates since they thereby can extract more
management  fees for less work (Braun and Scott, 2016). In conclusion, in theory, it
could be to be beneficial for GPs to keep high amounts of dry powder in the fund. Since
levels of dry powder have increased rapidly in the last couple of years, this is an area of
high interest. Extreme cases, known as “zombie funds”,  have also been observed,
providing practical implications for the theory. These being funds with almost no
investments, simply extracting annual management fees from their funds (Braun and
Stoff 2016).

                                  12
  2.8.     Literature overview

Name of Article   Author/Date       Data                Most relevant findings

Are Lower Private    Appelbaum and   Buyout funds      While median private equity buyout funds once beat the
Equity Returns the    Batt 2016        from 2006 - 2016  S&P 500, they have not done so since 2006.
New Normal?

Giants at the Gate:     Lopez-de-         334 PE funds       PE firms’ operations and actions do not seem mechanical
Investment Returns    Silanes,                                or easily scalable.
and Diseconomies     Phalippou &
of Scale in Private     Gottschalg 2013                     1 in 10 investments does not return any money, while 1 in
Equity                                                    4 has an IRR over 50%.

Private equity,        Cumming,        U.K.              As PE funds grow, their number of skilled GPs does not
leveraged buyouts,    Siegel and        management       grow proportionally.
and governance       Wright 2007      buyouts: 1982–
                                   2005

Private Equity        Kaplan &         1980-  2001,       The average fund returns are approximately equal to the
Performance:         Schoar  2005      quasi-liquidated    S&P 500. Performance drivers are a previous good
Returns,                                  funds larger than   performance and a smaller size. The relationship is
Persistence, and                         USD 5m, VC      concave. At the industry level, market entry and fund
Capital Flows                          and LBOs         performance are procyclical, but established funds are less
                                                                 sensitive to cycles than new entrants.

The Cost of Private    Braun and Stoff   586 buyout         Return spreads have increased over time, while fund terms
Equity Investing and   2016              funds, realized     on average have been stable, implying GP investment
the Impact of Dry                         funds, from         behavior is a third, vastly overlooked driver of PE
Powder                              North America,    investment costs. Dry powder is an overlooked driver of
                                            Europe, and Asia   cost in PE investing.

The Investment        Ljungqvist and    3,800 portfolio     Existing funds earn higher returns when investment
Behavior of PE        Richardson        companies by      opportunities improve and when demand for capital
Fund Managers       2003             hundreds of        increases. Supply increases result in  tougher competition
                                           private equity       for deal flow, and PE fund managers respond by cutting
                                       funds.  1981-2001  their investment spending.

What Drives Private   Phalippou &      US and European   Larger funds  perform better.  Fund performance co-varies
Equity Fund           Zollo 2005        Venture Funds     positively with both business cycles and stock-market
Performance?                            between 1980-     cycles.
                                   2003

What Drives PE?      Aigner,           104 European      Years of experience is an important factor for top
Analyses of Success   Albrecht,          funds between      performing private equity GPs.
Factors for Private     Beyschlag,        1971-2007, of
Equity              Friederich,       which 70% were   Successful GPs pursue riskier investments.
                     Kalepky &        liquidated
                                                                 GDP growth, low-interest rates, small fund sizes are
                     Zagst 2008
                                                              performance drivers in PE.

                                  13
3.    Hypothesis

Following previous research and reviewed literature on private equity performance
related to size, which is not conclusive, we have formulated two hypotheses regarding
the effect dry powder could have on performance:

H1: More dry powder  left at liquidation  is correlated with a higher  net  return

        In line with this hypothesis, we present the idea that firms with less dry powder
may have chosen to pursue a higher number of investments. To illustrate this, consider a
firm that has pursued a certain number of investments they consider optimal or perfect.
Do they choose to take on another investment, not as suitable as the other ones, just
because they have money left to spend? To be able to confirm or reject this theory, we
also test the correlation between the IRR and the number of investments pursued  by a
fund. If true, we should see a significant negative correlation between the IRR and the
number of investments pursued. In case no such correlation is found,  we suggest it may
be the case  that  funds with less dry powder have not spent their extra capitalization on
another investment, but either spent their dry powder trying to save failing investments,
or they could have paid too much in acquisitions  to start with. Both  scenarios would
also result in a lower IRR for the investments pursued, and hence a  positive correlation
between dry powder and IRR.

Also, based on previous research by Ljungqvist and Richardson, (2003), and Inderst and
Mueller (2003), we suggest that PE firms  pursuing  a strategy to keep some dry powder
enables them to act fast in the event of a sudden investment opportunity appearing.
These firms would accordingly have a higher IRR at liquidation since they have been
able to pursue optimal investment opportunities when  they arise, instead of investing
everything from the start as may be the case for those with no dry powder. This will,
however, be hard to test and is outside of our scope for this paper.

Additionally,  a  positive correlation between dry powder and IRR could  indicate that the
rapidly increasing fund sizes between 1990-2005 have resulted in funds that are too big
to be efficiently handled. As human capital, in general, does not increase proportionally
to fund size (Cumming, Siegel and Wright, 2007), our suggestion is that funds that are
pursuing less or smaller investments than other funds (leaving more dry powder) have
had a more appropriate size of their investment team for their pursued investments, than
funds investing their entire capitalization. They, therefore, have a higher IRR on their
pursued investments.

                                  14
H2: There is a negative or nonexistent relationship between funds’ dry powder  left at
liquidation  and  net  return to investors

The rationale in case the regression results in  a negative relationship is  based on the
agency conflicts in PE. The argument is that GPs may intentionally keep low
deployment rates since they earn a 2% management fee on total committed capital.
Therefore, there is an incentive to commit as much capital as possible, while not
deploying all since they in that way collect higher fees for their invested effort in the
fond (higher effective management fee). This incentive would result in funds with high
amounts of dry powder (low deployment rates) performing worse than those with  low
amounts  since their GPs do not act to maximize return, but rather to maximize their
effective management fees.

Additionally, this hypothesis is supported by Braun and Stoff (2016), suggesting that
dry powder is genuinely a fourth driver of cost in the PE industry. As the IRR in our
data includes fees (both the management fee and the carried interest or performance
fee), the IRR to investors would thus be lower for funds with high amounts of dry
powder, as LPs have paid higher management fees in comparison to the investments
made with their money.

In case no significant relationship is found, meaning the amount of dry powder at
liquidation has no relationship with the return to investors, it would imply that the only
cost for limited partners regarding dry powder is the need to retain enough liquidity to
cover their commitments. This outcome would, similarly to H1, question the notion that
dry powder is a major  driver of cost for investors.

                                  15
4.    Data

The majority of the data used in the regression was collected from Bloomberg’s Private
Equity database. It was later manually combined with fund strategies extracted from the
Thomson Reuter’s database. The original dataset included 1580 funds. However, funds
that were missing values were excluded, leaving us with a sample of 413 funds.  We see
no indications that the funds with missing values are systematic.

The dataset includes the following variables: Fund Name, Fund  Manager, Industry,
Vintage, Target Size, Committed Capital, Invested Capital, Dry Powder, and Net IRR.
All variables are reported by the fund manager, except the net IRR, which is reported by
LPs and calculated using their cash flows.

There are several issues when it comes to obtaining useful data on private equity in
general. According to Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke (2010), performance data only
cover a small fraction of funds started, as funds who did not survive are not included in
the performance measures. Moreover, there could be a particular bias to be expected
when using self-reported data, as funds with poor performance may have sustained from
reporting at all. However, we argue this performance bias is mitigated as the LPs report
the net IRR, and  not the GPs or fund managers, as is the case for the other variables.
The incentives for misreporting IRRs are significantly smaller for LPs than GPs, as they
have a  smaller  gain of reporting incorrectly. Also, all IRRs in Bloomberg are matched
against the reports of other LPs of the same PE fund. In this manner, largely
misreported performances are likely to be small.

However, survivor bias, which tends to plague standard private equity databases
(Harris, Jenkinson, and Stucke,  2010) maintains an issue in this study  as well.
Continuing, we are therefore aware of that our results regarding IRR and dry powder are
only for funds who have survived, implying that funds that have not found any
investments at all (with extreme amounts of dry powder) are not included in our dataset.

                                  16
   4.1.     Descriptive  Statistics

Table 1  –  Means for variables

 Variable          Obs      Mean      Std.Dev.       Min        Max
 Dry Powder       413       .041         .106          0          .911
 Number of inv.     413      8.952        8.962         0           71
 Net IRR           413       .10          .232         -.736        1.246
 Size (USD)        413     5.41e+08     8.30e+08    5  000 000    8.00e+09

Table  2  –  Means by size

 Size                  Net IRR          Dry Powder       Number of inv.
 First quartile             .066               .022              5.055
 Second quartile           .128               .041              7.879
 Third quartile            .093               .047              9.696
 Fourth quartile           .116               .054              13.369

Table 3  -  Means by strategy

 Strategy                 Net IRR        Dry Powder      Number of inv.
 Buyout                    .087             .047             9.391
 Venture Capital             .111              .03              8.974
 Other                      .103             .047             8.299

As we can see  in table 1, there is a significant variation in the amounts of dry powder
funds have reported; the smallest percentage reported being 0 and the largest 91.1.
Many funds reported having zero dry powder, while only one had 91.1%.  Consequently,
the mean is at 4.1%. Furthermore, funds on average pursued about  nine  investments,
with an average IRR around 10%, which in general can be considered standard numbers
for the private equity industry. The sizes of funds ranged from USD 5 million to USD 8
billion.

Table two and three display that dry powder seems to be clustered in the largest funds
and in funds pursuing either a buyout strategy or other strategies such as mezzanine or
real estate.

                                  17
   4.2.     IRR, dry powder and fund size over the years

Figure 1  –  Net IRR over Vintage

Note: net IRR to limited partners decreased between 1990-2007.

Figure 2  –  Share of Dry Powder over Vintage

Note: Dry powder in relation to total commitments increased between 1990-2007.

As can be seen, dry powder was not much of an issue in the 1990s. Almost all funds
deployed all committed capital, leaving none left at liquidation. These years, the IRR

                                  18
was also significantly higher. This is likely to be due to the boom of the internet and
tech industry, mostly affecting venture capital firms positively. Also, the level of
competition in the PE industry was lower. As the PE market matured,  the internet boom
was  over, and competition increased, the  average IRR also  decreased.

Figure 3 – Mean fund size over Vintage

Note: Average fund size increased between 1990-2007

In our data, we also see that the average fund size increased  between 1990-2007. This
increase is a result of the larger and larger amounts of capital poured into PE.

In  conclusion, our data shows decreasing returns, increasing amounts of dry powder and
a  growing average fund size. Although these results are for the years of 1990-2007, a
similar pattern is shown in today’s market (2019), where we have hit record levels in
fund size and dry powder, and returns to PE are decreasing.

                                  19
5.     Method

   5.1.     Variable selection

 Variables/Dependents                   Comment

 Net  IRR                                Dependent variable; net Internal Rate of
                                                Return to investors
 Dry Powder                               Independent variable; Dry powder  at
                                               liquidation  as a share  of  total commitments
 Number of investments                     Independent variable; number of
                                            investments

 Vintage                                  Dummy; year of liquidation

 Venture capital                             Dummy; funds employing a venture capital
                                                 strategy

 Buyout                                 Dummy; funds employing a buyout strategy

 Industry                                   Dummy; what industry specialization the
                                             fund has

 Smallest 25%                             Dummy; the smallest quartile in our sample

 Largest 25%                              Dummy; the largest quartile in our sample

 DPxBuyout                            Interaction variable; sensitivity to increases
                                             in dry powder for buyout  funds

   5.2.     OLS-regression and control variables

We use an OLS-regression to test our hypotheses, which is a type of linear least squares
method used to estimate uncertain parameters in a linear regression model. In order for
the regression to have optimal  explanatory power and provide the maximum likelihood
estimator, the error term has to be normally distributed. This was tested, and a
histogram of the error variables can be found in the appendix (figure 7).

                                  20
If we exclude all control variables, the primary  regression to test our hypothesis is as
below. It is in this test we will see whether there is any correlation between the dry
powder and return, and the number of investments pursued and return.

 𝑵𝒆𝒕 𝑰𝑹𝑹  =  𝜷𝟎  + 𝜷𝟏𝑺𝒉𝒂𝒓𝒆𝒐𝒇𝑫𝒓𝒚𝑷𝒐𝒘𝒅𝒆𝒓  +  𝜷𝟑𝑵𝒖𝒎𝒃𝒆𝒓𝒐𝒇𝒊𝒏𝒗𝒆𝒔𝒕𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒔  + 𝝐

We have then chosen to add control variables in order to see how the fractions of
explained variance change as we add them. These control variables being industry,
strategy,  vintage, and size. The variables are chosen as we know return differs across
industries, strategies, years and size. Therefore, we wanted to hold these effects still.

Also, we add an interaction variable to the table, since we expect the different
investment strategies to differ in how sensitive they are to dry powder. Adding the
interaction variable allows us to see whether, for example, buyout funds  tend to be more
sensitive than venture capital or other funds to increases or decreases of dry powder.

                                  21
6.    Results

   6.1.     Net IRR  and its  relation to  dry powder and the number of
     deals pursued

Table  4  –  OLS-Regression with interaction variable

 Dependent var:       Basis       Vintage     Strategy      Size        Industry     Interaction
  Net IRR            Model 1    Model 2    Model 3     Model 4    Model 5    Model 6
 Dry Powder         0.349***    0.450***     0.462***    0.440***    0.489***     0.982***
                      (0.11)      (0.10)       (0.10)      (0.10)       (0.13)       (0.20)

 Nr. of investments    0.005***    0.005***     0.005***    0.004***     0.004**      0.004**
                      (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)

 Vintage                         -0.025***    -0.025***    -0.026***    -0.026***     -0.026***
                                  (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)

 Buyout                                     -0.021       -0.024       -0.027        0.006
                                              (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)

 Venture Capital                            0.018       0.013       0.012        0.038
                                              (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)

 Smallest 25%                                           -0.050       -0.050        -0.050
                                                          (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)

 Largest 25%                                           0.002       -0.002       -0.003
                                                          (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)

 DPxBuyout                                                                  -0.704**
                                                                                    (0.22)
 Controlling for
                     No        No         No        No        Yes         Yes
 Industry
 R-Sqr               0.060      0.187       0.193       0.201       0.212        0.234
 N                  413       413        413        413        413        413
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

The OLS-regression tests the amount of correlation between variables, the perfect
correlation  being  1, and the perfect negative correlation  being  -1. The R-squared value,
known as the coefficient of determination, explains how much variance in the data is
explained by the model. In our test, the IRR works as the dependent variable, being
explained by dry powder and the number of investments pursued.

                                  22
Our results show a significant, positive correlation between funds’  dry powder and  their
internal rate of return, which remains and becomes increasingly significant as control
variables are added. When controlling for vintage, the correlation of 0.450 has an R-
square of close to 19%. A correlation of 0.450  can be considered  moderate. However, it
is significant and thus has high explanatory value.

The  results also show  that the number of investments undertaken by each fund has close
to zero correlation with their returns, with a significance of  𝜌  =  0.001. These results
also remain significant  as control variables are added.  The test also shows a significant
indication that there is a negative correlation between fund vintage and return, but with
a coefficient close to zero. The evolution of net IRR over the vintages in our data is
illustrated in the descriptive statistics.

   6.2.     Robustness of the models

The main interest  of  this study is  to  test the relationship between dry powder and return
to investors. The test shows a positive correlation across  all models, with significance  of
𝜌  =  0.001. We add control variables across  five  additional models to test the robustness
of the initial result. It is reasonable to expect that dry powder will differ across different
investment strategies, industries and vintages. As illustrated in industry reports,  dry
powder is also clustered in larger funds  (Bain Global Private Equity Report, 2018).  We,
therefore, add these variables, to avoid any underlying correlation with dry powder
affecting the correlation. The result remains significant, and the results show structural
validity. When adding the interaction variable  DPxBuyout, the non-significant
coefficient for buyout strategy changes its sign from positive to negative. The
interaction variable is significantly negative, confirming that a fund’s strategy is
relevant  when predicting its performance return to dry powder. This change of
coefficient is expected.  All other variables keep the same sign as control variables are
                                            s
added, and the  coefficient of determination  𝑅  increases from 0.060  to  0.234, with the
most substantial increase to the model adding vintage. This signals that the models’
explanatory efficiency increases with every added variable. In conclusion, the results
are robust.

                                  23
7.    Analysis

The result of the first regression presented in table  four  supports our first hypothesis that
there is a positive correlation between uninvested committed capital and net return to
investors. The results are significant on a  0.1% level across all models with control
variables. We also find that there is substantial proof for a non-existent relationship
between the number of investments pursued and net IRR.

   7.1.     Dry powder and fund return

The  presence of dry powder has in previously reviewed literature been discussed as a
driver of cost in private equity investing (Braun and Stoff, 2016), due to management
fees being calculated on total committed capital rather than total invested capital. Our
findings imply that, despite investors paying higher management fees due to dry
powder, funds with higher amounts of dry powder tend to perform better. These results
imply that higher performance returns can to some extent mitigate dry powder's effect
on management fees.

A possible reason for this result is that funds with higher deployment rates have spent
more money on investments that do not yield as high return. As these funds do not tend
to pursue extra investments (no correlation between the number of investments and
return),  this implies  that these  funds either have spent more capital on existing
investments to make them profitable or to  prohibit losses, or that they  have been more
aggressive in their bidding for their investments to start with, paying higher prices and
thereby earning a lower return.

In conclusion, our findings on the relationship between  dry powder and return suggest
that dry powder is more often used as capital reserve for demanding investments than as
a backup to be able act on sudden opportunities.

   7.2.     Buyout and Venture Capital Dry Powder

In model 6, we add the interaction variable DPxBuyout. It relates the two variables
Share  of Dry Powder with Buyout Strategy. We thereby test how dry powder's impact
on return differs between the different strategies present in our dataset. The coefficient
for buyout turns from negative to positive when moving from model 5 to model 6, while
the interaction variable for buyout is negative. In addition, we see the coefficient for dry
powder rises from 0.489 to 0.982 when the interaction variable for buyout funds is
added.

This implies that the observed average positive effect of dry powder on return to
investors is  partly  mitigated if a fund is using a buyout strategy, compared to venture
capital and other strategies. It thereby seems as if buyout funds do not have to add more

                                  24
capital into existing investments to make them profitable to the same extent as, for
example, venture capital funds. This finding makes intuitive sense, as a venture capital
strategy usually implies a higher risk and hence a higher variation in performance,
attributable to their strategy of investing in smaller and more uncertain companies, in
which capital needs are less predictable.

We consciously choose not to frame our sentences as “buyout funds do not have as
much to gain” from maintaining levels of dry powder, as dry powder per say does not
yield a higher return. It is the conclusions one can draw as an investor, from funds that
have  different amounts  of dry powder left at liquidation that are of importance. Rather
than dismissing high levels  of dry powder, investors should look at the performed
investments and what they have yielded, as the fixed management fee paid on total
committed capital is likely to be mitigated by high returns. However, one must be aware
of the fact that with high returns  the carried interest also rises, which may imply a
higher return spread and, as Braun and Stoff (2016) argue, an indirect cost of dry
powder. Nonetheless, we underscore that the implications of dry powder are particularly
important in today’s economic environment, as dry powder levels in the private equity
industry have reached global record levels.

   7.3.     Number of investments

In H1 we hypothesize that there is a negative relationship between the number of
investments a fund pursues  and its return to investors. The regression significantly finds
a coefficient of 0.005, implying that any correlation between the number of investments
pursuit and return to investors is close to zero. As shown in Table 2, the mean number
of investments varies with fund size. As size is added as a controlling independent
variable, the coefficient for the number of investments remains significant at 0.004. The
data, therefore, implies that the number of investments made by a fund is irrelevant to
its performance. I

This finding does  not support our reasoning in H1, where we argue that funds with a
high number of investments may have pursued extra investments in addition to those
considered optimal, and that they should therefore perform worse. Instead, our findings
suggest funds with  low amounts of dry powder may have had high deployment rates
since they have been forced to inject more capital to their existing investments to make
them profitable or to prohibit losses, alternatively that they have been more aggressive
in their bidding  for their investments to start with.

                                  25
   7.4.      The cyclicality of PE return

                                   s
The  coefficient of determination,  𝑅 , increases from 0.060  to 0.187 when vintage year
is added as a variable, meaning the vintage variable enhances the explanatory value to
our model significantly across all models. The coefficient for vintage is negative across
models 2-5, implying decreasing returns  over the years. This can also be viewed
graphically under descriptive data. The decreasing IRR over the years is an effect of the
economic cycles that affect our data, primarily the internet boom in the early 1990s
where venture capital firms showed exceptional performance. As vintage is controlled
for in model 2 between dry powder and IRR, the coefficient  for dry powder  changes
from 0.349 to 0.450, further emphasizing the importance of controlling for year  of
liquidation. It is noteworthy that, as dry powder levels increase over the years, IRR
levels decrease. Despite this, the two are undoubtedly  positively correlated.

                                  26
8.    Implications and conclusions

The results imply that dry powder might not be the great cause of concern it has been
discussed as.  Since  there is a positive correlation between dry powder and net return,
investors should not be discouraged to invest with managers demonstrating a habit of
keeping low deployment rates.  We argue that funds  that  exceed their intended
deployment rate (deploy almost all commitments) do so because their investments
require additional funding either to become profitable or to avoid losses. They,
therefore, have  lower IRRs as they have underestimated the money needed for specific
projects.

There is, nonetheless,  most likely  no single explanation for the results we see in our test;
in contrast,  they are probably a result of several factors,  as is also suggested in  H1. It is
noteworthy  that no correlation between the number of investments pursued  and IRR
could be noticed. This  signals that other factors play in,  such as:

1)   Funds which tend to spend all  their commitments may act on a pressure to invest
     their capital. There is, for example, a time pressure, since LPs gross return becomes
    lower when their commitments are not invested. There could also be pressure to
    outside (potential future) investors, to  show them the ability to find suitable
    investments.

2)   As can be seen in our dataset, the average fund size has grown. As previous
    research indicates, the size of the GP investment team tends not to grow
     proportionally with the size of the fund. This implies that funds that have not
     deployed all their capital may have teams that are more fit for their investments.
    They can, therefore, apply more resources to each investment, and as a
    consequence, they enjoy a higher return.

Lastly,  dry powder in the 1990s was not as much of a problem as it was the years before
the financial crisis, and especially today (2019), having reached global record levels.
However, there is a big gap in research on dry powder, and there seems to be a
misconception that  a high level  of  uninvested capital  at liquidation signals that  the
fund’s managing partner has  not done  its  job in  investing  all  capital. Our results provide
an  introduction to what it  could mean  that funds have maintained  some dry powder at
liquidation, and  indicate  that it may not be  all  negative.

Although our results show no indication of an optimal level of dry powder,  however,
there is  most likely  a point  where dry powder at liquidation does no longer  correlate
with  higher returns. However, due to the period of our  data being 1990-2005, and the
survivor bias, no such conclusions could be drawn. We, therefore, welcome future
research on this area.

                                  27
9.    Suggestions for further research

The increase of dry powder in private equity  has been mapped  out  and discussed, but
there is little theory on the implications this will for the private equity industry and its
investors. We suggest that future research further examines the relationship between dry
powder and fund performance.  It would also be valuable  to examine if there is an
optimal level of dry powder, and how the industry  standard relates to it.

We also suggest a more thorough examination of the costs associated with dry powder,
for example regarding the different measures for management fees and gross return, as
our results offer a contrary viewpoint to that discussed in previous literature. As our
interaction variables imply that dry powder’s effect on return is related to the fund
strategy, a more in-depth analysis of this relationship would be valuable.

As we find no significant results on the correlation between net return and fund size, our
results do not  add explanatory value to the size-performance relationship.  It  would  thus
be  interesting with a study specifically looking at if the fact that large funds have higher
amounts of dry powder in general could be considered an advantage or disadvantage  for
large funds’ return to investors.

                                  28
10.   References

Published papers

"Private Equity Premium Puzzle Revisited†", 2014,  The American Economic Review,
     vol. 104, no. 10, pp. 3297-3334.
Aigner, P., Albrecht, S., Beyschlag, G., Friederich, T., Kalepky, M. & Zagst, R. 2008,
    "What Drives PE? Analyses of Success Factors for Private Equity Funds",  Journal
     of Private Equity,  vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 63-85.
Bertoni, F., Ferrer, M. & Martí, J. 2013, "The different roles played by venture capital
     and private equity investors on the investment activity of their portfolio firms",
     Small Business Economics,  vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 607-633.
Braun, R.  & Stoff, I. 2016, "The Cost of Private Equity Investing and the Impact of Dry
     Powder",  The Journal of Private Equity,  vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 22-33.
Cumming, D. & Dai, N. 2010, "Local bias in venture capital investments",  Journal of
     Empirical Finance,  vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 362-380.
Cumming, D., Siegel, D.S. & Wright, M. 2007, "Private equity, leveraged buyouts and
     governance",  Journal of Corporate Finance,  vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 439-460.
Cumming, D. & Walz, U. 2010, "Private equity returns and disclosure around the
     world",  Journal of International Business Studies,  vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 727-754.
Demiroglu, C. & James, C.M. 2010, "The role of private equity group reputation in
     LBO financing",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 306-330.
Gompers, P., Kaplan, S.N. & Mukharlyamov, V. 2016, "What do private equity firms
     say they do?",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 121, no. 3, pp. 449-476.
Gompers, P., Kovner, A. & Lerner, J. 2009, "Specialization and Success: Evidence
     from Venture Capital",  Journal of  Economics & Management Strategy,  vol. 18, no.
     3, pp. 817-844.
Harris, R.S., Jenkinson, T. & Kaplan, S.N. 2014, "Private Equity Performance: What
     Do We Know?",  Journal of Finance,  vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 1851-1882.
Hege, U., Palomino, F. & Schwienbacher, A. 2009, "Venture Capital Performance: The
     Disparity Between Europe and the United States",  Finance,  vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 7-50.
Hellmann, T., Lindsey, L. & Puri, M. 2008, "Building Relationships Early: Banks in
     Venture Capital",  The Review of Financial Studies,  vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 513-513.
Hochberg, Y.V., Ljungqvist, A. & Lu, Y. 2007, "Whom You Know Matters: Venture
     Capital Networks and Investment Performance",  Journal of Finance,  vol. 62, no. 1,
     pp. 251-301.
Humphery-Jenner, M. 2012, "Private Equity Fund Size, Investment Size, and Value
     Creation",  Review of Finance,  vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 799-835.
Inderst, R. & Müller, H.M. 2003, "Internal versus External Financing: An Optimal
     Contracting Approach",  Journal of Finance (Wiley-Blackwell),  vol. 58, no. 3, pp.
     1033-1062.
Kaplan, S.N. & Schoar, A. 2005, "Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence,
     and Capital Flows",  Journal of Finance,  vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1791-1823.
Kaplan, S.N. & Strömberg, P. 2009, "Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity",  Journal
     of Economic Perspectives,  vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 121-146.

                                  29
Leifer, R., Gina, C.O., Rice, M. & Gina, C.O. 2001, "Implementing Radical Innovation
    in Mature Firms: The Role of Hubs",  The Academy of Management Executive
     (1993-2005),  vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 102-113.
Litvak, K. 2009, "Venture Capital Limited Partnership Agreements: Understanding
    Compensation Arrangements",  The University of Chicago Law Review,  vol. 76, no.
     1, pp. 161-218.
Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Phalippou, L. & Gottschalg, O. 2015, "Giants at the Gate:
    Investment Returns and Diseconomies of Scale in Private Equity",  Journal of
     Financial and Quantitative Analysis,  vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 377-411.
Metrick, A. & Yasuda, A. 2010, "The Economics of Private Equity Funds",  The Review
     of Financial Studies,  vol.  23, no. 6, pp. 2303-2303.
Phalippou, L. & Zollo, M. 2005,  What Drives Private Equity Fund Performance?.
Rizzi, J.V. 2009, "Back to the Future Again: Private Equity After the Crisis",  Journal of
     Applied Finance,  vol. 19, no. 1/2, pp. 165-177.
Robinson, D.T. & Sensoy, B.A. 2016, "Cyclicality, performance measurement, and
     cash flow liquidity in private equity",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 122,
     no. 3, pp. 521-543.
Taymaz, E. 2005, "Are Small Firms Really Less Productive?",  Small Business
     Economics,  vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 429-445.

Working papers

Appelbaum, A., Batt, R., 2016. Are Lower Private Equity Returns the New Normal?
    Working Paper, Center for Economic and Policy Research
Ljungqvist, A., Richardson, M.P., 2003. The Cash Flow, Return and Risk
    Characteristics of Private Equity, NYU, Finance Working Paper No. 03-001.
Harris, H., Jenkinson, T., Stucke, R., 2010. A White Paper on Private Equity Data and
    Research. UAI Foundation Consortium
Zweig, J., Auerbach, A., Tabares, J., 2014. Declaring a Major:  Sector-Focused Private
    Investment Funds. Cambridge Associates.

Industry reports

Bain & Company, 2018. Global Private Equity Report

                                  30
11.   Appendix

Figure  4  –  Mean Net IRR for strategies

Note:  The Net IRR differs between the strategies.

Figure  5  –  Distributions of Net IRR

Note: Illustration of the distribution of net IRR with a mean of 10%

                                  31
Table 5  -  Correlation table for all variables

Pairwise correlations

  Variables           Dry      Net    Vintag   DPxBuy-  Size USD     Nr. of    Buyout     Venture
                     Powder   IRR    e       out                    Inv

  Dry Powder        1.000
  Net IRR           0.147     1.000
  Vintage            0.129     -0.339   1.000
  DPxBuyout         0.708     0.010    0.094    1.000
  Size USD          0.058     0.040    0.138    0.009      1.000
  Nr. of Inv           -0.062     0.187    -0.031    -0.084      0.460         1.000
  Buyout             0.045     -0.043   -0.016    0.284      0.005        0.037     1.000
  Venture            -0.079     0.037    0.026    -0.167      0.007        0.002     -0.588      1.000
Note: Includes all variables except industry

Figure 6  –  Line graph of Net  IRR & Dry Powder over Vintage

Note:  Illustration of the decrease in Net IRR and increase of dry powder as a share of total commitments at
liquidation.

                                  32
Figure 7  –  Residual histogram

Note: It was confirmed our residuals are normally distributed. In other words, it was confirmed our data
meets the requirements for using the OLS regression. A  Breusch-Pagan / Cook-Weisberg test for
heteroscedasticity significantly shows homoskedacity.

                                  33