  Banking Relationships and first-day IPO Performance

             - Evidence from ex-ante pricing of Swedish firms

                           Stockholm School of Economics
                                 Bachelor Thesis in Finance
                                  May 2019

                               Abstract

The purpose of this thesis is to investigate how pre-Initial Public Offering (IPO) banking
relationships affect the level of underpricing for Swedish firms. By studying a sample of 273
IPOs between 2014 and 2018, no support for a signaling effect that reduces information
uncertainty for investors can be concluded since firms with a pre-IPO lending relationship do not
experience a lower level of underpricing. By further investigating the type of bank the
relationship refers to, the sample is narrowed to 122 IPOs, and empirical evidence is found that
a previous relationship with a bank that could be employed as the firm’s underwriter is associated
with a significantly higher level of underpricing. Finally, we find no evidence that employing the
existing relationship bank as the underwriter is related to a conflict of interest. The results thus
indicate that having a relationship bank with a business scope that goes beyond lending is
associated with a significant cost for the issuing firm in terms of money left on the table within
the studied sample, regardless of whether the relationship bank underwrites the issue or not.

Keywords: Initial Public Offering, Underpricing, Information Asymmetries, Banking
Relationships

Authors: Marcus Undén, 23883 & Christoffer Begander, 22634
Tutor: Ran Guo

Acknowledgments:
First and foremost, we would like to express our gratitude to our tutor Ran Guo at the Swedish
House of Finance for his guidance throughout the writing of this thesis. Also, we thank Håkan
Lyckeborg at the Center for Data Analytics for his comments on statistical methods. Finally, we
would like to thank Professor Alexander Ljungqvist at the Swedish House of Finance for offering
his expertise on the subject and giving us valuable insights.
Table of Content

1. Introduction 1
2. Previous Literature, Research Question and Hypotheses 3
  2.1. IPO Underpricing 3
  2.2. IPO Underpricing Theories 4
    2.2.1. Asymmetric Information Theories 4
    2.2.2. Theories Based on the Allocation of Shares 5
    2.2.3. Signaling Theory 6
  2.3. Relationship Banking 6
    2.3.1. Universal Relationship Banks 7
  2.4. Relationship Banking and IPO Underpricing 8
    2.4.1. Pre-IPO Relationship with a Lending Bank 8
    2.4.2. Pre-IPO Relationship with a Universal Bank 9
    2.4.2. Pre-IPO Relationship with the Underwriting Bank 9
  2.5 Research Question and Hypotheses 11
3. Data and Methodology 12
  3.1. Data 12
    3.1.1. The Scope of the Thesis 12
    3.1.2. Data Sources 12
    3.1.3. Data Collection 13
  3.2. Description of Variables (Name used in the data set) 14
    3.2.1. Dependent Variable 14
    3.2.2. Independent Variables 14
    3.2.3. Control Variables 15
    3.3.1. Comparison of Means 17
    3.3.2. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) Regression Analysis 17
4. Results and Discussion 18
  4.1 Results 18
    4.1.1 Overview of the Data 18
    4.1.2. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Banking Relationship on Underpricing 21
  4.2 Robustness Tests and Improving the Quantitative Analysis 24
    4.2.1. Robustness Test Methodology 24
    4.2.2. Results of the Robustness Tests and the Finalized Model 26
  4.3 Discussion of the Results 29
    4.3.1. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Lending Relationship 29
    4.3.2. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Relationship with a Universal Bank 29
    4.3.3. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Relationship with the Underwriting Bank 31
  4.4. Limitations 31
5. Implications and Conclusion 33
  5.1. Economic Implications 33
  5.2. Suggestions for Future Research 34
  5.3 Conclusion 34
References 36
Appendix 42
  Tables 42
  Graphs 47
1. Introduction

Accessing the capital market by selling shares to the public is perceived as a significant
milestone in a firm’s evolution. The money raised is a critical source for reinvestments,
funding of capital expenditures, essential acquisitions as well as to finance investments
in research and development (Ritter and Welch, 2002). Thus, a positive initial return has
consequences for firms going public since it lowers the proceeds needed to support
growth and instead transfers wealth to new shareholders (Lu, 2017).
       The underpricing of IPOs is a well-established anomaly, and the term is used
interchangeably with the first-day return of the issuing firm (Ritter, 1991). However, the
explanation is rather a puzzle that has intrigued scholars for decades, where research has
mainly focused on the explanatory power of information asymmetries between the
issuing firm, the underwriter and outside market investors as the primary underlying
source (Ritter & Welch, 2002). There are still areas of concern due to the complexity of
the matter and the link to pre-IPO banking relationships is one of the topics which has
been far from exhausted.
       Relationship banking is defined as a relationship where non-public, firm-specific
information can be exploited to benefit both participating sides. The bank attains
proprietary information about the client firm over time, across several interactions or
different products (Boot, 2000). Consequently, Boot (2000) shows that relationship
banking adds value to both parties, mainly through the long-term nature of the
relationship. Thus, having an earlier relationship with an underwriter certainly has
implications for the IPO firm and has been argued to impact the level of underpricing, as
it mitigates the problem of asymmetrically informed IPO parties (Schenone, 2004).
       However, previous research has revealed contradicting results regarding whether
a conflict of interest or a certification effect is prevailing when a bank with close ties to
a firm also underwrites the shares issued. The research has to a large extent covered
market-based financial systems in the United States, United Kingdom, and Canada (e.g.,
Puri, 1996; Schenone, 2004; Benzoni & Schenone, 2009; Hebb & Fraser, 2003; Hebb &
Fraser 2002), and more empirical evidence has explicitly been asked for (Klein, Wuebker
& Zoeller, 2016). Hence, this thesis aims to contribute with additional empirical evidence
to these previously inconsistent findings with data from Sweden. By examining pre-IPO
banking relationships in a rather unexplored context, one where banks are the primary
source of finance (Marklund, 2016) and to a great extent engage in relationship banking
(Gunnarsdottir & Lindh, 2011), we highlight the role of financial intermediaries in
general and their business scopes in particular, a topic that is frequently debated around
the globe in wake of the recent financial crisis (Lu, 2017).
       To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has yet investigated the
interconnection between underpricing and relationship banking in Sweden. Hence, this
paper aims to fill the research gap and facilitate a greater understanding of whether pre-
IPO banking relationships have a significant impact on the level of underpricing for firms
going public on the Swedish equity market.
       To investigate the effect of relationship banking on the IPO underpricing, a dataset
of IPOs conducted on Nasdaq and Spotlight between 2014 and 2018 is used. Three

                                                                              1
hypotheses are examined and tested by performing a univariate analysis and later
complemented with OLS regressions to examine the impact of other well-known factors
affecting the level of first-day returns (Puri, 1996; Aggarwal, Krigman & Womack,
2002). The first hypothesis examines whether a pre-IPO lending relationship affects the
level of underpricing. Contrasting previous research, arguing that such a relationship
signals to investors that the firm is of high quality which should reduce the level of
underpricing (Slovin & Young, 1990), no significant result is found. Secondly, firms with
a universal relationship bank are compared to non-universal relationship banks.
Schenone (2004) finds empirical evidence that firms with a pre-IPO relationship bank
that could underwrite the equity reduces informational frictions between involved IPO
parties and thereby results in lower levels of underpricing. Contrary to Schenone (2004),
we find that firms with a universal relationship bank experience a significantly higher
level of underpricing. Thus, such a relationship does not seem to have a mitigating effect
on information asymmetries between IPO stakeholders within the sample. Lastly, firms
that went public with their pre-IPO relationship bank are compared to firms that did not,
where previous studies have found contradictory results. One part of the finance literature
supports a certification effect that implies lower underpricing levels (Benzoni &
Schenone, 2009; Kroszner & Rajan, 1994; Puri, 1996). The other part of the research
body favors a conflict of interest effect, where investors need to be compensated for the
risk of receiving lemons when proprietary information from prior relationships can be
used to share the risk of default with the market, resulting in higher underpricing levels
(Kanatas & Qi, 2003; Klein et al., 2016). However, no significant difference in the level
of underpricing can be confirmed within the sample to support either theory.
       The implication of this thesis is twofold. First of all, neither a pre-IPO lending
relationship, universal banking relationship, nor a relationship with the underwriter
reduces the level of underpricing for the firms studied. Thus, banking relationships within
the sample does not seem to convey any additional information to investors when they
are determining the quality of an issuing firm before subscribing to the IPO. A potential
explanation to these findings could be that the Swedish stock market, in general, is
subject to rather low informational frictions, which would be supported by the fact that
the Swedish market is associated with a lower average level of underpricing in the later
years when contrasted to previously researched equity markets (Abrahamson & de
Ridder, 2015; Loughran, Ritter & Rydqvist, 2018).
       Second, firms with a universal relationship bank prior to the IPO is associated
with a significantly higher level of underpricing compared to firms served by a non-
universal relationship bank, which contradicts the findings of previous research. The
results show that firms with a pre-IPO universal banking relationship experience
underpricing levels that are 10 percentage points higher, compared to firms served by a
non-universal bank. A significant finding that, on average, translates to SEK 81.94
million that is being left on the table by the issuing firm. Furthermore, since no previous
theories support this significant finding, we would argue that these results potentially
could be explained by omitted variables, such as specific institutional investments or the
ownership structure of the issuing firm.

                                                                              2
2. Previous Literature, Research Question and Hypotheses

Below, the existing literature and empirical evidence on IPO underpricing are
investigated. The focus is further narrowed down to the theories concerning relationship
banking and IPO underpricing. Thereafter, the research question and hypotheses are
presented, based on the theoretical framework and previous research.

2.1. IPO Underpricing

Accessing the public capital market by conducting an IPO is perceived as a significant
milestone in a firm’s evolution. The money raised is a critical source for funding capital
expenditures and acquisitions, as well as to finance investments in research and
development (Ritter and Welch, 2002). Thus, a positive initial return has financial
consequences for the IPO firm. It lowers the proceeds firms need to reinvest and grow
and instead transfers wealth to new shareholders. The money left on the table is defined
as the difference between the first-day closing market price and the offer price times the
number of shares sold, and is averaging USD 9.1 million for the firm going public
(Loughran & Ritter 2002). Thus, underpricing is often considered as a large cost
associated with the IPO process, because of the considerable sum of proceeds that is
forfeited (Loughran & Ritter, 2002).
       The level of underpricing has varied considerably across industries (Ritter, 1991).
Loughran and Ritter (2004) have provided evidence in support of this, concluding that
firms within the technology industry have experienced a higher level of underpricing
historically. The authors also show that underpricing has varied across time, where the
internet bubble between 1999-2000 exemplifies a period with significantly higher IPO
underpricing levels. During this period, firms went from maximizing IPO proceeds to
maximizing research coverage and future benefits. At the same time, numerous firms had
complex internet-based business models which implied higher uncertainty regarding
their valuations.
      The geographical difference is also noticeable, where scholars have found
significant variation in underpricing spanning from 4.2 percent in Argentina during 1991-
2013 to 270.1 percent in the United Arab Emirates in the years 2003-2010 (Loughran,
Ritter & Rydqvist, 2018). When looking at evidence from the US over the last 50 years,
the average IPO has been underpriced by 16.8 percent, which translates to more than 125
billion USD in lost proceeds for issuing firms (Lu, 2017). Considering Sweden, research
by Rydqvist (1997), later complemented by Abrahamson and de Ridder (2015), find first-
day returns for 405 Swedish firms between 1980-2015 averaging 25.9 percent.
Investigating more recent IPOs conducted in 1996-2011, Swedish firms have
experienced average IPO underpricing of 7.68 percent (Abrahamson & de Ridder, 2015),
spanning in the lower range of the countries presented by Loughran et al. (2018).
       The high uncertainty regarding the issuing firm’s value has economic implications
and affects all IPO participants in different ways over time, across industries and
geographies. Thus, the subject has caught scholar’s attention for decades, and the

                                                                              3
underpricing anomaly of new issues has been analyzed through an assembly of theories,
that are not mutually exclusive. However, the largest part is focusing on asymmetric
information and it should be noted that a given theory has been found more applicable to
some initial public offerings than to others (Ritter & Welch, 2002).

2.2. IPO Underpricing Theories

Ibbotson (1975) was one of the first authors to identify IPO underpricing as a widespread
phenomenon and laid the foundation for the theoretical explanation as to why the
anomaly exists. Other authors have since strengthened this foundation through extensive
research of the topic, and a vast amount of theories, mainly concerning asymmetric
information and allocation of shares, has emerged (Ritter & Welch, 2002). It should be
noted that in line with the many existing theories, multiple factors affect the underpricing
levels. Despite the many influential factors, researchers have affirmed that theories
related to information asymmetries and the allocation of shares have substantial
explanatory power of the anomaly (Ljungqvist, 2007; Rock, 1986). Throughout this
thesis, the primary focus will be on asymmetrically informed IPO stakeholders and the
potential effect on the level of underpricing of having a bank-firm relationship before
going public.

2.2.1. Asymmetric Information Theories

According to the most prominent theories and explanations having robust empirical
support, asymmetric information is to blame for the underpriced shares when a company
goes public. The logic of the theories is that if no asymmetric information existed, i.e.,
all IPO parties were equally informed, the underpricing anomaly should be non-existent
at all times since the up-front compensation to participants being more or less informed
about the intrinsic value of the issuing firm would be uncalled-for (Schenone, 2004).
Theories trying to explain underpricing are predominantly focused on informational
frictions between informed and uninformed investors (Rock, 1986), between the
underwriter and informed investors (Benveniste & Spindt, 1989) and between the IPO
firm and uninformed investors (Allen & Faulhaber, 1989). In the model first presented
by Rock (1986), one random group of investors with superior knowledge about firms’
financials is distinguished from one group of investors without such information. Due to
the advantage held by the informed investors, they would only demand shares in high-
quality issues, whereas uninformed investors would bid and participate in all available
IPOs. As a result, the uninformed investors would be allocated a small fraction of well-
performing shares and a large proportion of shares in overvalued and overpriced IPOs.
Hence, the uninformed group would on average earn a negative return on the investment
and lose money; a scenario referred to as the “Winners Curse” (Thaler, 1988).
Consequently, the negative first-day return would eventually discourage uninformed
investors from subscribing to new issues and prevent them from participating in the
offering. However, the solely partaking of informed investors alone is not enough to clear
the IPO market, and the resulting excess supply would be costly for the underwriter

                                                                              4
selling the shares. Thus, to ensure the participation of uninformed investors, the
discounted offer price is rationally used to compensate less informed market participants
(Rock, 1986).
       Another well-established theory arguing that asymmetrically informed IPO
players are the fundamental cause of initial first-day returns is the book-building model,
introduced by Beneveniste and Spindt (1989), and later extended by Benveniste and
Wilhelm (1990). The critical aspects of this framework refer to the information advantage
held by institutional investors because of their recurring involvement in the IPO market,
where the underwriter is assumed to be uninformed about the true firm value. After
estimating a preliminary offer value, the underwriter will launch a roadshow to market
the issue to potential institutional investors and collect information about their valuation,
which ultimately should enable the underwriter to price the issue accurately. When the
institutional investors reveal information about what they are willing to pay during the
ongoing book-building process, they are later compensated for disclosing this valuable
information through deliberately underpriced shares (Beneveniste & Spindt, 1989).

2.2.2. Theories Based on the Allocation of Shares

The allocation of shares during an IPO has been subject to public scrutiny due to the
perceived unfairness where institutional investors attain advantages through being
allocated more shares than retail investors in offerings with high demand, referred to as
hot IPOs (Hurt, 2004; Schwartz, 2015). The theories investigate who is allocated shares
when the issue is oversubscribed, and how it depends on prior relationships with the
underwriter of the issue (Ritter & Welch, 2002). Underwriter’s prior relationships with
institutional investors have been argued to imply a disadvantage for certain investors
since underwriters can offer higher underpricing to preferred clients by offering shares
in hot IPOs (Loughran & Ritter, 2002). The fact that institutional investors are prioritized
above retail investors in oversubscribed IPOs has been proven in numerous papers
(Aggarwal, Prabhala & Puri, 2002; Cornelli & Goldreich, 2003; Hanley & Wilhelm,
1995; Lee, Taylor & Walter, 1996). It should also be noted that institutional investors
might have legal or portfolio restrictions that limit their investments to certain types of
offerings, for instance, connected to the type of stock exchange or a minimum size of the
investment (Hellman, 2000). Thus, the presented theories in this section should be most
relevant for firms that present a specific type of characteristics, such as larger firm size.
      Brennan and Franks (1997) present another perspective on the matter; by
allocating shares to chosen investors, management can retain their control and avoid
external investigations. Through allocating small shares of stock to investors and
allowing no large ownership stake, management can stay in charge, which introduces a
free-rider problem where sub-optimal levels of scrutiny are employed (Shleifer &
Vishny, 1986). Thus, it becomes too expensive for investors to oppose the management
given their smaller ownership stakes, which diminishes the risk of a hostile takeover
(Grossman & Hart, 1980). Thereby, issuing companies can use the allocation of shares
as a takeover defense (Booth & Chua, 1996; Mello & Parsons, 1998). As a result,
managers can retain control and continue to maximize their wealth through strategically

                                                                              5
allocating shares. The opposite mechanism has also been found in previous research, i.e.,
that the allocation of shares can be used to increase the value of the company through
bringing in institutional investors that control the management’s behavior (Stoughton &
Zechner, 1998).

2.2.3. Signaling Theory

Building on the theory of asymmetric information, a large amount of research has
emerged focusing on the signaling aspect of underpricing (Welch, 1989; Allen &
Faulhaber, 1989; Jegadeesh, Weinstein & Welch, 1993). The researchers investigating
signaling theories argue that companies use underpricing to mitigate ex-ante uncertainty
and signal high quality to attain benefits onwards (Welch, 1989). Based on the research
of Welch (1989) as well as Cliff and Denis (2004), these future benefits are connected to
better valuations at future seasoned equity offerings (SEOs) and more extensive analyst
coverage. There are three caveats for the signaling to be effective; the signal must be
observable for investors, take place before the IPO, and it must be demanding enough for
low-quality firms to restrict them from using it (Certo, Daily & Dalton, 2001).
       There are also other ways to signal high quality. Barry, Muscarella and
Vetsuypens (1991), show that the qualitative monitoring venture capital (VC) firms
provide is acknowledged by investors and reflected in a lower underpricing of these IPOs.
A pattern confirmed in more recent studies (Belghitar & Dixon, 2012). Furthermore,
Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012) showed that private equity (PE) backed IPOs were, on
average, less underpriced compared to non-sponsored IPOs. This is supposedly due to
the decreased ex-ante risk for investors implied by the insurance a PE-owned firm
provide, i.e., there is a certification effect of high quality for investors (Ferretti & Meles,
2011), as they believe that a PE firm would not invest in a firm of low quality.

2.3. Relationship Banking

One of the fundamental purposes of banks is quantitative asset transformation, since the
bank’s asset side is mainly illiquid, in the form of long-term loans that are funded through
liquid deposits with a contrasting time frame (Greenbaum & Thakor, 1995). The reason
for the illiquidity of loans is mostly contributable to information asymmetry, and the
presence of these frictions may be one of the main reasons for the existence of banks
(Bhattacharya & Thakor, 1993). The access of such proprietary information through the
process of establishing a relationship with a client firm to assess if it is valuable to provide
credit, is to a large extent linked to relationship banking (Boot, 2000).
       Relationship banks are defined as intermediaries that provide financial services,
and invests in obtaining proprietary information about the customer, and assesses the
profitability of the investments across several interactions with the customer (Boot,
2000). This information can be gathered over time or across products, or both (Boot,
2000). By this definition, both exclusive information and contact over several occasions
characterize the relationship. The bank gathers this exclusive information through the
costly process of screening. Thus, the proprietary information must remain exclusive to

                                                                              6
the bank, or else the screening process would be unprofitable to perform (Berger, Klapper
& Udell, 2001). Furthermore, relationship banking is particularly relevant when looking
at the Swedish market, due to the convention of Swedish banks engaging in relationship
banking and the large fraction of Swedish firms being debt financed (Gunnarsdottir &
Lindh, 2011).
       Inherently, relationship banking is accompanied by several advantages (Boot,
2000). The proprietary information can be utilized to allow less rigid contracting, and
thereby facilitate long-term relationships (Boot, Greenbaum & Thakor, 1993). Because
of the possibility of renegotiation, extensive covenants can be included that handles
conflicts of interest and reduce the amount of costly monitoring, through guiding the
relationship (Boot, 2000). The moral hazard and adverse problems related to lending can
be further mitigated through the usage of collateral (Besanko & Thakor, 1987).
Furthermore, the long-term nature of relationship banking might allow funding of de
novo companies, which might be unprofitable in the short term but profitable in the long
run (Petersen & Rajan, 1995). The benefits of relationship banking have been argued to
be particularly evident for Swedish banks, due to their close relations with the borrowing
firms, which allows early intervention if there would be any sign of financial distress for
the company (Strömberg & Thorburn, 1996).
       In contrast, several drawbacks connected to relationship banking has also been
identified. The soft budget problem, where borrowers realize the reluctance to recognize
losses for the bank, and thereby demand write-down of the debt, or further lending, which
puts the lender in a difficult position (Bolton & Scharfstein, 1996). The second issue is
the hold-up problem, which implies that the relationship bank can charge a higher rate
due to the lack of alternatives for the borrowing company (Rajan, 1992; Sharpe, 1990).

2.3.1. Universal Relationship Banks

Previous research has not always considered that universal relationship banks, through
their business scope, have different preconditions compared to non-universal relationship
banks. The definition of universal banking concerns a financial intermediary, in the form
of a bank, that performs a range of financial services, spanning from deposit-taking, asset
management, derivatives trading, and lending, to underwriting the issuance of new equity
(Saunders & Walter, 1994). Hence, universal banks differ from retail banks and specialist
banks by being able to provide products across different scopes and combine commercial
banking with investment banking (Saunders & Walter, 1994). Previous literature has
investigated the effect of the business scope of universal banks and shown that
information obtained across loan and other non-loan services impact the bank’s ability to
finance firms due to the decreased uncertainties regarding the firm’s prospects (Neuhann
& Saidi, 2018). Amongst others, the authors show that universal banks take younger,
riskier, and more productive firms public, due to the informational economies of scope.
Thus, while both universal and non-universal banks can be defined as relationship banks,
there are important distinctions and differences between the business models employed.

                                                                              7
2.4. Relationship Banking and IPO Underpricing

2.4.1. Pre-IPO Relationship with a Lending Bank

When uncertainty is present regarding the true value of an issuing firm, outside investors
will turn their attention to credible signals that lower the degree of doubt (Welch, 1989;
Allen & Faulhaber, 1989). Bank-firm relationships fill that role. Inside debt and lending
relationships provide a reliable signal regarding the creditworthiness and quality of the
firm that is considered especially important when issuing junior claims (Beatty & Ritter,
1986). Building on that conclusion, Slovin and Young (1990) test if the existence of
bank-firm relationships signals high quality to financial market participants at the time
of an IPO. Because banks provide the function of screening and monitoring, the
prevailing ex-ante uncertainty should be reduced, and the authors find a significant
negative relationship between the presence of a banking relationship and the initial first-
day return. James and Wier (1990) further investigate what kind of implications a
borrowing relationship has on the cost of going public. Empirically, they find that a pre-
IPO bank-firm relationship results in shares being severely less underpriced compared to
when no such relationship exists. More recently, Hao, Shi and Yang (2014) investigates
the implications of loan agreement disclosure in the IPO prospectus and document a
significant negative correlation between bank-firm relationships and IPO underpricing.
       In addition to providing investors with credible signals about the quality of the
firm, banking relationships also mitigate markets frictions, in terms of asymmetric
information, between the firm and the lender. During the process of screening and
monitoring, soft data is collected regarding the competence and trustworthiness of
managers, the ability to reach growth and profit targets and proprietary information about
prior projections (Rajan, 1992). Developing on this theme, Petersen and Rajan (1995)
find that availability of financing increases for firms when close ties and relationships
are built with an intermediary. Furthermore, scholars have shown that lenders can
establish a valuable reputation for making the right decisions whether to renegotiate loan
terms or liquidate a borrowing firm due to financial distress (Chemmanur & Fulghieri,
1994). This desirable reputation creates incentives to allocate resources to follow and
monitor the activities of the borrower to be further able to make adequate decisions,
which ultimately strengthen the signaling mechanism used by investors when deciding
to invest in an IPO (Chemmanur & Fulghieri, 1994).
      To conclude, consensus seems to be reached among scholars regarding the
important role of a banking relationship when a firm goes public. The relationship
mitigates the problem of asymmetric information between the firm and the lender and is
primarily interpreted as a signal of high firm quality by investors since low-quality firms
would not be approved for bank funding. Accordingly, investors are willing to pay a
higher offer price for firms with a pre-IPO banking relationship, resulting in a lower level
of underpricing and a smaller amount of money left on the table by the issuing firm.
       In traditional theories aiming to explain the underpricing anomaly as a result of
asymmetric information, the underwriter is assumed to be uninformed about the IPO
firm’s true value (Rock 1986; Benveniste & Spindt 1989; Allen & Faulhaber, 1989).

                                                                              8
However, in the sections below we investigate the effect on underpricing when the
relationship bank is of a universal sort, i.e., when the bank can combine the information
obtained from prior lending agreements with underwriting abilities.

2.4.2. Pre-IPO Relationship with a Universal Bank

Schenone (2004) hypothesizes that if market participants know that the issuing firm has
a relationship with a universal bank prior to the IPO, the asymmetric information
explanation behind the underpricing anomaly is no longer valid, and a lower initial return
should be expected. In this situation, uninformed investors in Rock’s (1986) model do
not require any compensation for competing with informed investors since they know
that the IPO price set by the relationship bank is accurate and thoroughly informative.
The underwriter will not need to compensate institutional investors for the disclosure of
private information about the issuing firm, as in the book-building theory by Benveniste
and Spindt (1989), because that same information is now in the underwriter’s possession.
Finally, firms of high value will not need to leave money on the table to signal their
superior quality and convince investors to pay higher prices for their seasoned offerings
in the future, as in Allen and Faulhaber (1989), since the quality of the firm will be
revealed to the market anyway. Furthermore, Schenone (2004) argues that what matters
for the information asymmetries to be reduced is only dependent on the pre-IPO
relationship bank’s underwriting abilities, and not if the bank underwrites the IPO. This
is because high-quality firms are assumed to go public with their pre-IPO relationship
bank in possession of proprietary information, while low-quality firms have incentives
to switch to an uninformed bank and try to receive a higher valuation. Since the
uninformed bank has a reputation at stake that would be seriously harmed if it sells a firm
for more than it is worth, the bank is assumed to price and value all approaching firms as
low-quality firms. Consequently, the low-value firms will be indifferent between staying
with the relationship bank and switching. In either way, the firm quality is revealed to
the market, resulting in reduced information asymmetries and lower underpricing levels
for both low- and high-quality firms. Schenone (2004) finds empirical evidence for her
claim and shows that firms with a pre-IPO banking relationship with a potential
underwriter face a significantly lower initial return compared to firms without such an
established relationship.

2.4.3. Pre-IPO Relationship with the Underwriting Bank

Scholars have also examined how universal banks in possession of firm-specific,
proprietary information due to previous lending relationships impact the level of
underpricing when the bank de facto underwrites the issue. However, empirical evidence
is contradictory, and no consensus has yet been reached (Klein et al., 2016). Several
researchers argue that the informational advantage makes the underwriter prone to act as
a certifier of high-quality issues. Opposing theories argue that the superior knowledge
can facilitate agency problems and incentivize hazardous actions where the underwriting
bank might try to transfer its loan risk to uninformed market participants by promoting

                                                                              9
low-quality issues, referred to as lemons (Akerlof, 1970). Thus, two opposing views have
emerged in the literature when a relationship bank is also the actual underwriter, entitled
the certification effect theory (Puri, 1996) and the conflict of interest theory (Benston,
1990).

The Certification Effect Theory

Because of the firm-specific proprietary information obtained through prior financial
interactions, a relationship bank can more precisely price a client’s securities and is thus
able to provide better certification of the true firm value, compared to when an
uninformed bank underwrites the IPO (Benzoni & Schenone, 2009). Puri (1996) provides
a theoretical model that shows that prior financial claims held by relationship banks
during an IPO enable better prices for the underwritten securities compared to when
specialized investment banks handle the offering. The author shows that relationships
between a firm and an intermediary affect the pricing of the equity issue in favor of
current shareholders, as the cost of going public decreases when less money is left on the
table. Similarly, Kroszner and Rajan (1994) find that banks that obtain firm-specific
information through prior relationships enable higher offer prices when underwriting
more information-sensitive securities, compared to investment banks. Puri (1996) finds
empirical evidence that supports the certification effect theory, as investors are willing
to pay higher prices for junior claims underwritten by banks with greater knowledge.

The Conflict of Interest Theory

As a result of the performed monitoring, advising, and screening, the bank may discover
that the firm is in financial distress. Because of the outstanding loan agreement, the
relationship bank has incentives to indulge in risk-shifting activities and can be tempted
to underwrite securities to use the proceeds to repay the senior claims and reduce
exposure to the troubled firm (Gompers & Lerner, 1999). Thus, outside investors are
fooled into buying overpriced shares. Since the market is assumed to be rational,
investors will require a higher initial return to compensate for this potential risk of
receiving lemons and an inherent conflict of interest results in more underpriced issues
underwritten by inside banks. The empirical evidence of Klein et al. (2016) is in line with
the conflict of interest theory. The authors ask if affiliated banks underwritten IPOs
performs differently from firms taken public by specialized investment banks, and finds
that relationship banking is correlated with higher first-day returns. A similar conclusion
is drawn by Ber, Yafeh and Yosha (2000) when comparing initial public offerings with
and without a loan relationship between the underwriter and issuer the year before the
IPO. Empirical evidence shows that the information advantage is used to underwrite
equity of low performing firms on the stock market and the results suggest a conflict of
interest when different banking activities are combined. Furthermore, Kanatas and Qi
(1998) argue that banks that both lend and simultaneously act as the underwriter are faced
with a conflict of interest that ultimately imposes a cost on the client firm when seeking
to raise funds as the underpricing increases.

                                                                              10
2.5. Research Question and Hypotheses

This thesis investigates how the presence of a pre-IPO banking relationship influences
the level of underpricing in the Swedish equity market. Previous research on the topic is
limited, rather contradictory and more empirical evidence has explicitly been asked for
(Klein et al., 2016). To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has investigated the
subject using data from Sweden; hence, we seek to fill this gap with the aim to answer
the following research question:

▪ How do pre-IPO banking relationships affect the level of underpricing for Swedish
   firms?

To answer the research question, three hypotheses have been formulated based on
theories and empirical evidence outlined, which suggests that the existence of bank-firm
relationships affects the amount of money left on the table by the issuing firm.
       The first hypothesis investigates the level of underpricing by comparing firms
with and without a banking relationship, defined as having a lending agreement prior to
the IPO. In line with previous research that has argued in favor of a signaling effect, we
expect a lower degree of underpricing, since the ex-ante uncertainty for outside investors
should be reduced (Slovin & Young, 1990). Hence, we formulate the following testable
prediction:

▪ Hypothesis 1: Firms with a pre-IPO lending relationship experience a lower level of
   underpricing than firms without such a relationship

Furthermore, previous literature argues that asymmetric information motivates the
discounted offer prices as different market participants need to be compensated for
informational frictions related to the true firm value during the IPO (Schenone, 2004).
However, when the firm has a pre-IPO relationship with a bank that could underwrite the
equity, market participants do not require the same extensive compensation for being
unequally informed (Schenone, 2004). Accordingly, the second hypothesis investigates
the level of underpricing when the pre-IPO bank is the lender and also have underwriting
abilities, i.e., a universal bank holding proprietary information about the issuing firm.
Based on previous research that argues for a reduction of asymmetric information
resulting in a lower level of underpricing, we formulate the following:

▪ Hypothesis 2: Firms with a pre-IPO relationship bank that could take the firm public
   experience a lower level of underpricing

Finally, we aim to examine the scenario when the underwriter in possession of superior,
firm-specific knowledge did take the firm public, where previous research has found
contradicting evidence. Some scholars argue that the bank with proprietary information,
generated through prior lending agreements can bridge the information gap between the
firm and investors by better certifying the quality of the issuing company (Puri, 1996).
In line with the certification effect theory, a negative correlation between being
underwritten by a relationship bank and underpricing has been found. Others have argued

                                                                              11
that the bank faces incentives to facilitate the IPO of a firm in financial distress if the
purpose of the proceeds is to pay back the senior claims. In line with the conflict of
interest theory, a positive relationship between underpricing and being underwritten by a
pre-IPO bank can be expected (Kanatas & Qi, 1998). Following Kanatas and Qi (1998),
we suggest that a conflict of interest is implied when a firm employs the relationship bank
as their underwriter. Thus, the hypothesis we aim to examine is the following:

▪ Hypothesis 3: Firms that employ the pre-IPO relationship bank as their underwriter
   experience a higher level of underpricing

To test the hypotheses defined in this section, our main sample is divided into different
subgroups. Examining the first hypothesis, the sample is divided into two groups, one
with a pre-IPO banking relationship in terms of lending agreements and one without.
Secondly, among firms with a lending relationship, a subsample is created and separated
into two groups consisting of firms associated with a bank that has underwriting abilities,
and firms that are not. Finally, examining the third hypothesis, we split the same
subsample used to test the second hypothesis to investigate the difference in underpricing
levels for firms that de facto employs their relationship bank as the underwriter and firms
that do not.
3. Data and Methodology

The following section explains the process of selecting the sample and gathering and
compiling the data. Thereafter, the different variables are introduced, clarified, and
motivated. Lastly, the methodology is presented.

3.1. Data

3.1.1. The Scope of the Thesis

To be able to investigate whether the presence of pre-IPO banking relationships affects
the level of underpricing for Swedish firms, recent IPO data spanning from January 1,
2014, to December 31, 2018, has been examined. The chosen time frame has been
studied, since no previous research to the best of our knowledge, has considered this
relationship deploying such recent data. Furthermore, the data is limited to Nasdaq and
Spotlight Stock Market. Finally, financial institutions and real estate companies are
excluded from the scope, which is in line with previous research on the subject
(Schenone, 2004; Benzoni & Schenone, 2009), as they have inherent differences
compared to other industries included in our study and hence cannot be rightfully
compared to these industries.

3.1.2. Data Sources

The Swedish IPO data, consisting of IPO date, offer price, and the name of the
underwriter was initially gathered through the Thomson’s Financial Securities Data

                                                                              12
Company (SDC) Platinum Database. However, the data proved to be insufficient when
compared to a list of all IPOs provided by Nasdaq and Spotlight. Therefore, all missing
data points were manually collected from firms’ IPO prospectuses. The first-day closing
price was manually obtained from Nasdaq and Spotlight and subsequently cross-checked
to the closing price presented by Avanza, aiming to confirm its accuracy. Data for the
independent variables and control variables were collected from the IPO prospectus of
each company, following the methodology used in previous research (Schenone, 2004).
When the IPO prospectus did not provide the relevant information, firm-specific data
was collected from the database Retriever. Based on the information provided in the IPO
prospectus, the firms were classified into industry groups by following the Global
Industry Classification Standards (GICS), the industry taxonomy and classification
framework used by the global financial community (S&P Global, 2018).

3.1.3. Data Collection

The data collection process generated an initial dataset of 527 IPOs and was after that
adjusted according to the following exclusion criteria:

1) The listing was not an initial offering, but rather a list change, rights offer, bond offer
     or a spin-off

2) The IPO prospectus could not be obtained, typically because the firm had been
     delisted or liquidated

3) It was impossible to find an offer price, either because the company used a floating
    price or because the price was not available in the IPO prospectus

Above restrictions limited the sample to 323 data points. Thereafter all companies
classified as financial or real estate firms were removed, as well as companies with
incomplete information regarding the firm’s banking relationship or other required firm-
specific information. This further limited the sample to 281 data points. The resulting
interim sample was thereafter investigated for outliers. In line with Dimovski and Brooks
(2006), observations with a first-day return more than 3.5 standard deviations from the
average were classified as outliers. Thereby eight outliers were revealed within the
sample. According to Wooldridge (2003), the inclusion of outliers that are uninformative
is not preferable as they increase the standard deviation of the dependent variable and
hence, introduces bias in the regression analysis. Because the identified outliers deviate
substantially from the mean and cannot be motivated by fundamental firm characteristics,
these data points were removed, in accordance with previous research (Dimovski &
Brooks, 2006). Consequently, this resulted in a sample of 273 IPOs related to the first
hypothesis. Examining the second hypothesis, only firms with a pre-IPO relationship
bank that could underwrite the issue were studied. Thus, firms without a banking
relationship were excluded together with observations where no information about the
bank that served the issuing company before the IPO could be obtained, which ultimately
resulted in a dataset of 122 IPOs. Finally, the same 122 observations were considered for

                                                                              13
the third hypothesis, where firms that employed the relationship bank as the underwriter
were examined and compared to firms that did not.

3.2. Description of Variables (Name used in the data set)

The section below explains the dependent, independent, and control variables used in the
comparison of means test and the multiple regression analysis. The control variables have
been selected after a review of the existing literature on IPO underpricing, aiming to
control for factors that have been found to impact the level of underpricing, in addition
to having a pre-IPO banking relationship.

3.2.1. Dependent Variable

Underpricing (Underpricing)

Based on the research question and outlined hypotheses, the dependent variable is
underpricing. We define underpricing as the percentage change in price between the
closing price of the IPO during the first day of trading and the offer price, in line with
previous research (Certo et al., 2001; Hao et al., 2014). Henceforth, the dependent
variable is specified as follows:

                                                             𝑃𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑖 − 𝑃𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑖
                             𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 =
                                                                                                      𝑃𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑖

Where 𝑃𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑖 is the closing price on the first day of trading for firm 𝑖 . 𝑃𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑖 is defined
as the offer price for firm 𝑖. 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 is defined as the percentage difference
between the first-day closing price and the offer price for firm 𝑖.

3.2.2. Independent Variables

Banking Relationship (Lending)

It has been shown that having a banking relationship before the IPO sends signals to
investors that the issuing company is of high value, which lowers the level of
underpricing (Slovin & Young, 1990). To test the first hypothesis, a banking relationship
dummy variable is utilized. A firm is classified as having a banking relationship if they
have a lending agreement with a bank according to the stated information in the balance
sheet presented in the IPO prospectus. Banks establish relationships through their
monitoring and continuous evaluation of the borrower and are therefore considered as a
relationship bank to borrowing firms. This definition follows the methodology used by
Schenone (2004) to identify if the firm has a relationship bank. The variable is a binary
variable that divides the data into two groups, which takes a value of 1 if the firms are
categorized as having a banking relationship before the IPO and 0 otherwise.

                                                                              14
Could Underwrite (Could)

Schenone (2004) provide evidence that having a bank-firm relationship with a potential
underwriter, i.e., a bank that could, but not necessarily did, underwrite the firm’s IPO,
lowers the asymmetric information connected to the equity issue. In line with previous
research (Schenone, 2004), we define and utilize this variable to test our second
hypothesis, which predicts that firms having a banking relationship with a prospective
underwriter should experience lower levels of underpricing since information
asymmetries between IPO participants are reduced. The variable is a binary variable that
takes the value 1 if the banking relationship refers to a bank with underwriting abilities,
and 0 otherwise.

Did Underwrite (Did)

Puri (1996) and Klein et al. (2016) propose the possibility of conflicting interests when
the relationship bank also act as the underwriter of the client firm’s equity. The
comparative advantage of the relationship bank’s access to proprietary information might
incentivize pushing lemons to the market to share the default risk of the firm with
investors (Klein et al., 2016). Furthermore, Benzoni and Schenone (2009), argue that
issues underwritten by a firm’s relationship bank could be associated with a conflict of
interest compared to IPOs conducted by underwriters without private information before
the listing. We define the variable in line with Benzoni and Schenone (2009) to test our
third hypothesis, stating that firms that employ their relationship bank as the underwriter
experience higher underpricing levels. The variable takes the value 1 if the firm has a
pre-IPO relationship with a bank that did take the firm public and 0 otherwise.

3.2.3. Control Variables

Financial Sponsors (VCPE)

VC-firms add value through actively engaging and offering expertise to their portfolio of
firms (Dolvin & Kirby, 2016). We include PE-firms in this definition of financial
sponsors as well since they tend to engage in companies in a similar manner as VC firms
(Kaplan & Strömberg, 2009). This implies a certification effect for investors, resulting
in reduced ex-ante uncertainty and thereby, lower underpricing (Barry et al., 1991).
Therefore, we expect the firms that are backed by financial sponsors, in the form of VC-
or PE-firms, within our sample to experience a lower level of underpricing. Accordingly,
we check for such a potential connection by including a binary variable that takes the
value 1 if the firm is backed by a PE- or VC-firm and 0 otherwise.

Technology Firms (Tech)

Technology firms often exhibit higher levels of complexity and thereby, higher ex-ante
uncertainty for outside investors (Loughran & Ritter, 2004). Accordingly, Dolvin and
Kirby (2016) confirm that tech firms experience higher first day returns compared to
firms in other industries. Since firms within the technology industry have been shown to
exhibit much higher underpricing, we consider this factor by including a tech dummy.

                                                                              15
The binary variable takes the value 1 if the company is defined as a tech company and 0
otherwise.

Firm Age at IPO (Log(Age))

Firms that have existed for a longer time are expected to have produced more information
that investors can use in their analyses, which should reduce the asymmetric information
between the firm and investors and result in a lower level of underpricing (Loughran &
Ritter, 2004). Thus, Loughran and Ritter (2004) use the age of the firm as a proxy for
firm risk, arguing that older firms are considered less risky. Henceforth, older firms are
expected to have lower underpricing within our sample, and therefore, we control for this
effect. Firm age is calculated as the difference in years between the firm’s founding and
the initial public offering. We use the natural logarithm of the defined age plus one, as
the effect is expected to be decreasing with the years passing.

Leverage (L/A)

Barry and Mihov (2015) argue that higher leverage is a characteristic of profitable firms,
which leads to less ex-ante uncertainty in the valuation and thus lowers the level of
underpricing. In line with Chang, Gygax, Oon and Zhang (2008) leverage is included to
control for the negative relationship between leverage and underpricing. The variable is
defined in line with Chang et al. (2008), where leverage equals total liabilities to total
assets presented in the last financial report approved by an accountant before the firm’s
IPO.

Total Assets (Log(Assets))

It has been shown in previous research that smaller firms, on average, are more
underpriced than their counterpart due to the uncertainty connected to the valuation of
the company and the sustainability of the business (Ibbotson, Sindelar & Ritter, 1998).
The firm size can also be used as a proxy for risk connected to the IPO and the issuing
firm, since larger firms can access better tools for survival and profitability, compared to
smaller firms (Carter, Dark & Singh, 1998; Finkle, 1998). In line with previous research
(Wang, 2005), we use the total asset value of the firm, defined as the total assets presented
in the last financial report approved by an accountant prior to the IPO as a proxy for firm
size. The natural logarithm of the proxy is used in the regression analysis since the effect
is expected to be decreasing with the size of the firm (e.g., Carter et al., 1998; Loughran
& Ritter, 2004).

                                                                              16
3.3. Methodology

3.3.1. Comparison of Means

To test the outlined hypotheses, the difference in means of the defined subgroups are
compared. Conforming to previous research, student’s t-tests are performed to be able to
compare IPO underpricing between the subgroups to find potential differences (Johnson
& Miller, 1998; Aggarwal et al., 2002a). Furthermore, previous research has
complemented the t-test with a non-parametric test, namely the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test
to allow for different variance between the samples and since it does not require the
dependent variable to be normally distributed (Johnson & Miller, 1988; Puri, 1996).
                                                                              1
Since the dependent variable underpricing is normally distributed , there is no need for a
non-parametric test, and thus, no Wilcoxon Rank sum test is performed.

3.3.2. Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) Regression Analysis

Previous research investigating the IPO puzzle perform regression analyses to explain
the underpricing phenomenon and the various factors affecting the level of money left on
the table (Loughran & Ritter, 2004; Cliff & Denis, 2004; Hao et al., 2014). In accordance,
potential differences in the subgroups are further examined by performing an ordinary
least squares (OLS) regression analysis. This is conducted for the three outlined
hypotheses, and hence builds on the relationship between the variable Lending and
Underpricing, Could Underwrite and Underpricing, and Did Underwrite and
Underpricing. There is little consensus in prior research regarding a definite model that
explains IPO underpricing, but it is well-established that multiple factors affect the level
of initial first-day returns (Ritter & Welch, 2002; Ljungqvist, 2007). Due to the
complexity of the subject and the many potential factors affecting underpricing, it could
be the case that variables with the explanatory power of the anomaly are not included in
the model. Hence, the regression could be subject to omitted variable bias, which
potentially leads to an under- or overestimation of the effect of incorporated variables.
Furthermore, the model is defined based on the variables which we have argued for to
have an expected impact on underpricing based on the existing literature on the topic, but
as mentioned, we acknowledge the potential bias from omitted variables.

The initial regressions are defined as follows:

Equation 1. OLS Regression for Underpricing and Lending:

   𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1(𝐿𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖) + 𝛽2(𝑉𝐶𝑃𝐸𝑖) + 𝛽3(𝑇𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑖) + 𝛽3(𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑔𝑒)𝑖 )
                             +𝛽4(𝐿/𝐴𝑖) + 𝛽5(𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)𝑖 ) + 𝜀𝑖

1
  A Shapiro-Wilk W test for normal data is performed on the dependent variable Underpricing. The test show that it
cannot be rejected at a 10 percent level, that the data is normally distributed. The table of the results is presented in
Appendix Table A.1.

                                                                              17
Equation 2. OLS Regression for Underpricing and Could:

     𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1(𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖) + 𝛽2(𝑉𝐶𝑃𝐸𝑖) + 𝛽3(𝑇𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑖) + 𝛽3(𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑔𝑒)𝑖)
                             +𝛽4(𝐿/𝐴𝑖) + 𝛽5(𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)𝑖 ) + 𝜀𝑖

Equation 3. OLS Regression for Underpricing and Did:

      𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1(𝐷𝑖𝑑𝑖) + 𝛽2(𝑉𝐶𝑃𝐸𝑖) + 𝛽3(𝑇𝑒𝑐ℎ𝑖 ) + 𝛽3(𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑔𝑒)𝑖)
                             +𝛽4(𝐿/𝐴𝑖) + 𝛽5(𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)𝑖 ) + 𝜀𝑖

4. Results and Discussion

Below, the results from the empirical analysis are presented, to investigate whether
different types of pre-IPO banking relationships affect the level of underpricing for
Swedish firms. To start with, descriptive statistics are shown to highlight any particular
differences in firm characteristics. After that, the empirical results from the univariate
analysis and OLS regressions are presented and finally discussed. Lastly, the limitations
regarding the employed data and methodology are discussed.

4.1. Results

4.1.1 Overview of the Data

Before the investigation of the hypotheses, an analysis of the full dataset is conducted to
obtain a fundamental understanding of the firm characteristics between the subgroups. In
line with Schenone (2004), this is performed since it allows for a more rigorous analysis
of the results found in the comparison of means test and OLS regression, and additionally
provides an overview of the firm types that are more prone to belong to either group. All
of the data and findings referred to in this section is presented in Table 1. This analysis
reveals that firms with a relationship bank before the IPO are in general larger firms
compared to firms without a relationship bank before the IPO, both considering total
assets and the firm valuation at the offering, and also older, looking at the firm age.
Furthermore, firms with a banking relationship are more often listed on Nasdaq instead
of Spotlight.
       When comparing the firms with a relationship bank that could take them public
to those that could not, e.g., universal versus non-universal relationship banks, a similar
pattern is evident. Firms with a relationship bank that could take them public are in
general larger and older firms. It can also be shown that firms with a universal
relationship bank are more often listed on Nasdaq than Spotlight, where 87.8 percent of
the firms with a universal relationship bank are listed on Nasdaq, compared to 55.0
percent of the firms with a non-universal relationship bank.
       Lastly, comparing firms that did go public with their relationship bank as the
underwriter to those that did not, it can be concluded that they are also substantially larger
and older firms. The firms that employed their relationship bank as the underwriter are

                                                                              18
also less often backed by a financial sponsor and to a larger extent tech companies, where
69.4 percent of the firms that employed their relationship bank is VC- or PE-backed and
13.9 percent are classified as tech firms.

                                                                              19
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics
The table illustrates descriptive statistics for the sample and subsamples used to examine the stated hypotheses. T-tests
are performed for each of the control variables, based on the independent variables Lending, Could Underwrite and
Did Underwrite for Group 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Lending is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm
has a pre-IPO lending relationship and 0 otherwise. Could is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has
a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank that could underwrite the issue and 0 otherwise. Did is a dummy variable
that takes on the value 1 if the firm employed their pre-IPO relationship bank as the underwriter and 0 otherwise.
Financial Sponsors is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the IPO and
0 otherwise. Technology Firms is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm and
0 otherwise. Firm Age is defined as the difference in years between the founding and the IPO. Liabilities to Assets is
the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Valuation at Offering is the offer price times the total number
of outstanding shares. Nasdaq is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is listed on Nasdaq and 0
otherwise. Significance levels (p-values) are specified with asterisks for the difference in means between the subgroups.

Group 1 Lending No Lending
                                             N = 170 N =103
Variables Mean Mean Difference in Means
Underpricing 0.073 0.054 0.019
Financial Sponsors (Proportion) 0.512 0.466 0.046
Technology Firms (Proportion) 0.253 0.233 0.020
Firm Age 15.188 8.544 6.645***
Liabilities to Assets 0.557 0.375 0.182***
Total Assets (SEK million) 782.003 64.704 717.299***
Nasdaq (Proportion) 0.729 0.534 0.195***
Valuation at Offering (SEK million) 1 156.442 379.289 777.153***
Group 2 Could Underwrite Could not Underwrite
                                             N = 82 N =40
Variables Mean Mean Difference in Means
Underpricing 0.134 0.006 0.128***
Financial Sponsors (Proportion) 0.512 0.650 -0.138*
Technology Firms (Proportion) 0.256 0.275 -0.019
Firm Age 19.28 9,000 10.280***
Liabilities to Assets 0.607 0.529 0.078*
Total Assets (SEK million) 1 556.049 31.555 1 524.494***
Nasdaq (Proportion) 0.878 0.550 0.328***
Valuation at Offering (SEK million) 2 118.999 269.498 1 849.501***
Group 3 Did Underwrite Did not Underwrite
                                            N = 36 N =86
Variables Mean Mean Difference in Means
Underpricing 0.129 0.076 0.052
Financial Sponsors (Proportion) 0.694 0.500 0.194**
Technology Firms (Proportion) 0.139 0.314 -0.175**
Firm Age 24.889 12.151 12.738***
Liabilities to Assets 0.674 0.543 0.131***
Total Assets (SEK million) 3 170.023 171.365 2 998.658***
Nasdaq (Proportion) 1.000 0.674 0.326***
Valuation at Offering (SEK million) 3 856.191 531.57 3 324.621***
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

                                                                                   20
4.1.2. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Banking Relationship on Underpricing

Lending Relationship

To examine whether a bank-firm relationship is associated with a lower level of
underpricing, an initial student’s t-test is conducted to compare the average first-day
return for firms with a pre-IPO banking relationship to firms without one. In line with
previous research, suggesting that lending agreements reduce ex-ante information
uncertainty as inside debt signals to the market that the IPO firm is of superior quality
(e.g., James & Wier, 1990), we expect firms that have such a relationship to be associated
with a lower level of underpricing. However, contrary to what is hypothesized, the initial
univariate analysis reveals that firms with a preexisting banking relationship on average
experience a higher level of underpricing. The difference in means is 1.86 percentage
points, however insignificant, presented in Appendix Table A.2. Henceforth, to conduct
further examination of the two groups in the sample, a regression analysis is performed
to investigate whether a linear relationship can be established between underpricing and
the presence of a bank-firm relationship during the IPO.
       Several assumptions are expected to be satisfied when running an OLS regression,
which is tested to eliminate biases in the presented model. The tests indicate that the
regression utilized for the first hypothesis violates the assumption of homoscedasticity in
               2
the residuals . Consequently, White’s (1980) robust standard errors are employed, which
is in line with how previous literature on IPO underpricing handles this issue (Amihud,
Hauser & Kirsch, 2003; Rydqvist, 1997).
       In line with the results from the comparison of means between the groups, the
multiple regression analysis implies no significant relationship between underpricing and
the bank-firm lending relationship (see Appendix Table A.3). In contrary to the stated
hypothesis, the independent coefficient indicates a slightly positive relationship of 0.2
percentage points when controlling for variables that could be expected to impact the
level of underpricing, according to previous research. To conclude, no significant
relationship between the presence of a lending relationship and the level of underpricing
is found.

Relationship with a Potential Underwriter

The second hypothesis concerns the effect on underpricing when a firm has a pre-IPO
relationship with a bank that possesses underwriting abilities. Previous research argues
for a negative relation between such a relationship and the first-day return due to reduced
information asymmetries between the issuing firm, outside investors, and the underwriter
(Schenone, 2004). Contrary to prior findings and to our outlined expectations, the
comparison of means shows that firms with close ties to a bank that could also take the

2
  A Variance inflation factors (VIFs) test is performed to test for multicollinearity in line with Corwin (2003). Using a threshold
value of 5 in line with Hair et al. (2010), it can be concluded that the results are robust to multicollinearity problems, since the highest
identified value is 1.37, presented in Appendix Table A.4. To conclude if the residuals are normally distributed, they are plotted
against a normal distribution using a Kernel density estimation. Based on the graph it is not possible to reject that the residuals are
normally distributed. The graph is presented in Appendix Graph A.1. Finally, a Breusch-Pagan/Cock-Weisberg test is conducted to
test for homoscedasticity in the residuals. The result is presented in Appendix Table A.5, and indicates that it is not possible to reject
that the residuals display heteroscedasticity at a 10 percent level.

                                                                              21
   firm public experience a first-day return of 13.4 percent, while IPOs conducted by firms
   without such a relationship is severely less underpriced, with an average underpricing
   level of 0.6 percent (see Table 2). The difference is significant at the 1 percent level. The
   average underpricing for firms that are served by a non-universal bank deviates
   substantially from the mean of the sample, and these firms experience close to zero
   underpricing on average.

Table 2. T-test on Underpricing based on the Independent Variable Could Underwrite
The table illustrates the results of a two-tailed t-test, performed on the dependent variable Underpricing.
Underpricing is defined as the percentage change in price between the first day closing price and the offer price.
The test compares the mean, based on the independent variable Could Underwrite where the subsample of 122
observations is divided into two subgroups, dependent on if the relationship bank that serves the firm prior to the
IPO could underwrite the issue or not.
                      N Mean Standard Error (95% Confidence Interval)
Could Underwrite 82 0.134 0.022 0.090 0.177
Could not Underwrite 40 0.006 0.038 -0.072 0.084
Combined 122 0.092 0.020 0.052 0.131
Difference 0.128 0.041 0.046 0.209

      Ha: diff < 0 Ha: diff ! = 0 Ha: diff > 0
   Pr(T<t) = 0.999 Pr( ⎸T⎹ >⎸t⎹ ) = 0.002 Pr(T>t) = 0.001

    To investigate whether the significant difference found in the t-test is driven by the Could
   Underwrite variable, a multiple regression analysis is conducted aiming to control for a
   potential impact from other factors. This is in line with the methodology used in previous
   research aiming to avoid biases in the regression. No violation of the OLS assumptions
                                                                 3
   is evident when performing tests to control for this . Thus, no modifications were made
   to the OLS regression for the second hypothesis.
          In line with the univariate results, the regression analysis shows a positive slope
    of the Could Underwrite coefficient. The result presented in Table 3 implies that a pre-
   IPO banking relationship with a potential underwriter, ceteris paribus, is associated with
   a higher level of underpricing by 10.6 percentage points, significant at the 5 percent level.
   Thus, no empirical evidence is found supporting the second hypothesis. Our results
   contradict the findings of Schenone (2004), that argues for a lower level of underpricing
   as informational frictions between different IPO participants are reduced. Henceforth, the
   data specifies an inverse relationship, which is robust when controlling for other known
   factors affecting the level of underpricing.

    3
       The performed VIFs test indicate that the results are robust to multicollinearity, and the highest value is 1.84, which is presented in
    Appendix Table A.6. When plotting the residuals using a Kernel density estimation with normal distribution it cannot be rejected that
    the residuals are normally distributed. The graph is presented in Appendix Graph A.2. Lastly, the Breusch-Pagan/ Cock-Weisberg
    test indicates that there are no problems with heteroskedasticity, and this can be rejected at a 10 percent level. The test is presented
    in Appendix Table A.7.

                                                                                 22
Table 3. OLS Regression Results for Underpricing and Could Underwrite
The table illustrates the results from regressions on Underpricing for the second hypothesis. The included variables
in the regression are Could, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A, and Log(Assets). The table presents the coefficient for each
variable and the standard error in parenthesis below the coefficient. Could is a binary variable that takes on the value
1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank that could underwrite the issue and 0 otherwise. VCPE is
a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is
a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the
logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets.
Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm. Significance levels (p-values) are specified with asterisks.

Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6
Could 0.128*** 0.128*** 0.129*** 0.113** 0.110** 0.106**
                       (0.041) (0.042) (0.042) (0.044) (0.044) (0.051)
VCPE 0.004 0.002 0.003 0.002 -0.000
                                      (0.039) (0.039) (0.039) (0.039) (0.042)
Tech 0.041 0.040 0.038 0.040
                                                      (0.044) (0.044) (0.045) (0.046)
Log(Age) 0.033 0.033 0.031
                                                                     (0.027) (0.027) (0.031)
L/A 0.028 0.026
                                                                                   (0.070) (0.073)
Log(Assets) 0.004
                                                                                                       (0.026)
Constant 0.006 0.004 -0.007 -0.078 -0.093 -0.091
                       (0.034) (0.042) (0.044) (0.074) (0.082) (0.084)
R-squared 0.075 0.075 0.081 0.093 0.094 0.094
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

   Relationship with the Underwriter

   To examine the level of underpricing when the underwriter that manages the IPO possess
   proprietary information about the issuing firm through prior lending agreements
    compared to when the underwriter is uninformed, a t-test is conducted. Previous research
   on the topic is contradictory, where some scholars have found evidence for a conflict of
   interest effect resulting in more underpriced offerings (e.g., Klein et al., 2016; Kanatas
   & Qi, 1998). However, the larger part of the research body instead argues in favor of a
    certification effect that is associated with a lower level of initial returns, as investors are
   willing to pay a higher price for shares offered by an underwriter with close ties to the
   IPO firm (e.g., Kroszner & Rajan, 1994; Schenone, 2004). In line with our predictions of
    a conflict of interest, stated in the third hypothesis, the findings of the univariate analysis
   indicate that firms that go public with their relationship bank on average experience an
   underpricing of 12.9 percent. This is 5.2 percentage points higher compared to IPOs
   underwritten by a bank without a prior relationship with the issuing firm (see Appendix
   Table A.8.). Although, the difference in means is not significant and thus cannot be
   confirmed.

                                                                                 23
To control for the impact of other factors affecting the level of underpricing, we once
again conduct a multiple regression analysis controlling for any potential influence from
the control variables. Since the OLS regression performed for the third hypothesis
presents heteroscedasticity in the residuals, White’s (1980) robust standard errors are
      4
used . The results from the multiple regression analysis suggest that firms with a previous
relationship with a bank that also did act as the underwriter are associated with a slightly
lower level of underpricing (see Appendix Table A.9.). The Did Underwrite coefficient
in the final regression has the value -0.2 percent. It thus seems as the coefficient could as
likely be positive as negative. The initial evidence is more in line with theories arguing
for a conflict of interest, but the difference in the level of underpricing is insignificant,
and when other variables are included in the regression framework the opposing relation
is indicated by the negative coefficient, slightly more in line with a certification effect
(Puri, 1996). Hence, we can conclude that the data, although indicative of a positive
relation initially and thus in line with theories arguing for a conflict of interest, cannot be
determined to specify such a relationship.

4.2. Robustness Tests and Improving the Quantitative Analysis

4.2.1. Robustness Test Methodology

In this section, the robustness, accuracy, and stability of the significant result for the
second hypothesis is tested. We employ various tools to contest these findings, to see if
other factors affect the outcome. This is achieved through replacing, adding, and
removing different regressors, presented as different robustness tests. Employing such
robustness tests has been advocated for in previous research since it is considered a valid
way of finding misspecification within the model (Leamer & Leonard, 1983; Lu &
White, 2014). Thus, we use various tests to conclude if the results in the second
hypothesis can be considered to be robust to changes in the model. The tests build on the
regression presented in column six for the second hypothesis in the result section.
Altogether, five robustness tests are included for this purpose.

Replacing and Excluding Variables due to Low Explanatory Value (first test)

In the first robustness test, two alternations of the model are performed to test how the
coefficients are affected. Firstly, Log(Assets) is replaced by another proxy for firm size,
defined as the natural logarithm of the offer price times the total number of outstanding
shares at the offering, Log(Valuation). The reason for not employing this proxy in the
initial model is that the previous literature seldom does. Although, we made a qualitative
assessment that young firms might be less likely to have capitalized or presented various
assets, especially connected to intangibles, and thus the valuation at the offering might
be more representative for the actual size of the firm. Therefore, we expect there to be

4
  A VIFs test show that there are no issues with multicollinearity in the model using a threshold of 5, since the highest identified
value is 2.22. The results are presented in Appendix Table A.10. The residuals show no large sign of non-normality when plotting
them against a Kernel density estimation with normal distribution. The graph is shown in Appendix Graph A.3. A Breusch-
Pagan/Cock-Weisberg test shows that we cannot reject that the residuals have a problem with heteroskedasticity at a 10 percent level
(see Appendix Table A.11.).

                                                                              24
some differences between the proxies while they still encapsulate the same effect, i.e.,
that larger firms have a more extensive asset base and a higher valuation at the offering.
       Furthermore, in line with Greenland (1989), variables that have very low
explanatory value are excluded from the OLS regression. This method relies on
subjectively evaluating the influence of control variables when one independent variable,
in this case, Could, is used to explain a dependent variable. Thereby, the VC- or PE-
backed control dummy is removed from the model. This modification in the model is
performed both to refine the model and to see how the coefficients are affected by the
change, and the results are presented in Table 4 in robustness test 1.

Including the Stock Exchange (Second test)

In the data sample used for the analysis, the data points are collected from two different
types of stock exchanges, Nasdaq and Spotlight. The Spotlight exchange focus on
attracting smaller growth companies that aim to evolve and grow their business through
a listing, while Nasdaq has different types of lists where companies that go public are
often larger and in a later stage of their business growth (Spotlight, 2019). Thus, the firm
characteristics should differ depending on what list the company has chosen to go public
through. Therefore, a binary variable that takes the value 1 if the company is listed on
Nasdaq and 0 if it is listed on Spotlight is included in the regression. It is expected that
firms that go public on Nasdaq are larger, older and with a more developed business
model and thus, in accordance with the asymmetric information argument, is expected to
experience lower levels of underpricing. The variable was not included in the initial
model since it was supposed to capture the effect of the age and size of the companies,
already included in the existing model. Since it cannot be rejected that the listing place
affects the level of underpricing, the Nasdaq dummy variable is included in Table 4 in
robustness test 2.

The Cumulative Market Return 15 Days Prior to the Listing (Third test)

The theoretically correct angle of incidence would be to report a market return adjusted
underpricing in the regression (Chan, Wang & Wei, 2004; Muscarella & Vetsuypens,
1989). Thus, to account for this factor, a control variable for the market return before the
IPO is added to the model. Loughran and Ritter (2004) find that the cumulative return
the previous 15 trading days before the IPO is a well-fitting proxy for predicting IPO
underpricing. Thus, we control for significant market events around the IPO by including
a control variable in line with Dolvin and Kirby (2016). The variable is defined as the
cumulative return for the index OMXS30 the previous 15 trading days before the IPO.
The chosen index is fitted to the current market environment in Sweden overall, to
encapsulate any significant market events around the IPO date. A market return variable
was not included in the initial OLS regression since the effect and difference is often
negligible due to the low daily returns compared to the first day returns of IPOs (Beatty
& Ritter, 1986). The low daily returns are considered by including the cumulative return
for 15 days, which should be more extensive than the one day-return and thus capture
important market events around the IPO. Since it is not impossible to reject the impact

                                                                              25
of the market return on the underpricing within the sample, it is considered through a
robustness test (see Table 4 robustness test 3).

Including Industry Fixed Effects (Fourth test)

It has been shown that different industries historically experience different levels of
underpricing (Loughran & Ritter, 2004). While the lion’s share of the IPO underpricing
literature contemplates this factor affecting the underpricing, by including a binary
variable for tech firms (e.g., Loughran & Ritter, 2004; Cliff & Denis, 2004), some authors
include industry fixed effects (e.g., Schenone, 2004). Previously we assessed that the tech
dummy would sufficiently capture this effect, but as a robustness test, and since we
cannot conclude if the variable de facto captures the industry effects, we remove this
variable and instead include industry fixed effects. The industry classifications identified
using GICS were later narrowed down to seven classifications of broader industry
groups: Technology, Healthcare, Manufacturing and Industrial, Consumer, School,
Energy and Professional Services. Companies that lacked a natural industry were
clustered together with the most similar classification, for instance, Mining and
Aerospace were included in Manufacturing and Industrial. In total, six dummy variables
are added to consider the effects of the defined industries. The results are presented in
Table 4 in robustness test 4.

Including Time Fixed Effects (Fifth test)

The level of underpricing has differed a lot between years, and periods such as the
internet bubble during 1999 to 2000 has to a large extent impacted the first day returns
for firms going public (Loughran & Ritter, 2004). A substantial part of the existing
research has incorporated this effect in their analyses, and while some has employed time
fixed effects (Schenone, 2004), others have included a dummy variable for a particular
period such as the dot-com bubble (Loughran & Ritter, 2004; Dolvin & Kirby, 2016). In
line with Schenone (2004), this well-known source affecting the underpricing levels is
tested for, by employing binary variables for each year except for one. Dummy variables
for the year 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 are thus added to the analysis. Time fixed effects
were not included in the initial model, since the chosen period for the sample has been
characterized as a hot IPO market throughout all of the five years, with no significant
market events comparable to the dot-com bubble (EY, 2018). Consequently, no
substantial differences are expected between the years, but since this cannot be
concluded, time fixed effects are added as a robustness test (see Table 4, robustness test
5).

4.2.2. Results of the Robustness Tests

In the first three robustness tests, no significant changes are evident to the overall model
and the related coefficients. The fourth and fifth test, introducing industry and time fixed
effects, respectively, seem to have a more considerable impact on the regression. The
impact on the model is specifically evident considering time fixed effects, which affects
multiple coefficients and the explanatory value of the model. This induces that there is a

                                                                              26
large difference in the level of underpricing depending on the year in which the IPO takes
place. The Could variable’s significant effect on the level of underpricing persists
throughout the five performed robustness tests, although the significance level decreases
to the 10 percent level when industry and time fixed effects are simultaneously included.
The coefficient for Could is 10 percent at lowest, and 12.8 percent as highest when no
other regressors are incorporated. The results thus indicate that the significant result of
the Could coefficient is robust. Furthermore, since the t-tests and all performed
regressions present a significant result, the Could variable seem to capture a significant
effect on underpricing, despite the substantial differences in firm characteristics between
the two subgroups. In line with the presented results, we argue that this section provides
evidence that the previous finding for the second hypothesis is robust, implicating that a
pre-IPO relationship with a universal bank leads to a higher level of underpricing within
the studied sample.

                                                                              27
Table 4. OLS Regression Robustness Tests for Hypothesis Two
The table illustrates the results from regressions on Underpricing for the robustness tests of the second
hypothesis. The included variables in this regression are Could, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A, Log(Valuation),
Nasdaq, Market Return. We also include Industry Fixed Effects, and Time Fixed Effects. This table presents
the coefficient for each variable and the standard error in parenthesis below the coefficient. Could is a dummy
variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank that could
underwrite the issue and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC-
or PE-backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm
is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A
is the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Valuation) is the logarithm of the offer price
of the company times the number of outstanding shares. Nasdaq is a dummy variable that takes on the value
1 if the firm is listed on Nasdaq and 0 otherwise. Market Return is the cumulative return of the OMX30 Index
15 days before the IPO. Industry Fixed Effects incorporates 6 dummy variables for all industries except for
one; the different dummy variables take on the value 1 if the firm is classified as belonging to that industry
and 0 otherwise. Time Fixed Effects incorporates 4 dummy variables, one for each year except for 2014, the
dummy variables take on the value 1 if the firm IPO takes place in the specific year and 0 otherwise.
Significance levels (p-values) are specified with asterisks.
Variable 1 2 3 4 5
Could 0.113** 0.113** 0.111** 0.121** 0.100*
                                     (0.048) (0.048) (0.048) (0.051) (0.052)
Tech 0.036 0.036 0.032
                                     (0.046) (0.046) (0.047)
Log(Age) 0.035 0.035 0.035 0.034 0.036
                                     (0.029) (0.029) (0.029) (0.030) (0.030)
L/A 0.031 0.032 0.035 0.048 0.048
                                     (0.072) (0.072) (0.072) (0.074) (0.073)
Log(Valuation) -0.003 -0.004 -0.004 -0.004 -0.005
                                     (0.014) (0.017) (0.017) (0.017) (0.017)
Nasdaq 0.008 0.005 0.012 0.034
                                                   (0.060) (0.060) (0.061) (0.063)
Market Return 0.505 0.512 0.385
                                                                 (0.613) (0.640) (0.642)
Industry Fixed Effects No No No Yes Yes

Time Fixed Effects No No No No Yes

Constant -0.085 -0.084 -0.082 -0.070 -0.073
                                     (0.089) (0.089) (0.090) (0.023) (0.241)
R-squared 0.094 0.094 0.100 0.115 0.168
 *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

                                                                                28
4.3. Discussion of the Results

4.3.1. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Lending Relationship

Concerning the first hypothesis, predicting that the presence of a lending relationship
prior to the IPO signals that the firm is of high quality to investors, no results in favor of
the theory presented by Beatty and Ritter (1986), are found. Thus, it is indicated that
having a relationship bank before the IPO does not seem to provide a signaling effect for
investors within the studied sample. Since no significant findings are established, we
would argue that it could be the case that the stated theory oversimplifies the signaling
effect a banking relationship is expected to have (Slovin & Young, 1990). Depending on
the type of bank that serves the firm before the IPO, i.e., if the bank is universal or not,
there are different types of signaling effects for investors to use when deciding to
subscribe to the IPO (Benston, 1990; Puri, 1996). Universal banks offer products across
scopes that non-universal banks cannot, and through the informational economies of
scope, this might imply that they attain an informational advantage compared to non-
universal banks (Neuhann & Saidi, 2018; Schenone, 2004). We would argue that this
informational advantage can be interpreted differently from an investor perspective,
either as a certifier of a correct company valuation or as a conflict of interest inherent to
the business model of universal banks that investors want to be compensated for.

4.3.2. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Relationship with a Universal Bank

Regarding the second hypothesis, stating that firms with a relationship bank that could
underwrite the IPO should experience a lower level of underpricing, a significant
difference has been detected where firms that have a previous banking relationship with
the ability to underwrite the IPO experience a significantly higher level of underpricing.
This result contradicts the findings in previous research (Schenone, 2004). There seems
to be no support for the theory that having a universal relationship bank reduces
information asymmetries between the IPO participants within the studied sample. Thus,
no empirical results were found in support of the second hypothesis. Therefore, the
signaling theory (Slovin & Young, 1990), perhaps do not oversimplify the signaling
effect of banking relationships, but instead, the investors within our sample might not use
such signals to determine the quality of a company. This is indicated since neither the
first nor the second hypothesis supports that relationship banks, with or without
underwriting abilities mitigate informational frictions between IPO stakeholders. The
theories connected to relationship banking and IPO underpricing cannot explain these
findings, but as mentioned throughout the thesis, the theories are rather unexplored.
Hence, we would suggest that the fundamental characteristics of the firms and its wider
implications could serve as an alternative explanation. Furthermore, it can be argued that
previous research might have assigned too much explanatory power to the impact of
having a relationship bank as a mitigator of informational disparities between
stakeholders during an IPO, which might not be the general case in all market contexts.

                                                                              29
In our sample, firm characteristics seem to be associated with the type of bank a company
has a relationship with before the IPO, where older and larger firms in general borrow
                          5
from universal banks . Besides, it is evident that companies served by non-universal
relationship banks, in general, are of smaller size. Because institutional investors can
have certain requirements or legal restrictions regarding which stock exchanges they are
allowed to invest in, and regarding the type of companies they have in their portfolio
(Hellman, 2000), they might be prone to mainly invest in larger IPO companies listed on
a more developed stock exchange, e.g., Nasdaq, which to a large extent corresponds to
                                                                             6
firms that have a universal relationship bank, in our sample . In addition, previous
research argues that institutional investors are recurring investors in IPOs and that they
tend to receive larger allocations of shares in underpriced issues than retail investors do
(Loughran & Ritter, 2002; Aggarwal et al., 2002b). Therefore, firms with universal
relationship banks could be more exposed to large institutional investors that push down
the valuation, which partially explains why they experience a significantly higher level
of underpricing. Albeit, since both size proxies and a stock exchange dummy are included
in the regressions, and are unable to explain the underpricing since the Could Underwrite
variable is significant also when they are included, these control variables are not able to
explain the difference in the level of underpricing. Instead, we argue that the overall
characteristics of the firms that are served by a universal relationship bank within our
sample potentially correlate with institutional investments in the IPO. As institutional
ownership is not controlled for in the regression, it could be an omitted factor that would
be able to explain the reason for the significant difference in the level of underpricing
observed.
       Furthermore, considering that firms with non-universal relationship banks, in
general, are smaller and younger, they could have had fewer funding rounds and thus
retained a more concentrated ownership structure. Owning a more substantial stake of
the firm increases the owner’s incentives to get a fair valuation and not lose money from
a too generous offer price, while a more fragmented ownership structure might find it
value maximizing to allow some underpricing due to the costs inherent with monitoring
the underwriter (Baron, 1982). Also, smaller firms might have to sell a more significant
part of their company to make it worthwhile going public, compared to larger firms.
Thus, the ownership structure is perhaps affected to a more considerable extent for firms
with a non-universal relationship bank, and it gets too expensive for the pre-IPO owners
to allow a large underpricing to signal high quality, in line with Allen and Faulhaber
(1989). Due to the same reasons that firms served by a universal relationship bank might
be more attractive targets for institutional investors, i.e., the firm size, listing place, firm
age, and potential ownership structure, they could to a larger extent be covered by equity
analysts and have more long-term investors they want to satisfy. In line with this, we
suggest that firms with a universal relationship bank might be more prone to allow
underpricing, since these firms could be more dependent on analyst coverage and that the

5
  The difference in the average assets and firm age is significantly smaller at a 1 percent level for firms with a non-universal bank
(see Table 1).
6
  Firms with a universal relationship bank are significantly more often listed on the Nasdaq exchange at a 1 percent level (see Table
1).

                                                                              30
investors have a positive first impression of the company, e.g., the benefits Welch (1989)
and Cliff and Denis (2004) claims are received for allowing an underpricing of the IPO.
These factors regarding the firm characteristics and ownership structure could potentially
correlate with being served by a universal relationship bank and explain part of the results
found for the second hypothesis. We thus argue that firms with universal relationship
banks might be more inclined to leave money on the table while firms with non-universal
banks see fewer benefits in underpricing their issue.
       Departing from the focus on asymmetric information, we suggest that being a firm
with a universal banking relationship could be associated with some underlying factors
which have not been included in our regression analysis but are important for the level
of underpricing when going public. These factors relate mainly to who are allocated
shares in the issue and the pre-IPO owners’ willingness to leave money on the table. It is
therefore argued that the banking relationship per se perhaps do not drive the substantial
difference in underpricing between the subgroups, although it captures a significant effect
that might be due to the abovementioned omitted factors.

4.3.3. The Effect of a Pre-IPO Relationship with the Underwriting Bank

The third hypothesis aims to investigate if investors require a risk premium for the
potential inherent conflict of interest when firm-specific information obtained from a
lending agreement is combined with underwriting activities (e.g., Benzoni & Schenone,
2009). Initially, an insignificant difference indicative of a potential conflict of interest is
found when performing a comparison of means test. When controlling for other factors
in the OLS regression analysis, the coefficient instead indicates a negative slope,
although insignificant. Our results imply that investors do not need to be compensated
for the risk of a potential conflict of interest (Klein et al., 2016) nor do they rely on banks
as certifiers of superior firm quality (Puri, 1996). We suggest that the findings could
potentially be interpreted as if the Swedish IPO market is rather transparent with already
low informational asymmetries between IPO stakeholders within the studied time frame,
which is supported by the fact that the Swedish IPO market on average has a lower level
of underpricing than most other countries do in the more recent years (Abrahamson & de
Ridder, 2015; Loughran, Ritter & Rydqvist, 2018). Therefore, investors may be
indifferent to whether the relationship bank underwrites the IPO or not.

4.4. Limitations

There are several limitations and potential areas of improvement connected to the
quantitative methodology. Firstly, regarding the sample, the chosen data span over a short
period. During the studied period, e.g., 2014 to 2018, Sweden has experienced a boom in
the number of IPOs conducted (EY, 2018). Investigating a more extended time frame
and not only a hot IPO market might have generated a more comprehensive examination
to understand the underpricing anomaly better.
       It should also be noted that there might be a potential endogeneity problem with
the statistical model. Possibly, the type of relationship bank that serves the company is

                                                                              31
not random, but instead, other factors correlate with both underpricing and the firm’s pre-
IPO banking relationship. For instance, it could be the case that a third factor, such as the
ownership concentration correlates with both a specific type of relationship bank and the
level of underpricing, as discussed in section 4.3.2. The issue connected to potential
endogeneity problems is considered by including multiple factors that potentially
correlate with both underpricing and the type of relationship bank the firm is served by,
in the analysis by running an OLS regression. In addition, the issue is considered by
discussing and acknowledging alternative explanations of the findings that were not
included in the model but potentially would provide some explanatory power if the factor
could be incorporated.
       Another restriction is the number of data points. The ability to draw general
conclusions is difficult given the small data set and the limitation to the Swedish market.
The Nordic countries should be expected to present a similar banking climate, and by
expanding the sample to all of these countries, a more extensive data set would be
attained. Thus, by increasing the time frame and the number of included countries, a more
extensive result and conclusion could potentially be drawn.
       Furthermore, outliers are removed to allow for a more rigorous analysis. This is
because significant results could be found for some variables otherwise based on a single
                   7
extreme outlier . In line with previous research, observations that deviate 3.5 standard
deviations from the mean are removed (Dimovski & Brooks, 2006). The employed
methodology to identify and remove outliers is a less arbitrary way than winsorizing the
dependent variable at a certain level since it is adjusted to the specific observations within
the data set and thus outliers are only identified if there are any substantial deviations
within the sample. Previous research on IPO underpricing differ in handling this
dilemma, and mainly papers with small samples seem to adjust for outliers in the primary
analysis, which is in line with this thesis. Banerjee, Dai and Shrestha (2010) winsorizes
their dependent variable to mitigate the effect from outliers, and Chambers and Dimson
(2009) use the same methodology as a robustness test, while Dimovski and Brooks
(2006) use a predetermined threshold based on the standard deviation to remove outliers
from their primary analysis. Thus, there seems to be no consensus on how to handle the
impact of outliers on the sample in IPO underpricing research, but rather a qualitative
assessment to the specific case seems necessary. As evidenced in the footnote,
performing an analysis including the outliers decreases the ability to draw reasonable
conclusions due to the massive impact of such observations. Therefore, we handled this,
with what we considered the best alternative, based on existing research of IPO
underpricing. Henceforth, the weakness in the presented methodology is mainly due to
the lacking consensus amongst scholars on how to handle the stated dilemma.
      Moreover, some of the utilized variables are not defined in line with the most
prominent research of the topic due to the lack of access to adequate data, which might
impact the reliability of the proxies. For instance, considering the VC and PE dummy, it

7
 It should be noted that by including all data points, there is no significant results for the second hypothesis. By removing the largest
outlier, which refers to a company with a first-day return of 310.7 percent, the findings for the second hypothesis is significant when
performing an OLS regression controlling for other factors. This exemplifies the need of an adjustment for outliers. Otherwise, a
single data point can induce a certain result.

                                                                              32
would have been interesting to include the size of the ownership stake, since owning a
larger share of the company would create a stronger incentive to bargain with the
underwriter to attain a higher valuation. Furthermore, tech companies in the sample are
defined rather wide, and by having access to similar company classifications as previous
research, e.g., SIC-codes, to be able to single out high-tech companies, might have
provided a better proxy for the industry effects. This is handled to some extent by
considering industry fixed effects as a robustness test. Furthermore, the strength of the
banking relationship might be necessary to signal high quality to investors. Potentially,
the mere existence of a banking relationship is not interpreted as a strong enough signal
of firm quality, and thus do not impact the level of underpricing. This could be a potential
explanation for the lack of findings connected to the reduction of asymmetric information
due to banking relationships, in the sample. In line with previous research, this thesis
limits the definition of banking relationships to whether the firm has a banking
relationship or not (Schenone, 2004). Thus, the variables do not include the size or
number of existent financial services. Hence it would be value adding to investigate if
the extent of the relationship has an impact on the signaling effect of pre-IPO banking
relationships.
       Lastly, having a proxy for the ownership concentration and whether institutional
investors invest in the IPO, would allow for a more rigorous analysis of the findings.
Since these omitted factors are discussed as potential explanations of the findings in the
second hypothesis, including them, would result in a more comprehensive analysis.
5. Implications and Conclusion
In this section, the economic implications of the findings are presented. After that, we
suggest topics for future research to investigate based on the results, and the overall
understandings that have been established regarding the IPO puzzle. Lastly, the
conclusion of the thesis is presented.

5.1. Economic Implications

The presented results in section 4.2. shows that, ceteris paribus, firms with a pre-IPO
universal relationship bank experience a level of underpricing that is 10 percentage points
higher compared to firms with a non-universal relationship bank. To grasp the economic
implication of this finding, the average cost in terms of lost IPO proceeds translates to
                       8
SEK 81.94 million . Thus, the money left on the table showcases the significant loss the
pre-IPO owners experience due to the higher level of underpricing. Although multiple
factors affect the underpricing level, it can be concluded that having a relationship bank
that could underwrite the firm’s IPO has a substantial effect on the amount foregone by
the issuing firm within the investigated sample.

8
  The average IPO proceeds for the firms having a pre-IPO relationship with a bank that could underwrite the issue, i.e., a universal
relationship bank, are SEK 819.43 million (see Appendix Table A.12). The cost in terms of lost proceeds is the total amount equivalent
to 10 percent of the underpricing, which amounts to SEK 81.94 million.

                                                                              33
5.2. Suggestions for Future Research

The presented results contradict previous research by Schenone (2004) who investigates
IPOs in the US during 1998 to the end of 2000, and since this thesis use more recent IPO
data in another geographical market, it would be interesting to see if the same result
would be found in the US using a corresponding time frame. Besides, further
investigating the geographical differences between the US and Sweden to conclude if the
findings in this thesis depend on a specific market climate for banks, would enhance the
understanding of banking relationship’s effect on IPO firms.
       Moreover, it would be interesting to see if there is a difference in long-term
performance depending on the pre-IPO banking relationship. Since it is heavily argued
that informational frictions are the primary source of underpricing, and by going public
the asymmetric information should be reduced and the true value of the company should
revert to a mean (Miller, 1977). Hence, it would be interesting to investigate if there is a
difference in the performance of these firms in the long run, which would enable a more
robust conclusion regarding how the business scope of pre-IPO banking relationships
affects the firms’ IPO performance.
       Furthermore, as evidenced in the result section, our data and analysis reinforce the
difficulties with utilizing a linear model to get a useful prediction model of the
underpricing anomaly. This is probably because multiple variables are influential, and
thus a linear relationship cannot easily be described. Future research could employ
artificial intelligence (AI), in the form of machine and deep learning to get a better
prediction model, in line with Tao, Deokar and Deshmukh (2018) that introduces a way
of utilizing such technology for analyzing IPO prospectuses. A methodology using AI
might allow better explanatory power of this complex phenomena, but the existing
research in the field considering AI is still in its early stage. Since intrigued scholars have
failed in establishing a conventional model for the underpricing anomaly for decades,
this new practice could be a way of getting closer to a final solution of the IPO
underpricing puzzle.

5.3. Conclusion

This thesis aimed to investigate how pre-IPO banking relationships affect the level of
underpricing for Swedish firms. Given the prior mixed empirical evidence, three
hypotheses were defined to disentangle the effect relationship banks have on the
underpricing levels, using a data set of IPOs conducted between 2014 and 2018 on the
Swedish equity market. Firstly, firms with a lending relationship before their IPO show
no difference in the level of underpricing compared to firms without a lending
relationship. The evidence does not support a signaling effect from having a lending
relationship before going public, and investors do not seem to interpret such a
relationship as a signal of high quality on average. Secondly, firms with a universal
relationship bank are compared to firms with a non-universal relationship bank. The
empirical analysis shows a significant difference in the level of underpricing, where firms

                                                                              34
served by a relationship bank with underwriting abilities are subject to a 10 percentage
points higher underpricing on average. The presented result is robust to other factors
affecting the level of underpricing, in the form of firm characteristics, IPO characteristics,
and market circumstances. Lastly, no significant difference in the level of underpricing
is evident when comparing firms that employ their relationship bank as the underwriter
to those that did not. Thus, the findings in the second hypothesis cannot be explained by
a potential conflict of interest, when the information obtained through screening and
monitoring are combined with underwriting abilities during the IPO. The empirical
evidence does not indicate that there is a certifying effect on the issue either since firms
that employ their relationship bank as the underwriter do not seem to experience a lower
level of underpricing.
       Relationship banking’s effect on the level of underpricing within the studied
sample seems to be contingent on the business scope of the relationship bank, rather than
if the relationship bank de facto has a lending relationship with the firm or underwrites
the issue. Henceforth, based on the overall findings, relationship banking, across different
business scopes, does not seem to mitigate informational frictions between the issuing
firm, the underwriter, and investors. Instead, the empirical results indicate that firms
within the investigated sample that have a pre-IPO universal relationship bank leave a
substantial amount of money on the table when going public.

                                                                              35
References

Abrahamson, M., Ridder, A. D. (2015). Allocation of shares to foreign and domestic investors:
   Firm and ownership characteristics in Swedish IPOs. Research in International Business and
   Finance, 34, 52-65. doi:10.1016/j.ribaf.2014.12.002
Allen, F. & Faulhaber, G. R. (1989). Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market. Journal of
   Financial Economics, 23, 303–323. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(89)90060-3
Aggarwal, R. K., Krigman, L. & Womack, L. K. (2002). Strategic IPO underpricing, information
   momentum, and lockup expiration selling. Journal of Financial Economics, 66, 105-137. doi:
   10.1016/S0304-405X(02)00152-6
Aggarwal, R. K., Prabhala, N. R. & Puri, M. (2002). Institutional allocation in initial public
   offerings: Empirical evidence. Journal of Finance, 57, 1421–1442. doi:10.1016/S0304-
   405X(02)00152-6
Akerlof, A. G. (1970). The Market for "Lemons": Quality Uncertainty and the Market
   Mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 488, 495-96. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-
   214850-7.50022-X
Amihud, Y., Hauser, S. & Kirsh, A. (2003). Allocations, adverse selection and cascades in IPOs:
   Evidence from the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. Journal of Financial Economics, 68, 137–158.
   doi: 10.1016/S0304-405X(02)00251-9
Banerjee, S., Dai, L. & Shrestha, K. (2011). Cross-country IPOs: What explains differences in
   underpricing? Journal of Corporate Finance, 17, 1289-1305.
   doi:10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2011.06.004
Baron, P. D. (1982). A Model of the Demand for Investment Banking Advising and Distribution
   Services for New Issues. The Journal of Finance, 37, 955. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
   6261.1982.tb03591.x
Barry, B. C., Muscarella, C. J. & Vetsuypens, R. M. (1991). Underwriter warrants, underwriter
   compensation, and the costs of going public. Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 113-135.
   doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(91)90016-D
Barry, B. C. & Mihov, T. V. (2015). Debt financing, venture capital, and the performance of
   initial public offerings. Journal of Banking & Finance, 58, 144-165.
   doi:10.1016/j.jbankfin.2015.04.001
Beatty, R. P. & Ritter, J. R. (1986). Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing of initial
   public offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 15, 213–232. doi:10.1016/0304-
   405X(86)90055-3
Belghitar, Y. & Dixon, R. (2012). Do venture capitalists reduce underpricing and performance
   of IPOs? Applied Financial Economics 22, 33-44. doi:10.1080/09603107.2011.597720
Benston, G. J. (1990). The separation of commercial and investment banking. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
Benveniste, L. M. & Spindt, P.A. (1989). How investment bankers determine the offer price and
   allocation of new issues. Journal of Financial Economics, 24, 343–361. doi:10.1016/0304-
   405X(89)90051-2
Benzoni, L. & Schenone, C. (2009). Conflict of interest and certification in the U.S. IPO market.
   Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19, 235-254. doi:10.2139/ssrn.603982

                                                                              36
Ber, H., Yafeh, Y. & Yosha, O. (2001). Conflict of interest in universal banking: Bank lending,
   stock underwriting, and fund management. Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 189–218.
Berger, N. A., Klapper, F. L. & Udell, F. G. (2001). The ability of banks to lend to informationally
   opaque small businesses. Journal of Banking and Finance, 25, 2127-2167.
Besanko, D. & Thakor, A. (1987). Collateral and Rationing: Sorting Equilibria in Monopolistic
   and Competitive Credit Markets. International Economic Review, 28, 671-689. doi:
   10.2307/2526573
Bhattacharya, S. & Thakor, A. V. (1993). Contemporary Banking Theory. Journal of Financial
   Intermediation, 3, 2-50. doi:10.1006/jfin.1993.1001
Bolton, P. & Scharfstein, S. D. (1996). Optimal Debt Structure and the Number of Creditors.
   Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1-25.
Boot, W. A., Greenbaum, S. & Thakor, A. (1993). Reputation and Discretion in Financial
   Contracting. The American Economic Review, 83, 1165-1183.
Boot W. A. (2000). Relationship Banking: What do We Know? Journal of Financial
   Intermediation, 9, 7-25.
Booth, J. R. & Chua, L. (1996). Ownership dispersion, costly information and IPO underpricing.
   Journal of Financial Economics, 41, 291–310. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(95)00862-9
Brennan, M. J. & Franks, J. (1997). Underpricing, ownership and control in initial public
   offerings of equity securities in the U.K. Journal of Financial Economics, 45, 391–413.
   doi:10.1016/S0304-405X(97)00022-6
Butler, A. W., Keefe M. & Kieschnick, R. (2014). Robust determinants of IPO underpricing and
   their implications for IPO research. Journal of Corporate Finance, 27, 367-383. doi:
   10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2014.06.002
Carter, R. B., Dark, F. H. & Singh, A. K. (1998). Underwriter Reputation, Initial Returns, and
   the Long‐Run Performance of IPO Stocks. The Journal of Finance, 53, 285-311.
   doi:10.1111/0022-1082.104624
Certo, T. S., Daily, M. C. & Dalton, R. D. (2001). Signaling Firm Value through Board Structure:
   An investigation of Initial Public Offerings. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 26, 33-
   50. doi:10.1177/104225870102600202
Chambers, D. & Dimson, E. (2009). IPO Underpricing Over the Very Long Run. The Journal of
   Finance, 64, 1407–43.
Chan, K., Wang, J.B. and Wei, K.C. (2004). Underpricing and long-term performance of IPOs
   in China, Journal of Corporate Finance, 10, 409–30.
Chang, X. Gygax, A. F., Oon, E. & Zhang, H. F. (2008). Audit quality, auditor compensation and
   initial public offering underpricing. Accounting & Finance, 48, 391-416. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
   629X.2008.00275.x
Chemmanur, T. J. & Fulghieri, P. (1994). Reputation renegotiation, and the choice between bank
   loans and publicly traded debt. The Review of Financial Studies, 7, 475-506. doi:
   10.1093/rfs/7.3.475
Cliff, M. T. & Denis, D. J. (2004). Do initial public offering firms purchase analyst coverage
   with underpricing? Journal of Finance, 59, 2871–2901. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
   6261.2004.00719.x

                                                                              37
Cornelli, F., Goldreich, D., 2003. Bookbuilding: How informative is the order book? Journal of
   Finance 58, 1415-1443. doi:10.1093/rfs/7.3.475
Dimovski, W. & Brooks, R. (2006) Factors Influencing Money Left on the Table by Property
   Trust IPO Issuers, Journal of Property Research, 23:3, 269-280, DOI:
   10.1080/09599910600969206
Dolvin, S. D. & Kirby, J. E. (2016). The Impact of Board Structure on IPO Underpricing. The
   Journal of Private Equity, 19, 15–21. doi:10.3905/jpe.2016.19.2.015
EY (2018). Nordic Capital Markets Insight, Full Year 2018. Collected from:
   https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY_Nordic_Capital_Markets_Insights_Janua
   ry_ 2018/$File/B18006dk-Nordic%20CMI_Jan-FI_05LR.pdf
Ferretti, R. & Meles, A. (2011). Underpricing, wealth loss for pre-existing shareholders and the
   cost of going public: the role of private equity backing in Italian IPOs. Venture Capital, 13,
   23-47. doi: 10.1080/13691066.2010.543321
Finkle, T. A. (1998). The relationship between boards of directors and initial public offering in
   the biotechnology industry. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 22, 5–29. doi:
   10.1177/104225879802200301
Gompers, P. & Lerner, J. (1999). Conflict of Interest in the Issuance of Public Securities:
   Evidence from Venture Capital. Journal of Law and Economics, 42, 53-80.
Greenbaum, S. & Thakor, A. (1995). Contemporary financial intermediation. New York, Fort
   Worth: The Dryden Press.
Greenland, S. (1989). Modelling variable selection in epidemiologic analysis. American Journal
   of Public Health, 79, 340-349. doi:10.2105/AJPH.79.3.340
Grossman, S. & Hart, O. (1980). Takeover bids, the free-rider problem and the theory of the
   corporation. Journal of Economics, 11, 42–64. doi:10.2307/3003400
Gunnarsdottir, G. & Lindh, S. (2011). Marknader för svenska icke-finansiella företags
   lånebaserade finansiering. Sverige: Riksbanken. Collected from:
   http://archive.riksbank.se/Upload/Rapporter/2011/POV_2/pov_2011_2_Gunnarsdottir_Lind
   h.pdf
Hanley, K. & Wilhelm, W. J. (1995). Evidence on the strategic allocation of initial public
   offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 37, 239–257. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(94)007975
Hao, X., Shi, J. & Yang, J. (2014). The differential impact of the bank–firm relationship on IPO
   underpricing: evidence from China. Pacific Basin Finance Journal, 30, 207–232.
   doi:10.1016/j.pacfin.2014.10.004
Hebb, G. M. & Fraser, D., R. (2002). Conflict of interest in commercial bank security
   underwritings: Canadian evidence. Journal of Banking and Finance, 26, 1935-1949. doi:
   10.1016/S0378-4266(01)00176-5
Hebb, G. M. & Fraser, D. R. (2003). Conflict of interest in commercial bank security
   underwritings: United Kingdom evidence. Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics, 42,
   79-95.
Hellman, N. (2000), Investor behaviour: an empirical study of how large Swedish institutional
   investors make equity investment decisions. PhD thesis, Stockholm School of Economics.
Hurt, C. A. (2004). Moral Hazard and the Initial Public Offering. Cardozo Law Review, 26,
   711-790.

                                                                              38
Ibbotson, R. G. (1975). Price performance of common stock new issues. Journal of Financial
   Economics, 2, 235–272. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(75)90015-X
Ibbotson, R. G., Sindelar, J. L. & Ritter, J. R. (1988). Initial public offerings. Journal of Applied
   Corporate Finance, 1, 37-45. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6622.1988.tb00164.x
James, C. & Wier, P. (1990). Borrowing relationships, intermediation and the cost of issuing
   public securities. Journal of Financial Economics, 28, 149–171. doi:10.1016/0304-
   405X(90)90051-Z
Jegadeesh, N., Weinstein, M. & Welch, I. (1993). An empirical investigation of IPO returns and
   subsequent equity offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 34, 153–175.
   doi:10.1016/0304-405X(93)90016-5
Johnson, J. M. & Miller, R. E. (1988). Investment banker prestige and the underpricing of initial
   public offering. Financial Management, 17, 19–29.
Kanatas, G. & Qi, J. (1998) Underwriting by commercial banks: incentive conflicts, scope
   economies, and project quality. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 30, 119–33.
Kaplan, S. N. & Strömberg, P. (2009). Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity. Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 23, 121-46. doi:10.1257/jep.23.1.121
Klein, G. P., Wuebker, R. & Zoeller, K. (2016). Relationship banking and conflicts of interest:
   Evidence from German initial public offerings. Journal of Corporate Finance, 39, 210-221.
   doi:10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2016.03.010
Kroszner, R. & Rajan, R. (1994). Is the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A Study of the U.S.
   Experience with Universal Banking Before 1933. The American Economic Review. 84, 810-
   832.
Leamer, E. & Leonard, H. (1983). Reporting the Fragility of Regression Estimates. The Review
   of Economics and Statistics, 65, 306-317. doi:10.2307/1924497
Lee, P. J., Taylor, S. L. & Walter, T. S. (1996). Australian IPO pricing in the short and long run.
   Journal of Banking and Finance, 20, 1189–1210. doi:10.1016/0378-4266(95)00053-4
Ljungqvist, A. (2007) Handbook of Corporate Finance. Empirical Corporate Finance. Elsevier,
   North-Holland.
Loughran, T. & Ritter, J. R. (2002). Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the table
   in IPOs? Review of Financial Studies, 15, 413–443. doi: 10.1093/rfs/15.2.413
Loughran, T. & Ritter, J. R. (2004). Why has IPO underpricing increased over time? Financial
   Management, 33, 5-37.
Loughran, T., Ritter, J. R. & Rydqvist, K. (2018). Initial public offerings: International insights.
   Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 2, 165-199. doi:10.1016/0927-538X(94)90016-7
Lu, K. (2017) Can Relationship Banking Reduce Firm’s IPO Underpricing? Washington
   University in St. Louis – John M. Olin Business School. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2937497
Lu, X. & White, H. (2014). Robustness checks and robustness tests in applied economics. Journal
   of Econometrics, 178, 194–206. doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2013.08.016
Marklund, L. (2016). The Swedish Financial Market. Sverige: Riksbanken. Collected from:
   https://www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/rapporter/den-svenska-
   finansmarknaden/engelska/2016/rap_finansm_160831_eng.pdf
Mello, S. A. & Parsons, E. J. (1998). Going public and the ownership structure of the firm.
   Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 79-109. doi:10.1016/S0304-405X(98)00018-X

                                                                              39
Mogilevsky, V. & Murgulov, Z. (2012). Underpricing of private equity backed, venture capital
   back and non-sponsored IPOs. Investment Management and Financial Innovations, 9, 47-59.
Muscarella, C. J. & Vetsuypens, M. R. (1989). A simple test of Baron’s Model of IPO
   Underpricing. Journal of Financial Economics, 24, 125-135.
Neuhann, D. & Saidi, F. (2018). Do Universal banks finance riskier but more productive firms?
   Journal of Financial Economics, 128, 66-85. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.01.011
Petersen, A., M. & Rajan, G. R. (1995). The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
   Relationships. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 407–443. doi: 10.2307/2118445
Puri, M. (1996). Commerial banks in investment banking conflict of interest or certification role?
   Journal of Financial Economics, 40, 373-401. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(95)00855-9
Rajan, R. G. (1992). Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm's‐Length
   Debt. The Journal of Finance, 47, 1367-1400. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04662.x
Ritter, J. R. & Welch, I. (2002). A review of IPO activity, pricing, and allocations. Journal of
   Finance, 57, 1795– 1828. doi: 10.1111/1540-6261.00478
Ritter, J. R. (1991). The long-run performance of initial public offerings. Journal of Finance, 46,
   3–27. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1991.tb03743.x
Rock, K. (1986). Why new issues are underpriced. Journal of Financial Economics, 15, 187–
   212. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(86)90054-1
Rydqvist, K. (1997). IPO underpricing as tax-efficient compensation. Journal of Banking and
   Finance, 21, 295-313. doi:10.1016/S0378-4266(96)00043-X
Saunders, A. & Walter, I. (1994). Universal Banking in the United States. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
Schenone, C. (2004). The effect of banking relationships on the firm’s IPO underpricing. Journal
   of Finance, 59, 2903-2958. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.2004.00720.x
Schwartz, J. K. (2015). Investor Participation in Initial Public Offerings. University of
   Pennsylvania Law Review, 164, 563-589.
Sharpe, S. A. (1990). Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending, and Implicit Contracts: A Stylized
   Model of Customer Relationships. The Journal of Finance, 45, 1069-1087.
   doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1990.tb02427.x
Shleifer, A. & Vishny, R. (1986). Large stakeholders and corporate control. Journal of Political
   Economy, 94, 461–488.
Slovin, B., M. & Young, E. J. (1990). Bank lending and initial public offerings. Journal of
   Banking and Finance, 14, 729-740. doi:10.1016/0378-4266(90)90073-B
Spotlight Stock Market. “Om Spotlight”. (2019-05-02) Collected from:
   https://spotlightstockmarket.com/sv/om-spotlight
Stoughton, M. N. & Zechner, J. (1998). IPO-mechanisms, monitoring and ownership structure.
   Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 45-77. doi:10.1016/S0304-405X(98)00017-8
Strömberg, P. & Thorburn, K. (1996). An empirical investigation of Swedish corporations in
   liquidation bankruptcy. EFI Research Report. Stockholm: Stockholm School of Economics.
S&P Global Markets Intelligence (2018). GICS Global Industry Classification Standard.
   Collected from: https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/documents/112727-gics-
   mapbook_2018_v3_letter_digitalspreads.pdf

                                                                              40
Tao, J., Deokar, V. A. & Deshmukh, A. (2018). Analysing forward-looking statements in initial
   public offering prospectuses: a text analytics approach. Journal of Business Analytics, 1, 54-
   70. doi:10.1080/2573234X.2018.1507604
Thaler, R. (1988). Anomalies: The Winner’s Curse. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2, 191-
   202. doi:10.1257/jep.2.1.191
Wang, C. (2005). Ownership and operating performance of Chinese IPOs. Journal of Banking &
   Finance 29, 1835-1856. doi:10.1016/0165-4101(86)90016-9
Welch, I. (1989). Seasoned Offerings, Imitation Costs, and the Underpricing of Initial Public
   Offerings. The Journal of Finance, 44, 421. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1989.tb05064.x
White, H., 1980. A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
   heteroskedasticity. Econometrica, 48, 817–838.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2003). Introductory econometrics, 2nd edition Mason. USA: Cengage
   Learning Publication.

                                                                              41
   Appendix

    Tables

    Table A.1. Shapiro-Wilk W Test for Normal Data for Underpricing
     This table illustrates the results of a Shapiro-Wilk W Test for Normal Data for the dependent variable
    Underpricing. Underpricing is defined as the percentage change in price between the first day closing
     price and the offer price. The test tests the null hypothesis that the variable is normally distributed.

   Variable N W V z Prob>z
    Underpricing 273 0.988 2.363 2.009 0.022

Table A.2. T-test on Underpricing based on the Independent Variable Lending
The table illustrates the results of a two-tailed t-test, performed on the dependent variable Underpricing. Underpricing is
defined as the percentage change in price between the first day closing price and the offer price. The test compares the
mean based on the independent variable Lending, which divides the sample into two subgroups dependent on if the firm
have a lending agreement with a bank according to the information stated in the IPO prospectus and the last reported
balance sheet prior to the IPO or not.
                         N Mean Standard Error (95% Confidence Interval)
Lending Relationship 170 0.073 0.032 0.033 0.112
No Lending Relationship 103 0.054 0.020 -0.009 0.117
Combined 273 0.066 0.017 0.031 0.100
Difference 0.019 0.036 -0.089 0.052

      Ha: diff < 0 Ha: diff ! = 0 Ha: diff > 0
     Pr(T<t) = 0.698 Pr( ⎸T⎹ >⎸t⎹ ) = 0.603 Pr(T>t) = 0.302

                                                                                   42
Table A.3. OLS Regression Results for Underpricing and Lending
The table illustrates the results from regressions on Underpricing for the first hypothesis. The included variables
in the regression are Lending, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). The table presents the coefficient for
each variable and the robust standard error in parenthesis below the coefficient. Lending is a dummy variable
that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a
dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech
is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is
the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total
assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm. Significance levels (p-values) are specified
with asterisks.

Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6
Lending 0.019 0.019 0.018 0.013 0.014 0.002
                        (0.038) (0.037) (0.038) (0.040) (0.042) (0.042)
VCPE -0.060 -0.006 -0.070 -0.006 -0.017
                                      (0.034) (0.034) (0.035) (0.035) (0.036)
Tech 0.039 0.038 0.038 0.045
                                                    (0.042) (0.042) (0.042) (0.043)
Log(Age) 0.010 0.010 -0.006
                                                                  (0.024) (0.024) (0.027)
L/A -0.005 -0.009
                                                                                (0.052) (0.051)
Log(Assets) 0.032*
                                                                                                   (0.018)
Constant 0.054* 0.057 0.048 0.030 0.031 0.029
                        (0.032) (0.038) (0.039) (0.062) (0.065) (0.064)
R-squared 0.001 0.001 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.013
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

Table A.4. VIFs Test - Lending
This table presents the variance inflation factors (VIFs), for the independent and control variables used in the
regressions. In this table the VIF for each variable used to investigate the first hypothesis is presented. Lending
is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank and 0
otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the IPO
and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm and 0
otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the leverage of the firm, defined
as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm.
Variable VIF 1/VIF
Lending 1.22 0.82
VCPE 1.05 0.95
Tech 1.03 0.97
Log(Age) 1.36 0.73
Leverage 1.11 0.90
Log(Assets) 1.48 0.67
Mean VIF 1.21

                                                                                43
Table A.5. Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg Test for Heteroscedasticity for Lending
The table illustrates the results from a Breusch-Pagan test performed to test if the regression is subject to
problems with homoscedasticity. In this table the test is presented for the regression with the independent
variable Lending. The regression includes the control variables VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets).
Lending is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank
and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed prior to
the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech
firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm leverage,
defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm. The test tests
the null hypothesis that the residuals are homoscedastic.

    Variables: Fitted Values of Underpricing
              Chi2(1) Prob > chi2
               6.380 0.012

Table A.6. VIFs Test - Could Underwrite
This table presents the variance inflation factors (VIFs), for the independent and control variables used in the
regressions. In this table the VIF for each variable used to investigate the second hypothesis is presented. Could
is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank that could
underwrite the firm's issue and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is
VC- or PE-backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm
is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is
the leverage of the firm, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets
of the firm.
Variable VIF 1/VIF
Could 1.49 0.67
VCPE 1.14 0.88
Tech 1.10 0.91
Log(Age) 1.40 0.72
Leverage 1.11 0.90
Log(Assets) 2.04 0.49
Mean VIF 1.38

Table A.7. Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg Test for Heteroscedasticity for Could
The table illustrates the results from a Breusch-Pagan test performed to test if the regression is subject to problems
with homoscedasticity. In this table the test is presented for the regression with the independent variable Could
Underwrite. The regression includes the control variables VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). Could is
a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank that could
underwrite the firm's issue and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is
VC- or PE-backed prior to the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm
is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is
the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the
firm. The test tests the null hypothesis that the residuals are homoscedastic.

    Null Hypothesis: Constant Variance
    Variables: Fitted Values of Underpricing
              Chi2(1) Prob > chi2
               2.150 0.143

                                                                                44
Table A.8. T-test on Underpricing based on the Independent Variable Did Underwrite
The table illustrates the results of a two-tailed t-test, performed on the dependent variable Underpricing.
Underpricing is defined as the percentage change in price between the first day closing price and the offer price.
The test compares the mean, based on the independent variable Did Underwrite and the subsample of 122
observations is divided into two subgroups, dependent on if the relationship bank that served the firm prior to the
IPO did underwrite the issue or not.
                    N Mean Standard Error (95% Confidence Interval)
Did Underwrite 36 0.129 0.024 0.079 0.178
Did not Underwrite 86 0.076 0.026 0.024 0.129
Combined 122 0.092 0.020 0.052 0,128
Difference 0.052 0.044 -0.034 0.014

     Ha: diff < 0 Ha: diff ! = 0 Ha: diff > 0
   Pr(T<t) = 0.883 Pr( ⎸T⎹ >⎸t⎹ ) = 0.235 Pr(T>t) = 0.117

Table A.9. OLS Regression Results for Underpricing and Did Underwrite
The table illustrates the results from regressions on Underpricing for the third hypothesis. The included variables
in the regression are Did, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). The table presents the coefficient for each
variable and the robust standard error in parenthesis below the coefficient. Did is a dummy variable that takes on
the value 1 if the firm employed their pre-IPO relationship bank as the underwriter and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a
dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is
a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the
logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets.
Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm. Significance levels (p-values) are specified with asterisks.

Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6
Did 0.052 0.056 0.066* 0.040 0.033 -0.002
                        (0.036) (0.036) (0.035) (0.035) (0.036) (0.045)
VCPE -0.021 -0.025 -0.017 -0.016 -0.023
                                        (0.040) (0.040) (0.039) (0.039) (0.040)
Tech 0.051 0.046 0.041 0.049
                                                       (0.054) (0.054) (0.058) (0.058)
Log(Age) 0.046* 0.048* 0.033
                                                                    (0.027) (0.027) (0.031)
L/A 0.042 0.027
                                                                                  (0.072) (0.073)
Log(Assets) 0.031
                                                                                                     (0.024)
Constant 0.076*** 0.087*** 0.073** -0.040 -0.064 -0.066
                        (0.026) (0.032) (0.034) (0.076) (0.089) (0.089)
R-squared 0.012 0.014 0.024 0.047 0.049 0.059
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

                                                                                45
Table A.10. VIFs Test - Did Underwrite
This table presents the variance inflation factors (VIFs), for the independent and control variables used in the
regressions. In this table the VIF for each variable used to investigate the third hypothesis is presented. Did is a
dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm employed their pre-IPO relationship bank as their underwriter
and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the
IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm
and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the leverage of the firm,
defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm.
Variable VIF 1/VIF
Did 1.81 0.55
VCPE 1.08 0.93
Tech 1.11 0.90
Log(Age) 1.40 0.72
Leverage 1.12 0.89
Log(Assets) 2.22 0.45
Mean VIF 1.46

Table A.11. Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg Test for Heteroscedasticity for Did
The table illustrates the results from a Breusch-Pagan test performed to test if the regression is subject to problems
with homoscedasticity. In this table the test is presented for the regression with the independent variable Did
Underwrite. The regression includes the control variables VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). Did is a
dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm employed their pre-IPO relationship bank as the underwriter
and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed prior to the
IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm
and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm leverage, defined
as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the firm. The test tests the null
hypothesis that the residuals are homoscedastic.

    Null Hypothesis: Constant Variance
    Variables: Fitted Values of Underpricing
              Chi2(1) Prob > chi2
               3.280 0.070

Table A.12. Mean Proceeds
This table presents the mean proceeds for firms with a universal relationship bank in the sample, e.g. Could = 1
firms. Could is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a
bank that could underwrite the firm’s issue and 0 otherwise. Proceeds is defined as the number of shares offered
times the subscription price, given that the offer is fully subscribed. This information was not possible to find for
two firms in the sample. Thus, the total number of firms included in the calculation is 80 firms. (Numbers
presented in SEK million).
Variable Mean Standard Deviation
Proceeds 819.434 146.707

                                                                                46
Graphs

Graph A.1. Plotted Residuals for the OLS Regression for Underpricing and Lending
The graph illustrates the plotted residuals from the regression on Underpricing for the first hypothesis. The
included variables in the regression are Lending, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). Lending is
a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank and
0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-backed before
the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is classified as a
tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm
leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets of the
firm.

Graph A.2. Plotted Residuals for the OLS Regression for Underpricing and Could
The graph illustrates the plotted residuals from the regression on Underpricing for the second hypothesis.
The included variables in the regression are Could, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). Could is
a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm has a pre-IPO lending relationship with a bank that
could underwrite the firm's issue and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if
the firm is VC- or PE-backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the
value 1 if the firm is classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at
the IPO plus one. L/A is the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the
logarithm of the total assets of the firm.

                                                                              47
Graph A.3. Plotted Residuals for the OLS Regression for Underpricing and Did
The graph illustrates the plotted residuals from the regression on Underpricing for the third hypothesis.
The included variables in the regression are Did, VCPE, Tech, Log(Age), L/A and Log(Assets). Did is a
dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm employed their pre-IPO relationship bank as the
underwriter and 0 otherwise. VCPE is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is VC- or PE-
backed before the IPO and 0 otherwise. Tech is a dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the firm is
classified as a tech firm and 0 otherwise. Log(Age) is the logarithm of the firm age at the IPO plus one. L/A
is the firm leverage, defined as total liabilities to total assets. Log(Assets) is the logarithm of the total assets
of the firm.

                                                                              48