R&D INDUCED IPO
UNDERPRICING

MONEY GLADLY LEFT ON  THE TABLE

JULIA BLOMSTERGREN

ELLEN DAVER

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm  School of Economics

2019
R&D Induced IPO Underpricing – Money Gladly Left on the Table

Abstract:

   Previous research has found that for firms investing in R&D,  asymmetric
   information  between firm insiders  and  outsiders raises  the cost of external capital
   above the fair level.  In this paper, we examine  how the presence of R&D activities
   affects  firms’  cost of raising capital in a special case of external financing  –  namely,
   the IPO.  In IPOs, an additional component called IPO underpricing is added to the
   cost of raising capital for the average firm,  a phenomenon  presumably  driven by
   asymmetric information.  We hypothesize  and find support  for  this  component  being
   systematically  larger the more R&D activities a firm does.  We do this using OLS
   regressions  that  model a relationship between R&D activities  and IPO underpricing.
   Furthermore, we test whether two chosen potential quality signals can mitigate the
   R&D induced asymmetric information, but find no support for this.  However, we
   conclude that  although the cost of an IPO is higher for  firms  doing R&D, the gains
    they can expect are also larger.

Keywords:

   Information asymmetry, IPO underpricing, R&D, Quality signal, External finance

Authors:

   Julia Blomstergren (23907)
   Ellen Daver (23788)

Tutor:

   Marcus  Opp, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Julia Blomstergren and Ellen Daver, 2019

                                   1
Contents

1.        INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 3
1.1.      Research and Development Activities ............................................................. 4

2.        LITERATURE REVIEW ................................................................................ 7
2.1.      Theory on Business R&D and Asymmetric Information .............................. 7
2.2.      Theory on IPOs and IPO Underpricing ......................................................... 9
2.2.1.    Why Do Firms Go Public?  ................................................................................. 9
2.2.2.    Evidence of IPO Underpricing  ........................................................................... 9
2.2.3.    Explanations for IPO Underpricing Building on Asymmetric Information ..... 10

3.       HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT ................................................................ 12

4.       DATA AND METHODOLOGY ................................................................... 13
4.1.      Data  Collection ................................................................................................ 13
4.2.      Variable Description ....................................................................................... 15
4.2.1.    Independent Variable ........................................................................................ 15
4.2.1.    Dependent Variable .......................................................................................... 16
4.2.1.    Control Variables .............................................................................................. 17
4.3.      The Model ........................................................................................................ 17
4.4.      Potential Issues ................................................................................................ 18
4.5.      Descriptive Statistics ....................................................................................... 18

5.        RESULTS ........................................................................................................ 21
5.1.      Type of Regression .......................................................................................... 21
5.2.      Results from Regressions ............................................................................... 21

6.        DISCUSSION .................................................................................................. 28
6.1.      R&D Activities and IPO  Underpricing......................................................... 28
6.2.      Measuring R&D Activities ............................................................................. 28
6.3.      Quality Signals ................................................................................................ 29
6.4.      The Implication of R&D Induced Asymmetrical Information................... 29

7.       CONCLUSION ............................................................................................... 31

8.        REFERENCES  ............................................................................................... 32

APPENDIX A ................................................................................................................ 36

                                   2
1.    Introduction

It is widely recognized that innovation plays a central role in the economic development.
Through innovation, new ideas and technologies are developed that enable productivity
to increase. On a societal level, the implication of increasing productivity is  that a larger
quantity of products is produced, wages rise and consumption increases  –  i.e. that
economic growth occurs (European Central Bank, 2017). In Sweden, the private sector is
the largest actor within innovation, accounting for 71 percent of the investment in
research and development (R&D) in 2017 (Statistics Sweden, 2017). Therefore, firms that
engage in R&D activities are of utmost importance to society and have attracted much
attention by the academia. Within this body of research, it has been identified that R&D
activities give rise to asymmetric information between firm insiders and firm outsiders.
The effect of this is that  for firms that do R&D,  the cost of external capital is above the
fair level (Hall & Lerner, 2010). This means that the risk-adjusted cost of capital is higher
for firms doing R&D, relative the average firm.

This paper zooms in on one special case of external capital raising, namely the initial
public offering (IPO) of a firm’s common stock.  In an IPO setting, the average firm
experiences a higher cost of capital than their normal level,  due to  a  well-studied
phenomenon known as IPO underpricing.  One of the most supported explanations for
IPO underpricing is that it is driven by asymmetric information. Therefore, there is reason
to believe that  the R&D induced information asymmetries will magnify the IPO specific
increase in cost of capital. If this is the case,  firms doing R&D will, in addition to
experiencing higher cost of external capital in general, on average be more severely
subjected to this cost of going public.

In this paper, we investigate and quantify the effect that the level of R&D activities in a
firm has on the level of IPO underpricing. We do this by proxying R&D activities with
the ratio of capitalized development expenditures over assets (henceforth also called
R&D capital), and then regressing IPO underpricing on this proxy. We then go on to
explore whether signals of quality of a firm’s R&D activities can mitigate the level of
asymmetrical information that the R&D activities give rise to. The chosen signals are
presence of venture capital (VC) and information about past R&D outputs, proxied by the
existence of patents. To test the effect of the signals, we use regressions to see whether
the effect of R&D activities on IPO underpricing is smaller for firms that exhibit these
quality signals.

We document the presence of “R&D induced IPO underpricing”, defined as the additional
IPO underpricing a firm with a certain level of R&D activities experiences in comparison
to an identical firm, in respect of all control variables, except it has no R&D activities.
When we test the effect of quality signals, we get no statistically significant results.

                                   3
Our model estimates the effect of R&D induced IPO underpricing to be positive. The size
of the effect decreases with higher levels of R&D activities. At the median level of R&D
capital among R&D firms, i.e. 20.3 percent, the R&D induced IPO underpricing is 6.6
percent.  At the median level of proceeds this effect, translated  to monetary values,
                                                                                      th
amounts to 7,914 thousand SEK. For firms with R&D capital at the 90  percentile, the
corresponding effect is 12.7 percent R&D induced IPO underpricing, which translates to
15,228 thousand SEK in monetary value. When we adjust the model to include the quality
signals, we find that neither the effect of R&D capital nor the effect of the quality signals
are statistically significant. Primarily, our interpretation of this is that our model does not
support the hypothesis of how the chosen  signals can mitigate the R&D induced IPO
underpricing. However, the results also  raise  questions about sample size limitations.

1.1.    Research and Development Activities

A commonly used definition of R&D is found in the Frascati Manual, published by
                  th
OECD. In the 7  edition of the manual, published in 2015, their definition is stated in the
following way:

     Research and experimental development (R&D) comprise creative and systematic work undertaken
    in order to increase the stock of knowledge – including knowledge of man, culture and society – and
     to devise new applications of available knowledge  (OECD, 2015).

The manual then elaborates on the meaning of the concept by clarifying which types of
activities it comprises:

     The term R&D covers three types of activity: basic research, applied research and experimental
     development. Basic research  is experimental or theoretical work undertaken primarily to acquire
     new knowledge of the underlying foundations of phenomena and observable facts, without any
     particular application or use in view.  Applied research  is original investigation undertaken in order
     to acquire new knowledge. It is, however, directed primarily towards a specific, practical aim or
     objective. Experimental development  is systematic work, drawing on knowledge gained from
     research and practical experience and producing additional knowledge, which is directed to
     producing new products or processes or to improve  existing products or  processes  (OECD, 2015).

All three types of R&D activities can be found in the operations of firms. However, basic
research is the one out of the three activities that firms most rarely engage in (Rosenberg,
1989). More commonly, firms carry out applied research, with the aim of developing
methods for  achieving some predetermined goals or to find applications for knowledge
generated through basic research (OECD, 2015). Lastly, firms’ development activities
consist of creating or improving specific products or processes. However only some
stages of the product development process are considered development activities, namely
those in which “generic knowledge is actually tested for the specific applications needed
to bring such a process to a successful end” (OECD, 2015). The level of uncertainty varies

                                   4
among the activities  –  from the highest level of uncertainty in basic research activities to
the least uncertainty in development activities (OECD, 2015).

Firms’ R&D activities are of interest for analysts, investors and other stakeholders, since
they can be an important source of value (Chan et al., 2001). However, these actors cannot
directly observe the R&D activities of the firms and thus they must rely on other sources
to receive information about the activities (Landsman et al., 2012). The main information
source for quantifiable information about firms’ R&D activities is their financial
statements. The way R&D activities are reported in financial statements depend on which
accounting standard the report follows. Since the probability of investments in  R&D
activities leading to future benefits is more uncertain than for many other investments, it
is not conclusive whether these expenditures should be expensed or capitalized. Different
accounting standard setters have taken different positions regarding these questions. For
example, under the US GAAP, R&D expenditures are exclusionary expensed, while
development  expenditures  are  capitalized  if  they  meet  certain  criteria  under  the
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).

In Sweden, which accounting regulations a firm follows depends on the size of the firm.
Firms that go public, i.e. the relevant firms in the context of this paper, almost exclusively
follow the regulation frameworks K3 or K4. While K4 contains the IFRS, K3 contains
the main Swedish accounting standards. Under K3, firms are to choose one out of two
alternative approaches of treating R&D expenditures  –  the expensing method or the
capitalization method. The expensing method prescribes firms to expense all R&D
expenditures. The capitalization model contains the same rules for treatment of R&D
expenditures as IFRS. Under K4, i.e. IFRS, the treatment of R&D expenditures depends
on whether the expenditures derive from research activities or development activities
(Verksamt.se, 2019). The definitions used for research activities and development
activities are based on the Frascati manual definitions. The IFRS definition of research
activities cover basic as well as applied research.

IFRS prescribes, in the following quote from IAS 38,  that  whether the R&D activities
should be capitalized is based on the six criteria:

   1)   The technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will be
        available for use or sale,
   2)   Its intention to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it,
   3)   Its ability to use or sell the intangible asset,
   4)   How the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits.
       Among other things, the entity can demonstrate the existence of a market for the
        output of the intangible asset or the intangible asset  itself or, if it is to be used
        internally, the usefulness of the intangible asset,
   5)   The availability of adequate technical, financial and other resources to complete
       the development and to use or sell the intangible asset and

                                   5
   6)   Its ability to measure reliably the expenditure attributable to the intangible asset
       during its development.

In practice, this means that expenditures that arise in firms’ basic research and applied
research phases will be expensed, since they can never meet the criteria for capitalization.
Expenditures that arise in the development phase, on the other hand, can potentially be
capitalized (IAS 38). Thus, firms’ R&D activities can be divided into three categories;
research, development with lower degree of certainty which does not meet the criteria
(uncertain development) for capitalization and development with higher degree of
certainty which meet the criteria for capitalization (certain development). Expenditures
that arise as a result of the first two types of activities will be expensed and reported on
the income statement. Expenditures that derive  from activities of the third type will be
capitalized and reported on the balance sheet. An overview of this is found  in Figure  1.

                                     Research
                                                        Expensed
         R&D activities         ”Uncertain” development

                                 ”Certain” development        Capitalized

Figure 1.  Illustration  of  accounting treatment  of R&D activities under IFRS

                                   6
2.    Literature Review

This paper builds on two different research areas, in which extensive previous research
has been performed in the different areas individually. For a more comprehensive
understanding of the fundamental concepts our research rests upon, the two bodies of
theory are reviewed separately below. Ultimately, our paper enters where these research
areas  overlap. Namely, as they both  advocate the  importance of information structures in
the context of investing decisions and subsequently the implications it has on capital
allocation. There have also been previous efforts to combine the two areas, such as the
research done by Guo et al., (2006)  investigating  the US IPO market in 1980-1995.  They
present  evidence  of  R&D  expenditures  having  a  positive  relationship  with  IPO
underpricing.  While their results provide validation for our hypothesis, it is not possible
to directly translate their results to the today’s Swedish IPO market because of differences
in the institutional environment as well as firm’s reporting of R&D activities.

2.1.    Theory on Business R&D and  Asymmetric Information

R&D activities are increasingly important aspects of firms’ operations. Over the past 30
years, the amount of R&D activities in firms has increased substantially, which can be
explained by an increase in the R&D activities of existing firms as well as the growth of
R&D-intensive industries (Franzen et al., 2007). Furthermore, for many firms, R&D
capital is a major source of firm value (Chan et al., 2002). As highlighted in the
introduction, R&D activities are also important for society as a whole. For these reasons,
firms’ R&D activities have received much attention from the academia.

Influential research within the economics literature has proposed that from a societal
perspective,  it is  underinvested in R&D activities in the private sector (Hall  &  Lerner,
2010). Hall and Lerner (2010) argue there are two reasons for this. Firstly, the private
gains for the firm investing in R&D activities are smaller than the societal gains, since
knowledge produced in one firm can be used to create value by other actors in society.
Secondly, R&D activities create asymmetric information between firm insiders and firm
outsiders and thus, raises the cost of capital above the fair level, which results in lower
than optimal allocation of external capital to R&D firms. They further claim the cause of
the asymmetrical information problem is due to firm insiders having superior information
about the nature of the R&D activities and the probability of success for the R&D
projects. The higher than fair cost of capital that R&D intensive firms experience has also
been documented empirically (see e.g. Chan et al., 2002; Eberhart et al., 2004)

The relationship between R&D activities and informational asymmetries has been
documented in empirical research as well. In a study by Aboody and Lev (2000), the
hypothesis that R&D activities are positively correlated with information asymmetry is
tested through an investigation of the relationship between R&D-intensity, defined as

                                   7
R&D expenses over sales, and gains from insider trading. They find support for their
hypothesis and draw the conclusion that R&D-intensive firms are subjected to higher
levels of information asymmetry than non-R&D-intensive firms. The same conclusion is
drawn by  Gompers (1995) who finds support for the hypothesis that venture capitalists
should invest heavily in R&D-intensive firms. His hypothesis is built on the assumption
that R&D-intensive firms’ exposure to information asymmetries make the monitoring
services  that venture capitalists provide more valuable than in other types of firms.

Aboody and Lev (2000) argue there are three reasons investment in R&D gives rise to
more information asymmetry than other types of investments. Firstly, R&D activities are
unique  to a firm and R&D capital can therefore not be valued with the help of the value
of R&D capital of other firms in the industry, which is possible for many other types of
capital. Secondly, there is no market for R&D capital and therefore no available market
prices which valuation can be based on. Thirdly, since Aboody and Lev’s study takes
place in the setting of American firms that follow the US GAAP accounting standards
and therefore expense all R&D expenditures, investors cannot observe value and
productivity changes. In contrast, the value of types of capital that are capitalized is
updated in quarterly and annual reports. Furthermore, they claim that R&D-intensity
increases investors’ cost of reducing the information asymmetry between themselves and
firm insiders, primarily since analyzing R&D-intensive firms requires the investors to
acquire sufficient scientific knowledge to understand the market and the firm’s activities.
Another circumstance that they suggest further complicates the valuation of R&D-
intensive firms is the scarcity of public information on firms’ R&D activities. Hall and
Lerner (2010) observe the same phenomena and explain this with the fact that revealing
information about innovative ideas to competitors can severely reduce the value  of those
ideas  –  a problem that is largest for basic research activities and decreases the closer to
“certain” development activities that the activity  gets.

Some information about firms’ R&D activities can however be gathered by studying their
past R&D performance, if the observer believes past R&D activities are representative
for current and future R&D activities. In a study performed by Cohen et al. (2013), it is
examined whether investors take firms’ past success at R&D into account in the valuation
of  R&D-intensive firms. They find that the market fails to distinguish between what the
authors categorize as “Good R&D” and “Bad R&D” based on how well previous R&D
investments have been translated into future sales, although this distinction is relatively
simple to make by analyzing the firms’ past performance. Their results thus imply that
investors do not take the results of past R&D activities into account when they value
current and future R&D activities, either because they do not believe past R&D activities
are representative for current and future R&D activities or because they simply fail to
utilize the information.

One notable common feature among the mentioned papers is that they have all been
carried out in settings in which R&D expenditures are fully expensed. This has two

                                   8
consequences. Firstly, they have used R&D expenses to proxy R&D activities. Secondly,
they have studied the effect of R&D in settings where the reporting of R&D activities
carry less information relative to countries that follow  IFRS, where investors get access
to productivity changes and information about the firm’s prediction about the probability
of future benefits.

2.2.    Theory on IPOs  and IPO Underpricing

       2.2.1. Why Do Firms Go Public?

To fully understand the implications  that IPO  underpricing has for the issuer, there is a
need for understanding the underlying reasons for choosing to undergo the IPO process.
As Brau (2010) notes, the reasons vary widely across firms.  Ritter and Welch (2002)
mention how some of these explanations  revolve around life cycle theories, stating how
it  for different reasons becomes optimal at a certain stage in a firm’s life to go public, e.g.
to achieve increased publicity towards future investors and acquirers, following the trend
of the industry or to obtain a first-mover advantage. As further discussed by  Brau, (2010),
theory  also  identifies  reasons  connected  to  corporate  finance  activities,  such  as
minimizing the firm’s cost of capital when bankruptcy costs included in the cost of debt
makes a mixture of debt and equity more optimal. The reason can also be that more debt
is not obtainable. There is also research investigating explanations more plainly built on
raising as much capital as possible at present, whether it be for financing business growth
investments, as suggested by the increase in asset sizes post-IPO found by  Mikkelson et
al., (1997), or for founders and other business insiders to cash-out of their investment
(e.g.,  Ang  &  Brau (2003)  and  Brau et al., (2007)).

       2.2.2. Evidence of IPO Underpricing

The  phenomenon  of how initial public offerings  (IPOs)  of firms’  common  stocks, on
average, exhibit underpricing is something that has puzzled scholars for decades. IPO
underpricing refers to the  situation in which the first day closing price after an IPO
exceeds the IPO’s offer price.  For existing shareholders, the consequence of IPO
underpricing is that they are ‘leaving money on the table’  –  i.e. not getting fully
compensated for the value of the assets that they are selling. Early research by Stoll and
Curley (1970), Louge (1973), Reilly (1973),  Ibbotson (1975)  show convincing  evidence
of the phenomenon. Since the 70’s, the research on IPO underpricing has grown large and
within this body of research, one of the major questions raised is why underpricing of
IPOs is observed.

One theory of the reason for IPO underpricing is that it is caused by general market
conditions.  Ritter (1984) shows  that during the 80s the IPO  underpricing  was abnormally
high, which could be explained by conditions in certain  industries such as the gas and oil
industry. Others instead present evidence of underpricing being highly dependent on

                                   9
fluctuations in  IPO  market conditions  (Ibbotson &  Jaffe, 1975)  or in the stock market
conditions (Butler et al., 2014).

The majority of the remaining theories  explaining the reasons for IPO underpricing  can
broadly be divided between  whether they rely on the assumption of asymmetric
information or symmetric information between the different parties  involved in the IPO
(Ritter & Welch, 2002). For the aim of this paper, explanations on IPO underpricing based
on asymmetrical information theories are the main focus.  Therefore, theories building on
symmetric information are not reviewed.

2.2.3.    Explanations for IPO Underpricing  Building on Asymmetric Information

One of the main strains of theory aimed at explaining the systematic underpricing of IPOs
builds on the idea of information asymmetry prevailing between different parties involved
in the IPO. The large body of asymmetric information theory, however, presents a wide
range of explanations for where this information asymmetry lies, and between which
involved parties.

Rock (1986) presents a model aimed at explaining the paradox of why some investors are
willing to obtain costly information of securities if the evidence put forward by Grossman
(1976) of how all investors’ information is visible and readily available in the equilibrium
price of the asset, holds true. Through his model, Rock suggests underpricing is a way for
the issuer to ration out shares between well-informed investors and uninformed investors,
whereas the latter who are crowded out from good issues and thus, biased towards bad
issues, would otherwise drop out of the market. The crowding out effect of uninformed
investors is a result of well-informed investors fully subscribing to “good” issues, while
only allowing accessibility to uninformed investors in “bad” issues in which they do not
want to participate themselves. Namely, Rock argues that only a random group of well-
informed investors are  aware of the firm’s prospects while neither the firm nor the
underwriter know the true value of the firm. Underpricing then functions as a way to
ensure uninformed investors’ participation in new issues by giving them the discount they
require in order to  on average break-even, resulting in full subscription being secured
even in “bad issues”.  Benveniste and Spendt (1989)  and  Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990)
also conclude that both the issuer and the underwriter lack information about the true
value of the firm, and only a small group of investors who frequently interact with the
firm, are informed about its just value. However, in contrast to Rock, they argue that
underpricing is a way of compensating  well-informed  investors for revealing their
information about the issue to the underwriter, which they do by disclosing the price that
they are willing to pay for the issued shares during the book building process.

Building on an assumption of asymmetric information rather prevailing between the
issuer and the underwriter,  Baron (1982)  explains underpricing in an agent-principle
context. The agency problem is argued to stem from the fact that the underwriter has

                                  10
superior information about the capital market, who then advises the issuer on the price
level of the unseasoned securities, and ultimately commits to sell them. As the
compensation to the underwriting bank is a function of total proceeds and thus, the price
of the issue shares, underpricing may be included in the underwriting contract since the
underwriter  has incentives to set the price at a level that secures full subscription in the
issue and hence, increase their  sales volume. However, contradicting evidence is put
forward by  Muscarella and  Vetsuypens (1989)  who find that when investment banks go
public and participate in their own distribution of shares, IPO underpricing is still
observed although there should be no underpricing under the assumptions of Baron’s
model since no asymmetric information exists between the issuer and the share
distributer.

A  substantial  branch  within  the  information  asymmetry  research  argues  that  the
information asymmetry predominantly, instead, prevails between issuer and external
investors. Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), Allen and Faulhaber (1989), and Welch (1989,
1992) assume  that  the only informed party in the IPO is the issuer itself. This assumption
is commonly coupled with rational investors fear  of  unknowingly investing in lemons, as
they presume only less-than-average quality  issuers are willing to sell their shares at the
average price. Underpricing is then the costly signal that high-quality firms choose to
differentiate  themselves  from  low-quality  firms.  It  is  also  argued  that  firms  use
underpricing to leave a  “good taste in investors’ mouths”  in order to receive a good price
on future issues. Welch (1989), for example, shows that a third of the IPO issuers between
the years 1977-1982 had reissued equity by 1986, typically at a price of three times the
IPO price. Research also establishes that there  are  other quality signals, aside from IPO
underpricing, that can be used to convey more internal information to externals in an IPO.
Booth and Smith (1986) argue how the  reputation  of chosen  underwriter influences
external perception of the firm’s quality, while Titman and Trueman (1986) state  similar
effects stem from the firm’s choice of auditor. Schenone (2004) similarly, establishes how
having a relationship bank taking the firm public can assist in equating any potential
unleveled information structures between firm insiders and outsiders. Building on the
same certification hypothesis, results by Megginson and Weiss (1991) suggest  that  VC-
backing leads to significantly lower underpricing.

Also based on the conjecture of how investors are less informed about the prospect of an
individual  issue,  Beatty  and  Ritter  (1986)  show  how  greater  levels  of  “ex  ante
uncertainty”, lead to greater levels of expected underpricing in a given IPO. The reasoning
builds on the presumption that uninformed investors only are willing to submit purchases
orders for offered shares if they, on average, can break-even across IPOs they invest in.
With higher levels of perceived uncertainty in the valuation of a preceding issue, then the
higher the compensation required from the uninformed investors  -  i.e. through a higher
level of underpricing.

                                  11
3.    Hypothesis Development

The first hypothesis is that a firm’s R&D induced asymmetrical information will, in
addition to leading to higher cost of capital and thereby setting the market value of its
R&D capital to below the fair value, cause the average price for capital sold through an
IPO to be more underpriced in relation to the first day market valuation (i.e. the market
value based on the first day closing price) than for comparable firms. Furthermore, while
much of previous research has drawn conclusion based on differences between ‘R&D
firms’ and ‘non-R&D firms’, we instead measure the effect of differences in the level of
R&D activities, to add nuance to the analysis.  We anticipate that the size of the positive
effect of R&D activities on IPO underpricing will decrease with higher levels of R&D
activities. The assumption is at the same increase in R&D activities will give rise to more
asymmetrical information the less R&D activities the firm has prior to the increase.

Hypothesis 1: Firms with relatively higher levels of R&D activities will have relatively
higher levels of IPO underpricing.

Secondly, we turn our attention to whether the degree of R&D induced  asymmetrical
information can be decreased by quality signals. Specifically, the firm quality signal that
is commonly viewed as the most important in the IPO context is considered, namely VC
backing. It is hypothesized that investors trust that the VC firms  are superior within the
technical competence and experienced needed to value R&D activities and that firms that
have been subjected to screening and monitoring by VC firms are more likely to have
high quality R&D activities that will have high future payoff. This would decrease the
asymmetrical information between firm insiders and firm outsiders.

Hypothesis 2: Given that a VC-backed  firm  and a non-VC-backed  firm  have the same
level of R&D activities, the VC-backed firm will experience a relatively lower level of
IPO underpricing.

Thirdly, we examine whether information about the output of past R&D activities can
reduce the R&D induced information asymmetry. Specifically, we hypothesize that given
the same level of current R&D activities, firms that have patents outstanding can show
that they have previously been successful in their R&D activities. They should therefore
experience lower underpricing.

Hypothesis 3: Given that a firm that has patents outstanding and a firm that does not have
patents outstanding have the same level of R&D activities, the firm that has patents
outstanding will experience a relatively lower level of IPO underpricing.

                                  12
4.    Data and Methodology

4.1.    Data Collection

The sample constitutes a unique data set of IPOs  that  occurred between January 1, 2012
and March 15, 2019, which was the date  that we received  the data directly from Nasdaq
Nordic’s data center. The data was confined to all IPOs during the time period done on
any of the three lists under Nasdaq’s management,  i.e. the Main list, First North and First
North Premier. As the research was aimed at examining the Swedish market, offerings on
any of Nasdaq Nordic’s lists outside of Stockholm where excluded. The initial sample
consisted of 450 IPOs carried out on the  Stockholm stock exchange during the  eight-year
period.

Furthermore, offerings stemming from equity carve-outs, rights or unit offerings, direct
listings without an attached  issue, or from issuers that changed lists or returned to the
public market after having been previously delisted, were excluded. Due to differences in
traits and trading between common and preferred stocks, offerings of preferred stocks
were dropped as well. After these exclusions, 200 IPOs were left in the sample.

As a next step, all  firms that use the expensing method allowed under K3 were dropped
since these firms expense development costs even though requirements for capitalization
are met. These firms thus lack capitalized development expenditures, which we need to
construct the proxy for R&D activities in our model. In this step,  another 10 observations
were dropped,  leaving a total of  190  observations in the sample.

Data on R&D expenditures was collected from annual reports. Attaining the capitalized
development expenditures from one, respectively two years preceding the IPO, for the
sampled firms was relatively simple. In the majority of the annual reports, capitalized
development expenditures were explicitly stated. In some reports, almost exclusively for
firms that have very little R&D, the capitalized development expenditures were not
separated from other intangible assets. In these cases, the notes were used to interpret how
much that can be derived from development activities. On the contrary, it was not possible
to get the R&D expenses for many of the sample firms, especially young and small firms,
neither in the income statement nor by interpretation of information in the notes. Data on
the issuers’ total assets and cash was also collected from the last, and second to last annual
report leading up to the IPO, which were provided by the database Retriever Business. In
some cases there was no data available for two years preceding the individual IPO, either
because the firm was not active at that point of time or because of major  business
restructuring hindering the accessibility of historical consolidated financial statements.
This issue was handled by only using the one most recent data point that could be
obtained. All balance sheet items were then adjusted for inflation using  data from the
Swedish  Central  Bank,  benchmarked  to  1980s  prices.  One  extreme  outlier  was

                                  13
recognized, which had an assets size three times larger than for the observation with the
second largest asset size. The extreme outlier was therefore excluded as to not distort the
results of the OLS regressions. Retriever Business was also used to obtain data on age of
the issuers, which was then cross-checked against information from the firms’ websites
to retrieve the actual age of the business, instead of the years  since the existing private
corporation was registered. This  was  due to the fact that many firms had been subjected
to corporate restructuring since the initial inception of the operation and transformed to a
newer corporation, which Retriever Business did  not always pick up on. Total proceeds
from the issue and the offer price was manually collected from the prospectuses published
in conjunction with the issue. First day closing prices of  the issued stocks as well as data
on the market return was collected  from Nasdaq Nordic. Whether a firm was classified as
research intensive was based on  an  assessment of the business description in the annual
reports.

Furthermore, data on the ownership in the firms prior to the IPO was collected from the
prospectus to determine whether the issue was VC-backed or not. For the IPO to be
considered VC-backed, a threshold of a minimum of 5 percent VC ownership was
applied. Data on the lead underwriter of the issue was also collected from the prospectus.
While there are already comprised rankings on top underwriters in other countries, such
as the one in the US market  comprised by Loughran and Ritter (2004), the same was not
obtainable about Swedish underwriters. To still be able to  construct a control variable for
underwriter reputation, data was collected on annual rankings of the top 5 Swedish Equity
advisors published by Kantar Sifo.  While not as comprehensive as rankings available on
other markets, we asses it is the best available option.

For subsequent hypothesis testing,  data on firms’ historical patent applications was also
needed. This data was collected from the Swedish Patent and Registration Office or the
corresponding government agency in specific countries when the issuer had its home
market outside of Sweden. These agencies provide databases that record all  patent
applications  submitted  in the home country of the firm, as well as all applications that
have  been  submitted  on an European level, i.e.  providing protection in all member
countries at once. The screening  of whether patents had been previously applied for by
the issuer, also spanned across the issuer’s fully owned subsidiaries, if applicable. Our
assumption was that if a firm had not applied for patents  in its home market nor in any of
the other European markets, they have not applied for any patents.

Throughout the additional data gathering for the dependent, independent and control
variables, a total of  7  observations was dropped due to missing values, leaving a total of
183  observations.

                                  14
4.2.    Variable Description

       4.2.1. Independent Variable

Most research on R&D has used total R&D expenditures to proxy R&D activities. As
previously mentioned, our sampled firms follow IFRS rules and for many of them, we do
not  have  access  to  the  R&D  expenses  (i.e.  research  and  uncertain  development
expenditures) but only the capitalized development expenditures. Excluding all firms that
do not report R&D expenses will create a major selection bias issue. On the other hand,
if we include those firms we only have capitalized development  expenditures to proxy
R&D activities with. We assess that the selection bias issue will be severe enough to make
any conclusions invalid, and therefore the firms for which the R&D expenses are missing
are kept in the sample.

The question that follows is whether the size of the capitalized development expenditures
can serve as a proxy for R&D activities, which depends on two things. Firstly, for this to
be true, the fraction of the R&D activities that are classified as certain development
activities must be  constant across the sample companies. The main source of variation in
this fraction is expected to be interindustry differences. Specifically, firms in research
intensive industries will have a larger fraction of research activities and presumably
higher degrees of uncertainty in development activities. Therefore, we expect that a unit
increase in the capitalized development expenditures in a research intense firm will be
the result of a relatively larger increase in R&D activities, and that each unit of increase
in R&D capital will therefore have a larger effect on IPO underpricing. This difference in
effect on IPO underpricing will be allowed for in the model.

Secondly, there cannot be variation in how conservative the firms are when interpreting
of the criteria for capitalization. If the interpretations vary, some of the difference in
capitalized development expenditures will measure differences in strictness of the
interpretation of the criteria rather than differences in R&D activities. Since this is an
unobservable characteristic it cannot be controlled for, and it is therefore a potential
source of errors in the model.

Capitalized development expenditures are expected to be a good proxy for R&D
activities, although it is possible that it is somewhat less precise than total R&D
expenditures. The  independent variable is thus defined as the average over the two years
prior to the IPO for capitalized development expenditures divided by total assets minus
cash and equivalents, since these balance sheet items are not considered to be results of
value creating activities.

                       ABCDE
                                          𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑑  𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡  𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠:
          𝑅𝐷  =  0.5 ∗                                                       1
                                   (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠:  −  𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ  𝑎𝑛𝑑  𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠:)
                      :FABCDG

                                  15
The purpose of scaling the capitalized development expenditures to the asset size is to get
a measure that is comparable for companies of varying sizes and that has an intuitive
interpretation.  In this paper we call this variable R&D capital.

      4.2.1. Dependent Variable

The dependent variable, IPO underpricing, is defined, in line with the vast majority of all
previous research, as:
                                    (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  −  𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟  𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒)
          𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔  =                                                 2
                                                           𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟  𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒

Table 1.  Description  of control variables

                Numbers of years between initial inception of the firm and the date of
                the IPO, where the natural logarithm is taken from the variable. Older
Firm Age
                firms are believed to have had longer exposure to investor attention
                 relative to younger firms.

                 Total assets as stated in the last financial reports leading up to the
                IPO. Larger firms are believed to have been exposed to more investor
Firm Size
                attention compared to smaller firms, having a negative correlation
             with IPO underpricing. [kSEK]

               Dummy for which year the firm’s IPO took place where 1 indicates
IPO 2015-      that it occurred during the years 2015-2017. The intent is to control
2017          for yearly effects as IPO markets are believed to be exposed to
                 fluctuations over time.

               Market return proxied by the average daily return on OMX
Market  Return  Stockholm 30 during the one month preceding the IPO. The variable
                  is included to control for general market conditions [%-units]

Research       Dummy of characteristics of firms’ main  business area where 1
Intensity        indicates research intensity.

Top          Dummy of underwriter of the issue where 1 indicates the top
Underwriter    underwriter took the firm public.

               Dummy of ownership in the firm leading up to the IPO where 1
VC-backed
                indicates firm backed  with Venture Capital.
Note:  the table shows all variables that are included as control variables in our model, also including their
description.

                                  16
       4.2.1. Control Variables

To avoid omitted variable bias issues and isolate the effect of capitalized R&D on IPO
underpricing, we need to control for other factors that are believed to  have systematic
impact on the  dependent variable and  are correlated with R&D activities. Variables for
firm age and firm size are included since older and larger firms are believed to be
subjected to less asymmetrical information than younger and smaller firms (see e.g. Bajo
et al., 2016). In line with research observing that fluctuations in general market conditions
correlate with varying levels of IPO underpricing levels (see  e.g. Butler et al., 2014),
market return is controlled for in the regressions. Furthermore, as in line with qualification
theory, it is also predicted VC-backed, relative non-VC-backed, IPOs will systematically
be exposed to lower levels of asymmetric information (see e.g. Megginson &  Weiss,
1991). Building on the same certification hypothesis, a control variable for the top
underwriter, i.e. the underwriter with the highest average ranking in Kantar Sifo’s annual
ranking  during the period of the sampled IPOs, is also included.  This underwriter is
Carnegie.

4.3.    The Model

The primary model in this paper is an Ordinary Least Squared (OLS) regression, designed
to test the effect R&D activities have on IPO underpricing. The model looks as following,

                  𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔R  =  𝛽T  +  𝛽VW   𝑅𝐷R  +  𝛽X𝑋R  +  𝜀R               3

where  𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔  is the first day closing price less the offer price divided by the
offer price and 𝑅𝐷  is the capitalized development expenditures over total assets excluding
cash and equivalents.  𝑋  is a set of control variables for firm characteristics  –  age, asset
size, a high-tech dummy and an interaction term between capitalized development
expenditures and a research intensive dummy  –  and IPO characteristics  –  market return,
a  top underwriter dummy, a VC dummy and years effect. Based on Hypothesis 1,  𝛽VW  is
expected to have a positive sign.

To test Hypothesis 2, the model is extended to allow for the effect of R&D capital on IPO
underpricing to differ depending on whether the  firm is VC backed,

        𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔R  =  𝛽T  +  𝛽VW   𝑅𝐷R  +  𝛽\]VW(𝑉𝐶R  ∗  𝑅𝐷R)  +  𝛽X𝑋R  +  𝜀R      4

where  𝑉𝐶  ∗  𝑅𝐷  is an interaction term between VC backing and R&D capital. The effect
of a unit increase in RD on IPO underpricing depends on  𝛽VW  and 𝛽\]VW  for a VC-backed
firm and only on  𝛽VW  for a firm that is not VC-backed. Under Hypothesis 2,  𝛽\]VW  is
expected to have a negative sign.

To test Hypothesis 3, the model is modified to allow for firms that have outstanding
patents  to be systematically less underpriced given the same level of R&D activities,

                                  17
           𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔R  =  𝛽T  +  𝛽VW   𝑅𝐷R  +  𝛽B𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠R  +  𝛽X𝑋R  +  𝜀R        5

where  𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠  is a dummy variable that measure whether the firm has any patents
outstanding. Under Hypothesis 3,  𝛽B  is expected to have a negative sign.

4.4.    Potential Issues

There are  a few  potential issues that our model could have, which we have discussed in
this chapter. There are two main potential issues that the reader should be aware of.
Firstly, the design of the  independent variable could be less efficient in proxying R&D
activities than we expect it to be. This issue can result in estimated effects that are not
precise and therefore, some caution should be used in the interpretation of the sizes of the
predicted effects.

Secondly, there is a risk that the model suffers from omitted variable bias. This issue is
typical for studies within IPO underpricing, since it is commonly accepted that the cause
and the drivers of the phenomenon  are not fully understood.

4.5.    Descriptive Statistics

Presented below are summary statistics  intended to allow the reader to  better  understand
the characteristics of the underlying sample.  Table  2  reports the number of IPOs in the
sample for each year between  2012 and 2019, including data on the yearly average IPO
underpricing given  in  percent. As can be observed in the table, the average underpricing
during the full period  is  10.02  percent, while the  individual observations  range between
an overpricing of 58.52 percent to a maximum of 147.3  percent underpricing. The last
column also shows the distribution of the total 183  observations of IPOs across the
different years.

Table 2.  IPO underpricing across years [%]

Year
of IPO        mean         min          max         sd           N
2012          -7.84          -32.35         16.67         34.66         2
2013          13.87         -13.33         72.73         29.85         6
2014          -1.52          -58.52         17.50         18.19         20
2015          13.38         -24.00         94.12         26.40         38
2016          13.09         -39.23         147.53        32.92         37
2017          14.88         -34.78         123.20        25.58         55
2018         1.67          30.33         77.14         23.42         23
2019          -26.51         -52.51         -0.05          36.78          2

Total          10.0          -58.5          147.5         27.3          183
Note:  descriptive statistics of  IPO underpricing,  given in %-units, across years. N
indicates  the  number of observations for  a given  year.

                                  18
Table 3 further gives an overview of the distributions of the continuous variables included
in the model. We conclude that R&D capital average at 19.72 percent, with ratios ranging
from 0 to 96.56 percent for the total sample. The average assets size is 477.55  million
SEK. While the age parameter is given by the logarithm of firm age, the actual ages for
our sampled firms span between firms less than one year,  to  the oldest firm at  an age of
139 years.

Table 3.  Descriptive statistics of  continuous variables

Variable      mean         median        min          max         sd           N
Underpricing   10.02%       6.20%        -58.52%       147.33%      27.26%       183
R&D Capital   19.72%       1.67%        0%          96.56%       28.44%       183
Assets        477.55        29           0.75          1227.94       8136.41       183
Ln(Age)       2.53          2.49          0            4.93          0.88          183
Market Return  0.02%        0.02%        -0.45%        0.05%        0.15%        183
Note: Underpricing indicates the level of IPO underpricing, R&D Capital represents the ratio of capitalized
development expenditures over total assets less cash and equivalents. Assets, given by the firms’ total assets
one year preceding the IPO, are presented in million  SEK. Ln(Age) is the logarithm of numbers of years of
age of firms.  Market Return is given as the average daily return on OMX Stockholm 30.

Table 4  illustrates how the sampled observations are distributed between the different
discrete variables included in our model by the number of firms in each sub-group.

Table 4.  Distribution of observations between groups  in categorical  variables

Variable                            N
VC-backed                 yes           84
                          no           99
Top Underwriter             yes           39
                          no           144
Research Intensity            yes           72
                          no           111
Patents                     yes           77
                          no           106
Note:  VC-backed takes the value “yes” for all IPOs
performed by a VC-backed firm.  Top Underwriter
takes the value “yes”  if  the IPO is backed by the top
underwriter. Research Intensity takes the value ‘yes’
if  the firm is research intensive. Patents takes the
value “yes” if the firm  has patents outstanding at the
time of the IPO.

Below, a correlation matrix of our different variables is presented.  From Table  5,  we  get
an indication that multicollinearity is  unlikely to be a problem in our model. The variable
Research Intensity  shows high degree of correlation with the R&D-variable which is not
surprising since firms that carry out research activities will also be likely to carry out
development activities. Furthermore, as in line with our conjectures, assets size and firm

                                  19
age show a positive relationship. From the matrix we can also conclude that including the
variable for time-fixed effects for year 2015-2017 is useful as its controlling effect is not
captured by any of the other variables in the model.

Table 5.  Correlation matrix

                                                                     Top   Y2015-
               RD      RI      Age    Assets    VC     MR    UW    2017    Patent

     RD         1

     RI          0.40      1

      Age         -0.27     -0.18       1

      Assets       -0.26     -0.27      0.35       1

     VC         0.11     0.13      0.08      0.02      1

     MR        0.005     0.05      0.08      0.09     -0.02      1

      Top UW     -0.30     -0.15      0.26      0.19     0.16     0.14      1

      Y2015       -0.03     -0.10      -0.03      0.05     -0.04     0.01     0.01       1
      -2017

      Patent        0.30      0.51      0.04      -0.09     0.17     0.11     0.02     -0.02       1
Note:  every data point presents the  pairwise correlation between the row variable and the column
variable. Included variables in the correlation matrix are; R&D capital (RD), Research intensity (RI),
Ln(Age) (Age), VC-backing (VC), Market Return (MR), Top Underwriter (Top UW), Years of IPO
2015-2017 (Y2015-2017), Patents (Patent).

                                  20
5.    Results

5.1.    Type of Regression

We start out by investigating whether the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) assumptions are
met. A variance inflation factor (VIF) test confirms what the correlation matrix implied,
by showing  that none of the variables have VIF values above 10 and that the model thus
does not have multicollinearity issues. Furthermore, the standard errors are approximately
normally distributed.

Another issue our model could potentially exhibit is heteroscedasticity. In  Figure A, the
residuals are plotted against the fitted values to facilitate a visual inspection. The model
shows a tendency for generating larger residuals at larger fitted values. Therefore, we
carry out a Breusch-Pagan test for heteroscedasticity, which gives the result that the null
hypothesis of homoscedastic error terms is rejected at all significance levels above 0.02
percent. The low level of the p-value is however largely driven by outliers. The preferable
approach to handle the heteroscedasticity would be to use a Weighted Least Squares
(WLS) regression. However, since we are unaware of the heteroscedasticity’s exact form,
we would need to use the Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS) method to model
the heteroscedasticity (Wooldridge,  2015). There are a range of opinions regarding the
sample size required for FGLS estimators to be more reliable than OLS estimators and
while some argue that a sample size of 200 could be enough, influential papers have
suggested that sample sizes of at least 1,000 observations are required (Moshagen &
Musch, 2014; Olsson et al., 2000). Due to our time consuming method for collecting data,
we are unable to meet the requirement of 1,000  observations. In addition, there is a high
probability that omitted variables are the source of the heteroscedasticity, since it is
commonly accepted within the field that the causes of IPO underpricing are not fully
mapped out, which would limit the effectiveness of FGLS estimators. Therefore, we
choose another way to handle the heteroscedasticity, namely using robust standard errors.
Considering that when the outliers are not considered the heteroscedasticity issue is not
severe, robust standard errors should be a sufficient measure.

Following these tests, we conclude the OLS regression is the most suitable method to use
for testing our hypotheses.

5.2.    Results from Regressions

We start out the hypotheses testing by running a simplified version of the model, in which
we include R&D activities through a dummy variable that takes the value 1 for all firms
that have R&D capital above 5 percent. Thus, for now, we do not take the potential effect

                                  21
              Fitted values

                                             Residuals

Note:  scatter plot with fitted values from our model on  the y-axis  and the residuals on the x-axis.
Figure 2.  Graph facilitating visual inspection for heteroscedasticity

of the level of R&D activities into account. The cut-off value of 5 percent is included to
ensure that the dummy variable captures the firms in which R&D activities are a large
enough part of the business to be relevant in investors’ valuation of the firm. The results
are shown in  Table  6  as Regression 1. The R&D dummy has a p-value of 2.8 percent
which means that the estimated difference in IPO underpricing between the R&D firms
and non-R&D firms is statistically significant. The interpretation of the estimated effect
is that R&D firms, on average, are 9.27 percentage points more underpriced than
comparable firms without R&D activities. This result indicates R&D activities have a
large and systematic impact on IPO underpricing, which suggests further investigation of
the relationship between the two is called for.

In Regression 2, the result of the full model including all control variable, is presented.
The results show how the level of R&D capital does not have a statistically significant
effect on IPO underpricing and that the effect of the level of R&D capital on IPO
underpricing is not statistically different between research intensive firms and non-
research intensive firms. Given our sample size constraint, it is reasonable to question
whether the reason for the insignificant results could be that the real effect is small rather
than that no effect exists. Therefore, we believe some useful insights can  still be gained
from studying the results of Regression 2. Firstly, the sign of the estimated effect of the
R&D capital variable is in line with our hypothesis and the p-value is just above a
significant level, which indicates there may be a real effect the model in its current form
is not able to capture, e.g. because there are too few observations to estimate the effect
with. The inclusion of the interaction term between research intensive firms and R&D
capital could contribute to the difficulty in estimating the effect. Secondly, the results
give us no reason to suspect a real difference exists in the effect of an increase in R&D
capital between research intense and non-research intensive firms, since the p-value for

                                  22
the interaction term is 51.9 percent  and the sign of the estimated effect is the opposite of
what we expected. Following these two insights, we will next respecify the model by
excluding the discussed interaction term.

Table  6.  Regression outputs

VARIABLES   Regression 1   Regression 2   Regression 3  Regression 4   Regression 5    Patents 6
                                             (Base
                                                regression)

RDsqrt                      0.215       0.146**      0.197**       0.103        0.115
                               (0.142)       (0.0720)      (0.0964)       (0.100)       (0.0723)
RI_RDsqrt                    -0.0980
                                  (0.152)
Ln(Age)         0.00730       0.0114       0.00841       0.0361       0.00759      0.00446
                 (0.0210)      (0.0197)      (0.0208)      (0.0318)      (0.0206)      (0.0206)
Assets           2.85e-06      9.09e-07      1.67e-06      -7.60e-06      1.57e-06      3.16e-06
                 (7.80e-06)     (7.82e-06)     (7.95e-06)     (1.15e-05)     (7.70e-06)     (7.77e-06)
VC              -0.0636       -0.0656       -0.0686*       -0.0670      -0.0942***     -0.0766*
                 (0.0402)      (0.0404)      (0.0396)      (0.0572)      (0.0356)      (0.0400)
Market         31.93***     32.07***     30.33***      36.23**      29.96**      28.21**
Return
                 (11.93)       (11.85)       (11.60)       (16.10)       (11.65)       (11.90)
Top UW         0.0444       0.0467       0.0502       0.0394      0.0551*      0.0451
                 (0.0313)      (0.0320)      (0.0311)      (0.0430)      (0.0307)      (0.0323)
Y201567        0.134***     0.128***     0.135***     0.156***     0.133***     0.135***
                 (0.0401)      (0.0409)      (0.0400)      (0.0587)      (0.0398)      (0.0401)
RDYN        0.0927**
                  (0.0419)
VC_RDsqrt                                                   0.0839
                                                                             (0.143)
Patents                                                                      0.0642
                                                                                         (0.0416)
Constant          -0.0435       -0.0531       -0.0476        -0.160        -0.0334       -0.0511
                 (0.0656)      (0.0648)      (0.0642)       (0.111)       (0.0628)      (0.0630)

Observations       183         183         183         120         183         183
R-squared        0.115        0.123        0.117        0.113        0.120        0.129
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                           *** p<0.01,  ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Note:  results from 6 slightly different versions of our model.  Regression 1-4 test hypothesis 1, Regression
5 tests hypothesis 2 and Regression 6 tests hypothesis 3. Included variables are; the square root of R&D
capital (RDsqrt), an  interaction term between the research intensity dummy and RDsqrt (RI_RDsqrt), the
logarithm of firm age (Ln(Age)), asset size (Assets), a dummy for VC-backing (VC), average daily market
return 30 days prior to the IPO (Market Return), a dummy for IPOs underwritten by the top ranked
underwriter (Top UW), a dummy for IPOs during the years 2015-2017 (Y201567), a dummy for firms with
R&D capital>5% (RDYN), an interaction term between the VC-backing dummy and RDsqrt (VC_RDsqrt),
a dummy for firm that have patents outstanding (Patents).

                                  23
                              0,25

                                  0,2

                              0,15
          Underpricing

                                  0,1

                              0,05

                              0
                             0     0,1    0,2    0,3    0,4    0,5    0,6    0,7    0,8    0,9     1
                                                  R&D capital
Note:  the  y-axis  states  different  levels of IPO underpricing.  R&D capital, i.e. capitalized
R&D expenditures over total assets less  cash, are given on the x-axis.
Figure 3.  Estimated R&D induced IPO underpricing at different R&D  capital levels

The respecified model is shown in  Table 6  as Regression 3, which we also call our Base
regression. This regression shows the level of R&D capital has a positive statistically
significant effect on IPO underpricing with a p-value of 4.4 percent, which subsequently
stagnates with increasing levels of R&D capital. Hence, results from Regression 3
supports our hypothesis 1. The total R&D induced IPO underpricing, defined as the
additional IPO underpricing a firm with a certain level of R&D activities experiences in
comparison with an identical firm in respect of all control variables except that it has no
R&D activities, at different levels of  R&D capital is shown in Figure  3. The estimated
effect of a percentage point increase in R&D capital on IPO underpricing at different
levels of R&D capital is presented in Figure  4.

                                  2,5

                               2

                                  1,5
             Change in
             underpricing
                               1

                                  0,5

                               0
                              0     0,1    0,2    0,3    0,4    0,5    0,6    0,7    0,8    0,9     1
                                                R&D Capital
Note:  y-axis shows percentage point changes in IPO underpricing  and x-axis shows level of R&D capital.

Figure 4.  Estimated effect of a unit increase in R&D  capital  on IPO underpricing

                                  24
From these figures, we learn how at the median R&D capital among R&D firms, 20.3
percent, the estimated R&D induced IPO underpricing is 6.6  percentage points and a one
percentage point increase in R&D capital is estimated to lead to a 0.15 percentage point
increase in IPO underpricing. To express the results in economic terms, we evaluate the
effect of R&D induced underpricing at the median IPO proceeds level, which is 119,905
thousand SEK at the current price level. The economic implication of the estimated R&D
induced IPO underpricing at the median level of R&D capital, evaluated at the median
IPO proceeds, is that the proceeds will be 7,914 thousand SEK less than for a comparable
firm without R&D activities, given that the capital raised in the IPO will have the same
first day market valuation. The same calculations have been carried out for the level of
                            th     th          th
R&D capital at the 25 , 75  and 90  percentiles, which is presented in  Table  7. For the
full calculations, see Appendix A.

Table 7.  Economic effect of R&D induced IPO underpricing

             R&D         R&D Induced   Loss in
Percentile      Capital        underpricing    in proceeds
   th
25           1.7%         1.9%         2,278 tSEK
   th
50           20.3%        6.6%         7,914 tSEK
   th
75           57.3%        11.1%        13,309 tSEK
   th
90           76.2%        12.7%        15,228 tSEK
Note:  the economic effect of R&D induced IPO underpricing at
        th     th     th           th
the 25 , 50 , 75  and 90  percentile of R&D capital among
R&D firms. The effect of the R&D induced IPO underpricing  is
evaluated at the median proceeds level, to capture the economic
implications.

Regression 3 further gives interesting estimated effects for some of the control variables.
Neither asset size nor firm age has a statistically significant effect on IPO underpricing
for the sampled firms. This result is surprising, since virtually all previous research on
IPO underpricing has shown that these two variables are good proxies for the level of
asymmetrical information in a firm. This could imply asset size and  firm age are less
important on the Stockholm stock exchange than on other stock exchanges. The effect of
the top underwriter dummy variable is not statistically different from zero, with a p-value
of 10.9 percent, and has the opposite sign from our expectations. Our results thus do not
support the IPO underpricing theories which suggest underwriter reputation is a quality
signal. In contrast, the VC dummy has a statistically significant estimated effect with a
coefficient of  -0.069 which, in line with our expectations, implies that ceteris paribus,
VC-backed firms are estimated to experience 6.9 percentage points less underpricing than
non-VC-backed firms. Market return also has a statistically significant effect with the
expected predicted sign, with a coefficient of 30.33. Since the market return values range
between 0.01 percent and 0.05 percent, the interpretation is made in terms of a 0.01

                                  25
percentage points increase. A 0.01 percentage point increase in market return is estimated
to increase IPO underpricing 0.3 percentage points.

In Regression 4, we observe that the positive effect of R&D capital on IPO underpricing
remains statistically significant with a p-value of 4.3 percent when all firms which do not
have any R&D activities are excluded from the sample. The estimated coefficient
increases slightly, from 0.146 to 0.197. A possible explanation for this increase is that as
the sample is biased towards the type of firm that does R&D, some omitted variable bias
now has a bigger effect. Moreover, while the  estimated effect of the VC-backing dummy
barely changes, its p-value jumps to 24.4 percent which indicates that among R&D firms,
the certifying effect of VC-backing is not as evident. The fact that the effect of the level
of R&D capital on IPO underpricing remains strong and statistically significant in this
regression provides further validation for our hypothesis that there are substantial
differences in the effect on IPO underpricing within the R&D firms group as well as
between the R&D firms group and  non-R&D firms group.

In Regression 5, we shift focus from examining the effect of R&D capital on IPO
underpricing (Hypothesis 1) to investigating whether VC-backing can act as a certifier of
quality for a firm’s R&D activities (Hypothesis 2), by including  an interaction term
between the R&D capital variable and the VC-backing dummy (henceforth called the
VC-RD variable). The result is that the effect of R&D capital on IPO underpricing is
neither statistically different from zero for VC-backed firms, as the  VC-RD variable has
a p-value of 56.0 percent, nor for non-VC-backed firms, as the p-value for the R&D
variable is 30.7 percent. These results could possibly partly be explained by sample size
limitations in the sense that the insignificance stems from the  fact that there are too few
observations to base the estimation of the effect on. Therefore, we are careful to draw any
decisive economic conclusions based on the results. The estimated effect of the VC-RD
variable  is  positive  which  indicates  that  in  our  sample,  the  R&D  induced  IPO
underpricing per percentage point increase in R&D capital is larger for VC-backed firms
than for non-VC-backed firms. Although this is not a significant result, it can explain the
insignificant effect of VC-backing in Regression  4. Since the sample in Regression 4 is
biased towards firms with higher levels of R&D capital, the negative effect VC-backing
has on IPO underpricing because of its the firm certifying effect is diluted by the positive
effect that VC-backing has on R&D induced IPO underpricing in our sample, since these
two forces go in opposite directions. In Regression 5 these two effects are separated,
which causes the estimated effect of the VC-backing dummy to drop to  –9.4 percent
compared to  –6.9 percent in the Base regression and the p-value to drop to 0.9 percent
compared to 8.5 percent.

In Regression 6, we turn our attention to whether the existence of information about
successful outcomes from previous R&D activities can mitigate the R&D induced
information asymmetry (Hypothesis 3). In the results from this regression, we observe
that the R&D capital variable is no longer statistically different from zero and that its

                                  26
estimated coefficient decreases from 0.146 in the Base regression to 0.115, which signals
that some  effect of the patents variable was picked up in the R&D capital variable in the
Base regression. This seems logical, since the existence of patents almost certainly means
that R&D activities have taken place at some point, which makes it likely that the firm is
still engaging in R&D activities. The patents dummy variable has a statistically
insignificant effect, and an estimated effect that is the opposite sign of what we expected.
Therefore, we find no support for our Hypothesis 3. We see two possible ways to interpret
of this result. Either the existence of patents is not considered a quality signal by investors,
or the patents variable does not measure what we intended it to but rather picks up some
dimension of the R&D activities that our R&D capital variable is not able to pick up. The
second interpretation is supported by the fact that the R2 value is 1.2 percent higher in
Regression 6 than in the Base regression, which suggests that more variation in IPO
underpricing can be explained when the existence of patents is controlled for.

                                  27
6.    Discussion

6.1.    R&D Activities and IPO Underpricing

Our results confirm our hypothesis 1 by showing that increases in a firm’s level of R&D
activities, proxied by R&D capital, have a positive effect on IPO underpricing. We  have
also presented results showing that there are statistically significant differences in the
effect on IPO underpricing between R&D firms and non-R&D firms, yet that statistically
significant differences can also be found within the R&D firms group. Based on these
results, we believe that we have validated that the observed effect of the level of R&D
activities on IPO underpricing is not driven by differences between the R&D firms and
non-R&D firms and that we have developed a detailed understanding of the effect. These
results are in line with the main findings in previous literature on R&D and the
asymmetrical information theories of IPO underpricing.

Our results have economic value, since the size of the estimated effect of R&D activities
on IPO underpricing in economic terms is substantial enough to have real implications
for the issuing firm, especially for the firms with the highest levels of R&D activities.

We do not find any support for our hypotheses 3 and 4. It must however be kept in mind
that statistical issues related to sample size limitations have likely contributed to  these
results. Further discussion of hypotheses 3 and 4 is found in  section  6.3  Quality Signals.

6.2.    Measuring R&D Activities

Next, we go into the question of how well capitalized  R&D expenditures proxy R&D
activities. While our interpretation of the results is that capitalized R&D expenditures
capture the effects that we intended it to, since its estimated effect on IPO underpricing
is in line with previous literature and our hypotheses, two observations regarding the
proxy are worth pointing out.

Firstly, to our surprise, our results indicate that the effect of R&D capital on IPO
underpricing is not statistically different between research intensive and non-research
intensive firms. There are a number of possible explanations to this. It could be due to
research intense firms having higher levels of R&D activities at which fluctuations have
minor impact on IPO underpricing. This means that the difference in the effect on IPO
underpricing between the estimated level of R&D activities based on capitalized R&D
expenditures and the real level of R&D activities is small, and it could be that it is too
small for our model to pick up and estimate with statistical significance since we have a
relatively small sample size. Alternatively, it could be that research activities give rise to
less information asymmetries than development activities since they are not perceived to
be as value relevant, either because potential future benefits will  materialize too far off in

                                  28
the future or because the ideas produced in the research activities must go through a
development phase before they can be utilized to create value.

Secondly, the results from Regression 6, in which we tested hypothesis 3, raises the
question of whether there is some dimension of R&D activities that the R&D capital
variable is unable to capture, since the patents variable seemed to pick up some dimension
of R&D activities that the R&D capital variable was not able to.

6.3.    Quality Signals

Our results do not provide support for our hypotheses that the quality certification of VC-
backing (Hypothesis 2) or information about the quality of past R&D performance
conveyed through patents (Hypothesis 3), can level out the information structure between
firm insiders and firm outsiders and thereby increase investors’ level of certainty in
valuing R&D activities. Before we discuss these results further, we stress it is possible
that the results are affected by sample size limitations. We chose these two signals since
they can easily be attained by investors at a low cost. Yet, their lack of statistically
significant effects in our sample raises questions of whether only signals with higher
degrees of informational intensity can convey information that is value relevant enough
to over  bridge the information asymmetries. Considering the complex nature of R&D
activities, this would be reasonable.

Another way to interpret the absence of significant effects of the signals is that from an
investor’s perspective, firms’ R&D activities are perceived as ‘black boxes’ in the sense
that a qualitative evaluation of the internal processes and technologies is considered too
complex and time consuming to be feasible. Instead, investors base their valuation of the
firm’s R&D activities on the quantitative measurements of inputs to R&D activities that
can be found in the firm’s financial statements. It is unlikely that analysts’ attitudes will
be similar to an extreme type of the ‘black box’ attitude, however it is reasonable to
believe that some degree of this kind of view of R&D activities can be found among
analysts. This interpretation of our results is in line with the findings of Cohen  et al.
(2013), who find that investors do not utilize information about past  success in R&D
projects when valuing current and future R&D activities, although this information is
easily attainable.

6.4.    The Implication of R&D Induced Asymmetrical Information

The implication of our results for an R&D intensive firm is that relative to comparable
firms, the capital they raise through an IPO will be more costly. However, we must
remember that the gains from going public should also increase with the level of R&D
activities a firm carries out. The reason for this is that public companies are more intensely
followed by analysts and potential investors, which means that on an aggregated level

                                  29
more information is produced about a public firm than about a private firm. This will
decrease the level of asymmetrical information between firm insiders  and firm outsiders.
Since asymmetrical information is the reason that R&D intensive firms experience cost
of external capital that is higher than the fair level, they will have a lot to gain from the
reduced information asymmetries that going public leads  to. The difference between an
R&D intensive firm’s private and public cost of capital should thus be larger than for
other firms. Since both the costs and the gains from going public are higher for R&D
intensive firms than for other firms, we cannot say that our results show that IPOs are
more unfavorable for R&D intensive  firms.

How much a R&D firm’s cost of external capital is decreased when it goes public will be
related to our previous discussion regarding quality signals. If we imagine that R&D
activities are looked upon as ‘black boxes’, the increased analyst coverage will only lower
the cost of external capital a minor bit closer to the fair level. If, instead, we think the
investors take all available quality signals into account to be able to value  the R&D
activities with a higher degree of certainty, it is possible that the post-IPO cost of external
capital of R&D firms will be close to the fair level.

Another implication of the R&D induced asymmetrical information concerns the fact that
an IPO can  be a strategy for founders and early investors to cash-out their investments.
In R&D intensive firms, firm insiders that wish to exit through the IPO will not realize
the future benefits but only bear the cost of leaving money on the table. This could make
founding and investing early in R&D intensive firms less attractive relative to other types
of firms. However, the size of this effect depends on to what extent founders and early
investors take this into consideration.

                                  30
7.    Conclusion

In this paper, we have presented evidence showing that in the setting of an IPO, the higher
level of R&D activities a firm has, the higher discount its capital will be sold-out at. Here,
discount refers to the difference between the raised proceeds and the market  value of the
capital raised on the first day of trading. While the cost of the capital that is raised in an
IPO increases as a firm’s level of R&D activities increases, so does the value of the future
benefits from going public. Therefore, the results should not  necessarily  be interpreted as
if the decision to go public is relatively costlier for R&D intensive firms. However, we
propose that it is plausible that R&D intensive firms’ higher exposure to IPO underpricing
puts a downward pressure on the  incentives to found and invest early in R&D intensive
firms.

We do not find any support for our hypotheses that the  two easily attainable signals of
high quality R&D activities should mitigate R&D induced asymmetric information
between firm insiders and firm outsiders. The two tested quality signals are VC-backing
and the existence of patents. These insignificant results may however be explained by the
signals carrying too low levels of information.

Moreover, we want to emphasize that there are limitations  of this paper, especially
regarding the proxy that we have used for R&D activity. While we are confident that our
proxy has captured the intended effects, we are hesitant to claim that the estimated effects
are precise. We therefore see potential for future research in developing a more precise
proxy for R&D activities, potentially using a combination of variables, that can be used
in countries in which total R&D expenditures are unobtainable.

Furthermore, we see major potential in further research regarding investors’ ability or
desire to contextualize firms’ R&D activities, by which we mean the act of utilizing all
attainable sources of information to reduce the uncertainty in the estimation of the firm’s
expected future benefits. Specifically, we encourage further attempts at identifying
quality signals that can  overbridge  the asymmetric information structure  between firm
insiders and firm  outsider which stems from the firm’s R&D activities.

                                  31
8.    References

Aboody, D. &  Lev, B. (2002). Information Asymmetry, R&D, and Insider Gains.  The
   Journal of Finance, 55(6), p. 2747-2766.
Allen, F. &  Faulhaber, G.R. (1989). Signalling by underpricing in the IPO market.
   Journal of Financial Economics, 23(2), p. 303-323.
Ang, J., & J. Brau. (2003). Concealing and Confounding Adverse Signals: Insider
   Wealth-Maximizing Behavior in the IPO Process.  Journal of Financial Economics,
   67(1), p.149-172.
Bajo, E., Chemmanur, T.T., Simonyan, K. & Teheranian, H. (2016). Underwriter
   networks, investor attention, and initial public offerings.  Journal of Financial
   Economics, 122(2), p. 376-408.
Baron, D. (1982). A model of the demand for investment banking advising and
   distribution services for new issues.  Journal of Finance, 37(4), p. 955-976.
Beatty R.P. & Ritter J.R. (1986). Investment Banking, Reputation and the Underpricing
   of Initial Public Offerings.  Journal of Financial Economics, 15(1-2), p. 213-232.
Benveniste, L.M. & Spindt, P.A. (1989). How investment bankers determine the offer
   price and allocation of new issues.  Journal of Financial Economics, 24(2), p. 343–
   362.
Benveniste, L.M. &Wilhelm, W.J. (1990). A comparative analysis of IPO proceeds
   under alternative regulatory environments.  Journal of Financial Economics, 28(1-2),
   p. 173–208.
Brau, J. C. (2010). Why Do Firms Go Public?.  The Oxford Handbook of
   Entrepreneurial Finance.  doi:  10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195391244.013.0016.
Brau, J. C., Li, M. & Shi, J. (2007). Do Secondary Shares in the IPO Process Have a
   Negative Effect on Aftermarket Performance?. Journal of  Banking and Finance
   31(9), p. 2612-2631.
Booth,  J.R &  Smith, R. (1986). Capital raising, underwriting and the certification
   hypothesis.  Journal of Financial Economics, 15(1-2), p. 261-281.
Butler, A. W., Keefe, M. O. & Kieschnick, R. (2014). Robust determinants of IPO
   underpricing and their implications for IPO research.  Journal of Corporate Finance,
   27(1),  p.  367-383.
Carter, R.B., Dark F. H. & Singh A.K. (1998). Underwriter Reputation, Initial Returns,
   and the Long-run Performance of IPO Stocks.  The  Journal of Finance, 53(1), p. 285-
   311.
Chan, J. K. C., Lakonishok, J. &  Sougiannis, T. (2002). The Stock Market Valuation of
   Research and Development Expenditures.  The Journal of Finance, 56(6), p. 2431-
   2456.
Cohen, L., Dieter, K. & Malloy, C. (2013). Misvaluing Innovation. The Review of
   Financial Studies, 26(3), p. 635-666.

                                  32
Eberhart, C. A., Maxwell, W. F.  &  Siddique, A. R. (2004). An Examination of Long-­‐
   Term Abnormal Stock Returns and Operating Performance Following R&D
   Increases.  The Journal of Finance,  59(2),  p.  623-650.
European Central Bank.  (2017).  How does innovation lead to growth?. Retrieved 2019
   March 17 from  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/explainers/tell-me-
   more/html/growth.en.html
Franzen, L. A., Rodgers, K. J. & Simin, T. T. (2007). Measuring Distress Risk: The
   Effect of R&D Intensity.  The Journal of Finance, 62(6), p. 2931-2967.
Gompers, P.A. (1995). Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
   Capital.  The Journal of Finance, 50(5), p. 1461-1489.
Grinblatt, M. and Hwang. (1989). Signalling and the Pricing of New Issues.  The
   Journal of Finance, 44(2), p. 393-420.
Grossman, S. (1976). On the efficiency of competitive stock markets where trades have
   diverse information.  The Journal of Finance, 31(2), p. 573-585.
Guo, R.,  Lev, B. & Shi, C. (2006). Explaining the Short-  and Long-­‐  Term IPO
   Anomalies in the US by R&D.  Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 33(3-4),
   p. 550-579.
Hair, J. F. Jr.,  Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L. &  Black, W. C. (1995).  Multivariate Data
                rd
   Analysis  (3  ed). New York: Macmillan.
Hall, B. H.  &  Lerner,  J. (2010).  Handbook of the Economics of Innovation  (Vol. 1).
   Elsevier.
Ibbotson, R.G. (1975). Price performance of common stock new issues.  The Journal of
   Financial Economics, 2(3), p. 235-272.
Ibbotson, R. G. & Jaffe, J. F. (1975). “Hot Issue” Markets.  The Journal of Finance,
   30(4), p. 1027-1042.
Landsman, W. R., Maydew, E. L. & Thornock, J. R. (2012). The information content of
   annual earnings announcements and mandatory adoption of IFRS.  Journal of
   Accounting and Economics, 53(1-2), p. 34-54.
Logue, D.  E. (1973). On the pricing of unseasoned equity issues: 1965–1969.  Journal of
   Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 8(1), p. 91–103.
Loughran, T. & Ritter, J.R. (2004). Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed Over Time?.
   Financial Management,  33(3), p. 5-37.
Lowry, M. & Shu, S. (2002). Litigation risk and IPO underpricing. Journal of Financial
   Economics, 65(3), p. 309-335.
Megginson, W.L. & Weiss, K.A. (1991). Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial
   Public Offerings.  The Journal of Finance, 46(3), p.879-903.
Mikkelson, W. H., M. Partch, & K. Shah. (1997). Ownership and Operating
   Performance of Companies That Go Public.  Journal of Financial Economics, 44(3),
   p. 281-308

                                  33
Moshagen, M. &  Musch, J. (2014). Sample Size Requirements of the Robust Weighted
   Least Squares Estimator.  Methodology: European Journal of Research Methods for
   the Behavioral and Social Sciences, 10(2), 60-70.
Muscarella, C.J., & Vetsuypens, M.R. (1989).  A simple test  of Baron’s model of IPO
   underpricing.  Journal of Financial Economics, 24(1), p. 125–136.
OECD. (2015). Frascati Manual 2015.  Retrieved 2019 March 5 from  https://read.oecd-
   ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/frascati-manual-2015_9789264239012-
   en#page1.
Olsson, U. H., Foss, T., Troye, S. V. & Howell, R. D. (2000). The Performance of ML,
   GLS, and WLS Estimation in Structural Equation Modeling Under Conditions of
   Misspecification and Nonnormality.  Structural Equation Modeling, 7(4), 557-595.
Reilly, F. K. (1973). Further evidence on short-run results for new issues investors.
   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 8(1), p. 83–90.
Ritter, J.R. (1984).  The ‘Hot Issue’ Market of 1980.  The Journal of Business, 57(2), p.
   215-240.
Ritter, J. R. & Welch, I. (2002). A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing and Allocations.  The
   Journal of Finance, 57(4), p. 1795-1828.
Rock, K. (1986).Why new issues are underpriced.  Journal of Financial Economics,
   15(1-2), p. 187-212.
Rosenberg, N. (1989). Why do firms do basic research (with their own money)?.  Studies
   on Science and the Innovation Process: Selected Work of Nathan Rosenberg.
Schenone, C. (2004). The Effect of Banking Relationships on the Firm's IPO
   Underpricing.  The Journal of Finance, 59(6), p. 2903-2958.
Statistics Sweden. (2017). Research and  Development in Sweden 2017.  Retrieved 2019
   April 10 from
   https://www.scb.se/contentassets/df42b5cbe7e54783889c309c315f087e/uf0301_201
   7a01_br_ufftbr1901.pdf
Stoll, H. R. & Curley, A.J. (1970). Small business and the new issues market for
   equities.  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 5(3), p. 309–322.
Titman, S. & Trueman, B. (1986). Information quality and the valuation of new issues.
   Journal of Accounting and Economics, 8(2), p. 159-172.
Verksamt.se. (2019). Årsredovisning för aktiebolag.  Retrieved  2019  April 10  from
   https://www.verksamt.se/driva/ekonomi-och-bokforing/bokforing/arsbokslut-och-
    arsredovisning/aktiebolag.
Welch, I. (1989). Seasoned offerings, imitation costs, and the underpricing of initial
   public offerings.  Journal of Finance, 44(2), p. 421–450.
Welch, I. (1992). Sequential sales, learning, and cascades.  Journal of Finance, 47(2), p.
  695–732.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2015).  Introductory Econometrics  (6. ed.). Mason, OH:
   Thomson/South-Western.

                                  34
Zoltan, J. A., Anselin, L.  &  Varga, A. (2002).  Patents and innovation counts as
   measures of regional production of new knowledge.  Research Policy, 31(7), p. 1069-
   1085.

                                  35
Appendix A

We start out by imagining the IPO of a non-R&D firm, in which the proceeds raised equal
our sample’s median proceeds size.

Median proceeds raised (inflation adjusted, base year 1980): 36,223 tSEK

Median proceeds raised (Feb 2019 prices) 119,905 tSEK

Next, we image the IPO of a firm that is identical in terms of asset size, firm age, VC-
backing, top underwriter backing that takes place in the same year as the non-R&D firm
at a time with the same average market return during the previous 30 days. The first day
market valuation, i.e. the valuation based on the first day closing price of the shares, of
the two firms are identical. This firm, however, has some level of R&D activities. In this
setting, the differences in proceeds raised between the two firms are the following:

At R&D capital X%: 0.146*119,905 tSEK
where is the R&D induced IPO underpricing at the R&D capital level X%.

       th
At 25  percentile R&D capital, 1.7%: 2,278 tSEK (current prices)

       th
At 50  R&D capital, 20.3%: 7,914 tSEK (current prices)

       th
At 75  R&D capital, 57.3%: 13,309 tSEK (current prices)

       th
At 90  R&D capital, 76.2%: 15,228  tSEK (current prices)

                                  36
37