P2P LENDING

AN INVESTOR’S PERSPECTIVE ON THE MEASUREMENT
OF RETURN AND FACTORS IMPACTING DEFAULT HAZARDS

ALFRED HEDLUND

AMANDA JOHANSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm  School of Economics

2019
P2P Lending

Abstract:

   The emergence of peer-to-peer (P2P) lending platforms has caught the attention
   of  researchers.  However,  limited  attention  has  been  directed  toward  the
  investors. This paper aims to explore and measure the components of P2P
   lending returns in Sweden. Using a data set provided  by  one of the leading P2P
   lending platforms we explore internal rates of return of three subsets of loans.
   Additionally, we utilize the Cox proportional hazard model to explore what drives
   the default of borrowers as it has a large effect on investor returns. We find that
   the existence of a credit loss fund has a vital impact on the return as well as that
   the hazard of default is significantly impacted by both hard facts such as interest
   rates but also by unverifiable information such as the purpose of the loan.

Keywords:

   P2P Lending, Peer-to-Peer, IRR, Survival Analysis, Cox Model

Authors:

Amanda Johansson (23876)

Alfred Hedlund (24021)

Tutor:

   Marcus Opp, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Professor, Department of Finance

  Acknowledgements:

   We would like to thank our tutor Marcus Opp for valuable feedback and input.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Alfred Hedlund and Amanda Johansson, 2019

                                   1
Contents

1.       INTRODUCTION...............................................................................................  3
1.1.     Peer-to-Peer Lending .....................................................................................  4
1.2.     The Platform Operating Model: An Investor Perspective ...................... 5

2.        PREVIOUS LITERATURE ............................................................................  9
2.1.      Return: Calculation Methodologies ..............................................................  10
2.2.      Probability of Default: Survival Analysis  ....................................................  10
2.3.      Other Risks Associated with P2P Investing .................................................  11

3.        DATA ...............................................................................................................  13
3.1.      Descriptive Statistics  ......................................................................................  14
3.2.      Construction of Variables and Data Adjustments ......................................  15

4.       METHODOLOGY .........................................................................................  16
4.1.      Benchmark Return Calculation ....................................................................  16
4.2.      Internal Rate of Return  .................................................................................  17
4.3.      Survival Analysis: The Cox Proportional Hazard Model  .......................... 19
4.3.1.    Observation Censoring ......................................................................................20
4.3.2.    Variable Selection  .............................................................................................21
4.3.3.    The Choice of Origin for the Measurement of Time.........................................21

5.        EMPIRICAL RESULTS  ...............................................................................  23
5.1.      Benchmark and Internal Rate of Return .....................................................  23
5.2.      Default: Survival Analysis .............................................................................  26
5.2.1.    Variable Selection  .............................................................................................26
5.2.2.    Cox Regression Result  ......................................................................................26
5.2.3.    Predictions Based on the Cox Model ................................................................27

6.       CONCLUSION ...............................................................................................  30
6.1.      Concluding Thoughts .....................................................................................  30
6.2.      Suggestions for Further Research.................................................................  31

7.        REFERENCES ..................................................................................................  33

8.        APPENDIX  .....................................................................................................  37
8.1.      Appendix 1  ......................................................................................................  37
8.2.      Appendix 2  ......................................................................................................  38

                                   2
1.     Introduction

The financial services industry  serves  as an intermediary between those who have
financial means at their disposal, and those who are in need of funds. The role of
financial intermediaries is to manage financial contracts used to pool funds, share
risks and transfer resources. They are compensated for providing these services and
the income generated from doing this measure the aggregate cost of financial
intermediation (Philippon, 2015). The potential for cost reductions and more
effective   financial   intermediation   stemming   from   the   rapid   technological
development around the turn of the millennium was believed to be high. However,
the unit cost of financial intermediation in the US has stayed roughly the same since
the beginning of the 20th century,  which  holds true even after controlling for the
quality of the intermediation as shown by Philippon (2015). The cost of financial
intermediation affects both firms who issue debt and equity as well as households
who borrow money or use asset management services. These costs are often seen
as a driving  force in the emergence and development of P2P financing in line with
the theory of financial intermediation (Allen & Santomero, 1997). As pointed out by
Havrylchyk and Verdier in 2018, it is too early to compare cost-efficiency of
traditional banks and P2P lending platforms. This is mainly because few P2P lending
platforms have achieved scale efficiency and profitability at this point in time
(Havrylchyk & Verdier, 2018). Although yet only in its earliest stages, online
marketplaces have the potential to replace banks as the traditional intermediary by
enabling the brokerage of consumer loans directly between borrowers and lenders.
In this paper we intend to study the attractiveness of the peer-to-peer (P2P) lending
market as an alternative investment to traditional financial instruments. Hence, our
research question is:

How can returns on P2P loans be measured and what affects these returns in terms of
attractiveness?

The attractiveness can be divided into two main components, risk and return, which
together measure the overall attractivity. Return is the gains or losses resulting from
an investment and it can be measured in multiple different ways. Risk on the other
hand is the possibility that the actual return will be different from what was
expected, at least in its most basic sense from an investor’s perspective. The risk
component can be divided into two sub-components, usually referred to as
systematic and idiosyncratic risk, which in turn can be further fractionated. In the
context of P2P lending, probability of default (PD) is the most significant risk
whether it is driven by borrower specific characteristics or macroeconomic factors.
We aim to contribute to a more nuanced view of the P2P lending market by using
traditional methods for evaluating capital investments and applying them to this
rather new concept of investing. The issue is analyzed using data from a Swedish

                                   3
lending platform, hereafter referred to as the Lending Platform. Realized returns are
calculated with the internal rate of return (IRR) method and a theoretical expected
return is estimated based on the interest rate charged from the borrowers and the
service fees. For the purpose of analyzing the PD component, we are performing a
survival analysis based on the Cox proportional hazard  model. However, both in
terms of risk and return we are limited by the relative short period of time our data
stretches over, as well as the general availability of data related to P2P lending on
the Swedish market. Compared to i.e. listed stocks and bonds, data on P2P loans are
not publicly available and as such requires the cooperation of specific companies. In
contrast to the US market, where both Lending Club and Prosper offer to export loan
data directly from their websites, the Swedish P2P lending companies offer a very
limited quantity of publicly available data why the study is based merely on data
provided by the Lending Platform. We find that the IRR of the loans is generally
above our constructed benchmark return, indicating that the benchmark might be
unrepresentative. Additionally, as a point of reference an average portfolio on the
platform earns between 0.43% and 4.59% before taxes depending on assumptions
regarding reimbursement for credit losses. Furthermore, we find a number of
significant  variables affecting the default hazard. As we expected, a higher interest
rate and lower credit score increases the hazard. The results from the Cox
proportional hazard model have elements in line with previous research but we also
found   variables   with   contradictory   impact.   For   example,   we   found   loan
consolidation to have a positive impact on default probabilities rather than being a
risk contributor. In the remainder of this section we present an introduction to P2P
lending, while the rest of this study is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present
previous literature related to P2P lending and how it is related to this paper. In
section 3 the data set used for the purpose of our study is presented and described
before we present our method of research in part 4. Section 5 presents our findings
on a component basis together with an overall evaluation. Finally, in the last section,
we offer some concluding thoughts together with suggestions for further research.

1.1.     Peer-to-Peer Lending

Since starting in 2005, P2P lending has experienced rapid growth (Milne  &
Parboteeah,  2016). P2P lending platforms are online intermediaries that match
borrowers with lenders. People wanting to borrow money either place requests for
loans online, where private lenders bid to fund these in an auction-like  process or
are being funded immediately given that their loan application is accepted by the
platform. Early on, the P2P lending system was seen as offering credit to people who
would not gain access to it elsewhere. In recent  years however the platforms have
expanded their reach, targeting a wider audience of both borrowers and lenders.
The benefits of peer-to-peer platforms could be summarized as follows: borrowers

                                   4
gain from higher probability of getting a loan funded at lower interest rates than the
banks can provide, while lenders gain from higher expected returns compared to a
traditional savings account. For a brief discussion of potential benefits to investors,
see Morse (2015). On the other hand, there are several disadvantages that should
also be considered. Loan default is an important matter in P2P lending since
individual  investors  bear  the  credit  risk,  rather  than  financial  institutions
specialized in dealing with such risks (Serrano-Cinca  et al.,  2015). Related to this
matter is the question regarding the agency problems arising when intermediaries
have no skin in the game, something Holmstrom & Tirole (1997) brought attention
to with their study on an incentive model of financial intermediation. Keys et al.
(2010) further studied how loan securitization lowered the incentives of banks to
screen borrowers, eventually contributing to the financial crisis in 2008. In light of
this, platform founders often claim to invest money in loans issued by their
platforms and several operators have adopted a hybrid business model where they
lend at least part of their own money to borrowers (Havrylchyk & Verdier, 2018).
As for the Lending Platform, they use something they refer to as performance-based
fees, meaning that they only collect the service fee from the lender when the
borrower fulfils their obligations (XXXXXX, 2019). In China, known for its enormous
shadow banking network1, there is already what could be seen as an ongoing P2P
lending crisis with several platforms collapsing (Hornby & Zhang, 2018).

1.2.    The Platform Operating Model: An Investor Perspective

Many P2P lending platforms operate in a similar way, with fees being charged both
from borrowers and investors, but how these fees are structured vary among
different platforms (Berger & Gleisner, 2009). In this section a simplified example of
the main characteristics of the Lending Platform's operating model is described
from an investor's perspective.

Investor A would like to invest some of  their disposable wealth in P2P lending.
Suppose they are a retail investor which will not have time to actively manage their
portfolio with regular frequency, leading to them choosing the Lending Platform’s
option ‘Autoinvest’. Autoinvest is an automated investment account which  spreads
the money invested across a minimum of 40 to 125 loans depending on the size of
the investment. The table below presents the relation between money invested and
the minimum number of loans in the portfolio (XXXXXX, 2019a).

1
 The shadow banking system is a term for the collection of  non-bank financial intermediaries  that
provide services similar to traditional  commercial banks  but outside normal  banking regulations. For
further information, see e.g.  (Ehlers, Kong, & Zhu, 2018).

                                   5
               Table 1: Number of loans in an Autoinvest portfolio
             Invested amount (SEK)     Minimum Number of Loans
              10,000 – 49,999           40
              49,999 – 99,999           50
              100,000 – 999,999         60
              > 1,000,000               125
              Source:  (2019)

Additionally, the investor has to choose if they want to invest with a  long-  or short-
time  horizon. According to the Lending Platform’s website, Autoinvest with a  long-
time  horizon will invest in loans with a maximum time to maturity of 15 years.
Investors  choosing the short horizon will instead end up with a portfolio of loans
with a maximum of 5 years to maturity. All loans in the portfolio will be what the
platform refers to as floating rate annuity loans with monthly payments, as this is
how all loans on this particular platform are structured. This structure implies that
the investor will receive equally sized monthly payments consisting of principal and
interest, given that none of the borrowers are late with their payment. However, if
one or more investors are late with their monthly payment, the platform has a Credit
Loss Fund that immediately reimburses the principal part but not the interest part
of the monthly payment.

As the purpose of this paper is to investigate the return to lenders, it is important to
understand how the interest rate and annuity payments of a borrower turns into
return earned by the investor. Hence, we provide the following simplified example
to show what effect the origination and service fee have on the return to the
investor2, compared to the interest rate the borrower faces.  See figure 1.

Figure 1. Operating Model

    Borrowers               Lending Platform                Lenders

 Cash Outflow                     Cash Inflow                      Cash Inflow

 - 900 Principal Payment           + 1000                          + 850 Principal Payment

 - 100 Interest Payment             Cash Outflow                     + 50 Interest Payment

 - 1000 Total CF                     - 900                               + 900 Total CF

 Outstanding Balance               + 50 Origination fee               Outstanding Principal

 - 900                              + 50 Service fee                    - 850

                               = 100 Revenue

2
 Please note that the terms lender and investor are used interchangeably throughout this paper.

                                   6
If as in the above example the borrower pays their monthly payment consisting of
1000 SEK, the payment reduces both the outstanding balance toward the investor
as well as the amount outstanding to the Lending Platform. The latter consists of the
origination fee which is paid off proportionally to the principal amount belonging to
the lender. Additionally, it pays one twelfth of the stated interest rate on the opening
balance. The interest payment can be divided into two parts, the service fee and the
return  to the lender. Since both parts are calculated based on the outstanding
amount the monthly percentage return to the investor can be calculated by
subtracting the fee (%) from the interest (%). For instance, say that the yearly
interest rates the borrower faces is 12% and the service fee charged by the Lending
Platform is 3% on a given loan. In any given month, the borrower will pay
12%/12=1%.  When this payment reaches the Lending  Platform,  they will take out
their monthly service fee of 3%/12 = 0.25% on the outstanding amount. The return
in   percent   that   reaches   the   investor   would   then   be   1%-0.25%=0.75%
corresponding to an investor Annual Percentage Rate (APR) of 0.75%*12=9%.
Hence, the investor APR can easily be calculated through subtracting the annual fee
from the annual interest rate the borrower faces. The principal payment can also be
divided into two parts, the principal that retires part of the outstanding amount
toward the investor as well as a part of the initial origination fee. The first part
simply reduces the invested amount for the lender, i.e. the outstanding amount is
reduced by this part of the principal payment. The origination fee on the other hand
has no obvious connection to the investor. Instead, one can think of the origination
fee as  a separate outstanding amount that the borrower has toward the Lending
Platform. As such, this part of the principal payment reduces the outstanding
amount toward the platform and does not affect the lender.

Now, what happens if the borrower fails to pay  their monthly payment for some
reason? A missed payment will result in no cash flow to the platform. Hence, no fees
will be charged from the lender due to the missed payment. Instead, the lender will
be reimbursed from the platform’s credit loss fund for the principal part of the
payment. Therefore, the investor would make a 0% return as the reimbursement
covers the principal amount. The credit loss fund covers only the investors choosing
to invest through Autoinvest. Even though this represents roughly 90%  of the
platform’s current investors, some still chose to manually decide which loans to
invest in. When investing manually, the lender is presented with information
regarding the loan,  e.g.  tenure, interest rate and purpose, as well as information
regarding the borrower, e.g. credit score (A-F6), marital status and age. The only two
things that differentiates manual investing from automatic investing is that you
compose your own portfolio and that you are not covered by the credit loss fund in
the event of  late payments and defaulted loans. In terms of fee structure, there are
no differences.

                                   7
In an attempt to create liquidity for lenders, the platform has set up their own
secondary market. In this market you can sell your entire investment account but
not  individual loans in that account. However, you can have several investment
accounts enabling you to sell parts of your invested capital. The price of the portfolio
is set by the selling party as a percentage of the outstanding amount, before it is
published on the secondary market where anyone can buy it for your advertised
price. However, liquidity remains fairly low and as of May 2019 the number of
transactions per month is about 1700 (XXXXXX, 2019).

                                   8
2.    Previous Literature

Previous research conducted on P2P lending and its effects has primarily been
focused on borrower maximizing factors, while the lenders’ perspective has been
relatively overlooked. Many platforms, including US market leaders Lending Club
(www.lendingclub.com) and Prosper (www.prosper.com), started out with an
origination  process  which  included  that  the  lenders  bidded  on  prospective
borrowers loans based on both hard verifiable numbers and soft unverifiable
information provided in the loan application. As a result, a vast amount of research
exists  on borrower characteristics and likelihood of funding success (see  e.g.
Freedman & Jin, 2017) and herding  behavior  in the bidding process (see  e.g.
Herzenstein et al., 2011). In a German study by Barasinska (2014) it could be shown
that gender has no effect on funding success, despite the opposite being proven
among traditional financial intermediaries in the US. As an explanation the author
states that gender discrimination seems to be eased by the ‘wisdom of the lending
crowd’  (Barasinska & Schäfer, 2014). Considering that the Lending Platform does
not operate in the same way  as the  above-mentioned  platforms, most studies
focused on funding success does not contribute much to the context of this study.

As previously mentioned, lender returns have received less attention in the
literature  but  Morse (2015) concludes that at least parts of the cost savings
generated by the disintermediation of lending seem to benefit investors. However,
she encourages future research on the risk and portfolio selection of lenders to find
to what extent these benefits are passed on to investors  (Morse, 2015). Hildebrand
et al. (2014) compare behavior and outcomes when Prosper removed its origination
rewards paid to group leaders, hence affecting their incentives. The key takeaway is
that by having a stake in the game, incentives to perform effective and qualitative
credit  risk  assessments  is  increased  (Hildebrand  et  al.,  2014).  What  is  left
unresolved however is how intermediaries as whole can be incentivized, rather than
just certain group leaders. As mentioned in the introduction, some platforms  are
implementing hybrid business models to address precisely this issue, but the effects
of it are yet to be discovered. Emekter et al.  (2015) found that a lower credit grade
is associated with a higher hazard rate, and probability of default. Furthermore, they
found that the higher interest rates  charged on the  high-risk  borrowers are not
enough to compensate lenders for the higher probability of default (Emekter et al.,
2015). Loan purpose is also considered to be a factor explaining probability of
default, and Serrano et al. (2015) find that e.g. loan consolidation and small business
loans are associated with a higher risk of default.

In conclusion, much of the existing literature has been focusing on the  behavioral
aspects of P2P lending and the borrower side of the exchange. However, limited
research on investor returns exists, in which further focus on the investor

                                   9
perspective is often encouraged. To the best of our knowledge, any research using
Swedish P2P lending data is yet to be published. Hence,  we aim to combine these
two gaps in the existing literature by using Swedish data to examine investor
returns.

2.1.    Return: Calculation Methodologies

There are multiple techniques for calculating both expected and realized returns.
Simply put, the return is the difference between what we invest and what we get
back. In reality however it gets more complicated than that, especially when taking
risk, multi-period returns and the time value of money into account. Broadly
speaking there are three main methods for calculating investment performance
results: the basic, time-weighted and money-weighted rate of return. The basic
method, often referred to as return on investment (ROI), is easy to interpret but has
several limitations. To calculate the ROI, you simply divide the return by the cost of
the investment, giving the percentage change over a set period. There is an obvious
risk in evaluating long-term performance with this measure as it does not take the
time value of money into consideration. Time-weighted return calculations are
mostly used to measure the performance of portfolio managers (Fabozzi, 2011) and
will hence not be discussed further in this section. For the purpose of this study, the
money-weighted rate of return will provide the most accurate measure of return
since it accounts for the value of cash flows in all given periods. The money-weighted
rate of return is commonly referred to as the internal rate of return. The IRR method
was introduced by Dean  (1962)  and became rapidly accepted  among decision-
makers, although also criticized from the very beginning. In a study from 1980, Rapp
lists several arguments in favor of using the IRR as an investment profitability
measure, emphasizing the simplicity  and  flexibility of the method. In order to
understand why the IRR metric has become so widely popular, Souder (1973) found
that decision-makers seem to rank models according to the following aspects in
decreasing order of importance: realism, flexibility, capability, use and cost. Taking
these  aspects into consideration, the IRR method is often seen to be a suitable way
to measure an investment’s rate of return.

2.2.    Probability of Default: Survival Analysis

Survival analysis is a branch of statistics for analyzing the expected duration of time
until one or more events happen. Historically, this type of analysis has been used
mainly in medicine or engineering where the time until an event is frequently
analyzed, such as death or machine failure. With the introduction of compliance
guidelines in the context of financial services business, survival analysis has become
more common as a result of the increasing need for accurate credit risk calculations

                                  10
(Dirick  et al.,  2017). Hazard models are a class of models in survival analysis with
the  feature  to  account  for  time,  making  them  dynamic  as  opposed  to  the
conventional static models often used for predicting defaults. Lane et al. (1986) first
introduced the Cox proportional hazard model (D. R. Cox, 1972) in finance literature,
highlighting its advantages being (1) the lack of underlying assumptions and (2) the
ability to explicitly  incorporate  the time to failure. They applied the model to the
prediction of bank failures and found that it tends to identify bankruptcies prior to
the actual failure date. The Cox model was first used in the credit context by Narain
(1992) and his work has been followed by several authors, e.g. Banasik (1999) who
found that applying the ideas of survival analysis give meaningful results in credit
scoring. In recent years, Cox paper from 1972 has been cited nearly 1,000 times a
year in scientific literature (Allison, 2014). Hazard models often perform better than
static models when forecasting default  (Dirick et al., 2017)  and the Cox regression
is the best all-round method for estimating regression models for event history data
by the judgement of many. Bellotti and Crook  (2009)  compared the logistic
regression directly with the Cox proportional hazards model and found that the Cox
model delivered superior results compared to the logistic regression model, and
that the addition of macroeconomic variables further improved the predictions.
Baesens et al.  (2005)  instead compared the Cox model with a neural network
survival analysis  model, mostly used in the artificial intelligence (AI)  context,  and
found that it did not significantly outperform the proportional hazards model
despite its rather complex nature. For further discussion of the advantages and the
use of the model, see Cox and Oakes (2018).

2.3.    Other Risks Associated with P2P Investing

An area  within P2P lending that seems to be more or less unexplored is how to
adjust the required return for the liquidity risk that is inherent in the asset class, due
to the nature of the operating model of most P2P platforms. Research on illiquidity
premiums originates from Amihud and Mendelson’s (1986) paper where the effect
on asset pricing is investigated through an analysis of the bid-ask spread as a proxy
for illiquidity. They find that the market-observed expected return is an increasing
concave function of the spread  (Amihud & Mendelson, 1986). Inspired by this
research, Chen et al. finds a liquidity premium in the levels and changes of bond
yields  (Chen et al.,  2007). Although the characteristics of P2P loans differs from
corporate bonds in many aspects, it is reasonable to assume that investors would
require a liquidity premium for investing in P2P loans as well as bonds, especially
considering the low number of transactions on the secondary market of i.e. The
Lending Platform. Lastly, there has been some discussions regarding platform
failure and bankruptcy in recent research. For instance,  (Havrylchyk & Verdier,
2018)  concludes that P2P lending platforms do not suffer from the risk of

                                  11
bankruptcy runs like traditional financial intermediaries and that the absence of a
government guarantee for deposited funds might reduce the moral hazard of
platforms  compared  to  banks.  Additionally,  Havrylchyk  and  Verdier  (2018)
comment on the phenomenon that some governments,  e.g.  in the United Kingdom,
require platforms to set up contracts with third parties to ensure continuation of
reimbursements to lenders in the event of bankruptcy and that orderly resolution is
much more likely for platforms than traditional banks. On the other hand, Morse
(2015) argues that a P2P lending platform experiencing financial distress surely will
impact the loan performance, and hence the lender  returns  negatively. The P2P
lending platform we study in this paper have a  third-party  contract with one of the
leading collection and credit solution agencies in the Nordics, which further assures
the investors that their monthly payments will be received in the event of insolvency
(XXXXXX, 2019b). Finally, it should not be forgotten that investing in P2P loans is
associated with traditional financial  risks such as volatility, market risk and legal
risk  (Namvar, 2014).

                                  12
3.    Data

Our empirical analysis of the attractiveness of P2P lending is based on a dataset
containing 77,887 monthly records reported between 2015-09 and 2019-04, from
a random sample of  6,218 loans provided by the Lending Platform3. Each record
contains borrower and loan characteristics as well as information regarding the
monthly payment. Among the variables describing the loan specifics, loan purpose
is included where loan consolidation  is the most common by far. The complete list
of variables including a description is presented in Appendix 1, while an overview
of the loan purposes can be found in table 2. Important to note is that a vast majority
of the loans have not reached maturity  yet and  are only in its earliest stages. This
give rise to a number of issues when trying to adopt the lenders’ perspective, since
consistency in cash flows and probability of default are two important determinants
when evaluating the attractiveness of investing in P2P loans.

 Table 2: Summary by loan purpose
 Loan Purpose             N        Ratio        Avg. DA      Interest Rate    Defaulted
                                    (%)          (SEK           (%)         Loans

 Business                 12        0.19        126,909         8.64           2
 Divorce                 16        0.26         37,378          8.39           0
 Education               62        1.00         48,383          9.24           1
 Home electronics          49        0.79         40,498          9.09           1
 Home improvement        389        6.26         57,391          9.06          23
 Kitchen appliances        155        2.49         41,058          8.27          10
 Loan consolidation        3216       51.72        86,677          9.28          132
 Marriage                39        0.63         51,538          9.43           5
 Move                   76        1.22        53,510          8.59           4
 NA                    54        0.87        63,315         9.08          3
 None                   6         0.10        82,500          8.57           2
 Other                  776       12.48        60,484          8.34          54
 Personal health           88        1.42         41,500          9.28           3
 Real estate               2         0.03         35,000          4.41           0
 Renovation              86        1.38         55,221          9.39           2
 Vacation                222        3.57         37,788          9.54          12
 Vehicle                 970       15.60        61,614          8.86          37
 Total (average)          6,218      100.00       (57,692)         (8.68)         291
 Notes: Avg. DA represent the average disbursed amount to borrowers and Interest rate represent
 the average rate stated in the loan terms, i.e. the rate paid by the borrower.

3
 We have requested a random sample of loans from the Lending Platform, but as the sampling process is
conducted outside of our control there is an inevitable risk of sampling bias.

                                  13
3.1.    Descriptive Statistics

A summary of descriptive statistics is presented in table 3. We find that loan tenures
range from 6 to 180 months and disbursed amount from 5,000 to 350,000 SEK. The
average loan tenure is a bit over 5.5 years while the average time since origination
is less than one year, showing that many loans are in the beginning  of their tenure.
Furthermore, some loans have been reported past their maturity date as the
minimum remaining tenure is negative 27 months. It is also questionable whether
someone aged 119 has actually received a loan through the platform, or that
someone  with a monthly income of 320,000 SEK would be in need of a small,
unsecured credit. These types of inconsistencies in the data can be troublesome and
cause noise in parts of the analysis.

 Table 3: Summary statistics
 Variable                    Mean     Median      Std. Dev.      Min       Max
 Interest rate (%)                 9.06        8.75         3.43        1.95       17.48
 Disbursed amount (SEK)          72,382      54,000       52,667       5,000     350,000
 Origination fee (SEK)            800.15      495.00       1,375.19       0.00     15,000.00
 Outstanding amount (SEK)        72,102     51,500       49,335       0.00      289,011
 Loan tenure (months)            66.18       60.00        38.66        6.00      180.00
 Time since origination (months)    11.53       9.00         8.23        0.00       43.00
 Remaining tenure (months)        54.36       45.00        40.16       -27.00      179.00
 Age                          42.44      40.00        14.18       20.00      119.00
 Monthly income* (SEK)          29,676     27,035       11,867       0.00      320,000
 UC Score                       4.05        1.83         5.18        0.01       24.93
 Ever 1 DPD                     0.34        0.00         0.48        0.00       1.00
 Ever 30DPD                    0.09        0.00         0.29        0.00       1.00
 Ever 60 DPD                    0.06        0.00         0.25        0.00       1.00
 N                                            6,218
 Notes: The statistics are generated from the last record of each loan.
 *Monthly income is reported by the borrower and not verified by the Lending Platform.

In table 4 the distribution of loans separated by loan status is presented. We find
that 167 out of the 6,218 loans in our dataset have reached maturity as of 2019-04,
and that 291 have experienced default. Additionally, 1702 of the loans have been
repaid early. When comparing the distribution of the number of loans to the
distribution of the disbursed amount, the ratios indicate that matured loans are
generally of smaller amounts than defaulted loans. However, this can partially be
explained by the fact that the loans which have already matured have shorter
tenures. Hence, it is likely that they are of smaller amounts.

                                  14
 Table 4: Loan distribution by loan status
 Status                     N      Ratio N      Disbursed      Ratio DA     Outstanding
                                (%)       Amount        (%)        Amount
 Current                    •         •            •             •             •
 Matured                   •         •            •             •             •
 Early repayment             •         •            •             •             •
 Defaulted                   •         •            •             •             •
 Total
 Notes: Disbursed amount represent the total amount originated and Ratio DA the proportion per
 status group. Outstanding amount is the total amount outstanding as of 2019-04.

3.2.    Construction of Variables and  Data Adjustments

Since we aim to adopt a lender’s perspective, some adjustments need to be made to
the  original  data  set  provided  by  the  Lending  Platform.  To  determine  the
attractiveness of P2P lending, we are interested in the monthly cash flow received
by the lender rather than the amount paid by the borrower. Since the reported
principal payment includes the amortization of the origination fee, it will be adjusted
proportionally in accordance with equation 1.

                                                          )*+,-+./0  3'.4*&'"+,&
 !"#$%&'" )*+,-+./0+,&  =  )*+,-+./0 3'.4*&'"+,&  −  (                     ∗  ;4&/0 <*+=. ?''+)  (1)
                                                   7+%8$*%'" !94$,&+

The total cash flow to the lender is subsequently calculated as the sum of the interest
amount and the adjusted principal amount. However, in the very first month the
funds are disbursed to the borrower, as such it represents a negative cash flow from
the perspective of an investor:

                 B/%ℎ ?04DE,F  =  !"#$%&'"  )*+,-+./0E,F  + H,&'*'%&  )/I9',&E,F             (2)
                         B/%ℎ ?04DE,K  =  − 7+%8$*%'" !94$,&E

where the  H,&'*'%&  )/I9',&E,F  in our data excludes the Lending Platform’s service
fee. As such the amount in its entirety is a cash flow received by the investor.  In
addition to generating these variables, a number of observations have to be
removed for certain parts of the analysis.  This is a result of inconsistencies in the
data. For instance, some loans have a  double-booked  last payment, generating
returns far beyond what is possible in reality. Such observations are believed to be
data errors and have been removed where they cause  noise in the analysis. We
contemplated constructing a debt-to-income variable for each loan, as this has
previously been shown to have an impact on the probability of default (see  e.g.
Serrano-Cinca et al., 2015). However, as the income data is both inconsistent and
self-reported, we decided to refrain from using the variable.

                                  15
4.    Methodology

While there exist several different methodologies to calculate returns, there seems
to be no industry standard for measuring returns on P2P lending platforms. The
industry  leader Lending Club uses a method they refer to as  net annualized return
(NAR). NAR is an annualized measure of the rate of return on the principal invested
over the life of an investment, meaning that as defaults occur over time the NAR will
decrease4. It is based on actual borrower payments received each month, net of
service fees, actual charge offs, and recoveries (Lending Club, 2019). For the purpose
of this study we use 1) a simplified method for estimating the theoretical expected
return and 2) the  IRR method for realized returns, both with a similar approach as
Lending Club in regard to service fees and charge offs5. Additionally, we introduce
survival analysis by fitting a Cox proportional hazard model to our data in order to
gain a better understanding of PDs and the factors contributing to default. In this
study, we have defined default as when a borrower is 90 days past due date, in line
with the standards proposed by the European Banking Authority (2016). If the loan
is already written off by the Lending Platform, without having been 90 days past
due, it is also considered to be in default. However, loans which have recovered from
being 90 days past due and fulfilled their obligations are not considered as defaulted.
In the following subsections we outline the methodology behind our return
calculations as well how we apply the Cox proportional hazard model with respect
to loan defaults.

4.1.    Benchmark Return Calculation

Average realized returns are often used  as a proxy for expected returns, although
the accuracy of this approach is often debated (see  e.g.  Elton, 1999). However, we
will use historical data to construct a benchmark to use as a point of reference for
expected returns. The benchmark expected return will be constructed using the
average interest rates as well as the service fee spread presented on the Lending
Platform’s website. The rate of return for a successful, non-defaulting, loan would
be the monthly interest rate faced by the borrower minus the monthly fee charged
by the Lending Platform, as they are both calculated based on the outstanding
amount.

4
  For a complete explanation of the NAR method, please see the Lending Club website  (Lending Club, ).

5
  Note: All return estimates and measures presented throughout this paper is on a before tax basis. Current tax
regulation as of May 2019 consists of 1) 30% tax on interest received 2) 30% tax on realized capital gains 3) 70% of
realized capital losses are deductible.

                                  16
4.2.    Internal Rate of Return

The internal rate of return takes the time-value of money into account and is defined
as the discount rate at which the net present value (NPV) of the cash flows generated
from the investment is equal to zero  (Berk  & DeMarzo, 2017).  Even though there is
no industry standard for calculating return on P2P platforms, the IRR is a common
measure among investors in many  fields,  as pointed out in the literature section. A
simple rule is to accept the investment if the IRR is greater than the expected or
required return and reject the investment if the IRR is less than that. However, it
should be noted that the IRR has several disadvantages such as the risk of giving
multiple IRRs if the cash flows change sign more than once or giving opposite
recommendations as the NPV rule6 in case of upfront cash inflows (Berk & DeMarzo,
2017). In the context of P2P lending, the investor’s initial cash flow is negative, and
the following payments are fixed. Hence, there are no sign changes in the cash flows
other than in the beginning, which further favors the use of the IRR for calculating
returns. One of the assumptions when using the IRR is that any intermediate cash
flows are reinvested at the discount rate, although also widely debated whether this
actually holds true or not (see e.g.  Rapp, 1980  or  Rich & Rose, 2014). However, as
the IRR is used in our context, it represents the average annual rate of return
without the effect of compounding. Hence, it is comparable to the yearly interest rate
the borrower faces, reduced by the service fee charged by the Lending Platform. The
IRR is calculated through solving the following equation:

                                 R
                                     B?Q
                   0 = NPV = P        Q                 (3)
                                      (1 + H33)
                                     QSK
where  B?0  is the initial investment,  B?Q  the monthly cash flows,  n  the number of
periods and N the loan tenure.

We apply the IRR method of calculating lender return on three subsets of loans. The
first subset of loans are those that have reached maturity and been fully paid off. As
for the second subset, it consists of loans that have been repaid in full before
reaching maturity. Finally, the third subset include all loans that are considered to
be defaulted. For every subset, the IRR of each individual loan is calculated before it
is aggregated on a credit score level to enable comparisons across credit scores as
well as against the benchmark return.

Since the purpose of this paper is not to study portfolio theory or optimization, we
have not used any sophisticated techniques for constructing portfolios out of the
subsets of loans described above. However, as we would still like to present a point

6
  The NPV decision rule specifies that all independent projects with a positive NPV should be accepted.

                                  17
of reference for what the average expected return of an Autoinvest portfolio might
look like, we have implemented a simplified approximation. Expected return is
generally calculated using the equation below (Bodie et al., 2014):

                           U(*)  = V(.W ∗ *W)                         (4)
                                                   W
where  .W  is the probability of scenario s and r is the return in that scenario. There
exist  countless scenarios from investing in most assets, including P2P loans.
However, very simplified one could think of two main scenarios, either the borrower
pays their principal and  interest,  or they default after which the investor receives
nothing7. The equation would then read:

                       U(*)  =  .Y  ∗ *Y  + (1 − .Y) ∗ *Z                   (5)

where  .Y  is the probability of default, *Yis the return if in the event of default and *Z
the return if the loan is repaid. Traditional financial institutions that lend money
have to estimate credit loss according to the Basel II framework, a calculation that
generally relies on three important parameters; 1) Exposure at Default (EAD) 2)
Loss Given Default (LGD) and 3) Probability of Default  (PD)  (BIS, 2005). The latter
explains the probability of default in a given portfolio and can be proxied using
different techniques. EAD on the other hand is an estimation of the outstanding
amount at risk in the event of default. Finally, the LGD describes in percent how
much of the amount at risk that is estimated to be lost in the event of default. While
this method is the industry standard for estimating expected credit losses, it is not
easily transferred to the P2P lending data we are using for two main reasons. Firstly,
we are calculating percentage returns and not amounts, which is what the EAD is
mainly used for. Secondly, the interest rate is used in the event of no default, which
implies that the downside in event of default should be comparable to this measure,
i.e. the percentage lost adjusted for received interest. As we would like to avoid the
use of complicated estimation techniques described by the Basel II framework, for
the reasons listed above, we have to find an alternative way to estimate these
parameters. The IRR can be calculated for loans that are defaulted and subsequently
used as the return in the scenario of default. In the scenario of no default, we will
use the IRR of matured loans as a proxy for the return. This is presented below in
equation 6:
                             *Y,E  =  H33Y,E  , *\,E  =  H33\,E                       (6)

The IRR of defaulted loans will take into account the amount lost when default
occurs, i.e. include both of the parameters EAD and LGD as described above. The
estimation of the portfolio return will be done with  two different assumptions

7
  Note: As of today, the investor would be reimbursed by the credit loss fund. As mentioned previously, this is not a
guarantee and might not be something investors can count on in times of worse economic conditions.

                                  18
regarding the credit loss fund, either the fund does not cover any of the future cash
flows or it covers all of the principal payments. In the former, each credit score will
be treated as having two scenarios as described earlier  on, either a borrower fulfils
their obligations and pays the full principal and interest until maturity, in which case
the average IRR from the subset of matured loans will be used as the return. Or, the
borrower defaults at some point in time, and for this scenario the average IRR of the
defaulted loans in that credit score will be used. When full reimbursement is
considered, the return is assumed to be 0% in the default scenario.

                                       b
                         U^*_`  =  V Da ∗ U(*a)                       (7)
                                     aSc
In line with equation  7, the sum of all weighted returns will represent an
approximation of the return expected of an Autoinvest portfolio. The approximation
will be more accurate for an Autoinvest portfolio with a short time horizon, as the
average IRRs used will be calculated on loans that have maturities below 5 years.8

For this approximation the probability of default,  .Y, will be estimated as the
percentage of the initial investment that defaults, as described in equation  8.

                                 Y
                             ∑1  7+%8$*%'" !94$,&Y
                          .Y,a  =    E                                            (8)
                             ∑ 1 7+%8$*%'" !94$,&E

where c denotes the credit risk class, d denotes the d:th defaulted loan and i the total
number of loans. We expect this estimation of PD to be lower than the actual long
run default rates, as many of the loans in the data set have only existed for a small
fraction of their total duration. Hence, our next step will be to further investigate the
default probabilities.

4.3.    Survival Analysis: The Cox Proportional Hazard Model

The purpose of introducing survival analysis in this study is to gain a better
understanding of the factors affecting the likelihood of default for borrowers on the
Lending Platform, as defaults are a main contributing factor to the return realized
by investors. Most models for failure prediction apply probit or logit techniques to
determine the probability of default9. The Cox proportional hazard model takes this
approach a step further as it allows predicting not only the probability of default,
but also the estimated time of this event  (Allison, 2014). The predictions are quite
limited however as the model cannot predict what happens after the last  observed

8
  In the data set none of the matured loans have maturities over 5 years.

9
  Probit and logit models are parametric models where the dependent variable is a binary response, commonly used
to predict future events. For further information see e.g.  (Aldrich & Nelson, 2006).

                                  19
time of event in the sample, but it avoids the risk of extrapolation, i.e. assuming that
any existing trend will continue. In a Cox regression model, the dependent variable
is expressed as a hazard. The model describes the relation between the occurrence
of an event and a set of independent variables, usually called covariates. The hazard
in this context is the probability that a loan  default. It is assumed that the hazards
stay  constant over time, why it is referred to as a proportional model  (Koletsi &
Pandis, 2017). To test the assumption of proportional hazard we utilize a Schoenfeld
residual test  (Schoenfeld, 1982). The Schoenfeld residual is calculated for each
observation that has a default event and for each individual explanatory variable.  If
the hazards are in fact proportional, the residuals should be uncorrelated with time.
The Cox model also allows for the inclusion of time-varying covariates, i.e. covariates
with the ability to change over time. In such cases, the complexity of the model
increases significantly, why the inclusion of  e.g.  macroeconomic variables in the
modelling is considered to be outside the scope of this paper.

One of the main benefits with the Cox model is that it is particularly suitable for
event data with large amounts of observations, and only a small fraction of events
occurring. For P2P lending data, the number of periods in which borrowers  do  not
default composes the vast majority of data points rather than the opposite. The Cox
model allows for censoring of these observations for which the event  never
happened;  a process further explained in the following section. While the small
fraction of events is not causing any problems, time to maturity and the fact that
most loans are only in its earliest stages are, especially since we cannot tell what
happens after the last observed event. To address this issue, the time variable could
be expressed as a  proportion of time,  defining the fraction that is left of the loan
duration. While this would be interesting and perhaps provide a more accurate
estimate of survival times during the full period of a loan, we have not been able to
find any existing literature supporting this approach.

4.3.1.    Observation Censoring

In survival analysis, a certain proportion of the cases is censored. Censoring occurs
when the event of interest has not yet been observed at the moment of data
gathering. At this point in time our data set is heavily right censored, meaning that
for the vast majority of the observations, the event of interest has not yet  occurred.
An event is the pre-specified endpoint of the study, for instance death or disease
recurrence. In the context of credit risk, the event of interest is borrower default.
When applying survival analysis to model time to default, as in the case of this study,
all cases not having experienced default until the time of data gathering are censored
at the  last time  recorded. By incorporating these non-event observations, the
statistical power of the model is significantly increased.

                                  20
Figure 2. The Censoring Process

                                             Defaulted
                                         Censored
   Borrowers

     0       Event time          t

4.3.2.    Variable Selection

The Cox regression investigates the association between time to default and one or
more predictor variables. Since we are performing the  analysis without time-
varying covariates, only variables that are constant over time are available for
selection. For each loan purpose, living status and marital status a dummy variable
is created, resulting in a total of 30 dummy variables. A complete list of the variables
is presented in Appendix 1, however using variables related to transaction data is
not possible since we are not including time varying covariates in our model. Fitting
the model on all relevant combinations of variables would require a significant
amount of time, why an iterative stepwise regression is applied instead. Stepwise
regression means that variables are added and tested successively, and then
dropped  if not proving statistical significance. Although stepwise regression as a
method for variable selection has received some criticism, it is still valuable as a way
of identifying covariates that are likely to have an impact on the dependent variable
(Frey, 2018). We apply a threshold on the p-value of 0.2 to find variables that might
have an impact on the probability of default. The resulting variables is then used  in
the final model.

4.3.3.    The Choice of Origin for the Measurement of Time

One aspect of model choice is the question of when time begins. This question is
relevant to both parametric and semiparametric regression models, but the
proportional hazards model offers a wider range of possibilities. The date of issue is
a natural starting point for calculating time of default, but even in this seemingly
straightforward example there is room for disagreement. In formulating this hazard
model, one could let the hazard be a function of a person’s age or calendar time
rather than time since the issuance of the loan. However, in the case of credit default

                                  21
the hazard is expected to depend on time since origination, at least to some extent.
The hazard could also be thought to depend strongly macroeconomic factors and
vary with historical conditions, that affect all  borrowers in the same way, meaning
that calendar time would be an appropriate time scale. In the end, we have chosen
to use time since origination mainly for two reasons. As mentioned in the previous
section, the inclusion of external time-varying covariates is outside the scope of this
analysis. Secondly, the time period of our sample ranges only from 2015-09 to 2019-
04, meaning that no major event of interest has taken place during this period. By
event of interest one could think of a financial crisis, unusual GDP growth or any
macroeconomic factor having an impact on the household economy.

Important to note in the context of time is that with discrete time data, as in this
study, there is a risk that two or more loans experience default at the same recorded
time. This would cause something called a tie, creating a problem since the Cox
model takes time as continuous and uses ranks of event times to fit the model. There
are multiple ways to handle this issue, and we have chosen to use the Efron
approximation method  (Efron, 1977)  since it is often considered to be the best
choice (see  e.g.  Borucka, 2014  or  Allison, 2014). This method requires only slightly
more computational power than  e.g.  the Breslow method10  while yielding a better
approximation.

10
   The Breslow Method is an alternative approach to handling ties in the data when using the Cox model.

                                  22
5.    Empirical Results

In the following section the results from the method outlined in section 4 will be
presented. First, we will present the results from the return measures, after which
the results from the survival analysis and its implications on default probabilities
will be presented.

5.1.    Benchmark  and Internal Rate of Return

The average interest rate per credit score ranged from 4.56% to 13.83% with an
overall average interest rate of 9.05%. After deducting the service fee spread, we
arrive at an interval in which one would expect the IRR to lie between for all non-
defaulted loans. Both the minimum and maximum return is increasing when moving
toward lower credit scores, which is expected as these return figures are unadjusted
for expected credit losses as well as the time value of cash flows. The expected credit
losses are likely to be higher in the lower credit scores, an assumption which is also
supported by the percentage of defaulted loans in each credit score. The results are
presented in table 5.

 Table 5: Benchmark return

 Credit Score        N     Interest Rate   Fee Spread   Min Return   Max Return    Defaulted
                           (%)         (%)        (%)        (%)        Loans

 A (highest)       658       4.56       1.50-3.27      1.29        3.06           •
 B               852       5.93       2.63-3.75      2.17        3.29          •
 C               896       7.03       3.45-4.20      2.83        3.58          •
 D              1334      8.96       3.15-4.50      4.46        5.81          •
 E              1281      10.51      3.70-5.50      5.01        6.81          •
 F (lowest)        1197      13.83      4.45-5.50      8.32        9.37          •
 Total (average)   6,218     (9.05)        NA         NA         NA          •
 Notes: Interest rate is the average rate charged from the borrowers in each risk class. Fees
 represent the fee charged by the Lending Platform, retrieved from their website.

In table 6 the results from calculating the IRR on the three subsets of loans is
presented.   Since the loans in Panel A have reimbursed investors both for the
principal as well as interest throughout the tenure, all of the loans have a positive
IRR. Interestingly, all credit scores have maximum IRR that is above the benchmark
expected  return,  indicating  that  the  investors  on  average  would  have  been
reimbursed for more than the interest minus service fee. Alternatively, the Lending
Platform have historically charged lower fees than those presented on their website
today. Unfortunately, we have no information regarding historical fees. It should be
noted that each credit score contains a low number of observations, why we refrain
from drawing any substantial inferences.

                                  23
In the second subset of early repaid loans the average IRR for each credit score is
comparable to the ones of matured loans, with only minor discrepancies. For all
credit scores but F the average IRR is higher for early repaid loans than for the ones
that are matured. A likely reason for this is that if a loan is retired early there is less
chance of a loan being late with payments which results in a higher return as the
time value  of money  is an important determinant of IRR. As can be read from the
table, each credit score has a minimum IRR of 0%, indicating that the borrower has
immediately repaid the loan before any interest is accrued. Whether or not this is
realistic can be debated, however it is not uncommon to refinance your loans as seen
from the fact that a majority of the loans have the purpose of consolidating  or
refinancing other loans.

The IRRs of defaulted loans11  were expected to be very negative as the majority of
loans in the data are far from matured, as presented in section 3. The a priori belief
of the IRR for different risk classes in this subset is arguable. On one hand, loans with
a good credit score is believed to have a lower probability of default and possibly
default later on in the loan, if at all. On the other hand, a low credit score would be
connected with a higher interest rate, meaning that lenders would have received
higher cash flows when default occurs, ceteris paribus. Considering that the number
of defaulted loans is only at 291 and that many loans have not even reached halfway
through to maturity, the timing of default becomes even more important relative to
the interest rate. Furthermore, the minimum IRR for each credit score sits at -100%.
Even though this indicates that the borrowers have defaulted as early as in the first
month, causing the investor to lose all invested money, other factors could yield an
IRR extremely close to  -100%. This is because the IRR generates a yearly return.
Implying, that a borrower defaulting less than a year into the loan, with 80% left to
pay until the cash flow equals the invested amount will have an IRR lower than  -
80%.

11
   The definition of default as presented in section 4 is 90 days delinquent or written off by the Lending Platform.

                                  24
 Table 6: IRR and maximum benchmark return
 Credit Score    N     Mean    Median    Std. Dev.     Min      Max     Interest Rate    Max Return
 Panel A: Matured loans
     A       34    2.54     2.46      0.85      1.31     3.76       3.38         1.88
     B       37    2.78     2.59      1.12      1.45     4.53       4.15         1.52
     C       28     3.37     2.69      1.51      1.42      7.57       4.99         1.54
     D       25    5.07     4.52      1.06      3.95     7.84       6.67         3.52
     E       21     6.42     6.24      0.80      5.18     8.02       8.02         4.32
     F        4     9.54     9.21      1.18      8.60     11.14      11.32        6.87
 Panel B: Early repaid loans
     A       139    2.62     2.57      1.06      0.00     5.54       4.02         2.52
     B       199    3.02     3.15      1.37      0.00     6.67       5.11         2.48
     C       236    3.68     3.40      1.93      0.00      8.87       6.40         2.95
     D       294    5.19     5.14      1.87      0.00     9.52       8.11         4.96
     E       264    6.69     6.73      2.19      -0.11     11.91       9.76         6.07
     F       193    8.97     9.23      3.06      0.00     15.73      13.36        8.91
 Panel C: Defaulted loans
     A        •      •        •        •         •        •          •           •
     B        •      •        •        •         •        •          •           •
     C        •      •        •        •         •        •          •            •
     D        •      •        •        •         •        •          •           •
     E        •      •        •        •         •        •          •            •
     F        •      •        •        •         •        •          •            •
 Notes: Interest rate represent the rate charged from the borrower and max return represent the
 maximum theoretical benchmark return.

When looking at the average interest rates across the three different subsets an
interesting pattern is revealed. For each credit score, the lowest interest rate
appears in the matured section, the second lowest in the early repaid section and
the highest in the defaulted section. Finding the highest rates in the subset of
defaulted loans is not surprising though, as high interest rates are one way of
compensating lenders for a higher probability of default. That the average interest
rate is higher for all credit scores in the subset of early repaid loans can be due to
several reasons. Although the causality is unknown, it is imaginable that these
borrowers repay their loans as a result of finding lower interest rates elsewhere.

Our point of reference for the return of an Autoinvest portfolio, using the IRRs above
as the measure of return, is presented in table 7. Column 6 describes what each
credit score contributes to the portfolios overall return, adjusted for default, when
we assume that the credit loss fund does not reimburse principal payments. The
total expected return of the portfolio is then only 0.43%. However, when we assume
reimbursed principal payments the return of the portfolio jumps to a  much higher
level of 4.95%. Even though the discrepancy between these two figures are very

                                  25
large, it is not surprising that the effect of not having to bear any principal losses is
large.

 Table 7: Autoinvest portfolio estimate
  Credit Score     PD      IRR     Default IRR     Weights     Wt. Return w/o    Wt. Return w
                (%)      (%)        (%)         (%)         CLF (%)        CLF (%)
      A         0.80      2.54       -90.01        0.10           0.18           0.25
      B         3.07      2.76       -71.62        0.15           0.07           0.40
       C         4.51      3.37       -68.26        0.15           0.02           0.48
      D         5.92      5.07       -77.57        0.21           0.04           1.00
       E         9.26      6.42       -75.99        0.21           -0.25           1.22
       F         7.96      9.54       -84.10        0.18           0.38           1.58
   Portfolio                                                  0.43           4.95
 Notes: PD is the probability of default, IRR is the return for non-defaulting loans and default IRR
 represent the negative return in the case of default. Wt. return w and w/o CLF describes what each
 credit score contributes with to the portfolios overall return, adjusted for default. Weights
 approximately represent the overall distribution of loans, i.e. the average Autoinvest portfolio.

5.2.    Default: Survival Analysis

In the following sections, we present the results from the survival analysis. First, we
present the results of the variable selection after which we present and discuss the
regression output. Finally, we present results related to the prediction of default.

5.2.1.    Variable Selection

The stepwise regression used to identify variables which have significant impact on
the hazard rate resulted in an output of 13 variables. When calculating the variance
inflation factor (VIF), the algorithm suggested that our initial model suffered from
multicollinearity. If problems with multicollinearity occur, as in this case, it can be
resolved through the use of a threshold for the VIF. However,  Hair et al.  (2014)
suggests that a VIF below 10 indicates that it is not severe enough to warrant
correction of the model. As such, all variables initially suggested was kept  in the
model, which is presented in table  8.

5.2.2.    Cox Regression Result

The aim when fitting a Cox model to time-to-event data, such as the loan data in this
study, is to estimate the effect of covariates on the baseline hazard function. The
baseline cumulative hazard can be used to calculate the survival probability S(t) for
any borrower at time t, taking its covariate profile12  into account. The hazard
function h(t) is the conditional probability of defaulting at time t having survived to
that time. The  Coefficient  reported in table 8 relates to the hazard, with a positive

12
  Covariate profile represent the specific values for each variable of an individual borrower.

                                  26
sign indicating a higher likelihood of default. In line with our expectations, the Credit
score  covariate has a negative sign and hence a positive impact on survival. The
credit score is assigned by the Lending Platform and a higher score indicates higher
creditworthiness. The  Hazard rate  is the exponentiated coefficient, which is
interpreted such that, everything else equal, a one-unit change in  Interest rate  is
associated with a 11.6%  increase in the hazard rate. A one-unit change in  Credit
score towards the better is however associated with a 13.9% (1-0.861) lower hazard
rate, a direction in line with our prior beliefs. Regarding loan purposes, we expected
loan consolidation to have a  negative impact on survival in line with the study of
Serrano-Cinca  et al. (2015). This turned out not to be the case in our sample, which
could potentially be explained by different  behavioral  patterns of UK and Swedish
borrowers. To test the assumption of proportionality, the Schoenfeld residual was
calculated for each default observation as described in section 4. If the hazards are
in fact proportional, the residuals should be uncorrelated with time. Four of our
explanatory variables, namely  age,  marital status single,  marital status divorced  and
loan purpose none, seem to be correlated with time as they generate significant p-
values. However, as noted by Allison (2014) the proportional hazard assumption is
often a satisfactory approximation even when violated.

 Table 8: Cox regression output
 Covariates:                           Coefficient         Hazard Ratio        SE(Coef)
 Interest rate                             0.110 ***             1.116             0.032
 Credit score                                 -0.149 *               0.861              0.077
 Age                                      -0.012 **              0.988             0.005
 Loan tenure                              0.003 *              1.003             0.002
 Marital status: Single                      0.375 ***              1.455             0.123
 Marital status: Divorced                   0.808 ***              2.244             0.266
 Purpose: Loan Consolidation               -0.414 ***             0.661             0.133
 Purpose: Vehicle                           -0.425 **              0.654             0.194
 Purpose: Marriage                        0.874 *              2.396             0.460
 Purpose: Education                         -1.110               0.329             1.006
 Purpose: Kitchen appliances                0.473               1.605            0.335
 Purpose: None                            1.193 *              3.296            0.717
 Living status: Apartment owner             -0.455 **              0.635             0.187
 N Total = 6178 Event = 291
 Notes: A positive sign of the coefficient indicates a higher probability of default.
 Significance codes: 0.01 ‘***’ 0.05 ‘**’ 0.1 ‘*’

5.2.3.    Predictions Based on the Cox Model

Table 9 displays the cumulative survival function  at mean  of all covariates in the
model. The survival function has a row for every observed time for default, from 3
to 31, in terms of months since origination. The numbers in the Cumulative survival
column are the estimated probabilities of “surviving” to each point in time without

                                  27
defaulting. The survival function can be derived from hazard function and vice versa.
For example, the probability of a loan making it to month 12 without experiencing
default is estimated to be 0.960 with a 95% confidence interval ranging from 0.954
to 0.967. Using this table, we can for example estimate the probability of default
during the second year of the loan tenure, given that the loan has not defaulted after
the first year, i.e. in month 12. This probability of defaulting between month 13 and
24 after origination is calculated as (0.957-0.883)/0.957 = 0.077, indicating a
baseline probability of default at 7.7%. Note that this is a baseline probability, for
any individual borrower the likelihood of default will be affected by the profile of its
explanatory variables.

Table 9: Cumulative survival function
Number of Observations:                        Total          Event
                                              6218          291
    Time       Number at Risk      Number of      Cumulative         SE
                                     Events         Survival
     5           4827            19           0.990         0.0013
     10           2988            14           0.971         0.0026
     12           2416            11           0.960         0.0034
     13           2118             8           0.957         0.0036
     24           500             3           0.883         0.0098
     26           372             3           0.868         0.0115
     30           174             1           0.846         0.0152
     31           141             1           0.838         0.0172
Notes: The complete table with all rows from 3-31 is found in Appendix 2.
Time is number of months since origination. Number at risk represent all borrowers still
at risk in the sample and number of events equals number of defaults each period.
Cumulative survival is the estimated probability of surviving to each time point, with the
standard error presented in column 5.

The survival function presented in table 9 stops at month 31, the last observed time
of default. As such, we cannot tell what the function looks like after that. This causes
a problem when trying to estimate probability of default over the lifetime of some
loans, considering that they can range up to 180 months. To address this problem,
we modified the dependent time variable to be expressed as  a proportion of time13,
rather than actual months since origination. As mentioned in section 4 however, no
literature either supporting or speaking against this approach seem to exist, why
these results should be taken with caution. With the modified time variable, the
estimated probability of survival until the end of the loan tenure would be
somewhere around 70%. The last observed time of default occurs at t = 0.958,

13
  The proportional time variable is calculated as number of months since origination divided by total loan tenure.
Hence, all records take on a number between 0 and 1.

                                  28
meaning that it defaulted near the very end of the loan tenure. Figure 3 displays the
survival curve at mean of all covariates in the model. The instantaneous rate of
event13, i.e. the rate of defaulting at any time  t, is the slope  at that time point of the
survival curve.

Figure 3: Survival curve at mean of all covariates with the time variable
expressed as a proportion of time.

13
   The instantaneous rate of event is calculated as: (S(t)  - S(t + dt)) / dt, where S(t) is the proportion not defaulting at
time t.

                                  29
6.    Conclusion

In this section we will present the conclusions and implications from our empirical
analysis. In addition, we will provide a  few suggestions for further research related
to P2P lending.

6.1.    Concluding Thoughts

Throughout this paper we have been concerned with how to measure returns as
well as the effect on returns of borrowers defaulting on their obligations. Firstly, for
each credit score we constructed a benchmark return unadjusted for default which,
in line with our expectations, indicated that the lower the credit score the higher the
return. Subsequently, we calculated the IRR of the loans for which we had a complete
set of cash flows. In many of the cases, the average IRR was higher than the
maximum benchmark return. Although this was a surprising result, there are
several potential explanations for this disparity. We believe that the most likely
reason is that the Lending Platform have adjusted their fee structure and that our
estimated maximum benchmark return is too low. Another explanation, yet not as
likely, is that our interest payment data is in fact not excluding service fees.
However, this seems doubtful as it has been clearly specified as the amount without
fees. Additionally, when manually inspecting a few loans in the data it is evident that
monthly payments are lower than what the borrower’s interest rate suggests. The
IRR of defaulted loans were found to lie on average around  -78%, indicating that
when a borrower defaults the investor loses  a  significant amount of money.
Furthermore, two points of reference regarding the return of an Autoinvest portfolio
were introduced. On one hand, we considered a case where the platform’s credit loss
fund is non-existent, resulting in an overall estimate of 0.43% yearly return in the
portfolio. On the other hand, we allowed for the credit loss fund to cover the entire
principal amount, making the investor unable to lose money. The  portfolio returns
then soared to a level of 4.95% in average yearly return. However, in reality the
expected return is bound to lie in between these two figures. This is because the CLF
actually covers the principal amount as of today but is unlikely to be able to
reimburse investors fully in times of poor macroeconomic conditions and financial
distress. Whether or not the true expected return is enough to compensate investors
for additional risk beside default is left uncommented. This is mainly because the
data used for our analysis is not enough to give a representative view of the long run
performance of investing in P2P loans on the platform and even more uncertain
when considering the entire Swedish or European market. As a final remark on the
expected returns, we noted that the estimation of PD used when constructing the
default adjusted return of an  Autoinvest portfolio is unlikely to be an ideal
representation of the long run probability of default. Hence, we introduced survival

                                  30
analysis to facilitate further examination of significant factors impacting the hazard
of default. Although our data spanned over a time period not sufficient to predict the
lifetime probabilities of default, we could still potentially gain an understanding of
what  might  affect  the  default  probability.  Consequently,  we  fitted  the  Cox
proportional hazard model on our data and found that both hard figures such as the
interest rate as well as unverifiable information like the purpose of the loan were
significant. For instance, the loan purpose consolidation was found to decrease the
hazard of default in our model which is in line with some of the previous research
(Polena & Regner, 2018). However, another study found contrasting results, i.e. loan
consolidation was instead found to be associated with a slight increase of the hazard
(Serrano-Cinca et al., 2015). For future reference, results could be improved by two
main efforts. Firstly, when data consisting of a higher proportion of matured loans
is available both the prediction accuracy and length can be improved significantly.
Secondly, when the quantity of data increases one could introduce subsets based on
the loan tenure to better capture the probabilities for each length of the loan.

In conclusion, we find that the IRR of repaid loans are generally higher than our
benchmark return, indicating that adjustments have been made to the service fees.
On the other hand, when adjusting for defaults we find an indication that the
weighted annual return of an Autoinvest portfolio should lie between 0.43% to
4.95% depending on the reliability of the platform’s credit loss fund. Additionally,
we find that the default hazard is impacted by both verifiable and unverifiable
information. All in all, we contribute to the existing literature through exploring the
investor’s perspective of P2P lending as well as by researching using data from a
Swedish platform15. The former being under-represented in the existing literature
and the latter being, to the best of our knowledge, previously unseen in the
literature.

6.2.    Suggestions for Further Research

Lastly, we would like to propose  some suggestions for further research of the
investor’s perspective  of  P2P lending. In some ways, this paper was limited to the
properties of the data obtained. For instance, with very few loans being matured it
raises questions regarding the robustness of the results presented. We would like to
encourage research which can validate both the return calculations, but even more
so the survival analysis used in the P2P lending context. As have been shown in this
paper, defaulting loans have an immense impact on the potential for returns. As data
availability increases both quantity wise and time horizon wise, we suggest that the

15
   Note: We would like to comment on the risk of funding bias as we are using data provided by the Lending
Platform. None of the authors receive any kind of financial compensation for the work presented in this paper,
neither are they aware of any other affiliations with the platform, including financial holdings, that may impact
the objectivity of what is presented in this paper.

                                  31
Cox model used in this paper is developed further by incorporating time-varying
covariates. This will allow for the use of macroeconomic factors as covariates,
meaning that one can potentially see the effect on the default hazard of factors such
as GDP-growth, employment and stock market performance. Furthermore, this
would allow for predictions and simulation of how investing in P2P loans might be
affected by an economic depression. Finally, we also suggest that future research is
directed at using modern portfolio theory to investigate the attractiveness of adding
Swedish P2P loans to a market portfolio.

                                  32
7.     References

Aldrich, John H., Nelson, Forrest D., (2006). Linear probability, logit, and probit
models.  Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage Publ. Retrieved from /z-wcorg/

Allen, F., & Santomero, A. M. (1997). The theory of financial intermediation. Journal
    of Banking and Finance, 21(11-12), 1461-1485.
    doi:10.1016/S0378-4266(97)00032-0

Allison, P. D., (2014).  Event history and survival analysis.  Los Angeles: SAGE.
    Retrieved from /z-wcorg/

Amihud, Y., & Mendelson, H. (1986).  Journal of Financial Economics,  (17), 223-249.

Baesens, B., Van Gestel, T., Stepanova, M., Van Den Poel, D., & Vanthienen, J. (2005).
    Neural network survival analysis for personal loan data. Journal of the
    Operational Research Society, 56(9), 1089-1098.
    doi:10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601990

Banasik, J., Crook, J. N., & Thomas, L. C. (1999). Not if but when will borrowers
    default. The Journal of the Operational Research Society, 50(12), 1185-1190.
    doi:10.2307/3010627

Barasinska, N., & Schäfer, D. (2014). Is crowdfunding different? Evidence on the
    relation between gender and funding success from a German peer-to-peer
    lending platform. German Economic Review, 15(4), 436-452.
    doi:10.1111/geer.12052

Bellotti, T., & Crook, J. (2009). Credit scoring with macroeconomic variables using
    survival analysis. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 60(12), p. 1699-
    1707. doi:10.1057/jors.2008.130

Berger, S. C., & Gleisner, F. (2009). Emergence of financial intermediaries in
    electronic markets: The case of online P2P lending. Business Research, 2(1), 39-
   65. doi:10.1007/BF03343528

Berk, Jonathan, DeMarzo, Peter., (2017). Corporate finance
    Retrieved from /z-wcorg/

BIS, Bank for International Settlements. (2005). An explanatory note on the Basel II
    IRB risk weight functions (July ed.). Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International
    Settlements.

Bodie et al., (2014). Investments. New York, N.Y.: Mc-Graw-Hill Education.
    Retrieved from /z-wcorg/

                                  33
Borucka, J. (2014). Methods of handling tied events in the cox proportional hazard
    model. Studia Oeconomica Posnaniensia, (2)

CHEN, L., LESMOND, D. A., & WEI, J. (2007). Corporate yield spreads and bond
    liquidity. The Journal of Finance, 62(1), 119-149.
    doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.2007.01203.x

Cox, D.,  R., Oakes,  D.,  (2018).  Analysis of survival data.

Cox, D. R. (1972). Regression models and life-tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical
    Society. Series B (Methodological), 34(2), 187-220.
    Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2985181

Dean, J., (1962). Capital budgeting. New York; London: Columbia University Press.
    Retrieved from /z-wcorg/

Dirick, L., Claeskens, G., & Baesens, B. (2017). Time to default in credit scoring
     using survival analysis: A benchmark study.  Journal of the Operational
    Research Society, 68(6), 652-665. doi:10.1057/s41274-016-0128-9

Efron, B. (1977). The efficiency of cox's likelihood function for censored data.
    Journal of the American Statistical Association, 72(359), 557-565.
    doi:10.2307/2286217

Ehlers, T., Kong, S., & Zhu, F. (2018). Mapping shadow banking in china: Structure
    and dynamics. BIS Working Paper (701)

Elton, E. J. (1999). Presidential address: Expected return, realized return, and asset
    pricing tests. The Journal of Finance, 54(4), 1199-1220.
    doi:10.1111/0022-1082.00144

European Banking Authority, E. (2016). Final report - draft regulatory technical
    standards on the materiality threshold for credit obligations past due under
      article 178 of regulation (EU) no 575/2013.

Fabozzi, F. J., (2011).  Handbook of finance. volume 3, volume 3.

Freedman,  S., & Jin, G. Z. (2017).  The information value of online social networks:
    Lessons from peer-to-peer lending
    doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijindorg.2016.09.002

Frey, Bruce B., (2018). The sage encyclopedia of educational research, measurement,
    and evaluation. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications. Retrieved from
    /z-wcorg/

Hair, Joseph F., Black, William C., Babin, Barry J., Anderson,  Rolph E.,  (2014).
    Multivariate data analysis. (pp. 205). Harlow, Essex: Pearson.
    Retrieved from /z-wcorg/

                                  34
Havrylchyk, O., & Verdier, M. (2018). The financial intermediation role of the P2P
    lending platforms. Comparative Economic Studies, 60(1), 115-130.
    doi:10.1057/s41294-017-0045-1

Herzenstein, M., Dholakia, U. M., & Andrews, R. L. (2011). Strategic herding
     behavior in peer-to-peer loan auctions
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2010.07.001

Hildebrand, T., Puri, M., & Rocholl, J. (2014). Adverse incentives in crowdfunding.
    Management Science, 63(3)

Holmstrom, B., & Tirole, J. (1997). Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the
    real sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 663-691. Retrieved
    from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2951252

Hornby, L., & Zhang, A. (2018, December 27).  Financial Times,

Keys, B. J., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., & Vig, V. (2010). Did securitization lead to lax
     screening? evidence from subprime loans.  The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    125(1), 307-362. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/40506283

Koletsi, D., & Pandis, N. (2017). Survival analysis, part 3: Cox regression.  American
    Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, 152(5), 722-723.

Lane, W. R., Looney, S. W., & Wansley, J. W. (1986). An application of the cox
     proportional hazards model to bank failure.  Journal of Banking and Finance,
    10(4), 511-531. doi:10.1016/S0378-4266(86)80003-6

XXXXXX. Avkastning & avgifter. Retrieved May, 2019,
    from https://XXXXXX.se/avkastning-avgifter

XXXXXX. (2019a). Retrieved May, 2019,
    from https://XXXXXX.se/hur-investerar-man

XXXXXX. (2019b). Retrieved April, 2019,
    from https://XXXXXX.se/Invest/Backup

Lending Club. Retrieved May, 2019, from
    https://www.lendingclub.com/landing/about-nar-2.action

Milne, Alistair K. L. and Parboteeah, Paul. (2016). The business models and
     economics of peer-to-peer lending.  ECRI Research Report,  No 17

Morse, A. (2015). Peer-to-peer crowdfunding: Information and the potential for
     disruption in consumer lending.  Annual Review of Financial Economics,  (7),
    463-482. doi:10.1146/annurev-financial-111914-041939

                                  35
Namvar, E. (2014). An introduction to peer-to-peer loans as investments.  Journal of
    Investment Management, (First Quarter 2014)

Philippon, T. (2015). Has the US finance industry become less efficient? on the
     theory and measurement of financial intermediation.  The American Economic
    Review, 105(4), 1408-1438. Retrieved from
    http://www.jstor.org/stable/43495423

Polena, M., & Regner, T. (2018). Determinants of borrowers’ default in P2P lending
    under consideration of the loan risk class. Games, 9(4)
    doi:10.3390/g9040082

Rapp, B.  (1980). The internal rate of return method  -  A critical study.  Engineering
    Costs and Production Economics, 5(1), 43-52.
    doi:10.1016/0167-188X(80)90017-8

Rich, S. P., & Rose, J. T. (2014). Re-examining an old question: Does the IRR method
    implicitly assume a reinvestment rate? Journal of Financial Education, 40(1),
    152-166. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/24331033

Schoenfeld, D. (1982). Partial residuals for the proportional hazards regression
    model. Biometrika, 69(1), 239-241.
    doi:10.1093/biomet/69.1.239

Serrano-Cinca, C., Gutiérrez-Nieto, B., & López-Palacios, L. (2015). Determinants of
    default in P2P Lending. PloS One, 10(10)

Souder, W. E. (1973). Utility and perceived acceptability of R&D project selection
    models. Management Science, 19(12), 1384-1394.
    doi:10.1287/mnsc.19.12.1384

                                  36
8.    Appendix

8.1.    Appendix  1

 Appendix 1: Variables and description
 Variable Name               Description
     A.   Loan Characteristics
 Loan ID                       Key for identification of each loan
 Interest rate                    Floating annual interest rate paid by the borrower
 Risk class                       Grade from A-F assigned to the loan by the Lending Platform
 Disbursed amount              Monetary amount paid out to the borrower
 Loan tenure                   Loan tenure in months
 Fee                         Monetary origination fee to be paid by the borrower
 Origination month              Loan origination month
 Loan purpose                 Purpose of the loan, categorized by business, divorce, education, home
                                    electronics, home improvement, kitchen appliances, loan consolidation,
                                 marriage, move, NA, none, other, personal health, real estate, renovation,
                                    vacation and vehicle
 Reporting month               Record reporting month
 Time since origination           Number of months since origination
 Remaining tenure              Number of months until maturity
 Outstanding amount            Borrowers current outstanding amount (including origination fee)
 Principal amount               Monthly principal amount paid by the borrower
 Interest payment amount         Monthly interest amount received by the lender
 1 day past due                  Dummy variable if ever 1 day delinquent
 30 days past due                Dummy variable if ever 30 days delinquent
 60 days past due                Dummy variable if ever 60 days delinquent
 90 days past due                Dummy variable if ever 90 days delinquent
 Amount 1 day past due           Outstanding amount when 1 day delinquent
 Amount 30 days past due         Outstanding amount when 30 days delinquent
 Amount 60 days past due         Outstanding amount when 60 days delinquent
 Amount 90 days past due         Outstanding amount when 90 days delinquent
 Written off                    Dummy variable if loan is written off by the Lending Platform
 Amount written off              Outstanding principal amount when written off
 Completed loan                Dummy variable if matured or paid off early
     B.   Borrower Characteristics
 Age                         Borrower age at origination date
 UC score                      Credit score collected from UC
 Employment status             Employment status, categorized by employed per hour, job seeker,
                                   pensioner, pensioner early, pensioner sick, permanent employee,
                                     probation, self-employed and temporary employment
 Monthly income                Monthly income, reported by the borrower
 Living status                  Living status, categorized by apartment owner, house owner, renting,
                                   second hand renting, shared living and weekend cottage
 Marital status                 Marital status, categorized by apart, divorced, married, none, cohabitant,
                                 single and widower
 Notes: Borrower and loan characteristics are reported once are hence constant over time, payment
 information is reported monthly.

                                  37
8.2.    Appendix 2

Appendix 2: Cumulative survival function
Number of Observations:                        Total          Event
                                              9931          451
    Time       Number at Risk      Number of      Cumulative         SE
                                     Events         Survival
     3           5935            16           0.998         0.0004
     4           5324            39           0.993         0.0010
     5           4827            19           0.990         0.0013
     6           4369            17           0.987         0.0015
     7           3972            18           0.983         0.0018
     8           3602            23           0.978         0.0022
     9           3239            10           0.975         0.0024
     10           2988            14           0.971         0.0026
     11           2729            20           0.964         0.0031
     12           2416            11           0.960         0.0034
     13           2118             8           0.957         0.0036
     14           1903             8           0.953         0.0039
     15           1693            13           0.946         0.0045
     16           1557            12           0.938         0.0050
     17           1410             6           0.934         0.0053
     18           1223             5           0.930         0.0056
     19           1058            11           0.921         0.0064
     20           932             7           0.914         0.0069
     21           835             7           0.906         0.0075
     22           729             5           0.900         0.0081
     23           612             7           0.889         0.0091
     24           500             3           0.883         0.0098
     25           422             3           0.876         0.0106
     26           372             3           0.868         0.0115
     27           332             2           0.862         0.0123
     28           282             1           0.858         0.0129
     29           218             1           0.853         0.0138
     30           174             1           0.846         0.0152
     31           141             1           0.838         0.0172
Notes: Time is number of months since origination. Number at risk represent all
borrowers still at risk in the sample and number of events equals number of defaults each
period. Cumulative survival is the estimated probability of surviving to each time point,
with the standard error presented in column 5.

                                  38