THE ROLE OF VENTURE
CAPITAL FUNDING ON IPO
UNDERPRICING

A STUDY ON U.S. IPOs BETWEEN 1985 AND 2020

AXEL KOTNIK

JULIUS TÄRNING

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO  Underpricing: A Study on U.S. IPOs
Between 1985 and 2020

Abstract:

       IPO underpricing is a historical phenomenon that has  cost entrepreneurs billions of
       dollars as their companies are undervalued on average when taken public.  This paper
       primarily serves to  provide an in-depth analysis  on  the effect  that  venture capital-
       funding  has  on IPO underpricing  when also  controlling  for VC-firms' bias towards
       high-tech industries. Secondly, we give a contemporary perspective on the phenomenon
       by including observations  from 2006 to 2020.  We  show  that the  framework  our
       methodology  is based on  exhibits multicollinearity in its original form, and that its
        unadjusted  venture capital-variable likely absorbs the effect of firms being in high-tech
       industries as a result of the large overlap among their observations. The unadjusted VC-
       variable is also shown to provide no explanatory power to the model in large. Our
        constructed non-tech VC-variable  indicates,  although  insignificantly,  that venture-
       capital funding contributes to less underpricing, while the unadjusted  VC-variable
      shows  the opposite. This implies that companies and their founders should not assume
       that venture capital funding  damages  future IPO prospects by inducing underpricing.
       Finally, a general increase in IPO underpricing and volatility is observed between 2006
       and 2020, while their  respective  correlations with  firm-specific  characteristics  and own
        past values have decreased. This suggests that other,  unexplored factors have become
       relatively more important  in  IPO underpricing in recent years.

Keywords: Initial public  offering, IPO underpricing, Venture Capital, Equity Capital
Markets, Company Valuation

Authors:
Axel Kotnik (24179)
Julius Tärning (24062)

Tutor:
Adrien  d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:
Adrien  d´Avernas, Assistant  Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Axel Kotnik and Julius Tärning, 2020
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Introduction

Initial public offering  (IPO)  underpricing, which  gives rise to a surge in  stock price
immediately following an IPO, is a phenomenon that has long confounded researchers in
finance. Despite its well documented history, there is conflicting evidence on the driving forces
behind IPO underpricing, which can be seen not only in its  continued occurrence, but in its
even larger magnitude today. To date, the most comprehensive and detailed framework for
predicting underpricing in IPOs has been constructed by Lowry, Officer & Schwert (2010).

Lowry et al. (2010) has developed a holistic  model to predict IPO underpricing, which
formulates initial returns as a function of firm-specific characteristics, its previous values in
time, and market-wide volatility in asset pricing. Their firm-specific characteristics are proxies
for information asymmetry, which by nature should make a company more difficult to value
for an underwriter, thus resulting in its offer price being set inaccurately. This inaccuracy most
often reflects in  lower  than market valuations in reality since information asymmetry  is costly
to investors, who are then compensated for this by a surge in stock price the days following the
IPO.

One of the examined variables was if a firm is  backed by a venture capital-firm  (VC) or not.
The intuition is that the involvement of a venture  capital-firm should mitigate information
asymmetry due to them sharing insight and knowledge about the prospect with the underwriter,
but previous research on the subject is conflicting; some find that VC-backed firms are more
underpriced at listing  on average  (Megginson & Weiss, 1991) and some find evidence to the
contrary (Hasan & Francis, 2001). Lowry et al. (2010) finds, against their hypothesis and in
line with Megginson & Weiss (1991), that VC-backing induces underpricing. However, they
are skeptical  of this result as they believe the variable might unintentionally pick up a “risky
industry effect” due to venture capitalists’  bias towards high-risk sectors, whose companies by
nature are complex and difficult to value, thus leading to higher underpricing.

Earlier research has thus failed to provide a definite  answer as to what the true  effect of venture
capital-backing on IPO underpricing  is, and is worth delving deeper into for the following
reasons. Entrepreneurs and their co-investors consistently miss out on up to 20% of equity
value due to underpricing, and Ljungqvist (2007) shows that the phenomenon has drained pre-
IPO investors of US $125 billion during their 20 years of measurement. For the founders, taking
their company public often serves as an exit opportunity,  and as such,  it is of utmost importance
for them to understand the mechanics behind underpricing: that way they can mitigate it and
realize maximal returns when going public. While most of the variables measured by Lowry et
al. (2010) are out of the entrepreneurs' control to some extent (firm age, industry, underwriter
rank, market-wide volatility, etc.), accepting venture capital is a choice, and information about
its effect on their IPO prospects is information they can act upon. From  a macro-perspective,
understanding the effect of VC-backing is becoming increasingly important: between 2005 and
2020, 39% of firms taken public were backed by venture capital in our dataset, a rise from 33%
between 1985 and 2005 when including the dot-com  bubble and 29% without it (also see
appendix A). In summary,  the effect  of venture capital-backing on underpricing is arguably the
most important variable in  this  model for investors  that are eventually looking to go public.  It
is  also playing a increasingly larger role in  any model that  serves to predict  IPO underpricing.

Our contribution is appropriately done following the framework developed by Lowry et al.
(2010), as their model is the most sophisticated and comprehensive  on the subject  as of today.

                                     3
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

To capture the true effect of VC-backing, and mitigate the potential “risky industry effect”, we
alter their VC-variable by disqualifying venture capital-backed IPOs that also belong to a high-
tech industry.  Thus,  our proxy for “risky industry” is the tech industry, a decision intuitively
motivated by the technological complexity and innovativeness of  such  firms' products, which
limits the predictability of their returns and requires a risk premium  for investors. Empirically
this is demonstrated in that high-tech firms receive less funding from traditional financial
intermediaries (Guiso, 1998) and a larger than average share of venture capital (Lee & Wahal,
2004). This is evident in the overlap of VC-funded and tech-orientation  firms  in our dataset, in
which only 18% of VC-backed firms are not high-tech, and 35% of tech firms are not backed
by venture capital. Additionally, we hope to improve the specification of the model and thereby
increase the overall understanding of IPO underpricing through this alteration as well: the large
intersection  in data  for  the variables Tech and VC raises suspicions of multicollinearity, as
Tech is another explanatory variable used by Lowry et al. (2010). Finally, the previously
mentioned rise in venture capital  funding combined with an increasing share of IPOs being
tech companies highlight the increasing importance to correctly specify both Tech and VC.
Our research question follows:

       To what extent does venture capital-funding in companies  contribute to higher IPO
        underpricing and volatility  in initial returns  when controlled for  belonging to a high-
       tech industry?

We find that the old VC-variable, which includes tech firms, provides no explanatory power to
the model. This implies  that entrepreneurs and investors should not assume that VC induces
strong IPO underpricing, as implied by the large and positive VC-coefficient in Lowry et al.
(2010). However, the true effect of venture capital-funding, i.e. the effect of the non-tech VC-
variable, is still uncertain. The large intersection between VC-backed and high-tech firms
reduces the number of observations for the non-tech VC-variable to a few hundred, and no
significant result is obtained. As a pointer, its value was consistently negative and close to zero,
unlike the regular VC-coefficient in Lowry et al. (2010). However, the  regular VC-coefficient
did converge (although insignificantly) to a negative value close to zero in our final
ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) regression,  thus  becoming almost identical to the non-tech  VC-
variable. The additional data  on IPOs  from 2005 to 2020 differs from previous years in that it
is not as  well explained by neither firm-specific characteristics nor its lagged values, despite
underpricing and volatility being  higher during the period. This suggests that these firm-
specific characteristics as proxies for information asymmetry and past average underpricing
are less important for predictions today, and  even that  perhaps other methodologies should be
considered for future research. Unlike Lowry et al. (2010), this paper did not investigate overall
market volatility as a variable, which may be of larger importance today.

                                     4
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Literature Review

This section will provide an overview of previous findings on IPO underpricing in general, and
a summary of the article written by Lowry et al. (2010) in particular, whose theory and research
this paper will be based on.  Finally,  this section will discuss literature on the properties of
venture capital funding  in IPO contexts.

The fact that IPOs are underpriced on average is well documented in literature and has been
studied extensively  (Dong, Michel, & Pandes, 2011). Although the underwriter, which sets the
IPO offer price, is highly informed about a given IPO prospect's operations and  accordingly  its
equity  value, the  final  price of a firm is always defined by  market demand. Therefore, public
investors  constitute aggregate demand and they will always determine  a firm’s  correct  market
price,  which almost always results  in an  ex-post  price  discrepancy (Rock, 1986).

Beatty & Ritter (1986)  develops on Rock  (1986) by investigating the effect of firm-specific
characteristics as  uncertainty proxies on IPO offer price. As can be expected, pricing errors are
larger in magnitude when  companies with uncertainty-yielding characteristics go public. They
also find that firms with large pricing errors  also tend to be underpriced  rather than  overpriced,
implying that the investors' cost of being uninformed prior to an IPO is  later  compensated by
higher initial returns.

Numerous studies have explored how IPO underpricing has developed over time and the
reasons behind the phenomenon itself.  Loughran & Ritter (2004) examined  trends in  IPO
underpricing  during the period  1990 to 2000 in particular. They  found  that IPO underpricing
increased towards the end, reaching a peak during the dot-com bubble of 1998 to 2000, a period
commonly referred to as the “IPO bubble period” in literature.

The article authored by Lowry et al. (2010), published in  The Journal of Finance, develops a
new and more complete method  of evaluating IPO underpricing that  incorporates firm-specific
asymmetry, time-patterns, and overall market volatility as explanatory variables. Their  paper
documents IPOs from 1965 to 2005 and examines both IPO monthly  average initial returns
and the  standard deviation of these initial returns, the latter being an  unexplored concept
priorly. They find a strong correlation between the two variables across time, i.e. that months
with high levels of initial returns also exhibit high volatility in these returns. While the
correlation is strongest during the  IPO  bubble period, they find a significant and prevailing
positive correlation across all examined periods. These results  demonstrate  the complex
mechanics  behind  IPO underpricing  and  advocates  for the use of volatility as part of the
equation.

Building on previous literature, they examine  firm-specific proxy variables for information
asymmetry  (uncertainty)  as  explanatory  variables  for  the  level  and  volatility  of  IPO
underpricing. While they considered most variables to be relatively uncontroversial in terms of
their  definitions and results, they became doubtful of their  VC-variable. They suspected  that  it
mistakenly  picked up a “risky industry effect” since venture capital firms are often biased
towards industries  defined by  high growth and riskiness. This proposition was not examined
further.

The empirical evidence  of  the effect that venture capital funding has  on IPO underpricing  is
conflicting. Megginson & Weiss (1991) find that firms backed by venture capital experience

                                     5
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

significantly lower underpricing than those who receive no venture capital funding. Evidence
presented by Hasan & Francis (2001) suggests the complete opposite, i.e.  that  firms who
receive  funding  from venture capital firms tend to have higher initial returns than the control
group  on average.

Contribution and Limitations

The results presented by Lowry et al. (2010) suggest that IPO underpricing is related to both
firm-specific factors and  market-wide factors. Our intention is to contribute to this article and
prior  research in two ways:

    (1)  We will examine a larger time set, by extending the data to 2020. In this regard, our
       paper is intended for anybody interested in  the  behavior  of IPO underpricing  and
       volatility from a more recent perspective. We  will combine these new results  with a
       methodological  replication on the same time set of Lowry et al. (2010), to ensure
       comparability.

    (2)  To isolate the true effect of venture capital on IPO underpricing, i.e. eliminate the risky
       industry effect, we will replicate the regressions in Lowry et al. (2010) with a VC
        variable that excludes high-tech firms.  By defining “risky industry” as high-tech
       industries, we also hope to improve the model in its entirety by eliminating potential
        multicollinearity.

For our thesis, we will not reconstruct the section in Lowry et al. (2010) that incorporates
market-wide uncertainty in equity securities as an explanatory variable for IPO underpricing.
Although this limits the scope of our paper, it is not relevant with regards to the effect of venture
capital-backing in IPOs.

Another limitation is that we lack information regarding firms' age and underwriter ranks, both
of which were firm-specific proxies for information asymmetry in Lowry et al. (2010). As an
implication, there may be slight discrepancies between the  coefficients in our regressions and
those in Lowry et al. (2010).

                                     6
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Methodology

We collected our data from the Securities Data Company database (SDC Platinum), which
contains information on IPOs ranging from 1985 to 2020 on the U.S. stock market. Lowry et
al. (2010)  mainly used SDC data in their article as well,  but complemented this with  a few
hand-collected datasets. We chose not  to include these as they  (1)  mostly covered IPOs prior
to 1985,  (2) only  a negligible share of their data came from these sources, and  (3) because the
datasets often covered the same IPOs. As can be seen in Table I, the unfiltered file from SDC
provides us  with 10 058 observations. 7 820 of the observations are from the period 1985 to
2005 and 2 238 observations  are  from the period 2006 to 2020.

In total, we have removed 2 745 misguiding observations. This includes all class A-issues, for
which there are always corresponding class B-issues, which otherwise would result in  the
double-counting of some IPOs. In addition to this, we have removed  shares that were traded
over-the-counter (OTC), as well as different types of  financial  funds  and instruments  found in
the original dataset. Lastly, we have removed a handful of observations containing  faulty
information, including stocks being listed on a non-American exchange or those with apparent
incorrect  information about their  offer price or stock price.

With these adjustments in place, we arrived at a total of 7 312 unique IPOs with 5 785
observations from 1985 to 2005 and 1 527 observations from 2006 to 2020.

                                       Table I
                             Sources  of IPO data, 1985-2020
Below is a summary of our dataset  from  the different subperiods. Data available is defined as class-B issues on
Nasdaq or NYSE with correct data.

The specific information we have collected for the firms  taken public are: (1) the final price of
the issue; (2) the stock price four weeks after the first trading day; (3) if the firm is listed on
Nasdaq or the New York Stock Exchange; (4) if the company's core business is defined as
high-tech (for instance, if  a business model focusing on telecommunication or data processing
services); (5) if the firm has received venture capital; (7) the total number of shares issued, and;
(8) the middle range offer price as  filed  in the  company’s IPO  prospectus.

After filtering the dataset, we have grouped the IPOs by the month they were taken public. For
example, if ten companies performed their IPO during March 2007, their average value is used
as a single data point defined as “March 2007”. Although our data points are ordered
chronologically in our analysis, the fact that some months had no IPOs at all means our data is
not always equally spaced in time.

This paper has been structured into three separate chapters whose results are contingent upon
each other in the following order:

   I.     Descriptive Analysis

                                     7
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

  II.     Cross-Sectional Analysis
 III.    Time-Series Analysis

 I.    Descriptive Analysis

Following the methodology of Lowry et al. (2010), we define an IPO's initial return (IR) as the
percentage difference between the offer price and the stock price four weeks after listing to
avoid the influence of underwriters' price stabilization measures  on the stock price the
immediate days following the offering (Ruud 1993; Hanley, Kumar, & Seguin 1993). Our data
supports this decision as well; using the stock price one day after the offer, we find that 57%
of IPOs have initial returns between  -10% to 10%, compared to only 43% if we use the stock
price one month after. Furthermore, the share of IPOs with initial returns less than  -10% is
substantially smaller one day later compared to one month later (4% versus 13% respectively).
Therefore, we use the stock price 31 days after going public.

For a given month, i.e. a given data point, the term “average IPO initial return” is defined as
follows:

                   where  i  denotes month  i,  n  denotes the total number of
                   companies going public that month, and  j  denotes the
                    IPO of company  j

By grouping our data into monthly averages, we can test for correlations between average IPO
initial returns  and the standard deviation of IPO initial returns for a single data point. The
monthly standard deviation of IPO initial returns  is defined as the standard deviation of that
month's individual companies' IPO initial returns. Without grouping our data into months, we
would only have a single initial return per data point, which cannot yield a standard deviation.

For a given month, i.e. a given data point, the term “standard deviation of IPO initial returns”
is defined as follows:

                   where  i  denotes month  i,  n  denotes the total number of
                   companies going public that month, and  j  denotes the
                    IPO of company  j

Throughout our sample, twelve separate months contain only one IPO, which means there are
no monthly standard deviations  for these data points. This is the  tradeoff between using larger
groups (e.g. quarters, half-years, years),  which generates  standard deviations for every period,
and using  smaller groups (e.g.  months),  which generates  more data points. Our decision to
group monthly partially stems from following  the methodology of  Lowry et al. (2010), and
partially from our desire to generate more insightful findings from having more data points.

                                     8
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Lastly in this section, we have performed autocorrelation tests with different lags for the two
variables average and standard deviation  of monthly IPO initial returns. This will provide an
indication as to whether the two are correlated and how the data behaves over time.

II.    Cross-Sectional Analysis

In this section, we examine firm-specific characteristics that may explain the results from
section I. The variables were chosen following Lowry et al. (2010) and  act as  proxies  for
information asymmetry  in a company  in  anticipation of  its IPO. More information asymmetry
should  increase  the returns and standard deviation  of returns  after  an IPO  due to the cost of
being uninformed as an investor. For our extension, we have added a non-tech VC-variable.

Four of our explanatory variables in our raw data set are dummy variables (VC, non-tech VC,
Tech, NYSE). For example, a company is either backed by venture capital (VC = 1) or it is not
(VC = 0). To transform these into monthly, non-binary variables  that are useful in regressions,
we  calculate  each  month’s  percentage  share  of firms with  a given  quality. For example,  in  a
month where three out of four companies are backed by venture capital, our VC-variable takes
a value of 0,75.

Two of our explanatory variables are continuous variables for each individual company
(Log(shares), Absolute price update). To transform these into monthly variables, the average
variable  value amongst the firms  in  the month is used.

Firstly, we examine the variables’ individual correlations with the two dependent variables (the
mean  and standard deviation of IPO initial returns)  over time. This provides an indicative
estimate of their significance and explanatory value. Secondly, we model the variables jointly
through regressions on the  mean  and standard deviation of IPO initial returns. This is done
through both ordinary least-squares (OLS) regressions and maximum likelihood-estimations
(MLE) of  coefficients generated in  weighted least-squares (WLS) regressions using the
standard deviations of the residuals as weights. For the WLS, the log of the variance of the
residuals  is  assumed  to  be  linearly  related  to  the  firm-specific  characteristics,  which
circumvents the problem of  receiving  biased standard errors if the variance of the residuals is
not constant. The fit of the two models will be compared using log-likelihoods and Akaike
Information Criterions (AICs), which is essentially log-likelihoods penalized for added model
complexity (i.e. more explanatory variables).

The equation for the mean of IPO initial returns in the WLS model follows:

The equation for the natural logarithm of the variance of the residuals in the WLS model
follows:

                                     9
 The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

III.    Time-Series Analysis

 In the final section of our analysis, we model our cross-sectional data as a time-series process.
 This is based on the theory that in times when there is a high degree  of uncertainty and
 mispricing in IPOs (i.e. high average and standard deviation of IPO initial returns), concurrent
 valuations are less reliable and thus the following months should be characterized by
 uncertainty as well (Lowry et al.,  2010). In short, the average and standard deviation  of  IPO
 initial returns are now modeled as a function of both firm specific characteristics and their own
 lagged values.

 Potential time-series patterns in the mean of IPO initial returns will be modeled  with an
 autoregressive moving average model ARMAX(p,q), which is a Box & Jenkins (1976) ARMA-
 process that includes explanatory variables in the regression. The autoregressive term AR(p)
 models the structural disturbances (as the model assumes some parts of the residuals to be
 predictable, these are called structural disturbances) as a process of their lagged values. The
 moving average term MA(p) models the white noise-disturbances in the residuals as a process
 of past values. Consider a regression with time-dependent residuals  μt:

 An ARMAX(p,q)-process assumes the residuals  μt  follow:

                  Where  𝜖𝑡  are  the residuals of the residuals, generated by a random white-noise
                process.

 To specify the ARMAX-model correctly, it is required to make sure the series is stationary (i.e.
 the level of initial returns remains roughly constant throughout our data). As can be seen in
 Figure 2 further into the paper, the initial returns in our sample are sufficiently stationary. The
 order of  p  (how many lags the AR-term should include) and the order of  q  (how many lags the
 MA-term should include) is set as the last significant lag (with 95% confidence) in an
 autocorrelation function and partial autocorrelation function of the data, respectively. For our
 data, both  p  and  q  are determined to be optimally set as 1.

 Potential time-series patterns in the standard deviation of IPO initial returns will be modeled
 with an autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity ARCH(m) model (Engle, 1982), which
 models the variance of the residuals, rather than the residuals  themselves, as a Box & Jenkins
 (1976) autoregressive (AR) process. In a regular OLS regression,  the conditional variance of
 the error terms is assumed to be constant and equal to the unconditional variance. With an
 ARCH(m)-process, the conditional variance of the error term is not constant and depends on
 prior error terms, but the unconditional variance is still constant. Consider a regression with
 time-dependent residuals  μt:

                                     10
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

An ARCH(m)-process assumes the variance of the residuals follows:

In addition to  the using  AIC-scores  and log-likelihood to measure the fit of our models, Ljung-
Box tests (Ljung & Box, 1978) will be performed on the autocorrelation function of the models'
predictions. Ljung-Box tests measure the autocorrelation of the residuals and is thus a diagnosis
for how well a model functions with regards to its own, past values. If autocorrelation has been
modelled adequately,  the Ljung-Box should become lower.

                                     11
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Empirical Results

  I.    Descriptive Analysis

Figure 1 shows the summary statistics for the individual companies' IPO initial returns in our
sample, in addition to a normal distribution with identical mean and standard deviation. The
data is defined by high kurtosis and a positive skew, and 64% of observations are found to have
an initial return between  -10% and 30%.

Figure 1.  Frequency distribution of IPO initial returns (1985  -2020).  Histogram displaying the distribution of
IPO initial returns for our sample compared with a normal distribution.

Figure 2 displays monthly means and standard deviations of IPO initial returns from  1985  to
2020. Visually the two appear to be strongly positively correlated, where a month with high
initial returns on average also has a high dispersion of returns,  which is in line with Lowry et
al. (2010). This is confirmed by testing their correlation, as seen in Table II. For our entire
sample period, the correlation between average IPO initial returns  and the cross-sectional
standard deviations  of these returns is 0,886. Looking at Figure 2, the time period 1998 to 2000
is characterized by uniquely high average initial returns and standard deviations. This will, in
line with  Loughran & Ritter (2004), hereafter be referred to as the “IPO Bubble Period”
(September 1998 to August 2000). By including  this period, the correlation between the level
and volatility of IPO initial returns dramatically rises, which is why it is excluded or captured
in a separate dummy variable in subsequent analyses. For our time extension, there is no need
to classify another bubble period, as the level and volatility in initial returns seem to be fairly
modest and consistent. We do find a somewhat general increase in mean and standard deviation
across the extended time set  however.

                                     12
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Figure 2: Monthly mean and standard deviation of IPO initial returns and the number of IPOs by month. The
mean for a given month is calculated as the average initial return  for a month, defined as the  average  percentage
change between the offer price and the stock price 31 days later  for all companies that went public that month.
The standard deviation  for a given month is calculated on the initial returns of the companies in that month.

Table II  provides further insight into the characteristics of  the  monthly means and standard
deviations of initial returns  that are  displayed in Figure 2. As can be seen in  Table II,  we have
divided the dataset in four different  time  periods.

We find the  correlation between  IPO  initial returns and the standard deviation  of IPO initial
returns  to be strong across the four examined periods. The correlation for our time extension
(2006 to 2020) is 0,773. When assessing the entire time sample (1985 to 2020) we  find a
correlation of 0,886. The correlation is slightly weaker, 0,684, when excluding the IPO bubble
period (August 1998 to September 2000). These results are consistent with the visual
representation seen in Figure 2.

To gain an insight into our extended time period 2006 to 2020, it is most useful to  compare it
to the entire sample period while omitting the bubble period. Between these two subsets, the
average and mean of IPO initial returns has increased in 2006 to 2020.

                                       Table II
 Descriptive  Statistics on the monthly mean and volatility of IPO initial returns (with lags)
Descriptive statistics on the cross-sectional averages and standard deviations of monthly IPO initial returns are
displayed. The correlations (Pearson correlation coefficient)  are calculated on the average and the standard
deviation (𝜎) of monthly initial returns.

                                     13
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Both variables exhibit strong autocorrelation when assessing the  full time  period  and including
the bubble period  (1985-2020). When  excluding  the bubble  period (1985-2020 omitting
bubble), we see a significant drop in  autocorrelation  amongst  average IPO initial returns and
cross-sectional standard deviation  respectively, which suggests bubble periods could be
classified as periods with  (1)  high means and  high  standard deviations of IPO initial returns,
and  (2)  high autocorrelation. The autocorrelations in  the extended time period 2006 to 2020 is
lower than in all other time periods  for all lags,  and close to non-existent for  some lags.
Although the time period 2006 to 2020 displays high returns and standard deviations, it also
exhibits very low autocorrelation and will thus not be considered another bubble period. The
time-dependent factor of IPO returns will be explored further in section III.

 II.    Cross-Sectional Analysis

Previous literature (Rock, 1984) has proposed the idea that  some companies are characterized
by larger  information asymmetry  prior to their IPOs, and should as such experience higher
variability  in  their immediate  returns. Additionally,  ex-ante information asymmetry should
yield  higher initial returns  as investors are compensated for the cost of being uninformed.

What observable factors impact the information  available  about a given firm prior to its  IPO?
An established firm that has been covered by analysts for years should theoretically be easier
to price for an investment bank a priori to its IPO. In contrast, a young, high-technology firm
whose valuation mostly depends on its future growth potential should theoretically be more
difficult to price. Suppose some periods on average are characterized by a higher share of IPOs
with characteristics that in theory makes them more difficult to value. This would, as shown
by Lowry et al. (2010), result in some periods having higher initial returns and higher initial
return volatility.

In order to quantify this reasoning and make it measurable, we will examine the relation
between initial returns and a set of variables that each should contribute to making an IPO more
difficult to value. Following Lowry et al. (2010) to the best of our ability, given the constraints
of our dataset,  we have constructed a list of  firm-specific characteristics  in Table III.

                                       Table III
                       Definition of variables used in our regression
Displays what values the variables take for each firm depending on its firm-specific characteristics.

                                     14
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

The theoretical hypotheses as to why these characteristics should have an effect on an
underwriter's ability to accurately value a given firm follow (Lowry et al., 2010):

NYSE. The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) is considered more prestigious and comes with
a heftier price tag. This results in more established firms being listed on NYSE and more
growth-oriented firms being listed on  other exchanges,  which should impair the  underwriter’s
ability to  correctly value firms listing on other exchanges. Our hypothesis is thus that the
average and standard deviation of initial returns should be lower for firms listed on NYSE.

Tech. Valuing tech firms are often more difficult due to the  uncertainty of their future growth
prospects (Kohers & Kohers, 2004). A general misunderstanding of technological innovations
and their predicted success is the main factor that drives uncertainty (Luigi, 1998).  Therefore,
our hypothesis is that tech-oriented firms are more difficult to value, and tech firms will have
higher and more volatile initial returns on average.

VC. Lowery et al. (2010) made the initial assumption that firms should be easier to value when
venture capital firms are involved due to  their extensive due diligence on prospective
investments. However, following their opposite results, and due to the potential risky industry
effect and large overlap amongst tech and VC-backed firms in our sample, we hypothesize that
this variable will follow the Tech variable closely both in terms of  magnitude and direction,
and thus the VC variable should increase the average and standard deviation of IPO initial
returns.

Non-tech VC.  The non-tech VC variable will attempt to diminish the risky industry effect that
the former VC variable may suffer from and thus capture the true nature of VC firms' effect on
IPO initial returns. Our assessment, as detailed previously, is that the tech industry is the best
                                 1
proxy for “risky industry” . Our hypothesis is that  non-tech VC as a variable diminishes
information asymmetry and thus yields lower averages and standard deviations of IPO initial
returns.

1
  One could argue that the reverse method could be  used, i.e. having a non-VC tech-variable.  However, this  is not
the case  as the business idea (if it is tech or not) comes before the company receives venture capital-backing.

                                     15
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Log(shares).  Underwriters  should  theoretically  experience  difficulty  in  valuing  smaller
offerings since smaller companies naturally cannot offer as detailed information a priori to their
IPO as larger ones. Thus, our hypothesis is that months with  larger share offers should
experience smaller and less volatile initial returns.

Absolute Price Update. This parameter can  be regarded as a proxy for how  much new
information is learned  about the firm during the registration period. Higher uncertainty about
a given company's value should therefore translate into a higher value for this variable, and
thus result in higher averages and standard deviations of initial returns.

In Table IV we  outline  the correlations  between average initial returns and standard deviation
of initial returns with the firm-specific characteristics. Firstly, one  observes that most of the
firm-specific  characteristics are not significantly correlated during the 2006 to 2020 period.
Accordingly, we will not analyze this period by itself  from now on, but solely as a part of our
entire sample from 1985 to 2020. The total period will be compared to the earlier subperiod
1985 to 2005 to gain insight into the changes that have occurred from 2006 and onwards, and
also for comparison with the results from Lowry et al. (2010), whose time period  is  1981 to
2005.

                                    Table IV
Correlations between monthly average initial returns and standard deviations and monthly
                                  market characteristics
The Pearson correlation coefficients are calculated for the average and standard deviation of monthly initial returns
and the average monthly characteristics. For the dummy variables (NYSE, Tech, VC, non-tech VC, NASDAQ),
the monthly characteristic is calculated as the percent of IPOs in that month that were categorized as 1. For the
continuous variables (Log(shares), Price update), the monthly characteristic is calculated as the average value of
the companies' values for those variables. The parentheses below the correlation coefficients are robust p-values.

                                     16
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

A quick overview of Table IV tells us that all correlations are weaker in our entire period, 1985
to 2020, when  compared to the 1985 to 2005 subperiod. Additionally, no particular variable
has decreased or increased in relative magnitude either. This indicates that other factors beyond
information asymmetry in individual IPOs  may have become  more important in later years. It
appears not to be an increased time-dependency either as the autocorrelations in Table II were
lower  when  compared to all other periods, although this will be further explored in section III.

In line with our hypothesis, by looking at Percent Tech and Percent VC together and Percent
non-tech VC separately, we see suggestive evidence  of  multicollinearity between the two first
variables.  This  can be seen  in  the similar magnitude  of the variables  in  all columns (e.g. 0,57
and 0,61 in 1985 to 2005; 0,29 and 0,34 in 2006 to 2020; 0,47 and 0,44 in 1985 to 2020
respectively). Indeed, the bivariate correlation between the two variables is 0,78,  thus
confirming  multicollinearity  to  some  extent.  Regarding  the  non-tech  VC-variable,  its
coefficient  is  close to zero  for most time periods, as opposed to the VC-variable which takes
on values between 0,25 and 0,57. The limited amount of observations that are both non-tech
and venture capital-backed (457 in total) hinders us from drawing strong conclusions on its
true value, which can also be seen in its insignificant p-values. However, we will include it in
our coming regressions to gain a perception of its value and see if it is modeled better  in  other
specifications.

Finally, a noteworthy but expected observation in Table IV is also that the omittance of the
bubble period weakens the coefficients for almost all variables. For our continued analysis, the

                                     17
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

bubble period will be captured by a bubble dummy variable instead, as it allows us to analyze
the period while simultaneously keeping it from interfering with the other variables.

To model the  firm specific characteristics jointly, we have performed OLS and WLS
regressions  in Table V. The OLS regression will serve as a baseline model for comparison
against the heteroskedasticity-consistent WLS regression. The WLS will likely be a better fit
for  the data, as can be seen preliminarily in the heteroskedasticity amongst the residuals in the
regular OLS model in Figure 3.

Figure 3.  Heteroskedastic residuals in OLS regression.  Residuals plotted against fitted values of an OLS
regression on the monthly average of IPO initial returns from 1985 to 2020. In this regression, non-tech VC is
used as an explanatory instead of the VC-variable. The figure illustrates the heteroscedastic errors and the
necessity for performing weighted least-squares regressions.

The first thing to note  in Table V  is the superiority of the WLS (MLE) model over the OLS
model at describing the data. For both columns without the bubbly dummy, column (aa) and
(ba), their log-likelihoods increase by more than 100% from 38,712 to  86,490 and 37,529 to
86,490 respectively when going from OLS to WLS  (MLE). The regressions that contain a
bubble dummy variable  also see an improvement in fit when modeled  by  WLS (MLE).
However, their fits  do  not improve  as dramatically as the  specifications without the bubble
dummy do,  but instead go from  a log-likelihood of 139,399 to  154,432 using the VC-variable
in column (ab)  and 139,180 to 156,245  using the non-tech VC-variable in column (bb). This is
because the bubble period is now captured by an explanatory variable, rather than by the
adjustments performed by the WLS in the columns without the bubble dummy.

Going from Average IR (initial returns) in the WLS (MLE) in the VC column (aa) to Average
IR in the WLS (MLE) in the non-tech VC column (ba), one can observe how the Tech-variable
increases in magnitude slightly, from 0,234 to 0,252. This is an anticipated result as Tech in
column (ba) now captures the positive effect VC had in (aa), which is the only variable that has
been removed.  The coefficients are in line with our hypotheses for Tech and VC, although we
expected the two to be more similar in magnitude.  Despite being  insignificant and not very
strong, the coefficients  of non-tech VC-variable  is negative  and  in line with our hypothesis.
This could indicate that the Tech-variable in fact  assumes  a more correct value in (ba).
However, these findings  also  raise questions  regarding  the true coefficient of Tech, as it is not

                                     18
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

clear whether the strong positive initial returns amongst tech  firms, many of which are venture
capital-backed,  are attributable to Tech or if they may  in fact  be attributable  to  VC.

On aggregate, the removal of the VC-variable and the addition of the non-tech VC variable
does not affect the explanatory values  of the models (going from columns (aa, ab) to columns
(ba, bb)) as the log-likelihoods remain essentially identical for the corresponding  columns.
Since the non-tech VC-variable is weak and insignificant, as observed in Table IV, it can be
concluded that the VC-variable never added explanatory value to begin with. Thus, the entire
model should be modeled better without the variable. This was confirmed after performing an
identical regression as in column (aa) but without the VC variable:  although the  log-likelihood
dropped from 86,490 to 85,90, which is  because we removed a variable, the AIC, which
penalizes for using unnecessary variables and added complexity, improved from  -148,98 to  -
151,583. Although a very minor improvement, the VC variable can be deemed unhelpful in
explaining the behavior of IPO initial returns in this model.  This additional regression is not
displayed in Table V.

                                   Table V
  Regressions on the average initial return and variance of IPO initial returns with firm-
                      specific characteristics as  independent variables
Two types of cross-sectional regressions are performed for four different specifications. The columns labeled OLS
display ordinary least-squares regressions on the monthly average IPO initial returns. The parentheses show the
one-sided t-statistics for each coefficient. The columns labeled MLE show maximum likelihood-estimations on
the coefficients calculated through  weighted-least squares regressions  on the monthly average initial returns, with
the monthly standard deviation of residuals as weights. The log of the variance of the residuals is assumed to be
linearly related to our firm-specific characteristics. The parentheses show the one-sided z-statistics for each
coefficient.

The predicted values for the average and standard deviation of IPO initial returns, from the
WLS  (MLE)  in column (ba), are depicted in Figure 4 and Figure 5 respectively. At a glance,
the model seems to predict the standard deviation of initial returns (Figure 5) better than it
predicts the average of initial  returns (Figure 4). For our final section, section III, we hope to
improve  the  prediction  of  the  average  initial  returns  by  incorporating  autoregressive
components.

                                     19
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Figure 4:  Observed versus predicted (by  WLS (MLE)) monthly average IPO initial return.  The gray line
represents the observed monthly initial returns of IPOs, calculated as the average of that month's companies'
percentage difference between their offer price and the stock price four weeks after taken public. The black line
represents the monthly initial returns predicted by the MLE model in Table V column (ba). The dotted segments
of the black line represent periods when there is insufficient data for at least one  firm-specific characteristic, for
which such values have been extrapolated by  performing a weighted least-squares regression, using the variable
in question as the dependent variable and using the  remaining  firm-specific characteristics  with complete data as
independent  variables.

Figure 5: Observed versus predicted (by  WLS(MLE))  monthly standard deviation of IPO initial returns.  The
gray line represents the observed monthly standard deviation of IPO initial returns, calculated as the standard
deviation of that month's companies' initial returns. The black line represents the monthly standard deviation of
initial returns predicted by the WLS (MLE) model in Table V column (ba). The dotted segments of the black line
represent periods when there is insufficient data for at least one firm-specific characteristic, for which such values
have been extrapolated by performing a weighted least-squares regression, using the variable in question as the
dependent variable and using the  remaining firm-specific  characteristics  with complete data as  independent
variables.

So far, the best model to describe the dataset was found to be column (bb) in Table V, with the
non-tech VC variable and the dummy variable. However, to allow for the bubble period to be
captured as a time-series phenomenon instead of as a variable, we will proceed with using WLS
(MLE)  in column (ba) as model for further analysis.

                                     20
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

III.    Time-Series Analysis

Clustering in firms with similar firm-specific characteristics, and the notion that market
uncertainty lags in time and causes uncertainty on periods afterwards, leads one to expect time-
series patterns in the average and volatility of IPO initial returns. In IPO pricing, a lack of
recent and price-accurate  listings should impair the underwriters'  ability to price  IPOs
immediately afterwards too. This section  serves to measure to what extent the average and
volatility of IPO initial returns are dependent on their own past values.

To measure this, we have conducted two different time-series regressions; one ARMAX(1,1)
process and one combined ARMAX(1,1) and  ARCH(2) process. The prior will model the
residuals as a function of past residuals, and the latter will model both the residuals and their
variance as functions of past residuals. As we observed strong autocorrelation in our sample in
Table II, which was  not adequately modeled for in our WLS  (MLE)  or OLS regressions (e.g.
see bubble period in  figure  4 and 5), our hypothesis is that these operations should provide
models that better fit the data. For comparison, the WLS models from columns (aa) and (ba)
are  included.

                                    Table VI
 Maximum likelihood-estimations on the mean and variance of IPO initial returns as time-
                                       series processes
The columns labeled MLE show maximum likelihood-estimations on the coefficients calculated through
weighted-least squares regressions  on the monthly average of IPO initial returns, with the monthly standard
deviation of residuals as weights. The log of the variance of the residuals is assumed to be linearly related to the
firm-specific characteristics (the coefficients for the firm-specific characteristics on variance are not displayed).
The parentheses show the one-sided z-statistics for each coefficient. The Ljung-Box Q-statistics are based  on  the
20th lag of the autocorrelation function of the residuals, or the squared residuals, and has an asymptotic chi-2
 distribution under the hypothesis of no autocorrelation. The p-values are displayed in parentheses below the Q-
statistics. The columns labeled ARMAX(1,1) add an autoregressive term (AR) and a moving-average term (MA)
to the error terms to correct for autocorrelation in the residuals. The columns labeled ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) add
an autoregressive term to the variance of the residuals.

                                     21
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

In  line with  Lowry et al. (2010), our AR-terms are all close to one, indicating a positive lag
effect on the average of IPO initial returns. For example, this means a positive residual of 1‰
at time t gives a positive residual of 0,9‰ at time t+1. In contrast to Lowry et al. (2010), whose
model gave a similar MA-term of close to one, our MA-terms all took on negative values
around  -0,6. This means a positive error term of 1‰ in the residuals at time t gives a negative
error term in the residuals of 0,6‰ at time t+1. In combination, the terms yield a positive but
diminishing lag effect on the average of IPO initial returns. The  coefficients are strongly
significant and the positive autocorrelation in the residuals  is  captured effectively. This can be
seen in the Ljung-Box Q-statistics, which drop dramatically for both columns (a) and (b) when
going from MLE, to ARMAX(1,1), to ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2). The log-likelihoods and AIC
scores also improve. The prediction performed by the ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) model with the
non-tech VC-variable is illustrated in Figure 6, which shows a remarkable improvement
compared to the WLS  (MLE)  in Figure 4.

For the MLE model in column (b), only Tech, NYSE, and Price Update had coefficients that
were significantly different from zero (|z-statistic|>1,96). Introducing the ARMAX(1,1) model
reduced the strength of the coefficients further. However, when going to the ARMAX(1,1)
ARCH(2) model, all coefficients improved and only non-tech VC and Price Update remained
insignificant. Although the non-tech VC-variable consistently has been insignificant in
previous sections, the Price Update variable seems to have mistakenly captured time-
dependency in the variance of the residuals in previous regressions.

                                     22
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Another intriguing observation in column (a) is that  the VC-variable shifts sign and remains
insignificant  when  moving  from  MLE  and  ARMAX(1,1)  to  ARMAX(1,1)  ARCH(2).
Although never significantly so, the coefficients of VC have consistently been positive
previously, and this finding could give an indication  that the true coefficient of VC is not
positive,  as  priorly thought. The non-tech VC-variable has  been negative throughout both
section II and III, and the convergence of both variables in the ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) model
suggests that the VC variable may not only have captured the effect of risky industries, but also
the effect of  conditional  variance in the residuals.

Finally, it is worth remarking that the models using the VC-variable versus the  models that use
the non-tech VC-variable are nearly identical  in other  coefficients, log-likelihoods, AICs, and
Ljung-Box scores. In Lowry et al. (2010), the Tech-coefficients remain roughly  constant
throughout their corresponding three models, around 0,075. Our tech in both ARMAX(1,1)
regressions are consistent with this, but in our MLE and ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) models with
the VC-variable, our Tech increases to 0,234 and 0,217 respectively.  A  similar pattern is
observed in  column (b)  with the non-tech VC variable.  The reason for this result is unclear.

Figure 6: Observed versus predicted (with ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2)-process) monthly average IPO initial return.
The gray line represents the observed monthly initial returns of IPOs, calculated as the average of that month's
companies' percentage difference between their  offer price and the stock price  four weeks  after taken public. The
black line represents the monthly initial returns predicted  by the ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) model  in Table VI,
column (b). Compared with Figure 4, which displays predicted values generated by a  WLS (MLE), the new
prediction shows an illustrative improvement in fit, which is confirmed by the log-likelihoods and AICs (see Table
VI column (b), MLE versus ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2)).

                                     23
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Conclusions

This study serves as a complementary study to the premier model on IPO underpricing to date,
developed by Lowry et al. (2010),  but with  a  particular  focus on venture capital-backing. It has
been done on both previously studied data from the period 1985 to  2005 and on hitherto
unexplored data from 2006 to 2020. Following the methodology of Lowry et al. (2010), we
have explored firm-specific factors and time-dependent components as underlying factors
driving IPO underpricing and initial return volatility. The  effect of venture capital-funding on
IPO underpricing is of particular importance since it is  one of few factors entrepreneurs and
investors can act upon (choose to accept VC-funding or not) and thus prevent their firm from
going public at below market value. Additionally, VC-funding has increased on average in
recent years (see appendix A) and it is therefore increasingly important to provide conclusive
evidence of its true effect, which is not agreed upon in literature. It is most suitable to perform
this analysis on the model of Lowry et al. (2010) as it is the most sophisticated model yet;
particularly as  they suspected that their VC variable picked up a “risky industry effect”.

We show that the VC-variable lacks explanatory power. To some extent, this  was
demonstrated by the increased explanatory value (decrease in AIC score) that was achieved
when estimating a weighted least-squares regression without the variable  in question as this
means the VC-variable solely added complexity  to the model. However,  the true effect of
venture capital-backing is still  uncertain. The  coefficient of our non-tech VC-variable  is  close
to zero and negative  throughout all sections, which the VC-coefficient  eventually  became  as
well  in the ARMAX(1,1) ARCH(2) regression. However,  these  coefficients were
insignificant we are only given an indication of the effect of venture capital-backing, which is
that it likely contributes less to underpricing than previously thought. Finally, by replacing
VC with non-tech VC, we effectively  eliminated the multicollinearity between  Tech and VC,
thus improving  the  specification and usability  of the model  for  when more data is available.

Compared to previously explored time periods (except when including  the bubble period), the
period from 2006 to 2020 exhibited higher IPO underpricing, higher volatility of initial
returns, and  a  higher correlation between the two. Despite this, almost all correlations
between firm-specific characteristics and the average  and standard deviation of IPO initial
returns decreased (see Table IV). In combination with the period's lower autocorrelations, as
seen in Table II, this suggests there may be other variables beside firm-specific characteristics
and time-contingency that  better explain IPO underpricing in recent years.

In conclusion, our findings suggest that entrepreneurs and investors should not necessarily
see venture capital-funding as disadvantageous for the success of a future IPO, as suggested
the results of Lowry  et al. (2010). On the contrary, it appears as if the involvement of a
venture capital-partner indeed does mitigate underpricing, although to what extent this is the
case remains unknown.

Directions for further research

The focus of this study has been to examine the monthly level and dispersion of IPO initial
returns from 1985 to 2020 and delving deeper into how different firm-specific characteristics
have an impact on the difficulty of accurately pricing an IPO. We find that the venture capital
variable  in previous findings does not yield a meaningful interpretation, either by itself or in
the model as a whole.

                                     24
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

For our dataset, a clear majority of firms that receive support from venture capital firms operate
in high-tech industries:  a variable that  in  itself contributes to uncertainty  in the valuation
process. As a consequence, a lot of observations are lost when constructing a non-tech VC-
variable.  The  sole  strong  conclusion we can draw is that  it is unfavorable to  model  the  VC-
variable and the Tech-variable jointly, as one only adds complexity in the presence of the other.
However, we believe our findings validate further research on this subject. With more
observations on venture capital-backed firms  outside high-tech industries, one could perhaps
isolate the true effect of venture capital funding on IPO underpricing.

Moreover, as seen in the values in Table IV, all coefficients of firm-specific characteristics take
on  lower values in our extended time set and no variable has increased or decreased in relative
magnitude or importance.  At the same time, the  mean and cross-sectional standard deviation
of initial returns have increased for our time extension.  This is not explained by increased time-
dependency in underpricing either, as can be seen in Table II.  Altogether, this  creates the
impression that other variables may be of larger importance today compared to before 2006. A
topic for further research would  therefore  be to concretize and assess factors beyond firm-
specific characteristics and time-dependence as explanatory  variables  for IPO underpricing.
Market-wide volatility in equity prices, as examined by Lowry et al. (2010), should also be
considered as one such factor.

If one were to deviate from the framework developed by Lowry et al. (2010), another approach
would be to ungroup the data points  and revert them back  into individual companies (at the
sacrifice of volatility measurements). This way,  one would possibly see the true effect of VC
as the number of observations increase.

                                     25
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

References

Beatty, R. P., & Ritter, J. R. (January-February 1986). Investment banking, reputation, and
the underpricing of initial public offerings.  Journal of Financial Economics, 15(1-2), pp. 212-
232.

Box, G. E., & Jenkins, G. M. (1976).  Time series analysis: forecasting and control, rev. ed.

Dong, M., Michel, J.-S., & Pandes, A. J. (2011). Underwriter Quality and Long-Run IPO
Performance.  Financial Management, 40(1), pp. 219-251.

Engle, R. F. (July 1982). Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of the
Variance of United Kingdom Inflation.  Econometrica, 50(4), pp. 987-1007.

Francis, B. B., & Hasan, I. (April 2001). The Underpricing of Venture and  Nonventure
Capital IPO:s An Empirical Investigation.  Journal of Financial Services Research, 19, pp.
99-113.

Guiso, L. (March 1998). High-tech firms and credit rationing.  Journal of Economic
Behaviour & Organization, 35(1), pp. 39-59.

Hanley, K. W., Kumar, A. A., & Seguin, P. J. (October 1993). Price stabilization in the
market for new issues.  Journal of Financial Economics, 34(2), pp. 177-197.

Kohers, N., & Kohers, T. (April 2004). Information sensitivity of  high-tech  industries:
evidence from merger announcements.  Applied Financial Economics, 14(7), pp. 525-536.

Lee, P. M., & Wahal, S. (August 2004). Grandstanding, certification and the underpricing of
venture capital backed IPOs.  Journal of Financial Economics, 73(2), pp. 375-407.

Ljung, G. M., & Box, G. E. (August 1978). On a measure of lack of fit in time series models.
Biometrika, 65(2), pp. 297-303.

Ljungqvist, A. (2007). Chapter 7  -  IPO Underpricing. i  Handbook of Empirical Corporate
Finance SET.  Elsevier B.V.

Loughran, T., &  Ritter, J. (2004). Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed Over Time.  Financial
Management, 33(3), pp. 5-37.

Lowry, M., Officer, M. S., & Schwert, W. G. (April 2010). The Variability of IPO Initial
Returns.  The Journal of Finance, 46(2), pp. 425-465.

Megginson, W. L., & Weiss, K. A. (July 1991). Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial
Public Offerings.  The Journal of Finance, 46(3), pp. 879-903.

PwC; CB Insights. (January 2020).  Statista.  Taken from https://www-statista-
com.ez.hhs.se/statistics/277501/venture-capital-amount-invested-in-the-united-states-since-
1995/

                                     26
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Rock, K. (January-February 1986). Why new issues are underpriced.  Journal of Financial
Economics, 15(1-2), pp. 187-212.

Ruud, J. S. (October 1993). Underwriter price support and the IPO underpricing puzzle.
Journal of Financial Economics, 34(2), pp. 135-151.

                                     27
The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing                             Kotnik & Tärning

Appendix

A.  Value of venture capital investment in the United States from 1995 to 2019

                                     28