ARE INVESTORS BETTER
SAFE THAN SORRY?

THETHE IMPACT OF EXTREME IMPACT OF EXTREME LOSSES IN THE RETUR LOSSES IN THE RETURNN DISTRIBUTION ON
DISTRIBUTIONCAPITAL ALLOCATION I ON CAPITALN ACTIVELY MANAGED E ALLOCATION INQUI ACTIVELYTY FUNDS
MANAGED EQUITY FUNDS

YLVALI BUSCH

GUSTAV GÖRANSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
   Are investors better safe than sorry? The impact of extreme losses in the return
   distribution on capital allocation in actively managed equity funds

   Abstract:

      In this paper, we show that capital flow to actively managed equity funds is dependent
      on past extreme negative return states of the fund. Specifically, we examine how an
     extreme negative monthly payoff impacts the investment flow of actively managed
      equity funds in the following year, adjusting for past performance and other fund
      characteristics. Our results indicate that investors make their investment decisions in
      line with one of the predictions of cumulative prospect theory, namely that investors
      place excess weight on tail events. As a result, they are less willing to direct
      investments into funds with an extreme negative payoff in their historical returns as
      they overweight the probability of similar extreme events in the future. Furthermore,
      we examine the practical implications of this investor behavior, discussing the impact
     on fund managers and their portfolio strategy. Our results are robust even when
      controlling for factors such as historical performance, volatility, fund fees, fund size
     and company size.

  Keywords:

      Mutual funds, actively managed equity funds, fund flows, extreme payoffs, prospect
      theory

   Authors:

      Ylvali Busch (24055)

     Gustav Göransson (24281)

   Tutor:

     Adam Altmejd, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

   Examiner:

      Adrien D’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
   Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
   Stockholm School of Economics
   © Gustav Göransson and Ylvali Busch, 2020
This page is intentionally left blank
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 2

   1. Introduction                       higher accuracy in predicting investor behavior
                                                compared to the expected utility framework
This paper examines how the demand for
                                                 (Tversky and Kahneman, 1981, 1992; Tversky
actively managed equity funds (a subset of
                                                    and Fox, 1995; Wu and Gonzalez, 1996; Stott,
mutual funds) is affected by the fund return
                                                  2006; Barberis and Huang, 2008; Abdellaoui,
distribution, showing that a trailing extreme
                                                Bleichrodt and Kammoun, 2013; Barberis,
negative return on record impacts capital flow
                                                           2013). Akbas and Genc (2020) (hereafter AG,
to the fund. The market dynamics behind the
                                                  2020) contribute to the understanding of how
demand for actively managed equity funds is
                                                  demand for mutual funds relates to
important to understand, as fund flows can
                                                 distributional features beyond mean
impact both incentives for the fund managers as
                                               performance by exploring how extreme
well as asset prices (Coval and Stafford, 2005;
                                                       positive returns impact fund flow. However, the
Wermers, 2005; Sensoy, 2008). At the same
                                                   other side of the spectrum has been left
time, retail investors hold 89 percent of net
                                                 unexplored, namely how fund demand is
assets of mutual funds (Investment Company
                                                       affected by extreme negative returns. Thus, our
Institute, 2019), making the demand for funds
                                               work is an extension of AG (2020), as we
subject to individual investor biases and
                                                      explore the impact of extreme negative returns
preferences. Such biases have previously been
                                             on fund flows while AG (2020) explore
shown to deleteriously affect the financial well-
                                                    extreme positive payoffs. Prospect theory
being of retail investors (Barber and Odean,
                                                    predicts that both positive and negative extreme
2012; Fred van Raaij, 2016). As a result,
                                                    tail events in the return distribution should
understanding such biases and preferences
                                                   impact investor behavior (Kahneman and
becomes key in order to protect the financial
                                                    Tversky, 1979, 1992), hence our research has
well-being of retail investors by improving the
                                                             theoretical relevance.
market structure.
                                                        Specifically, we explore how a single low-
Within the previous research on investor biases
                                                     payoff state impacts fund flow, adjusting for
and preferences, cumulative prospect theory is
                                                 past performance and other fund
a central model that can be used to understand
                                              characteristics. Evidence by AG (2020)
the behavior of retail investors. According to
                                                   suggests that investors prefer funds that have an
cumulative prospect theory, individual
                                                   extreme positive monthly payoff (12-month
investors overweight extreme outcomes in their
                                                      trailing) on record. We will from now on refer
decision-making. More specifically, individual
                                                            to this 12-month trailing highest monthly return
investors tend to overweight the probability of
                                                  as MAX, just as in AG (2020). Adjusting for
tail events, i.e. rare and high-impact events
                                                  the cumulative return over a twelve-month
(Barberis, 2013). This model has shown a
                                                   period, we aim to determine what impact the
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 3

twelve-month trailing style-adjusted minimum       by comparing two funds with identical
monthly return (hereafter, MIN) has on fund       cumulative return and volatility (see Appendix
flow. Figure 1 illustrates the MIN graphically        I), but different MINs.

Figure 1. Comparing the style-adjusted monthly returns of two fictitious funds over twelve months with
identical cumulative return and volatility, fund A has a more extreme MIN (June).

Our results indicate that MIN impacts fund flow      findings indicate that MAX has a larger impact
to actively managed equity funds, meaning       than MIN on future fund flow.
investors are subject to a behavior that does not
                                                      We contribute to the understanding of investor
correspond to expected utility theory. Instead,
                                                   preferences in two ways. First, our research
investors make their decisions in line with one
                                                   expands the theoretical understanding of
of the concepts within prospect theory, placing
                                                        investor behavior in relation to tail events for
excess weight on low probability events. As a
                                                   mutual funds, which is a relatively unexplored
result, they are less willing to direct
                                                  product in this context compared to other
investments into funds with an extreme
                                                 financial products (AG, 2020). Second, our
negative payoff on record as they overweight
                                                          research contributes to the understanding of
the probability of similar extreme events in the
                                                    investor behavior in relation to assets with
future. These results are robust even when
                                                      distributional features of crash-like returns
controlling for factors such as historical
                                                            rather than lottery-like returns. Furthermore, we
performance, volatility, management fee, fund
                                                   examine the practical implications of this
size and company size. Interestingly, our
                                                  investor behavior, discussing the impact on
                                                                    fund managers and their portfolio strategy.
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 4

    2. Literature Review                  outcome, yielding the investor an extreme
                                                    return, is overweighted in the decision-making.
   2.1 Investor psychology of tail           Hence, investors are willing to accept a higher
   events                                    price and lower return. The evidence for the

Investor psychology of tail events builds on the        opposite, that investors would shy away from
notion that people tend to overestimate and       negatively skewed stocks could be found by
overweight the occurrences of low-probability        looking at the high historical U.S. equity
and high-impact events, in line with cumulative        premium, also known as the “equity premium
prospect theory developed by Tversky and       puzzle”. According to the probability
Kahneman (1992). This theory implies that a       weighting, the negative skewness of the
person will both overestimate the likelihood of        aggregated stock market, due to historical large
tail events, as well as put more weight to the        crashes, would imply that investors overweight
event in their decision-making, than what       these negative tail events, and therefore require
would be expected from a utility framework       a higher equity premium (De Giorgi and Legg,
(Barberis, 2013). However, in this study we        2012).

will only be able to observe the aggregate
                                                  Although the evidence supports the
effects of these two concepts and not the
                                                 phenomenon of investors overestimating and
separate effects, as they are hard to distinguish
                                                   overweighting the likelihood of tail events,
between in a non-laboratory setting.
                                                   there have also been instances where the
Previous empirical research indicates that tail-        likelihood of such events might have been
events are indeed overestimated and       underestimated. An example of this could be
overweighted in decision making, resulting in        the 2008 financial crisis (Barberis, 2013). A
an excess demand for lottery-like assets as a        central concept to why some tail events might
historical right-tail outcome yields an        be overestimated while others might be
expectation of similar upsides in the future        underestimated, is the “availability heuristics”.
(Brunnermeier, Gollier and Parker, 2007;       The availability heuristics states that investors
Barberis and Huang, 2008; Eraker and Ready,        value the probability of an event by how easily
2015; AG, 2020). For instance, research by        such an event can be recalled (Barberis, 2013).

Barberis and Huang (2008) indicates that the
                                                2.2 Investor psychology of tail
skewness in the distribution of asset returns can
                                             events applied to mutual funds
be priced. Positively skewed stocks will be
overpriced and earn a lower average return.       Even though most mutual fund assets are held
This is due to the fact that the (unlikely)        by individual investors, the understanding of
possibility of the stock experiencing a right-tail         how distributional features impact demand is
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 5

low for mutual funds compared to other       and fund flow only holds in equity funds with a
financial products, such as stocks and options        high degree of active management, suggesting
(AG, 2020). Research by AG (2020) suggests        that it is the risk-seeking investors that prefer
that investors prefer funds that have an extreme        the lottery-like payoffs. Furthermore, AG
positive monthly payoff (12-month trailing) on        (2020) investigate proxies for fund visibility
record in line with cumulative prospect theory        and find that none of these proxies substantially
(preference hypothesis). Hence, AG’s (2020)       alter the relationship between MAX and fund
results support that investor preferences for        flow. Finally, when the preference hypothesis
gambling-like payoffs are also valid for mutual        predicts that reoccurring MAX in historical
funds. To corroborate this, AG (2020) explore        returns would enhance investor expectations of
two alternative explanations to the effects of        similar returns in the future, the visibility
MAX on fund flow, namely that MAX is a       hypothesis predicts the opposite. If a fund has
predictor of future fund performance and that        recently experienced a high MAX, additional
MAX impacts the fund visibility.                   high MAXs should not have the same effect, as
                                                    the fund is already in the investor’s option
Concerning the first alternative explanation, if
                                                   space. Consistent with the preference
MAX is a predictor of future returns, investors
                                                        hypothesis and not the visibility hypothesis, AG
would simply pick these funds to maximize
                                                   (2020) find evidence that the relationship
return, in line with expected utility theory.
                                                between MAX and fund flow is stronger for
However, AG (2020) do not find support that a
                                                  funds that have experienced high MAXs in the
trading strategy based on MAX would yield
                                                           past.
superior returns.
                                                Although AG (2020) use several types of
Concerning the second alternative explanation,
                                                mutual funds when they perform additional
AG (2020) acknowledge that fund visibility
                                                         tests, their main experiment is based on actively
(fund visibility hypothesis) can have an impact
                                                  managed equity funds. The reason being that
on the relationship between MAX and fund
                                                     the effect is only pronounced for this specific
flow but argue that increased visibility could
                                                  type of mutual fund. AG (2020) suggest that
not account for the entire relationship. It is
                                                    this distinction could be because actively
reasonable to believe that an extreme payoff
                                                    managed funds possess a relatively flexible
would yield significant attention to a fund.
                                                     investment mandate, enhancing the possibility
However, this would only contribute to
                                                 to make risky investments and generate the
including the fund in the option space for
                                                 volatility required to obtain tail events. Hence
investors. The actual choice would still be
                                                            attracting more risk-seeking investors.
subject to preference. AG (2020) find evidence
to support that the relationship between MAX
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 6

                                                       𝜋(𝑝) (the perceived probability). This
   3. Theoretical framework
                                                   definition was originally formulated for
   3.1 Cumulative prospect theory         prospect theory, but still holds for cumulative

                             1                            prospect theory. For small 𝑝, their empirical
Cumulative prospect theory was developed by
Kahneman and Tversky (1992) as a response to        research indicates that this function is
the predictive shortcomings of expected utility        subadditive:

theory. Instead of the notion that investors are
                                                            0 < 𝑟 < 1
rational in their decision-making from an                       𝜋(𝑟𝑝) > 𝑟 ∗ 𝜋(𝑝)
expected utility point of view, prospect theory                                       3
                                                The graphical representation  of cumulative
predicts that preferences for gains and losses
                                                    prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992)
are asymmetrical. Furthermore, the theory
                                                     shows the overweighting of stated or observed
implies that an individual will overweight the
                                                           probabilities.
tails of any distribution that is considered in a
decision-making process. Prospect theory can        Figure 2. Investor cumulative density function
be divided into two main concepts. The first        in cumulative prospect theory. Blue dotted line
concept is loss aversion, where investors are        shows the discrepancy of investor’s weighting.
predicted to prefer avoiding losses compared to
receiving a tantamount gain, having a concave
utility function when faced with a gain, but a
convex utility function when faced with a loss.
For this research, the second main concept is
however more relevant, concerning how

                                                 2
individuals overweight extreme events .

Kahneman and Tversky (1979) show the
overweighting of small probabilities
mathematically with a stated probability 𝑝 (the
observed probability) along with the function

1
  Our theoretical framework is based on cumulative         outcomes, instead of all low-probability outcomes
prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1992)              (Barberis, 2013).
                                                           2
rather than the original prospect theory (Kahneman          The empirical research done by Kahneman and
and Tversky, 1979) due to the wide adoption of             Tversky (1979) relies on the subjects being in the
cumulative prospect theory in research where               gain domain or the loss domain. In our dataset, it is
probability weighting is applied. This stems from           impossible to know which of these domains that
the fact that cumulative prospect theory addresses            the investor is in, and it is therefore hard to test the
important limitations of the original probability              loss aversion.
                                                           3
weighting function as it predicts that individuals              This function is slightly different for gains and
will only overweight extreme low-probability                losses, but this difference is in our case neglectable
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 7

   3.2 MAX and MIN                    MIN should be available to investors in the
                                             same way as MAX.
The MAX variable was chosen by AG (2020)
as existing literature suggests that investors
overweight positive extreme states in their           4. Variables and Data
decision-making, rather than measures of the              sample

entire distribution (Brunnermeier, Gollier and
                                               4.1 Variable definitions
Parker, 2007; Barberis and Huang, 2008).
                                                  For the time-constrained reader, we will
Furthermore, for investors to consider MAX in
                                                  summarize the differences between the
their decision-making, MAX must be
                                                      variables used in this study and by AG (2020).
accessible to investors (according to the
                                                         First, we have added the MIN variable, as this
principle of availability heuristics). Both in
                                                        is our extension of their study. There is a total
terms of the actual information, but also in
                                                        of two variables that are unavailable to us that
terms of investor understanding of MAX. Many
                                                    were used by AG (2020). The first variable is
financial sites report historical lowest and
                                                    the total load fee, further explained below.
highest monthly returns from the recent year.
                                                    Instead of total load fee, we use management
AG (2020) therefore argue that the extensive
                                                     fee, also further explained below. The second
adoption of online platforms to retrieve
                                                      variable is the continuous performance ranking,
financial information has made MAX available
                                                      used in the quadratic regression by AG (2020).
to investors. Furthermore, AG (2020) point to
                                                We do not replace this variable, instead we use
the fact that MAX is easier for retail investors
                                                      the discrete performance ranking that was also
to grasp compared to more complex measures
                                                  used by AG (2020), further explained below.
such as skewness.
                                                   All other variables are according to the
                                                procedures described by AG (2020). In
The main independent variable of interest in
                                                         addition, for the time-constrained reader, the
this study is MIN, which is used to measure a
                                                       variables used are summarized in table 1.
negative extreme return state in the monthly
style-adjusted return over the past 12-months.
                                                   The dependent variable of interest is the
This stems from a similar reasoning as in AG’s
                                                      quarterly fund flow as a percentage of current
(2020) choice of MAX, where the objective is
                                                   total net assets, FLOW, as defined by Sirri &
to measure an extreme state rather than an
                                                    Tuffano (1998):
entire distribution. Furthermore, we draw on
the same logic as AG (2020) concerning the
                                                                                   𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−1 ∗ (1 + 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 )
availability of MIN. Since financial sites report               𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊𝑖,𝑡 =
                                                                                                                                𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−1
historical lowest and highest monthly returns,
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 8

As fund flow is not given in the database that        returns. This correlation exists because
we use (CRSP database for mutual funds), it is        different styles restricts what type of stocks a
calculated by using the difference in TNA, and        fund can trade according to the style’s
subtracting the growth resulting from the fund        investment mandate. Hence, a fund that belongs

                                                                         4
return. The above formula calculates the growth        to a “winning” style is also more likely to have
of TNA accrued to the fund flow under the       superior returns. Furthermore, investment
assumption that all capital flows occur at the        decisions are likely to be based on fund style,
end of the quarter. By applying the analysis at        and different styles can periodically attract
the quarterly level, comparisons with prior        more attention in the media, as suggested by the
research is facilitated as this is the common        articles Mullainathan, (2002), Barberis and
level of analysis (AG, 2020).                          Shleifer (2003) and Pomorski (2011). Hence, to
                                                      differentiate the attraction of different styles
The main independent variable in this paper,        from the effects of MIN (or MAX) in our study,
MIN, is the minimum monthly style-adjusted        style-adjusted return is appropriate.
return over the past 12-months.
                                                Apart from the above, we also use several
𝑀𝐼𝑁𝑖,𝑡                                                      control variables that are probably more
= 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚(𝐴𝐷𝐽_𝑅𝑖,𝑡−11, 𝐴𝐷𝐽_𝑅𝑖,𝑡−10, … , 𝐴𝐷𝐽_𝑅𝑖,𝑡 )
                                                  familiar to the reader. FUND_TNA is the
                                                         aggregated total net assets for every share class
The independent variable MAX, the main
                                                 in a fund (identified by the CRSP variable
variable of interest in the article by AG (2020),
                                               crsp_cl_grp). COMP_TNA is the aggregated
is the maximum monthly style-adjusted return
                                                  total net assets for every fund in the same
over the past 12-months.
                                                 management company (identified by the CRSP
                                              variable mgmt_cd). AGE is the number of
   𝑀𝐴𝑋𝑖,𝑡
  = 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑚(𝐴𝐷𝐽_𝑅𝑖,𝑡−11, 𝐴𝐷𝐽_𝑅𝑖,𝑡−10, … , 𝐴𝐷𝐽_𝑅𝑖,𝑡 )           months since the fund was first offered
                                                (identified by the CRSP variable
Both MIN and MAX are based on the style-        first_offer_dt). Here, the date of first offer is
adjusted return. Therefore, we construct a help-        used as a proxy for the fund incubation date.
variable (ADJ_R) by subtracting the average
return within each style from each fund’s return
every month. The style-adjustment of return is
performed to account for the fact that funds
within the same fund style often have correlated

4
 The “winning” style is a fund style where the
comprising funds have performed better on an
aggregate level compared to other fund styles.
                 Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 9

                                                           5
AG (2020) use the two variables total load fee        SKEW is the 12-month trailing skewness of

                  6
and expense ratio to control for fund fees in the        fund return:
regression. However, the data used to aggregate

                                                                             −11          2   3
load fees was unavailable to us and we                          σ 𝑡=0(𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅ത)
                                                                            12            𝑚3
therefore use the management fee instead of         𝑆𝐾𝐸𝑊  = ۇ             ۊ =
                                                                                                              𝑖,𝑡                                                3
                                                                        σ −11       ത 2      𝑠
                                                                                  ට  𝑡=0(𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅)
total load fee. MGMT_FEE is the management                 ۉ      11 ی
fee charged by the fund company (identified by
the CRSP variable mgmt_fee). The       Where 𝑠 is the sample standard deviation (also
management fee is a percentage fee on capital        used for VOL) and 𝑚3is the third central
allocated to the fund. However, we cannot draw       moment.

any conclusions on whether management fee
and total load fees could function as good      MIN and MAX values always represent the
substitutes in a regression setting. EXP_RATIO       trailing 12-month’s most extreme returns

                                                                                                         7
is the expense ratio of the fund (identified by        compared to similar funds . Hence, to draw
the CRSP variable exp_ratio) and       conclusions whether investors value the effect
TURN_RATIO is the turnover ratio of the fund       of extreme returns beyond the impact on
(identified by the CRSP variable turn_ratio).        aggregated returns, it is essential that we
The expense ratio is the amount that        include a control variable for the fund’s relative
shareholders pay for operating expenses over        performance. Without this variable, the case
their total investment. Turnover ratio is defined       might be that a high (low) extreme return
as the minimum of aggregated sales or        simply reflects a high (low) aggregate return,
aggregated purchases of securities over average        rendering any regression results rather bland. A
12-month TNA.                                    variable that allows the regression to capture
                                                     the sensitivity of the flow due to the fund's
VOL is the 12-month trailing annualized       relative performance is especially important,
volatility of fund return:                                 since the performance-flow relationship is well
                                                   documented in the literature (Chevalier and
                                                 Ellison, 1997; Brown, Harlow and Starks,
                   σ −11      ത 2
                            𝑡=0(𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑅)
          𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖,𝑡 = ඨ                                1996). In our model, we represent fund
                      11
                                                      performance by grouping share classes together
                                                    based on their relative adjusted performance

5                                                           7
 AG (2020) use a weighted average of the front              To decide which funds that are comparable we
load and rear load fees to obtain this total load fee.          use the CRSP objective code, which classifies
6
 Expense ratio is defined as the amount that                mutual funds into several fund categories, called
shareholders pay for operating expenses over their          styles. The styles are further explained in the Data
total investment.                                                    filtering section.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 10

each month. We perform the ranking process by       bottom quintile (LOW_PERF), top quintile
calculating the adjusted return (ADJ_R)       (HIGH_PERF), or the three middle quantiles
threshold values that correspond to the bottom        (MID_PERF). Share classes are only ranked
and top quintile. We calculate this once every        within their respective fund style. This follows

                                                                                                                  8
month for every fund style. Based on this, for       the same procedure as AG (2020) , developed
every month, for every share class of all funds,        by Sirri and Tuffani (1998).
we assign if it has performed according to the

Table 1. Summary of variables as a courtesy to the reader

 Variable name Description

 FLOW The growth rate of a fund due to investment flows.

 MAX The maximum monthly style-adjusted return over the past 12-months.

 MIN The minimum monthly style-adjusted return over the past 12-months.

 FUND_TNA The aggregated total net assets for every share class in a fund.

 COMP_TNA The aggregated total net assets for every fund in the same management company.

 AGE The number of months since the fund was first offered.

 MGMT_FEE The management fee charged by the fund company.

 EXP_RATIO The expense ratio of the fund.

 TURN_RATIO The turnover ratio of the fund.

 VOL The 12-month trailing annualized volatility of fund return.

 SKEW The 12-month trailing skewness of the fund return.

 LOW_PERF This variable indicates that this month’s adjusted return belongs to the bottom
                               quintile of the adjusted returns in that particular month.

8
 We have only done the piecewise linear                  instead of the one based on 3 intervals (low, mid
regression and not the quadratic regression from            and high). We have not had access to the
AG (2020). This is because a quadratic regression           processing power required to compute a continuous
would require a continuous performance ranking,           performance ranking.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 11

 MIDDLE_PERF Indicates that this month’s adjusted return belongs to the middle 3-quintiles (20-
                            80 percentile) of the adjusted returns in that particular month.

 HIGH_PERF This variable indicates that this month’s adjusted return belongs to the top quintile
                                     of the adjusted returns in that particular month.

                                                                                    10
                                               excluded from our sample  (AG, 2020). Since
    4.2 Data filtering                          the CRSP index fund flag is only available after

The goal is to handle the data filtering in the       2001, we also remove funds with names
exact same way as AG (2020). However, the        indicating that they are index funds from the
data filtering is not described by AG (2020) at        sample by targeting names commonly used by

                                                                    11
a level of granularity such that it would be       such funds  All monthly data of funds without
possible for us to do an exact replication of their        a valid CRSP objective code are also eliminated
data filtering. We believe that our data filtering        from our sample. The same filtering process to
is similar enough to AG (2020) to enable us to        achieve the desired fund types is also applied by
compare our results with theirs. A full guide to        AG (2020).
our data filtering can be found in Appendix III.
                                                  The data is concatenated from the CRSP fund
The database used is the Wharton Research       summary source and the CRSP monthly return
Data Services (WRDS) Center for Research in        source in order to calculate all relevant
Security Prices (CRSP) survivor-bias free data        variables. We delimit the time period to August
on mutual funds. Our data sample covers       1998 and December 2016. The exact starting
actively managed domestic U.S. equity funds.         point of August 1998 is chosen as the central
Therefore, bond, balanced, international and        variable crsp_cl_grp, which is used to
sector funds are excluded by including funds       determine which share class belongs to which
denoted by CRSP objective codes EDCI,       fund, is not reported before that date. Regarding

                                                   9
EDCM, EDCS, EDYB, EDYG or EDYI . Each       missing values in the dataset, our guiding
CRSP objective code corresponds to a so-called        principle is to remove months with missing
fund style. Funds with CRSP index flags,       data, rather than eliminating entire share-
indicating that they are index funds, are        classes or funds, like AG (2020). Months that

9
 A specification on the CRSP objective codes can          but funds with index flag “E” (enhanced fund) have
be found here:                                             been reincluded.
                                                           11
http://www.crsp.org/products/documentation/crsp-             Funds with the following strings contained in the
style-code-0                                               fund names have been excluded from our sample:
10
  Funds with CRSP index flags (variable                  “Index”, “Idx”, “Indx”, “S&P 500”, “Dow Jones”
index_fund_flag) “B” (index-based fund) and “D”          and “BARRA”. Fund names containing
(index fund) have been excluded from our sample,         “Enhanced” or “Enh” have been reincluded in our
                                                       sample.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 12

lack information regarding TNA, management        some funds, it reports annual or no return data
fee, expense ratio or turnover ratio are        for other funds. As it turns out, the merger and
eliminated, as this prohibits us from calculating        liquidation rates are much lower for the funds
necessary control variables in the regression.        that have monthly return data, implying that
Months that lack fund codes and company       any study using monthly return data will
codes are also removed, as the absence of these       experience a skewed sample. The skewed
variables prohibits us from assigning the share        sample is a consequence of an understating of
class to a specific fund and management       the proportion of mergers and liquidations.
company. Concerning missing return data, our        Elton, Gruber and Blake (2001) conclude that
approach has been to make sure at least twelve        CRSP can in fact display similar problems to
consecutive months exist, so that the trailing        datasets with traditional survivorship bias, such
MIN, MAX and returns can be calculated.       as overstating the performance of funds. As AG
Hence, portions of a time series for a share-        (2020) point out, this skewness could introduce
class can be removed if there is not sufficient       extreme values around merger-dates when
data to retrieve the twelve-month trailing        FLOW is calculated. To mitigate such extreme
variables. Furthermore, we eliminate erroneous        values of FLOW, the bottom and top 1% tails
values from expense ratio and management fee,        of FLOW are eliminated. In addition, funds that
where only values between 0 (0%) and 1       have less than 1 year of reported returns are

                        12
(100%) are allowed  . We eliminate data where        eliminated. This is done to mitigate any
turnover ratio displays values smaller than 0       potential incubation bias, meaning that new
(0%).                                                funds attract more flow and outperform other
                                                         funds in terms of risk-adjusted return (Evans,
Together with Morningstar, CRSP has been the        2010). Both of these adjustments are also done
most widely used mutual fund database in        in AG (2020). Furthermore, Elton, Gruber and
recent research. One major difference between        Blake (2001) also find that CRSP has upward
the two databases is that CRSP is free from       biased return data compared to Morningstar,
traditional survivorship bias. However, Elton,        which is especially problematic for older data
Gruber and Blake (2001) show that CRSP has a        and small funds. As a result, we eliminate all
form of survivorship bias which they call       share classes with less than $500,000 in total
omission bias. The omission bias is a result of        net assets.
the return data being inconsistently reported.
While CRSP reports monthly return data for

12
  AG (2020) have not described an exact way of
filtering out erroneous values in the dataset, but
they describe that erroneous values are filtered out.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 13

An important thing to note is that the data in our        on quarterly data. The cleaned dataset contains
sample is calculated on share class level and not       330,307 quarter observations from 10,620
on fund level. In the article by AG (2020), share        share classes of 3,621 funds, which is

                                                                          15
class data was aggregated to fund level, one of        reasonably close  to the cleaned dataset used
the reasons being that fund load fee could be       by AG (2020).
aggregated (estimated) over share classes, to
achieve a total fund load factor that applies to           4.3 Descriptive statistics

                                     13
both front and rear load fees  . However, this       In table 3, we observe the means of the

                            14
data has not been available  during our work,        regression variables over years. We note the
and our analysis is therefore done on a share       large change in AGE, FUND_TNA and
class level. One argument for aggregating share        COMP_TNA between 1999 and 2000, likely
classes to funds is the aesthetic aspect of        reflecting the effect of the dot com bubble.
achieving results on fund level rather than share
class level, but we hope that the reader can        The correlation matrix indicates few notably
sympathize with this decision.                        high correlations that are rather intuitive. The
                                                   highest correlations displayed are between
Another difference between our study and AG       volatility and MAX, and fund TNA and
(2020) is that they have used data from January        company TNA. This is expected since a large
1992, whereas our dataset starts in August        MAX often leads to higher volatility. The other
1998. This is since the important variable CRSP        high correlation indicates the natural
share class code (CRSP variable crsp_cl_grp       relationship of large fund companies having
was unavailable before August 1998. We are      larger funds.
unaware of how AG (2020) handled this issue,       The correlation between volatility and MAX
but it is possible that the CRSP database has        could be an issue in the regression since a high
changed since their study was done, as the        collinearity can affect the standard errors.
dataset used in AG (2020) was first compiled in       However, AG (2020) alleviate potential
2016, whereas our dataset is compiled in 2020.         concerns that this would affect the results by
The monthly data is transformed into a       testing two alternative measures of MAX, a

                                                                                    16
quarterly data set, since the regression is done       matched-adjusted MAX   and a residual

13                                                         15
  The front load fee is an upfront percent charge or         AG (2020) dataset contains 150,181 fund quarter
an upfront fixed charge on allocated capital. The            observations from 3,674 distinct funds. Note that
rear load fee is a percent charge or an upfront fixed          their dataset contains ~ 6 more years. Some
charge on withdrawn capital.                               differences may also stem from differences in data
14
  In the CRSP dataset, it is possible to see the load          filtering. In a perfect replication setting, we would
fees based on different levels of capital allocation          have used the same dataset as AG (2020), but we
per customer, but it is impossible to identify what          have been unable to obtain that dataset.
                                                           16
load fees that have actually been applied, since we             Using benchmark portfolios in each quarter,
do not know the distribution of capital allocation.           where funds are ranked based on volatility, the
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 14

       17
MAX . These alternative measures of MAX       can therefore increase their share of winner
still allow a positive and significant relation to        stocks or decrease their share of losing stocks
fund flows, suggesting that collinearity is an        to mislead the evaluator into thinking that
unlikely driver of the results.                           returns must be good, since they seem to have a
                                                       portfolio with a high share of stocks that have
A Pearson Chi-squared test on the MAX and        been “winners” and low share of stocks that
MIN frequencies indicates that the data       have been “losers”.
displays seasonality in the distribution of MAX

                            18
and MIN over months . We can reject the null       Our distribution over months differs 6% for
hypothesis (both for MIN and MAX) that the       MIN and 5% for MAX between the most
distributions would be uniform at a significance        frequent month and the most infrequent month.
level of 0.1% (chi-square test statistics are both         This displays a slightly less smooth distribution
>4,000). Seasonality could arise due to several        over months relative to AG (2020)19.
factors, one of them being the phenomenon of
“window dressing” at year- or quarter-ends.
The idea behind window dressing is that fund
performance is not only dependent on actual
performance but also evaluated based on
screenings of holdings at year-end or quarter-
end (Lakonishok et. al. 1991). A fund manager

matched MAX is the difference between a fund’s           reject the null hypothesis that the MAX and MIN
MAX and the average MAX in the benchmark             frequencies (respectively of course) occur equally
portfolio that a fund belongs to that quarter                     likely over different months.
17                                                         19
  Replacing the MAX with the residuals from a              Our distribution over months differ 6% for MIN
cross-sectional regression of MAX trailing twelve           and 5% for MAX, whereas the difference is almost
month returns and volatility.                               4% for AG (2020).
18
  The Pearson Chi-squared test statistic is 4,600
for MIN and 4,000 for MAX. We can therefore
                      20
Table 2. Mean values  of variables over different years.

Table 3. Correlation matrix

20
  Note that the mean values are presented as a simple average of all data in the dataset. The variables in this
table are therefore not weighted with total net assets and can therefore not be compared directly with AG (2020).
Figure 3. Distribution of what month that the MIN for each data point corresponds to. For example,
12% of data points have a MIN that occurred in January.

Figure 4. Distribution of what month that the MAX for each data point corresponds to.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 17

   5. The regression model
                                                    Note that time is still denoted in months,
Like AG (2020), we employ the Fama and
                                                meaning that time index 𝑡 − 3 indicates the
Macbeth (1973) regression model to test the
                                                ending month of the previous quarter. The
relationship between MIN and FLOW in the
                                                            reader is reminded that the variables still reflect
subsequent quarter. The Fama and Macbeth
                                                                      quarterly data. For example: 𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊𝑖,𝑡 denotes
regression (1973) is a two-step regression
                                                         flow for the entire previous quarter with ending
model that is suitable for handling time series
                                                               month 𝑡. 𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊𝑖,𝑡−3 denotes flow for the entire
panel data. The first step is to regress the
                                                  quarter with ending month 𝑡 − 3. To avoid
dependent variable (in our case FLOW) against
                                                  perfect multicollinearity, MID_PERF is the
all proposed control factors. This produces a
                                                                   baseline category.
coefficient for each factor for each share class.
Step two is to regress FLOW against these
                                                  We employ the following regression model to
produced coefficients to achieve an overall
                                                    test the relationship between MAX and FLOW:
coefficient for each control factor. The model
was originally developed to estimate asset        𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊  = 𝛼 + 𝛽    ∗ 𝑀𝐴𝑋    + 𝛿    ∗ 𝑋
                                                                                               𝑖,𝑡             𝑖,𝑡−3           𝑖,𝑡−3      𝑖,𝑡−3      𝑖,𝑡−3
prices/returns/excess returns based on risk                          + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡−3
factors. In all regressions that we run, all
independent variables except for AGE are       We employ the following regression model to
lagged with one quarter, to better represent        test the relationships between MIN and FLOW
what information that investors have available.        and MAX and FLOW simultaneously:

 𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊  = 𝛼 + 𝛽     ∗ 𝑀𝐼𝑁     + 𝛿     ∗ 𝑋                 𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑖,𝑡−3 ∗ 𝑀𝐼𝑁𝑖,𝑡−3 + 𝛾𝑖,𝑡−3
           𝑖,𝑡             𝑖,𝑡−3          𝑖,𝑡−3      𝑖,𝑡−3      𝑖,𝑡−3
                    + 𝜀                                                              ∗ 𝑀𝐴𝑋𝑖,𝑡−3 + δ𝑖,𝑡−3 ∗ X𝑖,𝑡−3
                                  𝑖,𝑡−3
                                                                                       + ε𝑖,𝑡−3

Where the second control variable term 𝑋 is a
vector of the following control variables:

                  ln (𝐹𝑈𝑁𝐷_𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−3)
                  ln (𝐶𝑂𝑀𝑃_𝑇𝑁𝐴𝑖,𝑡−3)
                          ln൫𝐴𝐺𝐸𝑖,𝑡 ൯
                       𝑀𝐺𝑀𝑇_𝐹𝐸𝐸𝑖,𝑡−3
                       𝑇𝑈𝑅𝑁_𝑅𝐴𝑇𝐼𝑂𝑖,𝑡−3
                        𝐸𝑋𝑃_𝑅𝐴𝑇𝐼𝑂𝑖,𝑡−3
                               𝑉𝑂𝐿𝑖,𝑡−3
                           𝑆𝐾𝐸𝑊𝑖,𝑡−3
                             𝐹𝐿𝑂𝑊𝑖,𝑡−3
                        𝐿𝑂𝑊_𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐹𝑖,𝑡−3
                        𝐻𝐼𝐺𝐻_𝑃𝐸𝑅𝐹𝑖,𝑡−3
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 18

   6. Results                               in the last three regressions, in accordance with
                                              AG (2020). By doing this, the coefficient
   6.1 MIN - FLOW Relationship          estimate of a standardized control variable

The regression results indicate that there is a       responds to the effect on FLOW that a change
positive relationship between increasing (less        in the independent variable equal to one (1)
extreme) MIN and FLOW. This implies that        standard deviation has. For reference, the
investors tend to allocate more capital to funds      average FLOW in a quarter is 2.3%. For the
with less extreme historically negative returns.        MIN-FLOW relationship, an increase by one

                                                                                22
Without MAX included in the regression (1), a        (1) standard deviation  yields a 1.1 percentage
+1 percentage point change in MIN yields an       points increased FLOW in the next quarter.
increase of 0.42 percentage points in FLOW.
This relationship is robust to adjustment for        In the standardized variables combined
fund performance and is significant at a 0.1%        regression (6), we can compare the effect of

      21
level . In the combined regression (3), where       MIN and MAX, relative to their respective
both MIN and MAX are included as       deviations in the dataset. We notice that MAX,
independent variables, the effect of MIN on        considering its larger deviation in our dataset,
fund flow is still significant at the 0.1% level.       seems to have a larger effect (0.066) on FLOW
With MAX included in the regression, a +1       than MIN has (0.018). This is explained by the
percentage point change in MIN yields an       fact that although the coefficients of MIN and
increase of 0.71 percentage points in FLOW.       MAX are somewhat similar in regressions (1)
Hence, compared to regression 1 (without       and (2), MAX is more volatile (as we notice by
MAX), the size of the MIN coefficient is larger        observing their standard deviations, MIN: 2.1%
in the combined setting.                                    and MAX: 8.7%).

In order to compare the effects between control
variables, we use standardized control variables

21                                                         22
  Note that Table 2 shows *** to denote the 1%            For reference, the standard deviation of MIN is
level, but t-values are included                               2.1%.
Table 4. Regression results for the three non-standardized regressions and the three standardized
regressions.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 20

   6.2 MAX-FLOW Relationship         appropriate to compare the regression without
                                                 standardized variables. AG (2020) do not
The main research contribution of our article is
                                                       present the standard deviation, which prohibits
the MIN-FLOW relationship. However, in
                                                      us from comparing our results with theirs in the
order to compare our results with those of AG
                                                        standardized variable regression.
(2020), we argue that the MAX-FLOW
relationship is interesting to present as well.
                                                    In the combined regression (3), a +1 percentage
The time-strained reader who is only
                                               point change in MAX yields an increase of 0.82
interested in the MIN-FLOW relationship can
                                                   percentage points in FLOW.
therefore skip this section.
                                               6.3 Robustness of the regression
The MAX-FLOW relationship is robust to
                                               The Fama and Macbeth (1973) regression does
adjustment for fund performance and is also
                                                  not have a conventional Variance Inflation
significant at a 0.1% level. Regression 2 shows
                                                        Factor test. Instead, we rely on the correlation
that without MIN included in the regression, a
                                                    matrix to detect possibly critical
+1 percentage point change in MAX yields an
                                                     multicollinearity, in order to test the quality of
increase of 0.53 percentage points in FLOW.
                                                  our model. We also run a Variance Inflation
We can compare this to the effect between 0.26
                                                    Factor test on a cross-sectional regression,
to 0.33 in AG’s (2020) regressions, which
                                                      instead of the Fama and Macbeth (1973), with
indicates that our regression results are in fact
                                                  the same data and variables as the above
quite similar, although our regression indicates
                                                        regression. This test indicates that there is no
a slightly stronger relationship between MAX
                                                           critical multicollinearity in either the MIN-
and FLOW. In the standardized variable
                                                   FLOW or the MAX-FLOW regressions, as VIF
regression (5), an increase in MAX by 1
                  23                                is below 3.5 for all variables in the model.
standard deviation   yields +4.3 percentage
points increased FLOW in the next quarter. To
                                                 Most control variables show expected signs
compare with AG (2020), their result is that 1
                                                  across the regressions. For a more detailed
standard deviation yields 0.75% (piecewise
                 24                                 evaluation, see table 5 in Appendix II.
linear regression  ) and 0.95% (quadratic

             25
regression  ). However, the standard deviation
                                                       Since our model is based on share class data of
of MAX most likely differs between our dataset
                                                     funds, it is necessary to use robust standard
and AG (2020), meaning that it might be more
                                                   errors. However, since we also want to adjust

23                                                         25
  For reference, the standard deviation of MAX is            Quadratic regression refers to ranking
8.7%.                                                  performance with one continuous linear and one
24
  Piecewise linear regression refers to ranking              quadratic term.
performance as LOW, MIDDLE and HIGH.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 21

standard errors for autocorrelation in the time        of interest into the regression, MIN. From a
series data, we employ the Newey and West       theoretical point of view, MAX and MIN
(1987) standard errors with 1 time-period lag.        should both impact fund flow, as they are tail
The Newey and West standard error estimation        events on different sides of the loss and gain
is especially used to adjust standard errors for        domain. According to cumulative prospect
autocorrelation, but is also robust to       theory, extreme MINs should lead to lower
heteroscedasticity in standard errors (Newey        fund flow, while extreme MAXs should lead to
and West, 1987), and performs very similar to        higher fund flow. However, intuitively one
Huber-White robust standard error estimation        might think that a fund with a high MAX could
for panel data (Petersen, 2009). The Newey and       also have a high (less extreme) MIN, implying
West (1987) standard errors are also used by       that the effect we see from an extreme MIN
AG (2020).                                        could simply be attributed to MIN functioning
                                                 as a proxy variable for MAX. Therefore, we
AG (2020) perform a separate test to check       need to ensure that the effect of MIN on fund
whether their results are robust when using        flow displayed in the regression is not simply a
clustered standard errors. We have not been       consequence of correlation with MAX. We
able to test the robustness of our results with        check this is in two ways. First, by examining
clustered standard errors as we have used the        the combined regression it becomes evident
“asreg” package in STATA to perform the       that both MIN and MAX are significant also in
Fama and Macbeth (1973) regression. This       a combined setting. Second, a negative
package does not allow Newey and West       correlation can be observed between MIN and
(1987) standard errors to be clustered.       MAX in the correlation matrix. Since the
Although, AG (2020) conclude that their results        correlation is negative, we would expect MIN
are indeed robust when using clustered standard        and MAX to show coefficients with different
errors, it should be mentioned that since our        signs, if most of the effect of MIN would be that
data is on a share class level, it would be even        it functions as a proxy for MAX. As the reader
more interesting for us to perform this test.            can observe in the regression, the coefficients
                                                  have the same sign. To conclude, we seem to
   7. Discussion and                    find rather strong statistical evidence that the
       Implications                         effect of an extreme MIN is a real and
                                                       standalone effect, and not just a proxy for the
   7.1 Interactions between MIN
                                                   effect of an extreme MAX.
  and MAX

Compared to the original model developed by
AG (2020), we introduce an additional variable
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 22

    7.2 Theoretical implications:             counterintuitive as the results that investors
    Prospect theory as an explanatory        prefer funds with extreme MAXs. A key reason
    model of our results                       to invest in mutual funds would be to lower the
                                                         risk by benefitting from diversification, and the
It is perhaps counterintuitive that investors in
                                                    investors of mutual funds could therefore be
mutual funds would exhibit gambling-like
                                                     expected to be risk averse, and hence react more
tendencies by preferring funds with lottery-like
                                                   strongly to the prospect of heavy losses.
returns, as an important objective for these
                                                       However, as we control for volatility, the effect
investors would be to benefit from
                                                      of MIN goes beyond the “rational” (or at least
diversification and liquidity. However, AG
                                                  commonly quantified) way in which investors
(2020) suggest that investors’ tendencies to
                                                       shy away from risk. We can therefore argue that
overweight positive extreme returns is a more
                                                       investors that would want to control their risk
widespread phenomenon throughout financial
                                                       levels would most likely do so by observing the
markets than what has previously been
                                                   volatility of the fund, as opposed to the MIN of
understood, as it is also present for individuals
                                                        the fund. As a result, trading on MIN should not
who have already decided to invest in mutual
                                                     be considered a rational investment strategy,
funds. Building on the work by AG (2020), our
                                                         even for loss averse investors.
research suggests that investors also disfavor
funds with the opposite distributional feature,
                                                         An interesting result from our regression is that
namely extreme negative returns on record. Our
                                                  the coefficient for MAX is larger than the
results, together with the result from AG
                                                        coefficient for MIN, implying that the effect on
(2020), therefore suggest that mutual fund
                                                fund flow is stronger for a change in MAX
investors are subject to erring investment
                                                 compared to MIN. The standardized variable
decisions, at least from an expected utility
                                                    combined regression (6) suggests that the
perspective, on both the likelihood of high-
                                                overall impact of MAX on fund flow seems
payoff states as well as low-payoff states.
                                                  larger than the overall impact of MIN on fund
                                                         flow, when accounting for their deviations.
Our results are in line with cumulative prospect
                                               These results imply that MAX is more
theory, which predicts that individuals
                                                  important than MIN to explain future fund
overweight tail-events in their decision-
                                                      flows.
making. In our case, the theory predicts that
investors would be less inclined to buy funds
                                              As the coefficient of MAX is larger than the
with more extreme MINs, which is also what
                                                 coefficient of MIN in our regression, our results
our empirical results show. Our results,
                                                      stand in contrast to the results of Kahneman and
indicating that investors prefer funds with less
                                                  Tversky (1979, 1992), where individuals are
extreme MINs, might however not be as
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 23

shown to exhibit substantial loss aversion. In        theory. Recall that fund flow is not only driven
fact, most studies find loss aversion       by investors evaluating whether to enter the

            26
coefficients  around 2, meaning losses weigh       fund or not, but also by investors already
approximately twice as much as gains (Tversky        invested in the fund, evaluating whether to
and Kahneman, 1992; Abdellaoui, Bleichrodt       decrease or increase their fund holdings. As it
and Kammoun, 2013; Abdellaoui et al., 2016).        turns out, while “outside” investors would only
In contrast to this, our results indicate that the        be subject to probability weighting within
gambling-behavior associated with a       cumulative prospect theory (overweighting
preference for an extreme MAX (AG, 2020) is       extreme events), “inside” investors would
stronger compared to the loss aversion        experience an additional effect depending on
associated with a preference for a non-extreme        whether they are in the loss or gain domain.
MIN. Interestingly, other researchers have        According to the S-shaped value function in
found the same phenomenon when prospect       cumulative prospect theory (Kahneman and
theory is studied in a non-laboratory        Tversky, 1992), the risk-aversion is context-
environment, implying that the utility function        dependent for inside investors, who will be
differs from the predictions of classic prospect        risk-seeking in the loss domain and risk-averse
theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). As an       in the gain domain. For inside investors, an
example, Abdellaoui et. al. (2013) encountered        extreme MIN likely causes the investor to fall

                                                                                27
surprising results when trying to replicate        into the loss domain   whereas an extreme
laboratory results with observations of financial        MAX likely causes the investor to fall into the
professionals. Specifically, they found that a        gain domain. This implies that inside investors
large portion of the financial professionals in        would be risk-seeking in relation to an extreme
their study showed gain seeking behavior (as        MIN, meaning they might not contribute to a
opposed to risk aversion). On aggregate, their        negative fund flow by selling their position.
study also showed much lower levels of loss        Respectively, inside investors would be risk-
aversion compared to other studies.                   averse in relation to an extreme MAX, meaning
                                                   they would sell their position in the gain
There is however a possible explanation to our        domain, contributing to a negative fund flow.
results concerning the relative effect of MIN       Hence, inside investors will likely have a
and MAX on fund flow, that would not violate        directly opposite response compared to outside
the fundamentals of cumulative prospect        investors. Since the effect is larger in the loss

26
  Note that the loss aversion coefficient is not               negative total accumulated return, instead the
directly comparable to our results, we do not                perceptions of loss could also be valid for losing a
calculate this number in our statistical analysis              substantial part of a previously accumulated gain,
27
  Note that being in the loss domain does not              such as with an extreme MIN.
necessarily require that the investor would have a
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 24

domain (the S-curve is steeper) this could        or it would be difficult to argue that cumulative
contribute to explaining why the effect of MAX       prospect theory would be the correct
is larger than the effect of MIN on fund flow.        explanatory model. The effect of time on the
Unfortunately, as stated, the data does not allow        relationship between MAX and fund flow and
us to distinguish between inside and outside        MIN and fund flow would be interesting to test.
investors, nor between inside investors in loss        However, the regression model specifications
domain or gain domain. Therefore, we cannot        of how to test this would not be trivial, the main
expand this theoretical reasoning into an        problem being that the interactions between
empirical test.                                          time and MAX, as well as time and MIN, could
                                                      consist of a wide range of other effects apart
   7.3 Accessibility to MIN and           from the effect that we actually would like to
    MAX in investors’ option space         measure, the growth of online investment

In order for prospect theory to be a plausible         research. Therefore, any time-series over this
explanatory model for the observed effects of        data period could be tainted by other external
extreme MAX and MIN on fund flow, investors       factors that affected the financial markets over
must be able to consider MAX and MIN in their        these years. Examples of such external factors
decision-making. This is only possible if        could be the dot com bubble and the 2008
information regarding MAX and MIN are       financial crisis that have affected investment
accessible to investors. AG (2020) argue that        behavior and capital allocation over this time
the adoption of online platforms to access        period. Reliably measuring the effect of
financial data has made information about       investors’ access to information about MIN and
MAX available to investors, as many financial        MAX is something that we therefore leave for
sites report historical lowest and highest        future research.
monthly returns from the recent year. If this is
the case, the relationship between fund flow       Another interesting consideration regarding
and MAX (and MIN) could be subject to a time-        investors’ access to information about MAX
component and this relationship should grow        and MIN, is our use of style-adjusted return and
stronger with time, as more individual investors         not the actual return (in this paper as well as the
can access financial information through online       research done by AG (2020)). In line with the
services. If the relationship does not grow        accessibility prerequisite, investors must have
stronger with time, AG’s (2020) explanation of        access to information about MAX and MIN in
the relationship between MAX and fund flow,        order to include it in their decision making.
which is based on cumulative prospect theory,        There is no doubt that investors have easier
could be questioned. In this case, investors        access to actual return, rather than style-
would have to access MAX in some other way,        adjusted return, as style-adjusted return is
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 25

seldomly directly reported. This raises the        important. From previous literature, we can
question whether investors do in fact have       identify two main reasons expanded on below:
access to MAX and MIN if they cannot observe
the style-adjusted return. However, when doing           7.4.1 MAX as a portfolio strategy?

investment research, investors are often        First, the fund manager’s incentives are usually
presented with securities, such as mutual funds,        based on assets under management (AUM),
that are grouped by categories, for example;        implying that fund flow is a driver of fund
geographical market, industry focus or        manager behavior. In line with this, prior
investment style. This grouping of information        research shows that fund flow impacts the fund
means that although investors are not directly        manager’s behavior. For example, as return is a
exposed to style-adjusted returns, they are often        determining factor for future fund flow, fund
presented with the actual return of a fund as        managers tend to alter the riskiness of their
well as the actual returns of comparable funds.         portfolios as a response to the relationship
Hence, the evaluation of fund return is often       between performance and fund flow, especially
subject to benchmarking. Furthermore,        towards the end of the year (Chevalier and
previous research suggests that investment       Ellison, 1997; Brown, Harlow and Starks,
decisions are likely to be based on fund style       1996). However, fund flow is not always
(Mullainathan, 2002; Barberis and Shleifer,       strictly related to previous fund performance.
2003; Pomorski, 2011). This would imply that       Research by Cooper, Gulen and Rau (2005)
investors compare the return of funds within the       implies that if a fund changes name to
same fund style when investing (rather than       something in line with a “hot and new”
comparing the return between funds in general)        investment style, they can increase fund flow.
if they have decided on the style before        Financial ratings, media attention, in-your-face
deciding on the specific fund. We therefore       fees and marketing efforts have also been
argue that investors do have access to style-        shown to be determinants of fund flow, adding
adjusted return and that both MAX and MIN       to the idea that the fund flow is not always
fulfill the accessibility prerequisite.                   linked to measures such as fund performance

                                                    (Sirri and Tufano, 1998; Jain and Shuang Wu,
   7.4 Practical implications:
                                                   2000; Barber, Odean and Zheng, 2005; Guercio
   Consequences of the MIN-
                                                    and Tkac, 2008; Gallaher, Kaniel and Starks,
   FLOW relationship on portfolio
                                                    2009). Hence, cosmetic effects can influence
   strategy
                                                       capital allocation in funds for consumers in an
In order to understand why our findings are        irrational way. Fund managers can therefore
relevant, one needs to understand why the       also employ cosmetic measures to manipulate
capital flow in and out of a fund (fund flow) is        fund flow.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 26

As our results suggest that MIN and MAX           7.4.2 Ability to predict flow-induced
impact fund flow, this raises the question of           trades

how fund flow could be manipulated by
                                                       Second, fund flow also plays a key role in the
considering MIN and MAX in the portfolio
                                                        tendency for mutual fund returns to persist over
strategy. In fact, in the conclusion by AG
                                                       multi-year periods, meaning ‘winning’ funds
(2020), they introduce the idea that fund
                                                 have a larger tendency to keep on being
managers could increase their fund flow by
                                                 winning funds, while “losing” funds have a
choosing a portfolio strategy that would
                                                     larger tendency to keep on being losing funds
generate more extreme MAXs. As fund
                                                  (Wermers, 2003). Although part of the
managers can go to great lengths to manipulate
                                                momentum can be ascribed to the fact that
fund flow (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997; Brown,
                                                  winning funds hold winning stocks, the
Harlow and Starks, 1996), the idea of a MAX-
                                                     consumer reaction to fund performance and the
based portfolio strategy becomes highly
                                                    resulting behavior of the fund managers both
interesting. The results we show in this thesis
                                                      play important roles. While managers of losing
can contribute to an added perspective on such
                                                       funds tend to be reluctant to sell their low return
a strategy. Specifically, our results shed light on
                                                      stocks in favor of momentum stocks, the higher
the fact that fund managers who seek to
                                                      cash inflows of the winning funds enable these
generate extreme MAXs would also have to
                                                  to further implement momentum strategies
take into consideration how the effect of an
                                                  (Wermers, 2003; Grinblatt and Han, 2005).
extreme MIN would affect fund flow. As MAX
and MIN show a negative correlation of -0.2, a        This also has implications for underlying stock
strategy in place to generate extreme MAXs       prices. As the empirical research suggests that
would likely also generate a higher relative        fund flow affects underlying stock prices as
portion of extreme MINs. Since investors,       winning and losing funds respectively often
according to our regression, react negatively to        have correlated holdings due to portfolio
extreme MINs, a fund management strategy to        limitations imposed by the fund style. As funds
generate extreme MAXs in order to achieve       with sizable capital inflows (winning funds)
higher fund flow, would at least partially be        will be inclined to expand their current
countered by the negative effect on fund flow       positions, the stocks held in common by these
from the effect of extreme MINs. From this, our        funds will be subject to a positive price
research contributes to the interesting        pressure. Likewise, funds with sizable outflows
discussion introduced by AG (2020) regarding        (losing funds) will be inclined to decrease their
portfolio management considerations.                existing positions. Hence, stocks held in
                                                      common by constrained funds will be subject to
                                                 downward price pressure (Wermers, 2003;
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 27

Coval and Stafford, 2007). Coval and Stafford        fund flow, with implications for two trading
(2007) therefore suggest that a trading strategy         strategies.
based on trading against distressed mutual
                                                   Regarding our theoretical contribution,
funds can yield significant returns. As a result,
                                                 although we observe a relationship between
                                 28
there is an incentive to front-run  the expected
                                                       MIN and fund flow, in line with the predictions
flow-induced trades by constrained funds,
                                                        of cumulative prospect theory, we cannot prove
making predictions of future fund flows highly
                                                            that this relationship is actually a result of said
relevant. Hence, taking MIN (and MAX) into
                                                  theory. Hence, our discussion regarding the
account could enhance the performance of any
                                                  mechanisms behind the observed effect on fund
financial model used to predict future fund
                                                       flow due to extreme negative payoff states is a
flow.
                                                    theoretical one. In order to strengthen the
                                                       argument that cumulative prospect theory is the
   8. Conclusion                          correct explanatory model to use when

Our results show that investors in actively       accounting for the mechanisms behind the
managed equity funds make their investment       observed effects, we suggest two ideas for
decisions in line with one of the predictions of         future research.

cumulative prospect theory, namely that
                                                       First, we suggest that future research should try
investors place excess weight on tail events.
                                               to answer if MIN and MAX are actually
This implies that negative extreme payoff states
                                                     accessible in investors’ option space, for
in the historical return will result in smaller
                                                   instance by constructing a dataset where the
capital inflow in the future, even when the
                                                     magnitude of the effect over time can be studied
results are adjusted for historical performance,
                                                       in relation to the adoption of online financial
volatility, fund fees, fund size and company
                                                    tools. Second, our inability to distinguish
size. Interestingly, our findings indicate that
                                                      “inside” investors from “outside” investors in
MAX has a larger impact than MIN on future
                                                       the dataset restrains our ability to relate our
fund flow. Our results have implications both
                                                       results to prospect theory. If investor behavior
from a theoretical and practical point of view.
                                                 can be studied in the gain and loss domain
First, we contribute to the line of research
                                                        respectively, the predictions of prospect theory
investigating how the predictions of cumulative
                                                   could be studied with more accuracy.
prospect theory perform in a real-life setting.
                                                   Regarding our practical contribution, the
Second, we contribute to a deepened
                                                  consequences of the two discussed trading
understanding of the mechanisms affecting

28
  In this context, front-running is not used to                 the procedure of trying to predict stock price
describe the illegal act of trading on advance                movements by anticipating the behavior of large
information. Instead, the term is used to describe            mutual funds.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 28

strategies should be studied in more depth.
Furthermore, in order to protect retail investors
from financial deterioration, more research is
needed to understand how such investors could
be safeguarded from erring investment
decisions based on extreme MINs and MAXs.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 29

                                                      Brown, K. C., Harlow, W. V. and Starks, L. T.
   9. References
                                                 (1996) ‘Of Tournaments and Temptations: An
                                                   Analysis of Managerial Incentives in the
Abdellaoui, M. et al. (2016) ‘Measuring Loss
                                                 Mutual Fund Industry’, The Journal of
Aversion under Ambiguity: A Method to Make
                                                    Finance. JSTOR, 51(1), p. 85. doi:
Prospect Theory Completely Observable’,
                                                 10.2307/2329303.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. Springer New
York LLC, 52(1). doi: 10.1007/s11166-016-
                                                       Brunnermeier, M. K., Gollier, C. and Parker, J.
9234-y.
                                                         A. (2007) ‘Optimal beliefs, asset prices, and the
                                                  preference for skewed returns’, American
Abdellaoui, M., Bleichrodt, H. and Kammoun,
                                               Economic Review, 97(2), pp. 159–165. doi:
H. (2013) ‘Do financial professionals behave
                                                     10.1257/aer.97.2.159.
according to prospect theory? An experimental
study’, Theory and Decision, 74, pp. 411–429.
                                                   Chevalier, J. and Ellison, G. (1997) ‘Risk
doi: 10.1007/s11238-011-9282-3.
                                                 taking by Mutual Fund as a response to
                                                     incentives’, Journal of Political Economy.
Akbas, F. and Genc, E. (2020) ‘Do Mutual
                                                University of Chicago Press, 105(6), pp. 1167–
Fund Investors Overweight the Probability of
                                                    1200. doi: 10.1086/516389.
Extreme Payoffs in the Return Distribution?’,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
                                                      Cooper, M. J., Gulen, H. and Rau, P. R. (2005)
Elsevier BV, 55(1), pp. 223–261. doi:
                                              ‘Changing Names with Style: Mutual Fund
10.2139/ssrn.2734743.
                                              Name Changes and Their Effects on Fund
                                                  Flows’, The Journal of Finance, 60(6), pp.
Barber, B. M. and Odean, T. (2012) ‘The
                                                2825–2858. doi: 10.2307/3694805.
Behavior of Individual Investors’, SSRN
Electronic Journal. Elsevier BV. doi:
                                                     Coval, J. and Stafford, E. (2007) ‘Asset fire
10.2139/ssrn.1872211.
                                                   sales (and purchases) in equity markets’,
                                                     Journal of Financial Economics. North-
Barber, B. M., Odean, T. and Zheng, L. (2005)
                                                  Holland, 86(2), pp. 479–512. doi:
‘Out of sight, out of mind: The effects of
                                                      10.1016/j.jfineco.2006.09.007.
expenses on Mutual Fund flows’, Journal of
Business, 78(6), pp. 2095–2119. doi:
                                                    Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J. and Blake, C. R.
10.1086/497042.
                                                  (2001) ‘A First Look at the Accuracy of the
                                              CRSP Mutual Fund Database and a
Barberis, N. (2013) ‘The psychology of tail
                                                Comparison of the CRSP and Morningstar
events: Progress and challenges’, American
                                                Mutual Fund Databases’, The Journal of
Economic Review, 103(3), pp. 611–616. doi:
                                                    Finance, LVI (6).
10.1257/aer.103.3.611.
                                                     Eraker, B. and Ready, M. (2015) ‘Do investors
Barberis, N. C. (2013) ‘Thirty Years of
                                                         overpay for stocks with lottery-like payoffs?
Prospect Theory in Economics: A Review and
                                                   An examination of the returns of OTC stocks’,
Assessment’, Journal of Economic
                                                     Journal of Financial Economics. Elsevier,
Perspectives, 27(1). doi: 10.1257/jep.27.1.173.
                                                  115(3), pp. 486–504. doi:
Barberis, N. and Shleifer, A. (2003) ‘Style        10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.11.002.
Investing’, Journal of Financial Economics,
                                                Evans, R. B. (2010) ‘Mutual Fund Incubation’,
68(2).
                                                  The Journal of Finance, 65(4), pp. 1581–1611.
Barberis, N. and Huang, M. (2008) ‘Stocks as
                                                     Fama, E., & MacBeth, J. (1973). ‘Risk, Return,
lotteries: The implications of probability
                                                          and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests’. Journal of
weighting for security prices’, American
                                                      Political Economy, 81(3), pp. 607-636.
Economic Review, 98(5), pp. 2066–2100. doi:
10.1257/aer.98.5.2066.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 30

Fred van Raaij, W. (2016) ‘Understanding       Newey, W., & West, K. (1987). ‘A Simple,
Consumer Financial Behavior: Money       Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and
Management in an Age of Financial Illiteracy’.        Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance
New York City: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:        Matrix’. Econometrica, 55(3), 703-708.
10.1057/9781137544254.                         doi:10.2307/1913610

De Giorgi, E. G. and Legg, S. (2012) ‘Dynamic        O’Brien, R. M. (2007) ‘A caution regarding
portfolio choice and asset pricing with narrow        rules of thumb for variance inflation factors’,
framing and probability weighting’, Journal of        Quality and Quantity, 41(5), pp. 673–690. doi:
Economic Dynamics and Control. Elsevier,        10.1007/s11135-006-9018-6.
36(7), pp. 951–972. doi:
10.1016/j.jedc.2012.01.010.                          Pomorski, L. (2011) ‘Style Investing: Evidence
                                                from Mutual Fund Flows’, SSRN Electronic
Gallaher, S. T., Kaniel, R. and Starks, L. T.        Journal. Elsevier BV. doi:
(2009) ‘Advertising and Mutual Fund: From       10.2139/ssrn.559405.
Families to Individual Funds’, SSRN Electronic
Journal. Elsevier BV. doi:        Sensoy, B. A. (2008) ‘Performance evaluation
10.2139/ssrn.1362535.                                and self-designated benchmark indexes in the
                                                  Mutual Fund industry $’. doi:
Grinblatt, M. and Han, B. (2005) ‘Prospect        10.1016/j.jfineco.2008.02.011.
theory, mental accounting, and momentum’,
Journal of Financial Economics, 78, pp. 311–       Sirri, E. R. and Tufano, P. (1998) ‘Costly
339. doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2004.10.006.             Search and Mutual Fund Flows’, The Journal
                                                         of Finance, LIII (5).
Guercio, D. Del and Tkac, P. A. (2008) ‘Star
power: The effect of morningstar ratings on       Stott, H. P. (2006) ‘Cumulative prospect
Mutual Fund flow’, Journal of Financial and       theory’s functional menagerie’, Journal of Risk
Quantitative Analysis. Cambridge University       and Uncertainty. Springer, 32(2), pp. 101–130.
Press, 43(4), pp. 907–936. doi:        doi: 10.1007/s11166-006-8289-6.
10.1017/S0022109000014393.
                                                  Tversky, A. and Fox, C. R. (1995) ‘Weighing
Investment Company Institute (2019) FACT       risk and uncertainty’, Psychological Review.
BOOK A Review of Trends and Activities in the       American Psychological Association Inc.,
Investment Company Industry 59th edition.           102(2), pp. 269–283. doi: 10.1037/0033-
                                                 295X.102.2.269.
Jain, P. C. and Shuang Wu, J. (2000) ‘Truth in
Mutual Fund Advertising: Evidence on Future       Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1981) ‘The
Performance and Fund Flows’, The Journal of        Framing of decisions and the psychology of
Finance, 55(2), pp. 937–958.                         choice’, Science.

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect       Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1992)
Theory: An Analsysis of Decision Under Risk.       ‘Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative
Econometrica (pre-1986), 47(2), 263–291.            representation of uncertainty’, Journal of Risk
                                                   and Uncertainty. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Richard H       5(4), pp. 297–323. doi: 10.1007/BF00122574.
Thaler, and Robert W Vishny. 1991. “Window
Dressing by Pension Fund Managers.”       Wermers, R. R. (2003) ‘Is Money Really
American Economic Review Papers and       “Smart”? New Evidence on the Relation
Proceedings May.                                Between Mutual Fund Flows, Manager
                                              Behavior, and Performance Persistence’, SSRN
Mullainathan, S. (2002) Thinking Through       Electronic Journal. Elsevier BV. doi:
Categories. MIT and NBER.                       10.2139/ssrn.414420.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 31

Wu, G. and Gonzalez, R. (1996) ‘Curvature of        Operations Res.and the Management Sciences,
the probability weighting function’,       42(12), pp. 1676–1690. doi:
Management Science. INFORMS Inst.for       10.1287/mnsc.42.12.1676.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 32

   Appendix I – Additional data on the two funds

Figure 5. Graph showing that the two funds being compared have identical cumulative return and
volatility.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 33

   Appendix II – Summary of variables

Table 5. Summary of variables and their effect

 Variable name Effect Comment

 LN_AGE - Expected effect. Older funds might grow slower compared to new
                                funds.

 VOL + / - Volatility could indicate increased risk, as the model adjusts for both
                            adjusted yearly returns and MAX. We would therefore expect a
                                        negative effect across regressions.

 SKEW None Increased skewness implies a longer right tail: meaning investors can
                                expect frequent small losses and fewer large gains. Since we control
                                 for adjusted yearly returns and volatility, the skewness can be hard to
                                    interpret.

 FUND_TNA - Expected effect. Larger funds probably grow slower compared to
                                smaller funds.

 COMP_TNA + Expected effect. Larger fund companies probably have higher
                                  visibility and may attract more capital.

 LAG_FLOW + Expected effect. We expect to see time clusters of FLOW if there are
                                no drastic changes on the market.

 MGMT_FEE + Unexpected effect. A higher management fee should be unattractive
                                         to investors.

 TURN_RATIO None Insignificant effect and we would perhaps not expect any significant
                                relationship between turnover ratio and fund flow.

 EXP_RATIO - It is hard to interpret whether a higher expense ratio should have a
                           direct effect on FLOW.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 34

   Appendix III - Data filtering

The exact process of data filtering is not described on a detailed level in AG (2020). However, we
believe that the process that we have followed is very similar to what they have done in order to achieve
their final dataset.

We use the share class codes to download data for the same funds from the CRSP mutual funds database.

                                                                                                                             29
Our initial data cleaning removes rows where data for certain information is missing (before merging
the datasets for fund information and return data). This removes the following number of rows:

    • Turnover ratio - 27,137 rows
    • Expense ratio - 27,137 rows
    • Age - 1,865 rows
    • Management fee - 27,137 rows
    • CRSP objective code - 8,497 rows
    • Share class code - 4,898 rows
    • Management company code - 22,948 rows

After this, we merge the information datasets with the return dataset. We now filter out rows with
missing data again, since it is not certain that all rows after the merge contain complete data for all
variables. This removes the following amount of rows:

    • CRSP objective code - 322,933 rows
    • Monthly return (missing value can be denoted by “R”) - 25,894 rows
    • Total Net Assets - 4,814 rows
    • Share class code - 24,497 rows
    • Management code - 167,199 rows
    • Objective code - 0 rows
    • Management fee - 81,253 rows
    • Age - 12 rows

                                   30
    • Expense ratio - 0 rows

29
  CRSP mutual fund data cannot deliver information about the fund and return data in a single file. We
therefore must merge datasets containing fund information with the dataset containing return data for the fund.
30
  As we see, the number of missing data points is equal to 27,137 rows for turnover ratio, expense ratio and
management fee. It seems like the data is missing for the same rows for these 3 variables and that also explains
why 0 rows are removed when filtering out missing expense ratio and turnover ratio; they have already been
filtered out with management fee in the merged dataset.
                Busch and Göransson (2020): Are investors better safe than sorry? 35

    • Turnover ratio - 0 rows

After this, we follow the algorithm that requires each fund to have 15 consecutive months to be included
in the dataset. So, every time series with less than 15 consecutive months will be removed. This removes
21,658 rows.

This leads to a dataset that consists of 1,367,867 rows. After all the calculations have been done on a
quarterly basis, we are left with 409,663 rows, since we filter out all rows that do not represent the end
of quarters, 958,204 rows.

After this, we must remove all rows without lagged variables, since the lagged variables are the
variables of primary interest in the regression, removing 14,363 rows. We then filter out the bottom 1-
percentile and top 99 percentile of FLOW, just as AG (2020). This is due to the fact that fund mergers
and splits might distort the data. This removed 14,495 rows. Finally, we remove all rows with less than
$500,000 in AUM, removing 23,129 rows.

After this we remove all rows with expense ratio smaller than 0 (0%) or larger than 1 (100%), removing
24,235 observations. We remove rows with management fee smaller than 0 (0%) or larger than 1
(100%), removing 1,161 observations. We eliminate rows data where turnover ratio is smaller than 0
(0%), removing 1,754 observations.