REACTING TO THE ERUPTION
OF CONFLICT

AN EVENT STUDY ON THE JANUARY 2020 U.S. – IRAN
POLITICAL ESCALATIONS AND THE AMERICAN DEFENCE
INDUSTRY

VALTER EHRSTRÖM

MARC MOSLEY

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Reacting to the eruption of conflict: An event study on the January 2020 U.S. – Iran
political escalations and the American defence industry

Abstract:

   Through conventional event study methods, we investigate how the shares of American
   defence companies reacted to arguably one of the most central developments in U.S. foreign
   policy in recent history - the intensified actions between the U.S. and Iran during the start
   of 2020. Furthermore, we aim to explain the differences in stock price reactions between
   the defence companies based on individual company characteristics. A portfolio of the
   industry constituents reacted positively, indicating the event’s informational importance to
   the sector. However, only eight out of 28 publicly traded military contractors experienced
   significant abnormal returns due to the news on an individual level. While most of our
   selected financial ratios do not show significance, we conclude that the respective
   companies’ share of revenue originating from defence activities is significant in explaining
   the observed variation in abnormal returns.

Keywords:

   Abnormal return, Aerospace and Defence, Conflict, Event study, United States Iran tensions

Authors:

   Valter Ehrström (24074)
   Marc Mosley (23966)

Tutors:

   Anastasia Girshina, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrian d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
© Valter Ehrström and Marc Mosley, 2020

Acknowledgements

   We would like to extend our gratitude to Anastasia Girshina for her continuous support
   through active assistance and valuable feedback.

                                     2
1 Introduction
On January 3, 2020, the existing tensions between the U.S. and Iran skyrocketed and
consequentially sparked fears of an all-out war following the U.S. airstrike on Iran’s high-
ranked military official, Qasem Soleimani, and his associates. The gravity of this sudden
political crisis caused a social media frenzy with fears of World War III and sparked financial
and political journalists’ interest into U.S. based aerospace and defence-related companies
(Bogel-Burroughs, 2020 and Pound, 2020).
Determined by Berkman et al. (2011) and Capelle-Blancard and Couderc (2008), international
unforeseen political crises influence the stock market as well as the defence industry
significantly. Bearing this in mind, we assess whether the U.S. defence industry experienced
abnormal returns on account of the noteworthy event on January 3, 2020. Assessing this on
both industry and company level, we examine the event’s implied informational value for the
industry and its constituents. Additionally, in line with Capelle-Blancard and Couderc (2008),
we focus on individual companies’ exposure to military actions and, along with selected
financial characteristics, relate it to the variance in abnormal returns between the companies.
Exploring the event on January 3, 2020, our objective is to create an insightful and specified
case-study of the stock return implications for listed U.S. aerospace and defence (“A&D”)
companies. Attested by earlier mentioned studies, geopolitical escalations influence the world
economy and cause fluctuations in capital markets. Uncertain times leads investors to seek
reshuffling opportunities for their stock-portfolios with the quest of finding safer financial
instruments to harbour their assets. In the wake of conflict escalation, the market may arguably
expect companies supplying the military to meet an increase in demand, leading to increased
expected financial prosperity. For publicly listed companies, this loop may infer higher stock
returns and thus work as a relatively safe investment for investors seeking to mitigate the
impact on their portfolio. In pursuit of expanding on-topic literature we also aim at improving
the understanding of investor behaviour vis-à-vis the defence industry. At the time of writing,
the Council on Foreign Affairs (2020) presents the interstate conflict status between the United
States and Iran as critical and worsening. The primary concerns of a worsening conflict
between the countries would have severe complications for the nations, both politically and
economically (Council on Foreign Relations, 2020). Hence, we also hope to provide a good
foundation for future reference in the analysis of financial performance as a consequence of
U.S.- Iran conflict escalation.
We adopt traditional event study tools to examine the reaction of the stock market to the chosen
event. In analysing abnormal returns, we utilise a multivariate model built around the Market
model, the most widely used model for similar event studies (Ahern 2009). Our findings show
that the aerospace and defence industry experienced positive abnormal returns of 2.35 per cent
in the course of the January 3, 2020 conflict escalation. On a company-specific level, we
observe that 25 out of 28 constituents experienced positive abnormal returns with eight proving
significant at a p<0.05 significance level, due to the studied event.
We are aware and feel the need to disclose that our view represents a Western point of view
with an, in some regards, unfortunate bias towards Americanism. Our culture links closely to
U.S. culture, which pre-sets inevitable creation for bias towards American justification.
However, the same fundamentals arguably play into the market rationale of western stock
markets and are unlikely to influence the results of this study, as there are not any major
disputed facts surrounding the specific event examined. Furthermore, the thesis simply aims to
study the stock market impact of the event.

                                     3
1.1 Disposition
We structure this paper as follows; Section 2 presents previous event study literature on the
defence sector, and the history between the U.S. and Iran. In Section 3, we define the central
hypothesis of our study. Section 4 discusses statistical models used in the analysis, followed
by a description of our empirical data in section 5. In section 6, we present empirical results
and significance tests, followed by an analysis of our findings. Finally, critical reflections of
the study are discussed in section 7, as well as further, potential research areas on the studied
subject.

1.2 Motivation and aim
We conduct a quantitative analysis in the form of an event study around how investors in the
American defence industry interpreted the news of conflict escalation between the U.S. and
Iran.

 RQ: How did the U.S. airstrike on January 3, 2020, impact stock returns for the American
                                   defence industry?

2 Literature and background
2.1 Literary review
2.1.1 The stock market and global events
The general effects of political instability on the economy and the stock market is a widely
studied area. Niederhoffer (1971) conducted one of the first event studies on the effects of
world events on capital markets. Selecting 432 major headlines from the New York Times
during 1950-1966, Niederhoffer focused on the movements in the S&P Price Index and Dow
Jones Industrial Index five days following the chosen events. In his article, Niederhoffer
defines substantial return changes as the bottom and top ten per cent of daily changes in the
indices during the period. He then examined to what extent the chosen events resulted in said
substantial return changes. Although not conducted using the common event study methods of
today (Fama et al., 1969, Bowman, 1983, Brown and Warner, 1985, and MacKinley, 1997),
his early results indicated that information presented by global events are of value to the equity
markets, hence impacting stock returns. His findings also concluded that global events
generally are not predicted by the markets or pre-factored into asset prices.
Berkman et al. (2011) examined the impact of rare disasters on global monthly stock returns.
                                                                             th
Using data on over 440 international political crises during the 20  century, the authors created
a proxy for the probability of a widespread disaster at any given time. As the number of actual
rare disasters during the period was low, Berkman et al. instead focused on a large sample of
what they viewed as potential disasters. These events mainly included international political
crises that were assumed likely to change the probabilities of rare disasters, for example,
resulted in heightened tensions or risks of war.
The results of their study indicated that international political events significantly impacted the
global stock market returns during the period, even when accounting for the tremendous impact
of World War I and II. For each crisis that started during a given month, the world market
showed a significant negative return of -0.43 per cent. Berkman et al. also characterised the
observed crises into several categories based on their nature. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the
outbreak of war had the most considerable negative impact on monthly index returns, with -
1.25 per cent. Crises characterised as violent, and crises where major global powers (e.g. the

                                     4
U.S. and the Soviet Union) were involved, followed war, and impacted monthly stock market
returns with -0.75 and -0.70 per cent, respectively.

2.1.2 Global events and the defence industry
Capelle-Blancard and Couderc (2008) studied major unforeseen events’ impact on the defence
industry. Capelle-Blancard and Couderc’s paper could be considered a reversed event study.
Whereas the typical event study, such as our thesis, start by selecting an interesting event and
then move on to examine stock returns during the period, the authors did the opposite. Capelle-
Blancard and Couderc examined the share price development of 58 of the largest defence
companies between 1995 and 2005 and identified the most substantial daily abnormal returns
for each company during the period. They then used the dates of the identified abnormal returns
to determine the events that caused the stock price reactions. Their findings showed that seven
out of ten times, the abnormal returns originated from a news event; however, roughly 90 per
cent of the news events were company-specific.
Circa eight per cent of significant abnormal returns were due to events of entirely unforeseeable
geopolitical or macroeconomic nature, stating their impact on the A&D industry. Among these
events were the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, concerns about the war in Iraq and
Afghanistan, as well as oil price-related news. The authors also found that news around public
spending was especially crucial to the industry, considering that the primary customer for
American aerospace and defence firms is the U.S. government. Although the main drivers of
share price returns were company-specific news, Capelle-Blancard and Couderc conclude that
geopolitical events play a central role for both the defence sector and for the industry’s
constituents.
Furthermore, they analysed in increased detail the extraordinary incidents on September 11,
2001, where all but two of the studied defence companies experienced significant abnormal
returns at the 5 per cent level (including all sampled American defence companies). Capelle-
Blancard and Couderc found that the abnormal returns between companies in the defence sector
varied vastly, with roughly half of the companies experiencing positive abnormal returns of
+14 per cent on average, and the remaining half averaging negative returns of -9 per cent on
the day. Interestingly, they observed a strong connection between positive abnormal returns
and percentage of revenue from defence activities, indicating that defence activities reacted
relatively better to the event than other areas where the sampled companies were involved. The
observation also illustrates the A&D sector’s activity in both civil and military activities.
Capelle-Blancard and Couderc’s conclusions about the significance of international political
events on the industry’s stock returns coincide with the findings of several other event studies
on the subject (McDonald and Kendall, 1994, and Billingsley et al., 1987). By analysing the
stock price behaviour of 16 U.S. defence firms at 17 unforeseeable events involving military
force during the Cold War, McDonald and Kendall showed that the stock prices of defence
companies, on average, experienced positive abnormal returns on the news of such events.
Among their sample of events, intensifying actions involving the former Soviet Union had the
most prominent effect. Billingsley et al., in line with the earlier, market-wide findings of
Niederhoffer, also concluded that international, political events are not foreseen by the
investors of defence companies. As a result, the event requires investors to be reactive.

                                     5
2.2 Context of U.S. – Iran tensions and timeline of the event
Diplomatic relations between the United States and Iran have been non-existent since 1980
when Iran closed its Embassy in the United States, and the lateral political relationship was
severed. With the background of a failed construction of diplomatic relations, the U.S. has over
65 years been a victim and contributed to tumultuous history packed with intrigues and coups
in the Middle East. Most notable events that have shaped people’s conviction and the affected
countries’ foreign policies include the 1953 Iranian coup d’état, 1979 Iranian revolution and
the 1979-1981 Iranian hostage crisis. Also notable are the 1988 U.S. downing of Iran Air flight
655, early 21st century U.S. “Axis of evil” policy and fear of nuclear escalation as well as
2013-2016 converging relations, lifted sanctions and Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(“JCPOA”) nuclear agreement (Defense Intelligence Agency, 2019). The U.S. designated Iran
as a state sponsor of terrorism in 1984. Since then, the U.S. has significantly ramped up its
military presence in the Middle East, on what after 9/11 became labelled the “global war on
terrorism” (Bureau of Counterterrorism, 2019). Through 2020, the U.S. will have spent an
estimated $6.4 trillion on post-9/11 Wars (mostly concentrated in the Gulf Region), clearly
stating its importance as a revenue stream for the defence industry. (Crawford, 2019).

2.2.1 Heightened U.S.-Iran tensions
In May 2018, the Trump administration withdrew the U.S. from the 2015 nuclear agreement
(JCPOA), resulting in a rise in tensions and shifting the countries’ understanding for one
another further apart. The withdrawal from JCPOA and the reintroduction of sanctions lifted
three years earlier stirred up the pot in international relations (Smith, 2019 and U.S. Department
of the Treasury, 2019). Since then, the Iranians have rejected renegotiations and the discussion
of a new agreement. In early December 2019, signs of Iranian pressure on U.S interests in Iraq
started to emerge, which urged U.S Secretary of State Michael Pompeo and U.S. Secretary of
Defense Mark Esper to express decisiveness of action (Katzmann et al., 2020).
At Boxing week 2019 and the start of the New Year of 2020, the world came to encounter a
dire escalation in U.S.-Iran relations. The sudden escalation necessitated fast manoeuvring
from the U.S. government to curb calamity and halt what, from their point of view, could have
been a ‘new Benghazi’ (Appendix A.1). Referring to the Pro-Iranian siege of U.S. Embassy in
Baghdad that eventually led up to the airstrikes on January 3 that targeted Iranian Major
General Qasem Soleimani, leader of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force
(Appendix A.1) and second hand to the Iranian Supreme Leader (Katzmann et al., 2020). As
American defence companies (and their supply) are present in the affected area – and in case
of occurrence of a full-scale conflict their offering would likely become more demanded – we
find it interesting to see how the recent escalation influenced the listed American defence
companies’ share prices.

2.2.2 Timeline of event
The escalation of conflict between the U.S. and Iran can be divided into a four-phased timeline
as described by the think tank Institute for the Study of War, ISW (2020). The timeline spans
from May 2019 to the spring of 2020, with escalations peaking at the start of 2020. ISW refers
to the peak to as phase 3. Table 2.1 provides the reader with a detailed timeline of the
developments during phase 3, reaching its climax on January 3.

                                     6
 Date Description
 December 27, 2019 The militia group Kata’ib Hezbollah (Appendix A.1) orchestrates an
                        attack near the city of Kirkuk in Iraq. (Defense Intelligence Agency,
                       2019). The attack killed an American contractor and wounded several
                         American, and Iraqi service members (U.S. Department of Defense,
                      2019).
 December 29-30,     The U.S. responds with airstrikes in parts of Iraq and Syria where
 2019               members of Kata’ib Hezbollah reportedly were located. A day later,
                       a press briefing held by Secretary of State (“SoS”) Mike Pompeo and
                        Secretary of Defence (“SoD”) Mike Esper presents a risen threat level
                        in the Middle East. According to the White House (2019), U.S. targets
                       in western Iraq and eastern Syria links to the Iranian paramilitary
                        organisation.
 December 31, 2019 Iraqi protesters made up of supporters of the Kata’ib Hezbollah
                        militia followed up with storming the U.S. Embassy in Iraq’s capital,
                      Baghdad, lighting the Embassy’s reception on fire. Later in the day,
                       President Trump threatened Iran (Moore, 2020).
 January 1, 2020 SoD Mark Esper announces that the U.S. will deploy troops into the
                        area as a precaution (Browne et al., 2020).
 January 2, 2020 SoD Mark Esper delivers a warning that the United States will not
                         accept continued attacks against personnel and forces in the region.
                        Esper also encourages the allies of the United States in the area to
                        stand together against Iran as he warns about the high probability and
                      signs of additional upcoming attacks by Iran (Moore, 2020). In a
                       subsequent press briefing, Esper notes that the United States is
                      prepared to do whatever necessary to defend its interests (U.S.
                      Department of Defense, 2020).
 January 3, 2020 On Friday, January 3, U.S. President Trump authorises airstrikes on
                      target Qasem Soleimani and associates near Baghdad International
                        Airport, Iraq about 1:00 AM local time (UTC+3). The airstrike kills
                       ten individuals, including target Iranian Major General and
                      Commander of Iran’s elite Quds Force – Qasem Soleimani as well as
                     the commander of Kata’ib Hezbollah – Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis
                           (Moore, 2020).

Table 2.1: Timeline of the conflict escalation between the U.S. and Iran during December 27 – January 3, 2020.
As an indicator for the influence of the actions on January 3, 2020, retired U.S. Army general,
former CIA director and current KKR partner David Petraeus stated: “It’s impossible to
overstate the significance of this [the U.S. airstrike on January 3] action, it is much more
substantial than the killing of Osama bin Laden, it’s even more substantial than the killing of
[Abu Bakr] al-Baghdadi” (Public Radio International, 2020).
The actions by the U.S. on the night of January 3, 2020, brought the countries’ relationship to
a tipping point. After the event, Iran's Supreme leader declared Soleimani a martyr and
threatened severe revenge against the United States (BBC News, 2020). Consequently, the U.S.
deployed roughly 3,000 more combat troops and aircraft to the affected area and U.S. anti-
missile batteries were on alert throughout the Middle East, and Embassies put on lockdown
(Abduhl-Zahra et al., 2020). Afterwards, not only newspapers wrote about the aftermath,

                                     7
people on social media started to wage in on the implications of the airstrike. Until the time of
writing, the tensions remain high.

2.3 Theoretical assumptions
Studying abnormal stock returns due to specific events can be done through already well-
defined daily event study methods, as laid out by Brown and Warner (1985). Commonly, which
also holds for this paper, examining stock returns requires a few theoretical assumptions.
Below, we present the central assumptions on which this study relies.
Market efficiency. The ability to study an event’s impact on asset prices requires the
assumption that security prices quickly adjust to fully reflect the value of the new information
(Brown and Warner, 1980). This concept is consistent with the efficient market hypothesis,
which states that share prices reflect all relevant information currently available and is one of
the cornerstones of modern financial theory (Fama, 1970). As we conduct the study on daily
abnormal returns, the market must sufficiently trade the examined securities to enable quick
adjustments in prices.
Unforeseeable event. The event must be considered unexpected for observing how the market
reacts to the news. In brief, this implies that the event comes as entirely new information to the
market. Thus, the market does not factor the event into share prices before its occurrence. As
the event is unforeseen, investors are required to be reactive to the economic impacts of the
event, which, together with the market efficiency assumption, allows for a sudden change in
share prices.
Absence of other significant events. Essential for being able to draw any correct conclusions
about an individual event’s impact is that no other major events or news emerged during the
same period. If there were a possibility that the abnormal returns were due to some other
information, it would be impossible to firmly relate any results of such an event study to the
specific event. The assumption must hold on both a market-wide and company level.
3 Hypotheses
We present several hypotheses for studying the event’s impact on the industry. Due to the
severity of the U.S. actions, as well as the findings in several studies on the defence industry
and geopolitical tensions (Capelle-Blancard and Couderc, 2008, McDonald and Kendall, 1994,
and Billingsley et al., 1987), our first hypothesis is that the share prices of companies within
the defence industry were significantly affected by the event. We test this on both the industry
and company level.

    H1: The American defence industry experienced abnormal returns due to the event.

Furthermore, we set out to explore how selected financial ratios for the A&D companies relate
to the abnormal returns they experienced on the date of the U.S. actions. Based on the findings
of Capelle-Blancard and Couderc (2008), we also study the companies’ exposure to military
actions. As the defence sector also often are active within civil, commercial industries, we use
the share of revenue originating from defence-related activities as a proxy for exposure towards
military actions. As political events, such as the one studied in this paper, often affect several
industries, especially those heavily reliant on exports, a given event might have multiple,
varying influences on a company within the industry. Capelle-Blancard and Couderc’s (2008)
example of Boeing and Airbus’ negative reactions to 9/11 poses as a visible indicator of this

                                     8
phenomenon. The other financial ratios viewed as potentially relevant for investors are the size
of the company, leverage, and prior profitability (Humphrey et al., 2016).

    H2: A&D companies’ abnormal returns due to the event were related to the selected
                                   financial characteristics.

4 Methodology
4.1 Hypothesis 1: Measuring abnormal returns
The method for testing hypothesis 1 will roughly follow the event study frameworks by
MacKinley (1997) and Bowman (1983), using the statistical methods of Binder (1985) and
Humphrey et al. (2016). Studying the effect of an event on a company’s stock returns requires
measuring to which extent the stock return was due to the specific event. The literature refers
to this as abnormal returns (“AR”). We define the abnormal return as the difference between
the realised return during a specific period and a predicted return during the same period (absent
the effect of the event). The impossibility of viewing how the stock reacted to the event, and
simultaneously how the security behaved without the event, leaves the conductor of an event
study to the second-best option. We use statistical models to predict how the share would have
behaved on the same day without the effect of the event. Aiming to study the immediate
reactions of the stock market following the event, we are interested in studying the stock returns
daily. We denote our time variable t, measured in trading days, and define the daily abnormal
return as:

                                        𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − 𝐸(𝑅𝑖,𝑡 |𝑋𝑡 ) (1)

Where ARi,t is the daily abnormal share return of company i on date t,

 Ri,t is the realised daily share return of company i at date t, and

E(Ri,t|Xt) is the predicted daily share return of company i on date t according to a statistical
model.
The abnormal returns are assumed to be normally distributed with a zero-conditional mean.

                                                  2
                                         𝐴𝑅𝑖~𝑁(0, 𝜎𝐴𝑅𝑖) (2)

We calculate abnormal returns for both the individual sampled companies and the entire
industry, answering our first hypothesis if the event had any impact on the sector.

4.1.1 Defining the statistical model
Over the years, several financial models for estimating stock returns have been presented
(MacKinley, 1997). One commonality among most models, however, is that a specific
company’s returns are expected, in some form, to result from its historical correlation with the
returns of the general market. In analysing the abnormal returns, we base our regression model
on the Market model (“MM”), which is considered the most widely used model for these type
of event studies (Ahern, 2009).
The MM (equation 3) is relatively resemblant of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (“CAPM”),
where one assumes that a company’s daily returns follow a linear relationship with the market’s
returns (McKinley 1997). The MM, like the CAPM, considers the individual company’s

                                     9
CAPM risk – the company’s reaction to market-wide events/movements – through the factor
𝛽̂ 𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 . The abnormal return tells us if and how the company’s actual return deviates from
how it usually would react to a market-wide event, capturing to which extent the event has a
company-specific impact. Models, in which one assumes a linear relationship, are called factor
models. For event studies, factor models are preferred to other return prediction models as they
reduce the variance in the residuals, possibly resulting in an increased ability to detect event
effects (MacKinley, 1997). One may compare factor models to simpler models, such as the
Constant Mean Return Model where the predicted return is simply equal to the historical mean
return of the security.
                                       𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 (3)

Where Ri,t is the daily share return of company i at date t,

αi is the intercept of the linear regression model for company i,
βi is the slope of the linear regression model for company i,
Rm,t is the return of the market benchmark at date t, and

εi,t is the error term for company i at date t with the expected value of zero and finite variance.

𝜀𝑖 is assumed to be uncorrelated with the market return 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 , not autocorrelated and
homoscedastic.
However, the MM deviates from the CAPM in several ways. Most noticeably, the CAPM is
considered an economic model and includes economic restrictions such as constraining the
constant of the equation to the risk-free rate (McKinley, 1997). With the MM, we are only
interested in the security’s historical relationship with a chosen index, without posing any such
restrictions. McKinley (1997) finds that the validity of the CAPM restrictions on the MM is
sometimes questionable, and the results of an event study may be sensitive to these
assumptions. By instead using the MM, one can easily avoid the sensitivity to said restrictions.
As a result, the use of the CAPM in event studies has ceased almost entirely. Also, worth noting
is that the MM relates a specific security’s return to the absolute return of the market, whereas
the CAPM uses returns above the risk-free rate. Although the MM is one of the simpler factor
models in the realm of statistical models, Ahern (2009) argues that the MM provides similar
explanatory powers as some of the more advanced alternatives. Based on the model given in
equation 3, we express the predicted daily return of the individual company as:

                                      𝐸(𝑅𝑖,𝑡) = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 (4)

Where E(Ri,t) is the predicted return of company i on date t according to the MM.

Note that, according to the MM, the daily abnormal returns are equal to the residuals of the
model (𝜀𝑖,𝑡). In other words, abnormal returns are the share of the daily returns that cannot be
explained by the model.
The MM from equation 3 serves as the foundation for our regression model, presented below.
We expand the model into a multivariate model by adding a dummy variable D, equal to 1 on
the event date, and 0 on any other date (Binder, 1985, and Humphrey et al., 2016). Several
similar event studies deploy the multivariate regression model, most notably in studying how
the impact of a specific event varies between an industry’s constituents. Previous studies using
the method include measuring banks’ stock price reactions in financial crises (Smirlock and

                                     10
Kaufold, 1987, and Lau and McInish, 2003) and oil companies’ reactions to marine oil spills
(Humphrey et al., 2016). In the multivariate regression model, the coefficient of D fully absorbs
any abnormal return on the event date. The abnormal return of company i on the event date is
therefore equal to the gamma coefficient in our model (ARi,0 = γi). In testing for abnormal
returns, we test the null hypothesis stating that γi is equal to zero. Our initial belief is that γi
exhibits a positive value, as we expect the market to perceive the event as positive for the
companies within the A&D industry.

                                 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼̂ 𝑖 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖 ∗ 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑖 ∗ 𝐷 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 (5)

Where Ri,t is the daily share return of company i at date t,

α̂  i is the estimated alpha intercept of the regression model for company i,
β̂  i is the estimated beta coefficient of the regression model for company i,

Rm,t is the return of the market benchmark at date t,

γi is the coefficient for the dummy variable for company i, which captures the difference
between Ri,t and the regression model’s prediction on the event date,
D is a dummy variable equal to 1 on the event date, and 0 otherwise, and
εi,t is the error term for company i at date t with the expected value of zero and finite variance.
We determine all coefficients through an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of the
company’s daily returns against the market benchmark’s returns during a pre-determined
regression window. The regression shows how the security has correlated with the market
historically and lets us predict what the stock’s ‘normal’ behaviour on the event date would be.
To study the daily abnormal return for the industry on average, we create an equal-weighted
average daily return of our sampled industry companies (equation 6). Effectively we create a
continuously rebalanced index, placing equal weight on all included companies. We then treat
the daily average returns in the same manner as the individual companies’ returns in our model
(as illustrated in equation 7), yielding us the abnormal return for the industry ( 𝛾𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 ) on
the event date. In practice, we study how an equal-weighted portfolio of our chosen companies
correlate with the market index.

                                              1      𝑁
                                 𝑅𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑡 =   ∗ ∑ 𝑅𝑖,𝑡                              (6)
                                                   𝑁       𝑖=1

            𝑅𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑡 = 𝛼̂ 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 ∗ 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 ∗ 𝐷 + 𝜀𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑡 (7)

Where Rindustry,t is the average return of all our sampled companies (i.e. the industry portfolio)
at date t,
N is the number of sampled A&D companies,
α̂   industry is the estimated intercept of the linear regression model for the industry portfolio,
β̂  industry is the beta coefficient of the regression model for the industry portfolio,

Rm,t is the return of the market benchmark at date t,

                                     11
γindustry is the coefficient for the dummy variable for the industry portfolio, which captures
the difference between Ri,t and the regression model’s prediction on the event date,
D is a dummy variable equal to 1 on the event date, and 0 otherwise, and
εindustry,t is the error term for the industry portfolio at date t with the expected value of zero
and finite variance.

4.1.2 Estimation and event window
The event of interest in this event study is the U.S. airstrike at Baghdad Airport on January 3,
2020, around 1:00 AM local time (UTC+3), or 6:00 PM ET (January 2). As the event timing
is after the stock market closes in the U.S., we define January 3 as the first day of trading
following the event. We label this the event date (t = 0). The dummy variable D (defined in
equation 5) is therefore equal to 1 on January 3, 2020, and 0 on all other dates.
We define the timeline leading up to the event as the regression window, with the event window
examined limited to January 3, the first trading day after the airstrike. As it is the first day that
the market is open after the event, this is the date on which we expect the market to react to the
news. The time window is divided into two sub-windows, the event window, and the estimation
window, i.e. the period before the event window. In cases where the researcher is interested in
studying the impact of an event over an extended period, she may expand the event window
beyond the event date to include several days. By doing so, one can account for any
uncertainties regarding the timing of the event. The relevant length is highly dependent on the
examined event and varies significantly in previous event studies. At the longer end, Felimban
et al. (2018) used an event window of 40 days centred on the event date when studying the
impacts of dividend announcements on share prices. Using the large event window, they
accounted for any risks of leaked insider information between the vote by the Board of
Directors and the public announcement.
Choosing the correct event period is thus highly dependent on the specific event and the goal
of the study. Although a more extended period might result in a complete picture of the returns
of a prolonged crisis, it increases the risk of other events influencing the results. The risk of
other influencing events poses a problem, as we conclude in the theoretical assumptions. Due
to the examined event of this study being a classified military operation of which there are no
uncertainties regarding its timing, we isolate the event window to the specific event date during
which the U.S. decided to strike on the Baghdad International Airport in 2020.
Like the event window, the length of the chosen period before the event – the estimation period
– also varies. Typically, researchers choose a range of between 100 and 300 days for daily
return studies (Peterson, 1989). In this study, we use an estimation period of 120 trading days
before the event window, as suggested by MacKinley (1997). The estimation period could also
occur after the event window, however not relevant for this study due to the recency of the
event, and the unrelated market turmoil that followed during the spring of 2020. If the
estimation period stretches too far back in time, the returns used in the modelling of the stock’s
returns might not be an accurate depiction of how the share would behave on the event date. A
too short estimation period instead runs the risk of not including enough data points to model
the share’s returns accurately. As the statistical model used in this thesis also assumes that
market returns do not vary over time, one should also be careful of using a very long estimation
period. We illustrate the event study timeline in figure 4.1.

                                     12
                                      Regression window
                                            121 days

                             Estimation window                       Event window
                                    120 days                                 1 day

                                                                                                                                                         t

        -120                                                                      𝜏𝜏11  0         𝜏𝜏22
    (15.7.2019)                                                                (3.1.2020)

Figure 4.1: Illustration of the regression model timeline, including the estimation period before the U.S. actions,
t= [-120, -1], and the event date itself, t=0. t is defined as time, measured in trading days.

4.2 Hypothesis 2: Differences in abnormal returns
Given that our observed company-specific abnormal returns vary in size on the day of the
event, we conduct a cross-sectional analysis. By doing so, we aim to study if any differences
between the companies’ abnormal returns (𝛾𝑖 ) on the event date are due to the companies’
specific financial characteristics.
We adopt a similar regression model as used by Humphrey et al. (2016) when studying how
abnormal returns varied between oil and gas stocks during the Gulf oil spill in 2010.
Controlling for several financial ratios, they examined whether the sampled firms’ exposure to
the U.S. oil and gas market could be considered an explaining factor in the varying abnormal
returns. The abnormal return on January 3 for each company, as estimated in equation 5, is
used as the dependent variable. We define several key financial ratios as independent variables.
ln(SIZE) is the logarithmic value of the company’s total assets in 2018 (in USD millions),
which we use as a control variable for the difference in size between our sampled companies.
ROA is the company’s Return on Assets for the year 2018, controlling for previous
profitability. Hence, we account for any differences in abnormal returns possibly due to the
popularity or size of the company. Through ROA, we aim to account for any investor
preference to invest in a company with previous profitability. We define DEFENCE as the per
cent of revenue for the fiscal year 2018 originating from the defence sector. The variable acts
as a proxy for each company’s exposure to military actions, which Capelle-Blancard and
Couderc (2008) related to differing abnormal returns on 9/11. LEVERAGE is the debt-to-
equity ratio, controlling for the effect of leverage. We present a detailed description of how we
calculate the variables DEFENCE, ln(SIZE), ROA and LEVERAGE in Appendix A.2. Our
initial expectation is that all of the independent variables will show positive coefficients due to
the belief that investors favour more substantial companies with proven business models, as
well as the boost in return on equity that increased leverage may imply. Note that ROA,
DEFENCE and LEVERAGE are multiplied by 100. We quote one per cent as 1, as opposed to
0.01. We present the cross-sectional model in equation 8:

             𝐴𝑅𝑖,0 = 𝛾𝑖 = 𝛼0 + 𝛽1 ∗ ln(𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖 ) + 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖 + 𝛽3 ∗ 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐸𝑁𝐶𝐸𝑖
                                  +𝛽4 ∗ 𝐿𝐸𝑉𝐸𝑅𝐴𝐺𝐸𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖 (8)

                                     13
Where ARi,0 is the abnormal return of company i on the date of the event (January 3, 2020),
which is equal to γi, the coefficient of the dummy variable D in equation 5,
α0, β1, β2, β3 and β4 are the estimated intercept and regression coefficients,
ln(SIZEi) is the natural logarithm of the total assets of company i at the end of year 2018,
ROAi is the Return on Assets for company i for the year 2018,
DEFENCEi is the share of company i’s revenue originating from business activities in the
defence sector during the fiscal year 2018,
LEVERAGEi is the debt-to-equity ratio for company i for year 2018, and
εi is the error term for company i with the expected value of zero and finite variance.
To examine if the differences in abnormal returns on the event date were related to the selected
financial ratios, we test for the significance of each variable in the multivariate regression
model.

4.3 Description of model variables

 Variable Type Description
       𝑅𝑖,𝑡 Dependent Change in stock price for company i on date t, per cent

  𝑅𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦,𝑡 Dependent Average change in stock price for the N sampled A&D
                              companies on date t, per cent

      𝑅𝑚,𝑡 Independent Change in the market benchmark index on date t, per cent

      𝐷 Dummy 1 on the event date (January 3, 2020), 0 otherwise

     𝐴𝑅𝑖,0 Dependent Abnormal return for company i on the event date, per cent. The
                               abnormal return on the event date is equal to the regression
                                coefficient γi in the multivariate abnormal return model

     𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖 Independent Return on Assets for company i during 2018, per cent. See
                            Appendix A.2 for a detailed description of the variable.

 ln(𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖 ) Independent The natural logarithm of Total Assets for company i at the end
                            of year 2018, USDm

 𝐿𝐸𝑉𝐸𝑅𝐴𝐺𝐸𝑖 Independent Debt-to-equity ratio for company i at the end of 2018, per cent.
                            See Appendix A.2 for a detailed description of the variable.

  𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐸𝑁𝐶𝐸𝑖 Independent Share of 2018 fiscal year’s revenue from defence activities for
                             company i, per cent. See Appendix A.2 for a detailed
                               description of the variable.

Table 4.1: Description of model variables used in the multivariate abnormal return model and the cross-sectional
regression model on company characteristics.

                                     14
5 Empirical data
5.1 Sampled A&D companies
Our focus group, before exclusions, consists of 32 U.S. based companies within the Aerospace
and Defence GICS sub-industry (see Appendix A.1 for definition). These are large- and mid-
cap, U.S. listed, stocks of companies which all supply the defence industry in the U.S. To avoid
any selection bias, we have chosen to include the entire S&P Aerospace and Defence sector,
as it includes a wide selection of U.S. based A&D companies. We also deem the use of
American companies as a sample most appropriate, as the event examined was a bilateral
escalation between the U.S. and Iran. The sampled companies are presented in Appendix A.3.
The U.S. listed aerospace and defence companies included in the study are among the largest
arms producers in the world. Including companies like Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Raytheon,
Northrop Grumman, Huntington Ingalls and General Dynamics, the study comprises
companies with businesses ranging widely from technologically advanced surveillance and
intelligence products and services to missile defence systems as well as heavy-duty vehicles
such as tanks and nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines (Annual Reports, 2018).
Our sample includes both primes and subcontractors to the defence industry (see Appendix A.1
for definition).
Using annual reports for each company, total revenue, and an estimation of the defence-related
revenue, based on the companies’ revenue splits for the fiscal year 2018 is collected. Using the
revenue splits, we calculate the DEFENCE variable, our proxy for each company’s exposure
to military actions. Financial data for 2018, including total assets, debt, equity, and net income
for each included company, is collected through the database S&P Capital IQ. As an accurate
calculation of debt and equity is challenging and requires the addition of various hybrid
securities (Appendix A.1), we use S&P Capital IQ to ensure consistency in the calculation
between companies. All collected numbers are in millions of U.S. dollars, and as all the
included companies are U.S. based, we eliminate the need for currency conversions. Three of
the 28 sampled A&D companies did not enclose their revenue share originating from the
defence sector. We, therefore, exclude these companies from the cross-sectional analysis of
company characteristics. The three excluded companies are AeroVironment Inc, Axon
Enterprise Inc, and Spirit AeroSystems Holdings Inc.
Figure 5.1 illustrates the American defence companies’ widespread coexistence in commercial
and defence sectors. Among the 25 companies sampled here, the median defence-related
revenue share is only around 45 per cent of total revenue. For example, Boeing only receives
22 per cent of its revenue from sales to the defence sector, whereas the company generates a
majority of its revenue from the commercial aviation space.

                                     15
Figure 5.1: Box-and-whiskers plot on the share of revenue originating from defence-related activities during the
fiscal year 2018, among 25 of the 28 sampled Aerospace and Defence companies. n=25.
To avoid the presence of any other factors influencing the stock price during the event date, we
conduct a screening of press releases and other news during the period involving the 32
identified companies. Four companies were excluded due to other important news during the
period surrounding the event, resulting in a final set of 28 U.S. aerospace and defence
companies. We use Dow Jones’ Factiva database (2020) to examine whether other, significant
market-wide news or major U.S. economic reports were released on the event date. As the
exercise did not yield any findings, we ensure that any possible abnormal returns are not the
result of other significant events. We, therefore, deem the theoretical assumption of the absence
of other significant events to hold.

5.2 Stock data
Our stock dataset consists of the daily closing prices for each of the 28 selected companies for
all trading days from January 2018 to March 2020. We exclude all days where no trading occurs
in the U.S., namely holidays and weekends. By excluding non-trading days, we ensure that our
data set does not include duplicates in closing prices, which would result in days where the
daily return is equal to zero. The stock prices were retrieved from Thomson Reuters Eikon and
are all in U.S. dollars. Thompson Reuters defines the closing price as the price of the security
at the end of the day’s trading session on the security’s exchange. Thomson Reuters excludes
after-market trading in the closing prices, and all companies are listed in the U.S. Thereby, we
ensure that there are no time discrepancies between the closing prices of the securities. In other
words, the closing prices all occur at the same point in time. Should our sample include both
European and American companies, we would run the risk of wrongly defining the timing of
the event.
The reader should note that the prices are unadjusted for any dividends paid out during the
period, which may result in an inaccurate daily return on the day of the dividend pay-out. Due
to the recency of the event, adjusted daily stock return data was not available. We conduct an
investigative analysis of any new issues and/or stock splits during the time window of the study,
which came up empty for our sample of 28 companies. The analysis was done through
examination of each company’s press releases during the examined period.

                                     16
As all stocks are quoted in U.S. Dollars, we avoid any currency exchange rate effects on daily
returns. All selected companies are categorised within the Large- or Mid-cap segments on
either the New York Stock Exchange or Nasdaq Exchange. All shares are traded daily and
based on the companies’ sizes deemed sufficiently liquid for their prices to react to the news
quickly. We define the daily returns of the stocks as the difference in closing price compared
to the previous trading day. Note again that we multiply the daily returns by 100. Thus, a one
per cent change is quoted as 1, as opposed to 0.01.

                                                                   𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡
                        𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = (                  − 1) ∗ 100 (9)
                                                   𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1

Where 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 represents the daily share return of company i at date t,

𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡 is equal to the closing share price of company i at date t, and
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1 is equal to the closing share price of company i during the previous trading
day (t-1).
Brown and Warner (1985) acknowledge the presence of outliers and non-normality in daily
stock returns, which raises the question of how one should treat this. Three common methods
for treating outliers in event studies exist, to simply ignore them, to trim the sample to remove
inconvenient data points, or to replace the smallest and largest observations with values of pre-
selected cut-off points (Sorokina et al., 2013). Due to the nature of our regression model from
equation 5, outliers in individual stock returns cannot easily be identified by their absolute
values. Instead, outliers are defined by the size of the residual from our regression model.
Sorokina et al. (2013) advise against the removal of data points due to the possibility of deleting
valuable information from the analysis and decreasing transparency. Outliers, referring to
absolute stock returns, are therefore not excluded from our sample.

5.3 Market benchmark data
We use the MSCI USA Equal Weighted index as a reference index for the market. The index,
consisting of 636 American companies, measures the performance of U.S. Large- and Mid-cap
segments in the U.S. The chosen index is therefore assumed to provide a fair benchmark index
for the chosen companies, which fall into the same characteristics. Note that hence, the index
also includes some of the sampled A&D companies. Equal to the individual stocks, we also
calculate the daily return of the index as the change in closing price from the previous trading
day. The independent variable 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 is defined as:

                                                                  𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑞𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖,𝑡
                       𝑅𝑚,𝑡 = (                  − 1) ∗ 100 (10)
                                                   𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑞𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1

Where 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 represents the daily return of the MSCI USA Equal Weighted index at date t,

𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑞𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖,𝑡 is equal to the closing quote of the MSCI USA Equal Weighted index at date
t, and
𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑞𝑢𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖,𝑡−1 is equal to the closing quote of the MSCI USA Equal Weighted index
during the previous trading day (t-1).
We eliminate any discrepancies in returns between the index and the individual securities
caused by currency exchange rates, as the index is also measured in U.S. dollars. Although

                                     17
asset pricing commonly suggests using a value-weighted index as a market benchmark, an
equal-weighted index is more likely to detect abnormal returns due to the higher correlation
between the equal-weighted index and the security (Peterson, 1989).
That said, we will test the robustness of our results for the first hypothesis using an alternative
index, the S&P 500 value-weighted index. The characteristics of the two indices are similar.
However, the S&P 500 is limited to the largest roughly 500 companies in the U.S. As the
respective constituents’ market capitalisation determines the index weights, the S&P 500 is
more affected by the share price developments of its largest constituents. The MSCI USA
index, on the other hand, places equal weight on all included companies.

6 Results and Analysis
6.1 Hypothesis 1: Abnormal returns
6.1.1 Industry abnormal returns
Table 6.1 presents the OLS regression results from the industry-level regression model 120
days before the event date plus the event date. The industry-level analysis may be interpreted
as substituting the individual security in the multivariate regression model, for an equal-
weighted portfolio of our sample of 28 A&D companies. Thus, the regression results illustrate
the regression results of how our equal-weighted portfolio co-moves with the market
benchmark. We may observe that the estimated coefficient of the variable 𝑅𝑚,𝑡 , 𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 , is
equal to 0.961 on a p<0.01 significance level. The t-values, in parenthesis, relates to the
rejection of the null hypothesis assuming the corresponding coefficient equals zero.
The A&D industry experienced positive average abnormal returns of 2.35 per cent during the
event date, statistically significant at the 1 per cent significance level. The abnormal returns are
indicated by the value of the coefficient of dummy variable D, defined as 𝛾𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 in equation
7. The t-value of the coefficient, in parenthesis, is larger than 1.96 and therefore the coefficient
is significant at a p<0.05 level. We reject our null hypothesis of zero abnormal returns on the
industry level and conclude that the event resulted in significant abnormal returns for the
industry.

                                                                               (1)
 VARIABLES Aerospace and Defence

 Rm 0.968***
                                                                                      (13.85)
 D 2.352***
                                                                                      (3.638)
 Constant 0.00349
                                                                                    (0.0594)

 Observations 121
 R-squared 0.628
  t-statistics in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6.1: Regression results for the industry-level abnormal return model (Rindustry,t = α̂ industry + β̂  industry ∗
Rm,t + γindustry ∗ D + εindustry,t), where Rm equals the daily return of the MSCI USA index, and D is a dummy
variable equal to the event date (capturing the abnormal return on the date). Aerospace and Defence is the
dependent variable (equal to the daily return of the A&D industry, Rindustry).

                                     18
According to the multivariate regression model, the A&D industry exhibits roughly the same
daily return, on average, as our market benchmark index, the MSCI USA equal-weighted index.
A beta coefficient of 1 would imply that the model predicts the portfolio to move precisely the
same way as the benchmark index. Implying that the A&D during our regression period is
neither more nor less sensitive to market-wide movements than the market in general. It is
rather intuitive that as more and more companies are added to the portfolio, and our portfolio
moves closer to that of the market as a whole, the movements of the portfolio will start to
resemble the movements of the general market.
The findings indicate that the U.S. actions on January 3, 2020, were of significant informational
value to the U.S. defence industry. This is in line with McDonald and Kendall’s (1994) and
Capelle-Blancard and Couderc’s (2008) conclusions that major geopolitical events generally
result in positive abnormal returns for the industry. The result indicates market confidence in
U.S. aerospace and defence contractors as a consequence of the particular conflict. As the U.S.
government largely influences the revenue of the sector’s constituents, the abnormal returns
could relate to expectations of increased government spending on the defence sector. We also
conclude that the actions of the U.S. seem to have been unexpected by the market, due to the
significant abnormal returns.
The reader should note that the industry abnormal returns of 2.35 per cent do not correspond
to the value of investor funds that flowed into the sector, but rather how investors in the sector’s
constituents reacted on average. This is due to our studied portfolio placing equal weight on
each company, regardless of total market value. However, as we are interested in studying the
share price reactions in the industry, rather than the total monetary value of said reactions, we
find the equal-weighted approach more appropriate.
Our regression model has relatively high explanatory value as 63.5 per cent, explained by the
dependent variable. As the difference between the observed values and fitted values are
relatively small, this could be a sign of good fit for the model. As we have bundled 28
companies, the standard deviation of the daily returns is relatively lower than individual
companies, increasing the fit of the linear model.

6.1.2 Company abnormal returns
Table 6.2 shows the OLS regression results for each sampled A&D company. We note that
eight of the 28 sampled defence companies experienced significant abnormal returns on the
event date on a five per cent significance level (p<0.05), and six of the eight companies showed
abnormal returns on a p<0.01 level. Again, the abnormal return in the multivariate model is
given by the coefficient of the dummy variable D, (equal to 1 on January 3, 2020, and 0 on all
other dates). Significant abnormal returns on a p<0.05 (p<0.01) significance level are indicated
by ** (***) following the coefficient of D in table 6.2 and bolded rows. We reject our company-
specific null hypothesis, stating that the company’s abnormal return is zero, for eight of our 28
sampled firms. On an individual level, the event thus posed as significant informational value
for these eight companies.

                                     19
Company Rm D Constant N R-squared
                                1.165*** 0.468 0.0485
 (1) AAR Corp                                        121 0.197
                                   (5.380) (0.234) (0.266)
                               1.102*** 7.397*** 0.0662
 (2) AeroVironment Inc                                         121 0.244
                                   (5.129) (3.727) (0.367)
     Aerojet Rocketdyne          0.337 4.257** 0.0142
 (3)                                                                    121 0.051
     Holdings Inc                 (1.534) (2.098) (0.0767)
                                1.007*** 0.244 0.118
 (4) Arconic Inc                                         121 0.366
                                   (8.252) (0.217) (1.156)
                                 1.838*** 3.359 -0.333
 (5) Astronics Corp                                         121 0.329
                                     (7.530) (1.489) (-1.622)
                                 1.468*** -2.800 0.119
 (6) Axon Enterprise Inc                                          121 0.148
                                     (4.365) (-0.901) (0.420)
                               1.029*** 3.248** 0.114
 (7) BWX Technologies Inc                                         121 0.257
                                   (6.151) (2.100) (0.814)
                                 0.638*** 0.256 -0.0936
 (8) Boeing Co                                         121 0.090
                                     (3.419) (0.148) (-0.597)
                                 0.766*** 1.765 -0.0429
 (9) Cubic Corp                                         121 0.060
                                     (2.702) (0.674) (-0.180)
                                1.030*** 0.698 0.0522
 (10) Curtiss-Wright Corp                                           121 0.536
                                   (11.67) (0.856) (0.704)
                                 0.825*** 1.479* -0.0710
 (11) General Dynamics Corp                                         121 0.418
                                     (9.130) (1.772) (-0.935)
                                 0.972*** 1.153 -0.105
 (12) Hexcel Corp                                         121 0.351
                                     (7.964) (1.022) (-1.023)
     Huntington Ingalls          1.036*** 3.498*** 0.0284
 (13)                                                                    121 0.390
     Industries Inc                (8.305) (3.035) (0.271)
     Kratos Defense & Security   0.946*** 11.61*** -0.232
 (14)                                                                    121 0.190
      Solutions Inc                  (3.257) (4.325) (-0.952)
                                0.359** 3.686*** 0.0215
 (15) L3Harris Technologies Inc                                        121 0.106
                                   (2.582) (2.871) (0.184)
                               0.524*** 3.827*** 0.0423
 (16) Lockheed Martin Corp                                        121 0.287
                                   (5.568) (4.402) (0.535)
                                 0.684*** 2.758 -0.0225
 (17) Mercury Systems Inc                                         121 0.067
                                     (2.725) (1.188) (-0.107)
                                 1.247*** 1.874 -0.104
 (18) Moog Inc                                        121 0.335
                                     (7.673) (1.248) (-0.759)
     National Presto Industries     1.032*** 0.242 -0.0887
 (19)                                                                    121 0.280
      Inc                            (6.763) (0.171) (-0.692)
                               0.440*** 5.606*** 0.0507
 (20) Northrop Grumman Corp                                        121 0.168
                                   (2.951) (4.073) (0.405)
                                1.032*** 1.623 0.0749
 (21) Parsons Corp                                         121 0.203
                                   (5.454) (0.928) (0.471)
                                0.688*** 1.679 0.161
 (22) Raytheon Co                                         121 0.210
                                   (5.492) (1.451) (1.527)
      Spirit AeroSystems           0.706*** -0.00125 -0.0371
 (23)                                                                    121 0.119
      Holdings Inc                   (3.985) (-0.000766) (-0.249)
                                0.764*** 0.933 0.179
 (24) Teledyne Technologies Inc                                         121 0.228
                                   (5.886) (0.778) (1.640)
                                  1.575*** -0.612 -0.200
 (25) Textron Inc                                         121 0.463
                                       (10.04) (-0.422) (-1.514)

                                     20
Company Rm D Constant N R-squared
                                0.970*** 2.167 0.168
 (26) TransDigm Group Inc                                         121 0.220
                                   (5.679) (1.374) (1.168)
                                1.839*** 3.604 0.0144
 (27) Triumph Group Inc                                         121 0.257
                                  (6.311) (1.338) (0.0587)
                                1.101*** 1.840 0.155
 (28) Vectrus Inc                                         121 0.186
                                   (5.153) (0.932) (0.862)
t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6.2: Regression results of the company-specific abnormal return model for each of the 28 sampled A&D
companies (Ri,t = α̂ i + β̂ i ∗ Rm,t + γi ∗ D + εi,t), where Rm is equal to the daily return of the MSCI USA index,
and D is a dummy variable equal to 1 on the event date (capturing the abnormal return on the date).
It is also observable that most of the defence firms, 25 out of 28, experienced positive abnormal
returns, including all eight companies that showed significance. We may compare our results
to Capelle-Blancard and Couderc’s (2008) results on the impact of 9/11, which showed a
roughly 50/50 split between negative and positive abnormal returns. Many factors could,
however, explain the difference, including a different sample of defence companies, and mainly
very different implications of the event. The prevailing direction of the abnormal returns is
further evidence that the event posed as positive news for the industry and is likely one of the
reasons for why the industry portfolio showed significant abnormal returns despite only eight
companies showing significance on the individual level.
The mentioned eight companies mainly include the most high-profile defence companies in the
U.S., which are often referred to as the prime contractors (Peters, 2020). These are the
companies that the Department of Defense awards the most contracts. These companies are
also the largest in the industry, including General Dynamics, L3Harris and Lockheed Martin,
which brings up another reasoning for why the difference in size is interesting to study in the
cross-sectional analysis. Interpreting the results on abnormal returns, the market may view the
abovementioned companies as essential in the region, hence most likely to profit from
increased military presence in the area. Table 6.3 lists the eight companies and illustrates both
their actual and abnormal returns on the event date. The benchmark index return is also shown,
telling us that the market overall reacted with a negative return of -0.518 per cent on the day.
Recall that we define the abnormal returns based on the MM as the difference between the
observed return and the linear prediction. The third column, difference, can, therefore, be
interpreted as the predicted return for the company based on the estimated alpha and beta
coefficients. As the estimated beta coefficients were positive for all companies, and the market
return was negative on the event date, the predicted returns (differences) are all negative.

                                     21
Company Abnormal return Actual return Difference
AeroVironment Inc 7.397 6.892 -0.504
Aerojet Rocketdyne Holdings Inc 4.257 4.096 -0.160
BWX Technologies Inc 3.248 2.829 -0.419
Huntington Ingalls Industries Inc 3.498 2.990 -0.508
Kratos Defense & Security Solutions Inc 11.610 10.888 -0.722
L3Harris Technologies Inc 3.686 3.522 -0.164
Lockheed Martin Corp 3.827 3.598 -0.229
Northrop Grumman Corp 5.606 5.429 -0.177
MSCI USA Equal-Weighted index -0.518
(All values in per cent)

Table 6.3: List of the eight A&D companies that experienced significant (p<0.05) abnormal returns on January 3,
2020, including their abnormal return, actual return, and the difference, as well as the return of the MSCI USA
index on the event date.
The differences in abnormal returns are highly notable. Of the 28 sampled companies, Kratos
Defense & Security Solutions Inc, a producer of, among other, high-tech, unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) or colloquially known as drones, showed the highest abnormal returns – circa
11.61 per cent. The company shows actual returns on the event date of 10.89 per cent, as seen
in table 6.3. Following Kratos Defense & Security Solutions Inc, AeroVironment Inc and
Northrop Grumman Corp, also leading producers of unmanned vehicles, experienced abnormal
returns of circa 7.38 and 5.61 per cent, respectively. This commonality is particularly
interesting, as the United States’ grand strategy on the war in the Gulf region since George. W.
Bush administration has been heavily focused on drone-usage in targeted attacks (Sterio, 2012).
However, it should be noted that we are unable to firmly conclude if this is the reason behind
the substantial abnormal returns of these specific companies. On the other end of the spectrum,
Axon Enterprise Inc, which manufactures non-lethal weapons and body cameras for law
enforcement, showed negative abnormal returns on -2.80 per cent, although nonsignificant. As
Axon Enterprise Inc. has not received any public procurement contracts from the Department
of Defense in recent years, but rather supplying law enforcement agencies on the state and
municipality level, one could assume that the company’s exposure towards the U.S. Army and
the U.S.-Iran event would be limited (Axon Enterprises Inc Annual Report, 2018). The broad
span in abnormal returns, over 14 per cent, makes a cross-sectional analysis of why the
abnormal returns might differ deemed highly relevant.
Two central assumptions are the efficient market assumption, stating that the current share
price of a public company reflects all available information and that the company’s share price
reflects the present value of all future expected cash flows to the shareholder. Given these
assumptions, the U.S. escalations resulted in heightened investor expectations of financial
prosperity for the eight companies that experienced significant abnormal returns. Simply, we
interpret the quick adjustments of the share prices (the abnormal returns) as investors
readjusting their expectations of the companies’ future cash flows due to the event.
It is worth touching upon the R-squared values of the regression, which for some companies
seem very low. The company-specific R-squared values can be compared to the industry
portfolio’s in table 6.1, which is considerably higher. The difference can partly be explained
by the fact that a portfolio smooths over the “noise” present in individual security returns
(Brown and Warner, 1985). Hence, the standard deviation of the portfolio is lower than the
standard deviation of the individual securities.

                                     22
6.1.3 Robustness of the results
6.1.3.1 Alternative market benchmark index
In some cases, the wrong choice of a market benchmark index can also explain the low R-
squared values (Peterson, 1989). If the chosen index is not relevant for the company, the co-
movement between the two are naturally not likely to be high. As the MM uses error terms for
calculating abnormal returns, and a worse fitted model increases the error terms, rejecting the
null hypothesis becomes more difficult (Peterson, 1989). We test our model using a different
market benchmark index to see whether our initial results hold.
We conduct the same empirical analysis of the first hypothesis using the value-weighted S&P
500 index, as opposed to the MSCI USA index. Appendix A.4 illustrates the results. On
average, the regressions using the value-weighted S&P 500 index yielded lower R-squared
values than our chosen, equal-weighted, market benchmark index. The company-specific
results are very similar using the two indices, with the same eight companies experiencing
significant abnormal returns. Noticeable, however, is that General Dynamics Corp,
manufacturer of, by the U.S. air force widely used, F-16 fighter jets, now shows significant
abnormal returns on a p<0.05 significance level, as opposed to the previous significance level
(p<0.10) when using the MSCI USA index. The equal-weighted industry portfolio experienced
abnormal returns of 2.57 per cent according to the MM with the S&P 500 index, compared to
our previous result of 2.35 per cent using the MSCI USA index. The indices’ daily returns
naturally differ due to their different weighting methods, which impacts the regression results.
Overall, the two indices yielded very similar results regarding significant abnormal returns.

6.1.3.2 Different estimation windows
Ahern (2009) argues that the regression results, and therefore possibly the conclusions of an
event study, are likely to differ based on the selected estimation period used in the statistical
prediction model for daily returns. To account for this possibility, we re-estimate the regression
using different time windows. We change our estimation window by 33 per cent in either
direction, to 160 as well as 80 days. Appendix A.5 illustrates the results using the longer and
shorter estimation periods.
Like the use of an alternative index, we observe that the regression results change slightly. This
can be expected due to the removal or addition of data points. However, it is also visible that
the results on abnormal returns are similar to the ones from our initial analysis (seen in table
6.2). The main difference in the results is that, given the shorter estimation period of 80 days,
TransDigm Group Inc shows significant abnormal returns at a p<0.05 significance level. As
can be expected with the industry portfolio, where the noise in daily returns is considerably
less than of the individual stocks’, the results have changed minimally. In all cases, we estimate
the industry abnormal return at 2.35 per cent and significant.
The exercise using different time windows and a different index highlights the fact that the
results of an event study vary slightly based on the assumptions made. Thus, there is not a one-
size-fits-all method that may be applied. We may, however, conclude that our results on
significant abnormal returns hold fairly well when altering the assumptions on benchmark
index and estimation period.

6.2 Hypothesis 2: Differences in abnormal returns
We begin by presenting a correlation matrix between all variables in the multivariate cross-
sectional regression model (Table 6.4). The p-values (shown in parenthesis) relate to the
rejection of a null hypothesis assuming zero correlation. We observe that no independent

                                     23
variable exhibits a perfect linear correlation with the abnormal returns. However, we find that
our independent variable DEFENCE significantly correlates with the abnormal returns on the
event date on a p<0.05 significance level, with a correlation coefficient of 0.537. The variables,
therefore, are exhibit a moderate linear relationship. We find that the independent variables
LEVERAGE and ln(SIZE) correlates on a p<0.05 significance level, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.45. The correlation implies that in our sample, the larger firms (in terms of total
assets) have higher amounts of debt relative to equity. Correlation between the independent
variables can result in multicollinearity, which poses a problem when estimating the regression
model. In section 6.2.1, we show that strong multicollinearity is not present in the analysis.

                 AR lnSIZE ROA LEVERAGE DEFENCE
 AR 1.000
 lnSIZE -0.120 1.000
                           (0.568)
 ROA -0.240 0.209 1.000
                         (0.248) (0.315)
 LEVERAGE -0.127 0.453* 0.297 1.000
                          (0.547) (0.023) (0.149)
 DEFENCE 0.537* 0.085 0.196 -0.037 1.000
                        (0.006) (0.687) (0.349) (0.861)
 p-values in parenthesis
 * p<0.05

Table 6.4: Correlation matrix of all variables in the cross-sectional regression model on company characteristics
(ARi,0 = α0 + β1 ∗ ln(SIZEi) + β2 ∗ ROAi + β3 ∗ DEFENCEi + β4 ∗ LEVERAGEi + εi).
The results from our cross-sectional regression model, aiming to relate the abnormal returns
between the companies to their characteristics, are inconclusive (Table 6.5). The companies’
share of revenue originating from the defence sector (the independent variable DEFENCE)
proved significant on a p<0.01 level, with a coefficient of 0.044. Our controlling variables
ROA and ln(SIZE) did not prove significant on a p<0.05 level, although both exhibited
negative coefficients of -0.17 and -0.19, respectively. ROA is significant on a p<0.10 level.
The variable LEVERAGE showed a positive coefficient of 0.02, however insignificant at a 5
per cent significance level.

                                     24
                                                                                              (1)
 VARIABLES AR

 lnSIZE -0.189
                                                                                                  (-0.649)
 ROA -0.171*
                                                                                                  (-1.931)
 LEVERAGE 0.0193
                                                                                      (0.291)
 DEFENCE 0.0441***
                                                                                      (3.541)
 Constant 2.612
                                                                                      (1.051)

 Observations 25
 R-squared 0.424
  t-statistics in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6.5: Results from the cross-sectional regression of company abnormal returns (ARi,0 = γi = α0 + β1 ∗
ln(SIZEi) + β2 ∗ ROAi + β3 ∗ DEFENCEi + β4 ∗ LEVERAGEi + εi where ln(SIZE) is equal to the natural
logarithm of company i’s total assets 2018, ROA is equal to Return on Assets 2018 for company i, DEFENCE is
equal to the is the share of company i’s revenue originating from business activities in the defence sector, and
LEVERAGE is equal to the debt-to-equity-ratio for company i.
The significance in DEFENCE supports our hypothesis that the companies’ abnormal returns
due to the U.S. escalations were significantly related to the weight of the company’s business
operations within the defence sector. With every percentage point increase in DEFENCE, the
abnormal return increased with 0.04 percentage points. The results are intuitive, given that the
event impacted a larger share of the entire business for a company with a higher value of
DEFENCE. The significance supports our expectation that investors would favour companies
with larger relative military exposure to the event. Figure 6.2 illustrates the relationship
between the share of the revenue from defence activities and abnormal returns on the event
date. As seen in the regression results above, a slight upwards-sloping trend can be noted in
figure 6.2, as well.
The significant relationship between DEFENCE and abnormal returns coincide with the
findings of Capelle-Blancard and Couderc (2008) on defence companies during the September
11, 2001, acts of terrorism. Unlike our method, however, they compared the mean abnormal
returns for defence companies with under 49 per cent in defence-related revenue, to the mean
of those with 50 per cent and above. Our findings suggest that the defence sector reacted more
positively to the news regarding the U.S. airstrike relative to the other business areas, in which
the defence contractors are engaged. These other business areas include a range of activities,
including commercial aviation, marine technology and even kitchen appliances and baby
products.
The insignificance in ln(SIZE) and ROA does not support our initial belief that both more
substantial companies, in terms of total assets, and companies with prior profitability, would
experience higher abnormal returns on the event date. The insignificance of ln(SIZE) also
suggests that we do not find any favouring of prime contractors by the market, although the
reader should note that the ln(SIZE) variable is a crude proxy. Any differences in abnormal
returns due to a leverage effect on shareholder returns can neither be acknowledged. Similarly,
Humphrey et al. (2016) also did not find the variables significant in their event study on oil-

                                     25
related companies. Hypothesis 2 is thereby only partly supported due to the significance in
DEFENCE, whereas all other explanatory variables proved insignificant.
The explanatory power of our cross-sectional analysis is weakened by the fact that only eight
of the companies’ abnormal returns were significant in the testing of hypothesis 1. Hence, the
low significance in the dependent variable itself might have influenced the results of the cross-
sectional regression model. Other reasons for why the model is unable to explain the
differences between the companies may be due to our data, which we base on 2018 financials.
Whereas markets generally are forward-looking, and 2019 had already ended (but not yet
reported), we rely on historical ratios. These may not have been of interest to the stock market
anymore, which focused on updated predictions. A final possibility is that the financial ratios
chosen due to their perceived importance to investors, are faulty and were not considered by
investors. I.e. we cannot rule out the risk of a wrongly specified model.

Figure 6.1: Scatter plot of company abnormal returns on the event date (ARi,0) according to our statistical model
and respective company’s share of revenue from the defence sector (DEFENCEi) for 25 of the 28 sampled
Aerospace and Defence companies. n=25.

6.2.1 Multicollinearity
We test for multicollinearity in our cross-sectional model using the Variance Inflation Factor
(VIF). Multicollinearity, the correlation between independent variables, poses a problem due
to the difficulty in estimating the relationship between each independent variable and the
dependent variable. Given a large presence of multicollinearity in our regression model, the
results of how the independent variables each independently amounts to the regression output
becomes unreliable. Wooldridge (2012) suggests ten as a general cut-off value for the VIF,
where a higher number implies strong multicollinearity between the independent variables. As
seen in Table 6.6, we observe a mean VIF of 1.21, with LEVERAGE exhibiting the highest
value, 1.35. Hence, no multicollinearity is assumed present.

                                     26
 Variable VIF 1/VIF
 LEVERAGE 1.35 0.74
 lnSIZE 1.28 0.78
 ROA 1.16 0.87
 DEFENCE 1.06 0.94
 Mean VIF 1.21

Table 6.6: Variable Inflation Factors (VIF), testing for multicollinearity between the independent variables in the
cross-sectional regression model (γi = α0 + β1 ∗ ln(SIZEi) + β2 ∗ ROAi + β3 ∗ DEFENCEi + β4 ∗
LEVERAGEi + εi).

7 Concluding remarks
7.1 Limitations
The major limitation of this study is its inability to provide any insight into the general effects
of geopolitical events on the defence industry. The limitation is due to us having focused on a
single, high-profile event in recent U.S. foreign policy. The study instead functions as a modern
addition to the previous studies on the subject, such as Billingsley et al. (1987) and Capelle-
Blancard and Couderc (2008).
Moreover, contrary to many event studies in general, the aim of this thesis is not to test the
market rationality during the examined event. Testing for market rationality would require
comparing the financial performance of the companies to the abnormal share price reaction,
which is not possible due to the recency of the event. Instead, our purpose is rather to more in-
depth examine how investors in the American defence industry immediately interpreted and
responded to the news of the escalations. Although we successfully capture investors’ reaction
on the specific date, our limited event window does not allow us to capture the market reaction
during the period of the escalations, including the events that followed. The small event
window was chosen due to the risk of including the effects of other, unrelated events, as well
as the chosen date being the most central in the U.S. – Iran developments.
The market reactions of other industries and their constituents due to the U.S. escalations, also
remain unexplored, and we do not deem it unlikely that abnormal returns (positive or negative)
could have been exhibited in other sectors as well. These could perhaps include the oil industry,
which is also highly present in the Gulf region. Instead, the event study was limited to the A&D
sector, due to its direct relationship with American foreign policy and the U.S. military. That
said, our study has concluded that the A&D sector, according to our statistical model,
experienced more substantial returns due to the event, than what our statistical model would
expect if the U.S. actions had equal implications across the entire market. We also observed
that the American defence industry experienced significantly larger returns than the U.S.
market in general on the event date, which reacted with negative returns on -0.52 per cent on
the event date.

7.2 Further research
Arguably U.S. geopolitics has changed since the Cold War when Billingsley et al. (1987) and
McDonald and Kendall (1994) studied how the shares of defence companies reacted to news
of escalations. Whereas our study finds anecdotal evidence that news on heightened conflict is
still highly relevant for the American defence industry today, it fails to study the effect in
general. Further research, revisiting the subject of conflict escalation in a broader level is
therefore deemed increasingly interesting by us. The relevance of such a study is fuelled by

                                     27
what can be seen as a global rise of populism, not to mention among large global powers, and
a heightened political focus on putting the country first, as opposed to cross-border unity.
Moreover, our results indicate that several high-tech defence contractors, including
manufacturers of unmanned aerial vehicles and robots, experienced the highest abnormal
returns due to the event. Therefore, relating any general abnormal returns of such events to
defence contractors’ products could offer interesting insights into whether the stock market
views technology firms as the largest profiteers of war in the new era.

7.3 Conclusion
In this thesis, we have examined how the skyrocketed geopolitical tensions between the U.S.
and Iran, impacted the publicly traded American companies within the American aerospace
and defence industry. In the first part of our empirical analysis, we use standard event study
methods, a multivariate model built around the Market Model, to determine that the event
resulted in significant abnormal returns for the American A&D industry. We also conclude that
all but two of the sampled A&D companies exhibited positive abnormal returns on the date of
the event, although not all significant. Given fundamental valuation theories, we conclude that
the market plausibly perceived the event as likely to improve the financial status of the industry.
The result indicates investor confidence in U.S. aerospace and defence contractors as a
consequence of the particular conflict. The market’s pro-reactiveness to the event also indicates
that the event was unexpected, and not already factored into asset prices.
As mentioned, however, our results indicate that only eight of the 28 sampled companies
experienced significant abnormal returns on an individual level. Although the reason for why
the eight stand out is not statistically tested for, we provide a discussion around the eight
significant securities, which include some of the most high-profile defence contractors in the
U.S. and the world. The company-specific test also highlights the volatility in individual stock
returns, which may pose difficulties when conducting event studies. Moreover, the differing
abnormal returns between securities illustrate investors’ differentiation between industry firms.
In the second part, we relate the differences in the companies’ abnormal returns on January 3,
2020, to several selected financial ratios. Although most financial ratios, including size,
profitability and leverage prove insignificant, we find a linear relationship between the
company’s share of revenue from the defence sector and its abnormal returns on the day of the
event. The relationship is in line with previous event studies that studied the A&D industry.
Our anecdotal findings pose an interesting question whether Billingsley et al. (1987) and
McDonald and Kendall’s (1994) studies of the industry’s general behaviour to political
escalations during the Cold War era still hold today. While the evidence itself is compelling,
the impossibility of predicting such an event somewhat limits the practical implications of
predicting such an event. It could, however, be of interest to someone speculating in more
frequent conflicts in the region.

                                     28
8 References
Abduhl-Zahra, Qassim, and Karam, Zeina; 2020, Iran vows revenge for US attack that killed
powerful general, Associated Press (AP), January 4. (Retrieved from
https://apnews.com/e36db7c72c1adba1a6cae75091bc273d on 15.03.2020).
Ahern, Kenneth R., 2009, Sample selection and event study estimation, Journal of Empirical
Finance 16, 466-482.
BBC News, 2020, Qasem Soleimani: US kills top Iranian general in Baghdad air strike, BBC
News, January 3. (Retrieved from https://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-50979463
on 10.03.2020).
Berkman, Henk, Jacobsen, Ben, and Lee, John B., 2011, Time-varying rare disaster risk and
stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 313-332.
Billingsley, Randall S., Lamy, Robert E., and Thompson, G. Rodney, 1987, The Reaction of
Defense Industry Stocks to World Events, Akron Business and Economic Review 18, 40-48.
Binder, John J., 1985, On the Use of the Multivariate Regression Model in Event Studies,
Journal of Accounting Research 23, 370-383.
Bogel-Burroughs, Nicholas, 2020, For a Post-9/11 Generation, War Isn’t New but Fears of
Another One Are, New York Times, January 5. (Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/05/us/iran-world-war-3-draft.html on 08.05.2020).
Bowman, Robert G., 1983, Understanding and conducting event studies, Journal of Business
Finance and Accounting 10, 561-584.
Brown, Stephen J., and Warner, Jerold B., 1980, Measuring security price performance,
Journal of Financial Economics 8, 205-332.
Brown, Stephen J., and Warner, Jerold B., 1985, Using Daily Stock Returns: The Case of
Event Studies, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 3-31.
Browne, Ryan, and Kelly, Caroline, 2020, US sending additional forces to protect embassy
threatened by protesters in Iraq, Cable News Network (CNN), January 1. (Retrieved from
https://edition.cnn.com/2019/12/31/politics/iraq-embassy-additional-forces-mark-
esper/index.html on 15.03.2020).
Bureau of Counterterrorism, 2019, Country Reports on Terrorism 2018, United States
Department of State Publication, 211-212. (Retrieved from https://www.state.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2019/11/Country-Reports-on-Terrorism-2018-FINAL.pdf on 01.05.2020).
Capelle-Blancard, Gunther, and Couderc, Nicolas, 2008, What drives the market value of
firms in the defence industry?, Review of Financial Economics 17, 14-32.
Council on Foreign Affairs, 2020, Confrontation Between the United States and Iran.
(Retrieved from https://www.cfr.org/interactive/global-conflict-
tracker/conflict/confrontation-between-united-states-and-iran on 04.05.2020).
Crawford, Neta C., 2019, United States Budgetary Costs and Obligations of Post-9/11 Wars
through FY2020: $6.4 Trillion, Cost of War Project (Brown University).
Defence Intelligence Agency, 2019, Iran Military Power Ensuring Regime Survival and
Securing Regional Dominance, U.S. Government Publishing Office, 1-63. (Retrieved from

                                     29
https://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Military%20Power%20Publications/Iran_
Military_Power_LR.pdf on 01.05.2020).
Dow Jones Factiva, 2020, Dow Jones news articles on January 3, 2020, Dow Jones Factiva
Database. (Retrieved from
https://global.factiva.com/ha/default.aspx#./!?&_suid=158910889832308685983348255377
on 20.03.2020).
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work, The
Journal of Finance 25, 383-417.
Fama, Eugene F., Fisher, Lawrence, Jensen, Michael C., and Roll, Richard, 1969, The
Adjustment of Stock Prices to New Information, International Economic Review 10, 1-21.
Felimban, Razaz, Floros, Christos, and Nguyen, Ann-Ngoc, 2018, The impact of dividend
announcements on share price and trading volume, Journal of Economic Studies 45, 210-230.
Humphrey, Phillip, Carter, David A., and Simkins, Betty, 2016, The market’s reaction to
unexpected, catastrophic events: The case of oil and gas stock returns and the Gulf oil spill,
The Journal of Risk Finance 17, 2-25.
Katzmann, Kenneth, McInnis, Kathleen J, and Thomas, Clayton, 2020, U.S.-Iran Conflict and
Implications for U.S. Policy, p. 9, Congressional Research Service, January 6. (Retrieved
from https://fas.org/sgp/crs/mideast/R45795.pdf on 01.05.2020).
Lau, Sie Ting, and McInish, Thomas H., 2003, IMF bailouts, contagion effects, and bank
security returns, International Review of Financial Analysis 12, 3-23.
MacKinley, A. Craig, 1997, Event Studies in Economics and Finance, Journal of Economic
Literature 35, 13-39.
McDonald, James E., and Kendall, Walter R., 1994, Measuring the economic effects of
political events: War and the U.S. defence industry, Journal of Applied Business Research
10, 57.
Moore, Elena, 2020, Timeline: How The U.S. Came To Strike And Kill A Top Iranian
General, National Public Radio, January 4. (Retrieved from
https://www.npr.org/2020/01/04/793364307/timeline-how-the-u-s-came-to-strike-and-kill-a-
top-iranian-general on 15.03.2020).
Niederhoffer, Victor, 1971, The Analysis of World Events and Stock Prices, The Journal of
Business 44, 193-219.
Peters, Heidi M., 2020, Defense Primer: Department of Defense Contractors, Congressional
Research Service, January 31. (Retrieved from https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/IF10600.pdf on
08.05.2020).
Peterson, Pamela P., 1989, Event Studies: A Review of Issues and Methodology, Quarterly
Journal of Business and Economics 28, 36-66.
Pound, Jesse, 2020, Defense stocks double the S&P 500′s return six months after Middle East
turmoil, history shows, Consumer News and Business Channel (CNBC), January 6.
(Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/01/06/defense-stocks-double-the-sp-500s-gains-
months-after-crisis-events.html on 02.04.2020).

                                     30
Public Radio International, The World Staff, Gen. Petraeus on Qasem Soleimani’s killing:
'It's impossible to overstate the significance', January 3. (Retrieved from
https://www.pri.org/stories/2020-01-03/gen-petraeus-qasem-soleimani-s-killing-its-
impossible-overstate-significance on 21.04.2020).
S&P Capital IQ, 2020, Financial statements 2018. Retrieved from S&P Capital IQ database
on 01.05.2020.
S&P Dow Jones Indices, 2020, S&P Aerospace & Defense Select Industry Index. (Retrieved
from https://us.spindices.com/indices/equity/sp-aerospace-defense-select-industry-index on
12.03.2020).
S&P Global Market Intelligence, 2018, GICS Global Industry Classification Standard
(Report). (Retrieved from
https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/documents/112727-gics-
mapbook_2018_v3_letter_digitalspreads.pdf on 16.03.2020).
Smirlock, Michael, and Kaufold, Howard, 1987, Bank Foreign Lending, Mandatory
Disclosure Rules, and the Reaction of Bank Stock Prices to the Mexican Debt Crisis, The
Journal of Business 60, 347-364.
Smith, Dan, 2019, The US withdrawal from the Iran deal: One year on, Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), May 7. (Retrieved from
https://www.sipri.org/commentary/expert-comment/2019/us-withdrawal-iran-deal-one-year
on 28.04.2020).
Sorokina, Nonna, Booth, David E., and Thornton, John H., Jr, 2013, Robust Methods in
Event Studies: Empirical Evidence and Theoretical Implications, Journal of Data Science 11,
575-606.
Sterio, Milena, 2012, The United States' Use of Drones in the War on Terror: The (Il)legality
of Targeted Killings under International Law, Case Western Reserve Journal of International
Law 45, 197-214.
The White House, 2019, Press Briefing by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Secretary of
Defense Mark Esper, Press Release, December 30. (Retrieved from
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/press-briefing-secretary-state-mike-
pompeo-secretary-defence-mark-esper-palm-beach-fl/ on 15.03.2020).
Thomson Reuters Eikon, 2020, Daily closing prices. Retrieved from Thomson Reuters Eikon
Database on 12.3.2020.
U.S. Department of Defense, 2019, Statement From Assistant to the Secretary of Defense
Jonathan Hoffman, Press Release, December 29. Retrieved from
https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/Article/2047960/statement-from-
assistant-to-the-secretary-of-defense-jonathan-hoffman/ on 15.03.2020).
U.S. Department of Defense, 2020, Press Gaggle by Secretary Esper and Chairman Milley,
Transcript, January 2. (Retrieved from
https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Transcripts/Transcript/Article/2049496/press-gaggle-
by-secretary-esper-and-chairman-milley/ on 15.03.2020).
U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2019, Re-imposition of the sanctions on Iran that had been
lifted or waived under the JCPOA, October 25. (Retrieved from
https://www.treasury.gov/resource-

                                     31
center/sanctions/Programs/Pages/1142018_jcpoa_reimpose_sanctions_archive.aspx on
28.04.2020).
U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, 2020, Notice on the Legal and
Policy Frameworks Guiding the United States’ Use of Military Force and Related National
Security Operations. (Retrieved from
https://foreignaffairs.house.gov/_cache/files/4/3/4362ca46-3a7d-43e8-a3ec-
be0245705722/6E1A0F30F9204E380A7AD0C84EC572EC.doc148.pdf on 06.05.2020).
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2012, Introductory Econometrics: A modern approach, Fifth Edition
(South-Western Cengage Learning, Mason, OH, USA).

Company annual reports
AAR Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Aerojet Rocketdyne Holdings Inc, 2018 Annual Report
AeroVironment Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Arconic Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Astronics Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Axon Enterprise Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Boeing Co, 2018 Annual Report
BWX Technologies Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Cubic Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Curtiss-Wright Corp, 2018 Annual Report
General Dynamics Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Hexcel Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Huntington Ingalls Industries Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Kratos Defense & Security Solutions Inc, 2018 Annual Report
L3Harris Technologies Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Lockheed Martin Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Mercury Systems Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Moog Inc, 2018 Annual Report
National Presto Industries Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Northrop Grumman Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Parsons Corp, 2018 Annual Report
Raytheon Co, 2018 Annual Report
Spirit AeroSystems Holdings Inc, 2018 Annual Report

                                     32
Teledyne Technologies Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Textron Inc, 2018 Annual Report
TransDigm Group Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Triumph Group Inc, 2018 Annual Report
Vectrus Inc, 2018 Annual Report

                                     33
9 Appendix
A.1: Concepts and definitions

 Aerospace & Defence Businesses that manufacture civil or military aerospace
                                  and defence equipment. Including parts or products,
                                defence electronics and space equipment, aircraft and
                                   aircraft parts primarily used in commercial or private air
                                   transport, military aircraft, radar equipment and weapons
                                  and excluding manufacturers of communications satellites
                             (S&P Global Market Intelligence, 2018, and S&P Dow
                                   Jones Indices, 2020).
 Hybrid securities Financial instruments that have qualities of both debt and
                                          equity.
 Islamic Revolutionary Guard     Identified as supporting terrorist organisations throughout
 Corps Quds Force (IRGC-QF)   the Middle East. Iran has acknowledged the involvement
                                   of the IRGC-QF in the Iraq and Syria conflicts. (Defence
                                Intelligence Agency, 2019 and U.S. House of
                                       Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs, 2020).
 Kata’ib Hezbollah Iraqi Shia militia group linked to Iran’s Quds Force and
                                  subordinate to the counter-insurgency group “Popular
                                  Mobilization Forces” or (PMF) which is supported by Iran
                                       (Defence Intelligence Agency, 2019)
 New Benghazi Two U.S government diplomatic compounds were attacked by a
                                         militia group in the city of Benghazi in Libya in 2012. The attacks
                                           resulted in U.S casualties and created discussion if the attacks could
                                     have been anticipated and stopped. The 2012 Benghazi attacks
                                      became a point of embarrassment for U.S foreign policy and have
                                        arguably formed their continued obsession of being present in the
                                         Middle East to assert power. The fear of an equal event takin place
                                   with similar circumstances again – could be cited as a ‘new
                                       Benghazi’.

 Prime A company with a significant and frequent role as a prime
                                  contractor to the U.S. Department of Defence, who in turn
                                     subcontracts to other companies.
Table A.1: Central concepts and definitions

                                     34
A.2: Specification of regression variables
For the cross-sectional regression model with company-specific characteristics (equation 8),
the independent variables ln(SIZE) and ROA are defined accordingly:
ln(SIZEi) = Ln Total Assets = Natural logarithm of total assets of company i, reported at the
end of the latest reported full year to the event (2018)

                              ln (𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖 ) = ln(𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,2018) (𝐴. 2.1)

Return on Assets (ROAi) = Net income for 2018 / Average of opening and closing balance of
total assets during 2018 for company i

                                                         𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑖,2018
               𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖 = (                             ) ∗ 100 (𝐴. 2.2)
                                  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,2017 + 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖,2018
                                  2

DEFENCEi = Revenue originating from the defence sector / Total Revenue for company i
during 2018

                                      𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖,2018
           𝐷𝐸𝐹𝐸𝑁𝐶𝐸𝑖 = (                                     ) ∗ 100 (𝐴. 2.3)
                                                       𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑖,2018

LEVERAGEi = Total interest-bearing debt / Total Shareholder’s equity for company i at the end
of 2018
                                                  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑖,2018
               𝐿𝐸𝑉𝐸𝑅𝐴𝐺𝐸𝑖 = (                                  ) ∗ 100 (𝐴. 2.4)
                                                                 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖,2018

                                     35
      A.3: List of the 28 sampled Aerospace and Defence (A&D) companies

* VECUTXTGITDGTXTTDYSPRRTNPSNNOCNPKMOGaMRCY.OMAXR.KLMTLHXKTOS.OHIIHXLHEIGDDCOCWCUBBABWXT.KAAXN.OATRO.OARNC.KAVAV.OAJRD.KAIRTicker
 Company is solely active within the defence sector, Defence




   Vectrus IncUnited Technologies CorpTriumphTransDigm Group IncTextron IncTeledyne Technologies IncSpiritRaytheon CoParsons CorpNorthrop Grumman CorpNational Presto Industries IncMoog IncMercury Systems IncMaxar Technologies IncLockheed Martin CorpL3Harris Technologies IncSolutions IncKratos Defense & SecurityHuntington Ingalls Industries IncHexcel CorpHEICO CorpGeneral Dynamics CorpDucommun IncCurtissCubic CorpBoeing CoBWX Technologies IncAxon Enterprise IncAstronics CorpArconic IncAeroVironment IncAerojet Rocketdyne Holdings IncAAR CorpName

                      AeroSystems Holdings Inc
                                                                                        -Wright Corp
          Group Inc











                                                                                               Revenue
                13 972    27 058 30 095          53 762               36 193       101         14 014
   1 279 3 199957   2 9027 222 3 561 3232 709493      6 801618 8 1762 189        2 4121 203 1 780420803   2711 8961 748
                                                                             127
                                                        , 2018

-
rev. (%) is defined as 100%
                                                                                                           Defense
   1 233        3 494     27 0581 47930 095          47 3115 101   8 176     27 608       23 1951 291           1 888 2018
         643335   697n.a.         230921493          618    370         911532      n.a.112841n.a.   446
                                     -Rev

                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                           Defense
                                                                                                                  2018 (
   96    20 35 25 24    100%*41 100%*71 34 100%*88 75  100%*100%*16    76    37 44 22 72    13 6     99 25
     .          .    .    .    .    n.a.     .          .    .               .    .                  .          .          .    .    .    .    n.a..    .0% n.a..    .
  4%  1%0%0% 0%     5%  0%0%     0%0%      9%  3%  8%2%9%6%  9%     6% 5%
                                                                     % -Rev,

                                                                                                                                                     )

             12 38914 264    134 21137 653          44 876               45 408       117 359                     Assets,
   572   3 331     3 8095 686 2 613 4142 9681 157     9 8521 0106 3832 824        3 2551 549 1 6557207754 7954992 4901 6042018



                                                                                                   2018
   6     -11 7  8  8  11 4  9  8  9  4  3     11 8   -   13 9     8     8  1  9  13 5  6  3  12 5  3    ROA,
     .                .     .     .          .     .     .     .     .     .                .      0           .          .          .     .     .          .     .     .          .     .
  6%   .  5%3% 7%.3% 6%1%9%7% 5%4%   .0% 8% .3% .1%9%   3%   5% 1%1%.5%5% 2%5%.6%8% 2%
         4%                                                                                         (
                            %
                                                            )

                                                                                                   2018
   0.3x   -5.9x-7.7x0.7x0.3x1.5x1.1x-0.5x1.8x0.0x0.6x0.3x   9.7x1.1x 0.6x 0.8x0.7    1.1x   0.5x0.3x33.83.3x0.0x0.6x0.1x0.0x1.5x0.2x  D/E
                                                                    x                    x                            (x),

                                                                                                     Exclude
     Yes                               Yes                Yes   Yes

       Table A.3: List of sample companies within the American Aerospace and Defence industry and selected financial
        data

                                          36
A.4: Hypothesis 1 testing using the S&P 500 index

Company Rm D Constant N R-squared
                          1.166*** 0.706 0.0296
 (1) AAR Corp                                              121 0.179
                            (5.064) (0.348) (0.161)
                          1.049*** 7.581*** 0.0520
 (2) AeroVironment Inc                                              121 0.213
                            (4.558) (3.738) (0.282)
     Aerojet Rocketdyne    0.420* 4.390** 0.00306
 (3)                                                                     121 0.059
     Holdings Inc           (1.827) (2.169) (0.0167)
                          1.027*** 0.465 0.101
 (4) Arconic Inc                                               121 0.345
                            (7.877) (0.405) (0.967)
                            1.881*** 3.768 -0.365*
 (5) Astronics Corp                                               121 0.312
                              (7.240) (1.646) (-1.756)
                            1.439*** -2.523 0.0971
 (6) Axon Enterprise Inc                                               121 0.130
                              (4.029) (-0.802) (0.339)
                          1.060*** 3.481** 0.0958
 (7) BWX Technologies Inc                                              121 0.247
                            (5.987) (2.232) (0.676)
                            0.624*** 0.375 -0.103
 (8) Boeing Co                                              121 0.078
                              (3.161) (0.216) (-0.651)
                            0.780** 1.932 -0.0563
 (9) Cubic Corp                                               121 0.057
                              (2.615) (0.735) (-0.235)
                          1.053*** 0.926 0.0340
 (10) Curtiss-Wright Corp                                                 121 0.507
                            (11.01) (1.099) (0.444)
     General Dynamics     0.886*** 1.695** -0.0884
 (11)                                                                    121 0.437
     Corp                   (9.482) (2.059) (-1.183)
                            1.056*** 1.416 -0.126
 (12) Hexcel Corp                                              121 0.374
                              (8.381) (1.276) (-1.252)
     Huntington Ingalls     1.028*** 3.703*** 0.0122
 (13)                                                                    121 0.351
     Industries Inc          (7.603) (3.110) (0.113)
     Kratos Defense &      0.907*** 11.77*** -0.245
 (14)                                                                    121 0.178
      Security Solutions Inc  (2.948) (4.345) (-0.994)
     L3Harris Technologies 0.445*** 3.826*** 0.00987
 (15)                                                                    121 0.126
     Inc                    (3.081) (3.008) (0.0853)
                          0.627*** 4.014*** 0.0269
 (16) Lockheed Martin Corp                                              121 0.342
                            (6.598) (4.797) (0.353)
                            0.745*** 2.944 -0.0376
 (17) Mercury Systems Inc                                              121 0.071
                              (2.827) (1.269) (-0.179)
                            1.245*** 2.127 -0.124
 (18) Moog Inc                                              121 0.303
                              (7.114) (1.380) (-0.882)
     National Presto         1.002*** 0.429 -0.103
 (19)                                                                    121 0.239
      Industries Inc            (6.075) (0.295) (-0.783)
     Northrop Grumman   0.562*** 5.790*** 0.0353
 (20)                                                                    121 0.198
     Corp                 (3.652) (4.274) (0.287)
                          1.165*** 1.936 0.0492
 (21) Parsons Corp                                               121 0.234
                            (5.974) (1.128) (0.315)
                          0.697*** 1.826 0.149
 (22) Raytheon Co                                              121 0.196
                            (5.248) (1.562) (1.400)
     Spirit AeroSystems      0.730*** 0.162 -0.0501
 (23)                                                                    121 0.115
      Holdings Inc            (3.917) (0.0986) (-0.336)
     Teledyne Technologies  0.863*** 1.166 0.160
 (24)                                                                    121 0.263
     Inc                    (6.479) (0.993) (1.497)

                                     37
Company Rm D Constant N R-squared
                             1.517*** -0.335 -0.221
 (25) Textron Inc                                               121 0.390
                                (8.627) (-0.216) (-1.570)
                          1.089*** 2.457 0.144
 (26) TransDigm Group Inc                                              121 0.250
                            (6.186) (1.585) (1.021)
                            1.741*** 3.904 -0.00861
 (27) Triumph Group Inc                                              121 0.209
                              (5.510) (1.403) (-0.0341)
                          1.116*** 2.076 0.136
 (28) Vectrus Inc                                               121 0.173
                            (4.928) (1.041) (0.750)
     Aerospace and Defence 0.997*** 2.572*** -0.0141
 (29)                                                                    121 0.612
      sector                   (13.13) (3.846) (-0.232)
t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table A.4: Regression results of the company-specific abnormal return model for all A&D companies, as well as
the industry portfolio using the S&P 500 index as an alternative to the MSCI USA index. The regression model
is defined as Ri,t = α̂ i + β̂ i ∗ Rm,t + γi ∗ D + εi,t, where Rm is equal to the daily return of the MSCI USA index,
and D is a dummy variable equal to 1 on the event date (capturing the abnormal return on the date).

                                     38
A.5: Hypothesis 1 testing using shorter and longer estimation periods

                                                                  Length of estimation window
                                                         160 days 80 days
 Company Rm D Rm D
                                                    1.273*** 0.427 1.290*** 0.644
 (1) AAR Corp
                                                        (6.287) (0.204) (3.075) (0.277)
                                                    1.094*** 7.558*** 0.730* 7.193***
 (2) AeroVironment Inc
                                                        (5.341) (3.580) (1.827) (3.243)
                                                    0.503*** 4.217** 0.685** 4.603***
 (3) Aerojet Rocketdyne Holdings Inc
                                                        (2.729) (2.218) (2.572) (3.110)
                                                    1.003*** 0.199 1.317*** 0.413
 (4) Arconic Inc
                                                        (9.659) (0.186) (6.665) (0.376)
                                                    1.656*** 3.262 1.582*** 3.006*
 (5) Astronics Corp
                                                        (7.385) (1.411) (5.037) (1.724)
                                                        1.438*** -2.739 1.516** -2.877
 (6) Axon Enterprise Inc
                                                             (5.082) (-0.939) (2.565) (-0.876)
                                                    1.030*** 3.258** 0.837*** 3.248***
 (7) BWX Technologies Inc
                                                        (7.603) (2.332) (5.424) (3.790)
                                                    0.713*** 0.260 0.701** 0.339
 (8) Boeing Co
                                                        (4.465) (0.158) (2.277) (0.198)
                                                    0.880*** 1.804 0.841 1.854
 (9) Cubic Corp
                                                        (3.840) (0.763) (1.594) (0.633)
                                                    1.130*** 0.733 0.898*** 0.629
 (10) Curtiss-Wright Corp
                                                        (13.58) (0.854) (5.486) (0.691)
                                                    0.904*** 1.469* 0.814*** 1.541*
 (11) General Dynamics Corp
                                                        (10.72) (1.688) (5.117) (1.744)
                                                    0.977*** 1.066 0.958*** 1.243
 (12) Hexcel Corp
                                                        (9.206) (0.974) (4.593) (1.073)
                                                    1.014*** 3.439*** 0.988*** 3.373***
 (13) Huntington Ingalls Industries Inc
                                                        (9.394) (3.091) (4.753) (2.921)
                                                    0.901*** 11.45*** 0.719 11.33***
 (14) Kratos Defense & Security Solutions Inc
                                                        (3.657) (4.508) (1.548) (4.389)
                                                    0.377*** 3.669*** 0.0945 3.605***
 (15) L3Harris Technologies Inc
                                                        (2.762) (2.610) (0.403) (2.766)
                                                    0.544*** 3.803*** 0.455*** 3.812***
 (16) Lockheed Martin Corp
                                                        (6.617) (4.487) (2.947) (4.444)
                                                    0.777*** 2.838 0.729* 3.014
 (17) Mercury Systems Inc
                                                        (3.632) (1.287) (1.949) (1.451)
                                                    1.328*** 1.880 1.404*** 1.907
 (18) Moog Inc
                                                        (9.441) (1.296) (5.770) (1.412)
                                                    0.930*** 0.232 1.168*** 0.322
 (19) National Presto Industries Inc
                                                        (6.672) (0.161) (4.592) (0.228)
                                                    0.529*** 5.612*** 0.290 5.599***
 (20) Northrop Grumman Corp
                                                        (4.044) (4.165) (1.265) (4.392)
                                                    0.910*** 1.504 1.088*** 1.530
 (21) Parsons Corp
                                                        (5.050) (0.810) (3.323) (0.841)
                                                    0.672*** 1.723 0.808*** 1.761*
 (22) Raytheon Co
                                                        (5.829) (1.450) (4.905) (1.925)
                                                    0.839*** 0.140 0.526* 0.0502
 (23) Spirit AeroSystems Holdings Inc
                                                        (5.341) (0.0864) (1.913) (0.0329)

                                     39
                                                                  Length of estimation window
                                                         160 days 80 days
 Company Rm D Rm D
                                                    0.879*** 0.974 0.566** 0.885
 (24) Teledyne Technologies Inc
                                                        (8.111) (0.871) (2.589) (0.728)
                                                        1.649*** -0.613 1.562*** -0.615
 (25) Textron Inc
                                                             (12.71) (-0.458) (6.870) (-0.487)
                                                    1.083*** 2.245 0.876*** 2.169**
 (26) TransDigm Group Inc
                                                        (7.740) (1.556) (4.656) (2.075)
                                                    1.800*** 3.585 2.133*** 3.792
 (27) Triumph Group Inc
                                                        (6.950) (1.342) (4.298) (1.376)
                                                    1.039*** 1.799 0.728** 1.558
 (28) Vectrus Inc
                                                        (5.549) (0.931) (2.239) (0.864)
                                                    0.995*** 2.350*** 0.939*** 2.354***
 (29) Aerospace & Defence sector
                                                        (16.33) (3.739) (7.742) (3.494)
  t-statistics in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table A.5: Regression results for variables Rm and D of the company-specific abnormal return model for all A&D
companies, as well as the industry portfolio, using alternative estimation periods of 160 and 80 days. The
regression model is defined as Ri,t = α̂ i + β̂ i ∗ Rm,t + γi ∗ D + εi,t, where Rm is equal to the daily return of the
MSCI USA index, and D is a dummy variable equal to 1 on the event date (capturing the abnormal return on the
date).

                                     40