IS THERE A SWEDISH SIZE
EFFECT?

CONTROLLING FOR QUALITY

VINCENT HANSSON

PONTUS WESTESSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

Is there a  Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality

Abstract:

   Whether size affects  a  firm’s expected return or not has been  widely  disputed  in asset
   pricing literature.  However, recent evidence suggests there is a size premium in the
   United States.  Despite this,  whether  a  size effect  exists  or not  remains unclear  in many
   countries, for example in  Sweden.  In  our paper, we  test  if there is a size effect  in
   Sweden,  by  replicating  recent literature  testing  for  a size effect  in the United States
   when  controlling for quality.  We test for a size effect  in Sweden  through multiple
   linear regression of SMB,  controlling for  size-dependent  differences in firm quality,
   market  risk  exposure,  momentum  and  value.  Our  results  indicate  there  is  no
   statistically significant  size effect in Sweden  between 1995-2019, with an SMB alpha
   monthly mean of  –0.03%  (t-statistic  –0.14),  when  controlling for the above  factors.
   Additionally, we  find a positive relationship  between size and  quality,  as well as  the
   presence of a  consistent quality premium in  Sweden.  We believe  this interaction of
   size and quality  may have  previously  obscured  the lack of a size effect  in Sweden.

Keywords:

   Sweden, Quality minus junk, Size  premium, SMB, Carhart four-factor model

Authors:

   Vincent  Hansson  (24214)
   Pontus  Westesson  (24292)

Tutor:

   Håkan  Thorsell,  Visiting Researcher, Department of  Accounting

Examiner:

   Adrien  d’Avernas,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Vincent Hansson and Pontus Westesson, 2020

                                   1
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

1. Introduction

Since the introduction of modern portfolio theory  to  financial  economics, a large body of
literature has explored  whether  empirical models can estimate asset prices. One such
model for pricing equities is the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), introduced  by
Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), which uses a single  risk  factor to estimate a firm's cost
of capital. However, the CAPM does not fully explain the returns of diversified portfolios,
suggesting  additional factors may be needed to explain returns. One such factor is the
"Small minus big" (SMB) factor,  measuring the difference in returns between small and
big companies.  The factor dates back to Banz (1981) who first discovered an empirical
anomaly that small firms tend to have higher returns than big firms.  With  Reinganum
(1983) and Schwert (1983) confirming  the anomaly across the United States equity
market,  the SMB factor  was eventually  included  in  empirical models explaining returns
(e.g. Fama and French, 1993; Carhart, 1997). Since then, the SMB factor  has had a
tremendous impact on investment practice, spawning new categories of investment funds
and small-cap indices (Asness, 2018).

However, the interpretation of SMB being a size  effect has received widespread critique.
Instead of being a size effect, critics argue  the SMB factor  only shows smaller firms
outperforming big firms,  as size proxies for  other effects and risks  that influence returns.
This criticism against a size effect  has primarily revolved around seven key findings
(Asness,  2018).

First, Berk (1995, 1997)  finds  no relation between size and returns, when measuring size
in ways besides market capitalization, which is inversely related to a firm’s cost of capital.
Secondly,   Horowitz,   Loughran   and   Savin   (2000)   show   SMB’s   significance   is
concentrated in extreme stocks with  market capitalization  lower than $5m. Third, Chan,
Karceski, and Lakonishok (2000)  demonstrate  that SMB has diminished after its
discovery in the 1980s. Fourth, Chen, Ibbotson, Kim and Hu (2013) argue that size is
merely a proxy for liquidity, and SMB reflects an illiquidity premium. Fifth, Easterday,
Sen and Stephan (2009) find that SMB is significantly larger during  the first trading days
in January, to then rapidly decline, suggesting SMB is related to the January effect rather
than size. Sixth, Israel and Moskowitz (2013) find that the size effect has a weak historical
record, with a non-significant alpha relative  to CAPM between 1926 and 2011. Lastly,
Fama and French (2011) find that SMB is much weaker internationally, which should not
occur without significant arbitrage in the price of size between markets.

In 2018, the seven above critiques against a size effect  were addressed by Asness,
Frazzini,  Israel, Moskowitz, and Pedersen (2018a) testing for a size effect while
                        1
controlling for quality.  They test for a size effect controlling for quality through a QMJ
factor, believing the size effect has been obscured by  an  positive  relationship between
quality and size, where quality commands a premium. QMJ refers to “Quality Minus
Junk”, introduced by Asness, Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), a factor that when used in an
SMB regression, adjusts for the empirical observation that small firms tend to be of lower
quality on average. When controlling for firm quality as above, Asness et al. (2018a) find

1
  Quality is defined as characteristics that investors should be willing to pay a higher price for, everything
else equal. Please see  section 1.2  for more definitions.

                                   2
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

a significant size premium in the United States. This significant size premium affirms that
size has a relation to returns in the United States and that SMB contains a pure size effect,
not explained by the critics’ alternative explanations.

In relation to the above critiques and findings, we test if there is a size effect in the
Swedish public equity markets. We control for the same well-known market anomalies
as  Asness et al. (2018a) including quality through QMJ, replicating their paper but with
a focus on Sweden. To perform our test, we create a six-factor model, including Carhart’s
four factors, a lagging market factor and the QMJ factor. We derive all factor returns from
the ground up  and construct portfolios following the methodology of Asness, Frazzini
and Pedersen (2018b). We construct our portfolios using  a sample of  equities listed on
major Swedish stock exchanges, between 1995 and 2019,  with  on average 275 Swedish
       2
firms.

To determine if there is a size effect in Sweden, we run a linear regression of SMB against
our model’s other explanatory factors, treating the regression constant as SMB alpha. We
generate coefficients on the explaining factors and adjusted R-squared, indicating the
magnitude and explanatory power of the different factors against SMB. We interpret
SMB alpha as  the share of  SMB not explained by controlling for  size-dependent
differences in  market  risk exposure, momentum, value and quality. The remaining
unexplained difference (SMB alpha), we hence view as a potentially pure size effect in
the Swedish equity market.

Through our tests, we expand  the  understanding of whether there is a size effect in
Sweden.   In contrast to Asness et al. (2018a)  who  test the United States’ size effect
controlling for quality, we focus on studying the Swedish size effect in-depth. For
example, we determine SMB alpha in Sweden and not merely a difference in SMB alpha
                             3
when controlling for QMJ.  Additionally, we show how SMB alpha and other relevant
factors have varied over time, as well as how returns alpha varies across size deciles in
Sweden (similar to the detail of the original study on the United States equity market).
Our paper is to the best of our knowledge, the first paper examining in detail the Swedish
size effect controlling for a QMJ factor.

1.1  Research question
We answer the following research question in the paper:

Is there a  size effect in Swedish equity markets, and if there is, what is the size of this
effect in the Swedish equity markets, controlling for other well-known market anomalies
including quality?

2
 The dataset includes stocks listed on NASDAQ OMX Stockholm Large Cap, Mid Cap, Small Cap, and
the First North Stock Exchange.
3
 Asness et al. (2018a) studied the Swedish market between 1983–2012, as part of a robustness check on
many international equity markets, but only reported the magnitude of change in SMB alpha (after adding
QMJ) and not actual SMB alpha for Sweden.

                                   3
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

1.2 Relevant definitions
Throughout the paper, we often refer to the terms listed below. We use these terms in the
context of our definitions, and while alternative definitions exist, they may not accurately
portray our intended meaning.

Classifications  are firm-specific metrics used to determine whether to include or exclude
a specific firm in a subset portfolio. For example, such a metric could be  market
capitalization, and we could classify firms as either “big” or “small” depending on their
relative market capitalization.

Subset portfolios  are value-weighted portfolios that include firms belonging to the
intersection of two classifications. We use these portfolios as components in constructing
factor portfolios.

Zero-investment portfolios  are combinations of subset portfolios which as a group
collectively require zero investment at acquisition. These portfolios are achieved by
purchasing and short-selling subset portfolios of equivalent value, resulting in a net-zero
investment at time t=0.

Factors  are zero-investment portfolios that aim to explain the difference in returns
between firms having different classifications. For example,  the SMB factor as defined
below.

SMB  is a “small minus big” factor, which we construct from the intersection of subset
portfolios based on size and book-to-market ratios. The factor explains the difference in
returns between small and big firms on a monthly basis.

SMB alpha  is the regression constant’s value when regressing SMB against (controlling
for) other known factors influencing returns.  It is the difference in returns between small
and big companies not explained by other known factors.

Size effect  is the term we use to describe a statistically significant SMB alpha value,
regardless of whether SMB alpha has a negative or positive sign.

Size premium  is the term we use to describe a size effect with a statistically significant
positive SMB alpha value.

QMJ refers to a “quality minus junk” factor, which consists of subset portfolios with firms
classified on size and quality. The factor helps explain the difference in returns between
high quality and low quality (referred to as junk) firms.

Quality  we define as a set of firm characteristics that,  all else  equal, investors would be
willing to pay more for (see section  2.3  for the characteristics).

                                   4
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

2. Literature review

Asset pricing theory, that is theory  which aims to explain  the cost of capital of firms, is a
topic well-studied in  financial  economics literature. In the following section, we present
a brief overview of this literature, focused on  research relevant for our tests of a size
effect.

2.1 Asset pricing models and the SMB factor
The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) was introduced in the early 1960s by Sharpe
(1964) and Lintner (1965) and helps explain how firms’ exposure to systematic risk
relates to expected stock return. However, CAPM is unable to fully explain the returns of
diversified portfolios, which suggests the existence of additional factors explaining
financial returns (e.g. Fama and French, 1992; He and Ng, 1994). One early such factor
was the SMB factor, which  started  as an empirical  phenomenon in the United States first
discovered  by Banz (1981). Alquist, Israel and Moskowitz (2018) argue the SMB factor
became the first real returns anomaly to challenge the CAPM.

Many papers have since introduced potential factors to explain returns besides CAPM
(e.g. Stattman, 1980;  Banz, 1981; Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993). For example, factors
such as HML have been introduced, which is an observation that stocks with high book-
to-market ratios tend to outperform stocks with low book-to-market ratios (Stattman,
1980).

In 1993, Fama  and French (1993) created a three-factor model composed of a market
factor,  an SMB factor,  and  an HML  factor to explain firms’ returns as an alternative to
the CAPM. Since its introduction, the three-factor model has had two significant
revisions. Firstly,  Carhart (1997) created a revised version of the model by introducing a
fourth factor, UMD (momentum),  as an explaining variable. Secondly, Fama and French
(2014) added two new factors to the original model: RMW (a profitability factor) and
CMA (an investment factor). For reference, these are the revised versions of the Fama
French three-factor model:

                      Equation 1:  Carhart’s Four-Factor Model
         𝑅!  − 𝑅"  =  𝛼!  + 𝛽#𝑆𝑀𝐵  + 𝛽$(𝑅$  − 𝑅") + 𝛽%𝐻𝑀𝐿  + 𝛽&𝑈𝑀𝐷  + 𝜀!

                 Equation 2:  Fama  and French’s  Five-Factor Model
   𝑅!  − 𝑅"  =  𝛼!  + 𝛽#𝑆𝑀𝐵  + 𝛽$(𝑅$  − 𝑅") + 𝛽%𝐻𝑀𝐿  +  𝛽'𝑅𝑀𝑊  +  𝛽(𝐶𝑀𝐴  + 𝜀!

Carhart (1997) finds that by including a one-year momentum factor in his asset pricing
model, the explanatory power of returns in the United States improves to an adjusted R-
                                                                                   4
squared of 0.933 compared to CAPM’s adjusted R-squared of 0.834.

2.2 Evidence against a size effect
As mentioned in the introduction, the SMB factor’s inclusion in multi-factor models
eventually came under heavy criticism in the United States. The criticism mainly revolves

4
 For a size decile 1 portfolio in the United States, between 1963 and 1993.

                                   5
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

around critics believing SMB does not contain a size effect, and they base this on seven
key findings (Asness, 2018).

The first critique relates to the construction  of the SMB factor. Berk (1995, 1997) argues
that measuring size through market capitalization is flawed, as market capitalization is
both a measure of a firm’s discount rate and size, which are inversely related. Berk (1995)
finds that by measuring firm size with alternative metrics, there is no evidence of a
                                                                 5
relation between size and returns  in the United States.

Furthermore, the second critique of SMB is that a limited set of tiny firms drives the
factor’s significance and the unexpected returns of these firms should be attributed to
reasons besides their size. For example, Knez and Ready  (1997) show that SMB is
concentrated in the extreme 1% of observations. Furthermore, Horowitz, Loughran, and
Savin (2000) find that by excluding firms with a market capitalization lower than $5
million, SMB loses its significance in a sample between 1963-1997.

Moreover, the third critique argues that while an SMB-related size effect has existed, it
diminished following its publication in 1981. For example, Chan et al.  (2000) find that
during 1984-1998 large-cap stocks outperform small-cap stocks in the United States.
Likewise, Schwert (2003) finds that a size effect has either disappeared or become much
smaller by studying the returns of a size-based trading strategy after 1982. These
arguments find strength in the no-arbitrage principle, as investors became aware of the
anomaly in 1981 and shortly after, the size effect disappeared.

Next, the fourth main critique of a size effect is that while it exists, size is simply a proxy
for liquidity, and smaller firms generate higher returns only due to a relative illiquidity
premium. For example, Chen et al. (2013) find links between size and liquidity that are
especially prevalent among micro-cap stocks. Crain (2011) also proposes this illiquidity
premium theory, in his review of the literature, as a possible explanation for size-related
observations, such as that the smallest stocks have the largest size premium.

The fifth critique of the size effect is that SMB’s significance is driven by  a strong  effect
in January, which then rapidly declines, indicating a link between SMB and the January
anomaly. For example, Keim (1983) attributes nearly 50% of the size anomaly between
1963-1979 to the January effect. The link to the January effect persists with newer data,
with Easterday, Sen and Stephan (2009) finding that the January returns effect is “suitably
represented by firm size”.

The sixth  critique  against a size effect is that newer studies examining it historically, with
broad data sets, have not been able to find a significant historical record for a size effect.
Israel and Moskowitz (2013) examine the alpha of SMB against CAPM in the United
States between 1926-2011 and find the size effect has  non-significant  alpha across the
entire period (t-statistic 1.16), as well as in all subsets of this period. Furthermore, Israel
et al. (2013) find no significant evidence that “size, value, or momentum premia have
changed over time”,  calling into question  the existence of a size effect.

5
 The alternative metrics for size tested were book assets, book PP&E, employees, and sales.

                                   6
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

Lastly, the seventh critique against a size effect is that while it appears in the United
States, it is much weaker internationally for no particular reason. For example,  Barry,
Goldreyer, Lockwood, and Rodriguez (2002) find no significant size effect  when
                                                       6
studying 35 emerging markets between 1985-2000. Likewise, Fama and French (2011)
examined SMB returns in four global regions between 1990 and 2010, finding that “the
global models do not do well when asked to explain average returns on regional size-B/M
                                     7
or size-momentum portfolios”.

2.3 Quality minus junk factor
Similar to the SMB factor, Asness et al. (2014) introduced the quality minus junk (QMJ)
factor in 2014. The  factor builds on an empirical observation that firms of higher quality
tend to outperform junk firms (of low quality). The factor consists of a  zero-investment
portfolio with firms categorized on quality, using a range of metrics for quality averaged
into three categories: profitability, growth, and safety (Asness et al., 2018b). Previously,
QMJ also included a fourth category (payout) as a measure of quality, but it was dropped
in the 2018 revision of QMJ.

The profitability category contains six metrics for measuring firm profitability (Asness et
al., 2018b). One of the six metrics is a gross profit to total assets ratio, which Novy-Marx
(2013) shows is a measure of firm quality. Other metrics for profitability include  cash
flow over assets  and having  low accruals, stemming from Sloan (1996), Richardson,
Sloan, Soliman, and Tuna (2005) showing that the likelihood of future earnings
performance depends on the magnitude of cash and accrual components of current
earnings. The remaining three metrics used for profitability are  return on equity,  return
on assets, and  gross margin,  which are metrics based on value investing theory proposed
by Graham and Dodd’s security analysis book (Asness et al., 2018b).

A firm’s composite quality score also contains the growth category, which has six metrics
for measuring firm profitability growth (Asness et al., 2018b). The metrics are average
growth rates  of the above six profitability measures, over five years.  The category builds
on Mohanram (2005) showing that growing firms tend to significantly outperform the
least growing (or most shrinking) firms.

Lastly, the safety category of a firm’s composite quality score utilizes  five metrics to
measure quality through business risk (Asness et al., 2018b). The first metric is  betting
against beta  (BAB), building on Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) showing that firms with
low beta tend to have higher alpha. The second metric is having  low leverage, which is
based on Penman, Richardson, Tuna, (2007), George and Hwang (2010) highlighting that
firms with low leverage tend to have higher alpha. The third and fourth  metrics
correspond to bankruptcy risk, as measured through the  Altman Z score  (Altman, 1968)
and Ohlson O score (Ohlson, 1980). Asness et al. (2018b) define the metric so that lower

6
 The 35 emerging market countries were: Czech  Republic, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Portugal, Russia,
Slovakia, Turkey, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Venezuela, Bahrain, Israel, Jordan,
Oman, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, China, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, India, Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia,
Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Morocco, Nigeria, South Africa, Zimbabwe.
7
 The four regions were: North America (US, Canada); Europe (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway,  Portugal, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, UK); Japan; and Asia Pacific (Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Singapore).

                                   7
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

credit risk equals higher firm quality, based on Campbell, Hilscher, and  Szilagyi (2008)
showing that financially distressed firms deliver anomalously  low returns. The final
metric used for measuring firm safety is having  low ROE volatility, which also is a sign
of firm quality (Asness et al., 2014; 2018b).

All the three categories are combined to create a single quality score, with each metric
averaged first in their category then averaged across categories, to create the composite
score. Dependent on the quality score obtained, firms are categorized as quality, junk or
neither, which determines QMJ portfolio allocation. For our construction of the QMJ
portfolio, please see  section 3.1.3  and  3.1.5.

2.4 Size premium controlling for quality (through QMJ)
When deriving the QMJ factor, Asness et al. (2014) found that small firms  tend to be
“junk” significantly more than big firms. Being curious about the implications of the
finding, Asness et al. (2018a) empirically test a size effect controlling for quality  in the
United States and 23 international equity markets. Finding a significant size premium,
they argue  that  their paper “Size matters if you control your junk” resurrects the size
premium in the United States by directly addressing the concerns of  the  critics  above.

In the paper, Asness et al. (2018a) find that there is a significant size premium in the
United States, between 1957 and 2012,  with an  SMB alpha  of  +0.49% per month (t-
statistic 4.89) when controlling for QMJ versus +0.14% (t-statistic 1.23)  without QMJ.
They further find that the size premium remains significant, of SMB alpha +0.83% per
month (t-statistic 5.98) when measuring size by alternative measures such as book assets,
addressing the critique of Berk (1995, 1997). Likewise, they find that the size premium
is not concentrated in extremely small stocks, addressing the critique of Horowitz et al.
(2000).

Furthermore, Asness et al. (2018a) find that the size premium is not purely a liquidity
effect, as SMB alpha remains significant (t-statistic 2.03) when controlling for liquidity,
addressing the findings of Chen et al. (2013). In testing for a size effect when isolating
January versus non-January, they also find that their size premium is more consistent over
the entire year, with a January SMB alpha of +1.57% (t-statistic 4.74) versus a non-
January SMB alpha  of +0.38% per month (t-statistic 3.62). Finding a size premium in
February-December, they also address the critique of Easterday et al. (2009) who suggest
the size effect is a disguised January effect. Furthermore, they find that the size premium
has been  persistent over time when controlling for quality, challenging the findings of
Schwert (2003) that any size effect has diminished since the 1980s.

In addition to their findings in the United States, Asness et al. (2018a) also study the
impact of controlling for QMJ on a size effect in 23 international equity markets. They
find a positive increase in SMB alpha in 22 markets (all but Ireland) when controlling for
                                                                                                          8
quality, which addresses the weak international results critique of Barry et al. (2002).
The positive change in SMB alpha, however, varies in each country, with Hong Kong and

8
 The 23 international equity markets tested were: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong,  Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, New
Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and UK.

                                   8
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

the United States seeing the most substantial increases in SMB alpha of +0.75% and
+0.50% respectively, with Sweden at +0.10%, and with eight countries having an effect
                    9
of +0.01%–0.05%. These country-specific differences speak for a size effect being more
prevalent in some markets than others.

3. Theoretical framework

In relation to the above findings of Asness et al. (2018a), we test if there is a size effect
in Sweden. To  test for the size effect, we start by constructing a theoretical model that we
will regress SMB against, to examine SMB alpha. In the  sections  below, we give an
overview of how we construct this model and perform our regression.

3.1 Theoretical model
Our  model starts from a Carhart four-factor model, adding a QMJ and lagging excess
return factor, as detailed below and similar to Asness et al. (2018a). We prefer Carhart’s
four-factor model over Fama and French’s (2014) five-factor model, as Carhart’s model
does not include a profitability factor, which avoids having two factors controlling for
profitability as QMJ includes a profitability metric. Starting from the Carhart four-factor
model and adding our two additional factors, our theoretical model becomes:

                              Equation 3:  Our model
                  𝑅!  − 𝑅"  =  𝛼!  + 𝛽#𝑆𝑀𝐵  + 𝛽)𝑄𝑀𝐽  + 𝛽$! (𝑀𝐾𝑇*)
                    +𝛽$!"# (𝑀𝐾𝑇*+,) + 𝛽%𝐻𝑀𝐿  + 𝛽&𝑈𝑀𝐷  + 𝜀!

In  constructing  our  model  factors,  as  explained  in  section  3.1.5,  we  follow  the
methodology of Asness et al. (2018a). In deriving classifications for our factors, we also
follow Asness et al. (2018a, 2018b), albeit with a few modifications outlined in  section
3.1.1  –  3.1.4.

3.1.1 Size classification of firms
In our model, we  derive  factors based on two subsets of  firm size (small  and  big), and we
give equal weighting to these subsets when calculating returns for model factors, in order
to examine a factor’s explanatory power with regards to SMB. We categorize firms as
either “small” or “big” according to total  market capitalization  relative to other Swedish
firms in June every fiscal year. Firms with market capitalizations in the 1st to 70th
percentile are classified as “small”, and firms with market capitalizations in the 71st to
100th percentile are classified as  “big”. We have set the 70th  percentile  as a cutoff point,
so the  cutoff point  roughly matches the median market capitalization of the NYSE
(similar to Asness et al., 2018b).

3.1.2 Book-to-market ratio classification of firms
From our sample, we also classify the  relative  book-to-market ratio  of firms, calculated
as  book shareholders’ equity  divided by total  market capitalization. We rank firms
numerically on this ratio, irrespective of size, and calculate their relative percentiles

9
 The 8 countries were: Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain, and UK.

                                   9
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

monthly. Firms with the  30% lowest ratios  (1st to 30th percentile) are classified as
“growth”, whereas firms with the 30% largest ratios (71th to 100th percentile) are
classified as “value”. The firms with ratios in between these (growth and value)
classifications (in the 31st to 70th percentile)  are classified as “middle”.

3.1.3 Quality classification of firms
Next, we generate quality scores for each firm, using the metrics for profitability, growth
and safety introduced in  section 2.3.  All of the quality metrics we use from  the various
categories  are  summarized below in  Table 1.  We calculate the quality metrics using
                                                                                          10
available annual accounting data, as well as monthly data on market prices.

             Table 1: Metrics used for firms’ quality classification

                Profitability category        Growth category           Safety category

   Metric #1    GPOA: Gross profits over    G_GPOA: five-year         LEV: Minus leverage in
                 assets                        growth in gross profits       firm

   Metric #2    ROE: Return on equity       G_ROE: five-year growth    BAB: Minus beta
                                                 in return on equity

  Metric #3    ROA: Return on assets       G_ROA: five-year growth   Altman_Z: Metric for
                                                in return on assets            bankruptcy risk

   Metric #4    CFOA: Free cash flow       G_CFOA: five-year         EVOL: five-year standard
                 over assets                   growth in free cash flow      deviation in return on
                                               over assets                   equity

                                                                                                   11
  Metric #5    GMAR: Gross margin       G_GMAR: five-year        N/A
                                             growth in gross margin

  Metric #6    LACC: Minus accruals      G_LACC: five-year         N/A
                                               decrease in accruals

Table 1.  Describes the  firm-specific metrics used to determine  the quality composite score for firms  in
Sweden between 1995-2019.

We convert the scores on each quality metric into a relative numerical rank that compares
performance between firms, per year. Firms’ numerical ranks are then used to generate
standardized Z scores for each firm on each metric, as per below:

              Equation 4:  Generation of Z scores for each  quality metric
                      𝑍"!'$ !  =  (𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚  𝑖 './0−𝜇 './0) ÷ (𝜎 './0)

The Z scores of each metric are then averaged for each firm and year, in the quality
metrics’ respective categories. Afterwards, we average the Z scores of the three categories
into a single measure for the quality of a firm in a specific year.

10
  For exact calculations of each metric, see appendix section 2.
11
  As we lack sufficient data to calculate the Ohlson O score (a measure of credit risk) for all firms, we
drop this metric from the safety category, using instead only Altman Z to measure credit risk.

                                  10
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

                Equation(s) 5:  Averaging of Z scores across categories
                 1
       𝑍1'2"!*.3!4!*5  =   × (𝑍6178  + 𝑍97:  + 𝑍978  + 𝑍;<78  + 𝑍6=89  + 𝑍>8;; )
                    6

            1
     𝑍6'2?*%  =   × (𝑍6 6178  + 𝑍6 97:  + 𝑍6 978  + 𝑍6 ;<78  + 𝑍6 6=89  + 𝑍6 >8;; )
              6

                     1
                𝑍@."A*5  =   × (𝑍>:B  + 𝑍C8C  + 𝑍84*$./ D  + 𝑍:B7>)
                        4

                  Equation 6:  Calculating the composite quality score
                     1
                𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦  =   × (𝑍1'2"!*.3!4!*5  + 𝑍6'2?*%  + 𝑍@."A*5)
                        3

We then classify firms’ quality as “quality”, “junk”, or “none”, depending on their quality
score and size classification. We do this by conditionally sorting on size, and then
generating size-dependent quality percentiles based on a firm’s composite quality score.
Firms in the 1st to 30th percentile of  composite  quality  scores for a year in their size
category are classified as “junk”, whereas the 71st to 100th percentile of scores are
classified as “quality”.

3.1.4 Momentum classification of firms
Additionally, we derive a (up/down) momentum classification in our sample by ranking
firms’ past  ten-month  returns  lagged by two months (similar to Asness et al., 2018a). We
rank firms numerically on their relative returns, irrespective of size, and calculate their
relative ranks on a rolling monthly basis. Firms with the 30% lowest returns (1st to 30th
percentile) are classified as “down”, whereas firms with the 30% highest returns  (71st to
100th percentile) are classified as “up”.

3.1.5 Model factors
Using the above classifications and subset portfolios, we derive factor portfolios for our
model.  We create  our factor portfolios through the intersections of subset portfolios with
different  classifications  as described above. We give equal weight to all subset portfolios
and take “long” positions in one of the  classifications  subsets, and “short” positions in
the other  classification,  resulting in on average “zero-investment” portfolios. The net-
zero investment in the factor portfolios stems from using the proceeds from short-selling
one  classification’s  subset portfolios, to purchase equity in the other  classification’s
subset portfolios.

We calculate weighted returns on the factor  portfolios every month, as the change in
market capitalization of the subset portfolios, adjusting for any dividends. Therefore, our
factors explain the difference in returns between firms having one classification and those
firms with the other  classification,  on a monthly basis.

SMB factor
The “Small Minus Big” factor is based on six subset portfolios calculated from the
intersection of the  size  and  book-to-market  classifications. The factor describes the

                                  11
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

difference between the returns of small and  big firms. We calculate it as the arithmetic
mean of the “small” portfolios’ return minus the mean of  “big”  portfolios’ return.

                        Equation 7:  Small minus big portfolio
                1
             𝑆𝑀𝐵  =   × K𝑅@$.44 E.4&A  + 𝑅@$.44 $!FF4A  + 𝑅@$.44 G'2?*%L
                   3
                1
                  −   × (𝑅C!G E.4&A  + 𝑅C!G $!FF4A  + 𝑅C!G G'2?*%)
                   3

HML factor
The “High Minus Low” factor is based on four subset portfolios calculated from  the
intersection of the  book-to-market  and  size  classifications. The factor describes the
difference between the returns of value and growth firms. We calculate it as the arithmetic
mean of the “value” portfolios’ return minus the mean of  “growth”  portfolios’ return.

                        Equation 8:  High minus low portfolio
          1                        1
     𝐻𝑀𝐿  =   × (𝑅@$.44 E.4&A  + 𝑅C!G E.4&A)  −   × (𝑅@$.44 G'2?*%  + 𝑅C!G G'2?*%)
           2                            2

QMJ factor
The “Quality Minus Junk” factor is based on four subset portfolios calculated from the
intersection of the  quality  and  size  classifications. The factor describes the difference
between returns of quality and junk firms. We calculate it as the arithmetic mean of the
“quality” portfolios’ return minus the mean of  “junk”  portfolios’ return.

                       Equation 9:  Quality minus junk  portfolio
          1                           1
     𝑄𝑀𝐽  =   × (𝑅@$.44 )&.4!*5  +  𝑅C!G )&.4!*5)  −   × (𝑅@$.44 H&/0  +  𝑅C!G H&/0)
           2                                2

UMD factor
The “Up Minus Down” factor is based on four subset portfolios calculated from the
intersection of the  momentum  and  size  classifications. The factor describes the  difference
between the returns of firms having positive and negative momentum. We calculate it as
the arithmetic mean of the “up” portfolios’ return minus the mean of  “down”  portfolios’
return.

                 Equation 10:  Up minus down (momentum) portfolio
             1                     1
       𝑈𝑀𝐷  =   × (𝑅@$.44 &I  +  𝑅C!G &I)  −   × (𝑅@$.44 F2?/  +  𝑅C!G F2?/)
              2                         2

MKT and lagging MKT factor
In contrast to the other factors above, our two final factors (MKT and lagging MKT) does
not use the above  classifications. Instead, the market factors  describe excess returns on
the Swedish stock market.  They are calculated as  long portfolios  consisting of two
elements, the returns of the OMXSPI Stockholm index and the yield of 1M Swedish T-
bills. We calculate the factors  on a monthly basis, as the monthly return of the stock
market index minus the risk-free rate’s monthly yield.

                                  12
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

We include  the MKT factor to control for differences in market risk, by including the
Swedish stock market index’s excess returns  in our regression. We include  our lagging
market factor  to control for the possibility of illiquid firms experiencing lead-lags in their
price response to macroeconomic news (similar to  Asness et al., 2018a).

                 Equations 11:  MKT (Market excess return) portfolio
          𝑀𝐾𝑇(*)  =  (𝑅$  − 𝑅")(*)  =  (𝑅7=L@1M)(*)  − (𝑌𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 @N: ,= O+3!44)(*)

      𝑀𝐾𝑇(*+,)  =  (𝑅$  − 𝑅")(*+,)  =  (𝑅7=L@1M)(*+,)  − (𝑌𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 @N: ,= O+3!44)(*+,)
                          where  t  is equal to  the current month

3.2 Statistical regression to isolate SMB alpha
Using our theoretical model with the above derived factors, we determine if there is a size
effect in the Swedish equity markets through multiple linear regression. By regressing
SMB  (dependent  variable)  against  our  other  factors  (independent  variables),  the
regression explains how differences in returns between small and big firms (SMB) arise.

        Equation 12: SMB regression against Carhart, lagged MKT, and QMJ
   𝑆𝑀𝐵  =  𝛼  + 𝛽$! (𝑀𝐾𝑇*) + 𝛽𝒎𝒕"𝟏 (𝑀𝐾𝑇*+,) + 𝛽%𝐻𝑀𝐿  + 𝛽&𝑈𝑀𝐷  + 𝛽)𝑄𝑀𝐽  + 𝜀

                                                                                        12
The regression yields coefficients for each of the factors and a regression constant.  The
regression also provides measures for the explanatory power of the regression (adjusted
R-squared) and the certainty (t-statistic) that a  coefficient  differs from zero (our  null
hypothesis). We treat individual variables as statistically significant if the absolute value
of the t-statistic > 2.00 (p-value <0.05) in line with academic convention. If variables are
not statistically significant, we do not reject the null hypothesis or make a distinction
                                                      13
whether the coefficient should be zero or not.

The different coefficients’ signs correspond to observed differences between big and
small firms in the underlying factors/explanatory variables. For example, a negative QMJ
coefficient would indicate smaller firms having lower quality than big firms on average.
Our  regression constant  (SMB alpha), therefore, represents the difference in returns of
small and big firms that  cannot  be explained as differences in:
    a)   Momentum between small and big firms (UMD explanatory variable controls for
        this)
    b)  Quality between  small and big firms (QMJ explanatory variable controls for this)
    c)   BE/ME ratios between small and big firms (HML explanatory variable controls
        for this)
    d)  Market risk / systematic risk exposure  between small and big firms

If the regression constant is statistically significant, we treat it as a size effect for small
firms in the Swedish equity markets in accordance with Asness et al. (2018a). Therefore,
it is SMB alpha (the regression constant) that we investigate empirically in our tests
below.

12
  For the exact definition for the size effect, see section 1.2.
13
  The null hypothesis being that the coefficient/factor does not explain variation  in SMB, hence equals
zero.

                                  13
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

4. Empirical  test

4.1 Data and processing
Performing our empirical tests, we calculate all factors and metrics from  the ground up,
using raw data from the Compustat - Capital IQ, Thomson Reuters Eikon and Riksbanken
databases.  We  process  the  raw  data  as  outlined  below  to  ensure  the  sample’s
appropriateness for empirical analysis.

To  perform  our  empirical tests, we use all available accounting and market data on
Compustat  for  Swedish  equities  in  the  available  time  interval  (1987-2019).  For
accounting data, we use annual figures, and for market data, we use the daily securities
data on all available equity securities (multi-class shares included) for each Swedish firm
in the database. Besides data on equities, we also  use the Thomson Reuters Eikon
database for the daily price of the OMXSPI index between 1987-2019, and the Swedish
Riksbank website for the daily trading yield on the Swedish 1M T-bill between 1983-
2019.

We process the raw accounting data by dropping any  duplicate observations for a single
fiscal year, keeping the latest available data. If some accounting data is missing for a firm,
we keep the observation, but individual metrics that lack sufficient data to calculate we
set as missing (e.g. ROE can be set as missing), similar to Asness et al. (2018b). Next, we
proceed to process the raw market data. We drop observations that are not common shares
or do not have a claim on a company’s earnings, as  our  model  is not applicable to these
securities  (similar to  Asness et al., 2018a). We  also  drop non-primary securities from  our
data sample,  if firms have multi-class share structures,  after  calculating  firms’ total
market capitalization. We use this method because  a firm’s primary  shares  tend to be
more liquid and have up-to-date price information, which is  better  for  calculating returns.
Next, we sort our observations by firm and date, dropping all observations that are not
the last observation in a specific month. This way, we keep only one price observation
per firm, in a specific year and month, which we use to generate monthly returns. Monthly
returns are calculated for all firms when a new price is  available (excluding prices carried
forward).

After this first round of data processing, we require firms to have at least one measure
available in each category (one quality metric in profitability, one in growth,  and one  in
safety), to generate a quality score (ignoring missing values). Observations without a
generated quality score cannot be assigned into quality deciles, which is required to
construct the QMJ portfolio. Therefore, we drop these observations. We also drop three
extreme outliers, setting observations’ returns  missing if  their  monthly return exceeds
+1000%. We proceed to generate our factor portfolios, then lastly, drop portfolios
                                                                            14
generated before 1995 due to the very limited sample size before 1995.  In order to see
the exact breakdown  of the number of observations dropped in each step, please see the
data processing  section in Appendix  2.

14
  The first year we include in our analysis is 1995, which uses 65 firms in our sample to generate factors.

                                  14
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

4.2 Methodology
In this section, we outline how we generate our metrics, construct our subset portfolios,
and derive our factors. We process data and drop observations according to the steps
outlined in the data processing section above. We calculate our quality, size and  book-to-
market metrics and generate portfolios based on the methodology of Asness et al. (2018a,
2018b), with modifications as outlined in  section 3  and  appendix section 2.

In doing this, we start by calculating accounting-based and market-based quality  metrics,
returns and size classifications. We use the accounting data to calculate profitability and
                                                                     15
growth metrics, as well as the leverage and EVOL safety metric.  Additionally, we use
the accounting data as components to calculate the Altman Z score and book-to-market
ratios. We use market data to calculate returns, size (market capitalization),  beta, and as
a component for Altman Z score and book-to-market ratios.

We then perform sanity checks for all quality metrics and generate the composite quality
                     16
scores for all firms.  Next, we combine our data sets through merging our accounting
and market data. We match our accounting data to market data by date, aligning
accounting data for fiscal year  t-1  to price observations between June 1st year  t-1  to May
31st  year t. Through the alignment, we assume that  an  equal half of a fiscal year’s
revenues and costs occur in the first half of the year, an assumption that Asness et al.
(2018b) also make.

We then create our subset portfolios by including firms based on the intersections of
relative market capitalization (size), quality, momentum and book-to-market ratios. Firms
in categories which correspond to specific subset portfolios (e.g. small and value) are
marked with an include flag and are included in the construction of the portfolio. Included
firms are value-weighted, according to the firm’s market  capitalization in the previous
month, and rebalanced monthly. We then calculate the total return of each subset portfolio
every month as the difference in the price of each security multiplied by its relative weight
in the portfolio. We adjust stock prices  to correct for dividends or stock splits, ensuring
                                                   17
returns are calculated as accurately as possible.  Then, we generate factor portfolios by
arithmetically averaging the returns of our long and short subset portfolios as per  section
3.1.5.

Lastly, we regress our derived factors using multiple linear regression per year and month,
to generate our relevant outputs. We then perform tests on the factor portfolios for
heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation, and multicollinearity, finding only a slight issue with
                    18
heteroscedasticity.   We also perform a series of robustness checks, comparing our

15
  For exact metric  calculations, please see appendix section 2.
16
  If a sanity check is breached, we replace the metric’s  value with a missing value, thus excluding it from
Z score calculations. Examples of sanity checks on metrics include a) not having negative equity; b)
having positive revenue; and etc.
17
  We calculate returns using the Compustat formula:
                   ( (prccd ÷ ajexdi) ✕  trfd ) ÷ (( prccd[t-1]  ÷ ajexdi[t-1] ) ✕  trfd[t-1] )  –  1.
18
  Multiple linear regression assumes the sample has homoscedasticity, no autocorrelation, and no
multicollinearity. Our factor portfolios undergo tests for these factors, see appendix section 4 for results.

                                  15
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

derived factors with  data on these factors from the  Swedish House of Finance, and  our
                                          19
results  appear  robust through time.

4.3 Main results and discussion
After deriving our factors as above, we begin by testing our Swedish SMB factor in
section 4.3.1  for statistical significance  between 1995 to 2019, also testing for a potential
January effect. In  section 4.3.2,  we perform a regression  of SMB  controlling for our
model’s  other  factors, testing  SMB alpha. In  section 4.3.3, we compare our regression’s
results  to the United States results of Asness et al. (2018a). Furthermore, in  section 4.3.4,
we examine how SMB, SMB alpha and QMJ have varied over time in Sweden and discuss
potential explanations for this variation. We also look closer at the interaction between
SMB and QMJ. In  section 4.3.5,  we analyze the distribution of quality and size in our
sample and discuss potential explanations for the test results of the regression. Finally, in
section 4.3.6, we proceed to examine returns’ alpha across size deciles to test the linearity
of quality’s correlation with size.

4.3.1 The SMB factor in Sweden
In line with Banz (1981), we hypothesize that we will find 1a) a positive difference
between the returns of small and big firms on average for the duration of our test. As
discussed, this difference in returns (SMB) may have many potential explanations; for
example, smaller firms may have a higher risk, lower liquidity, and lower firm quality.
Furthermore, we hypothesize that 1b) SMB could be driven by a disguised January effect,
so we expect to find a stronger SMB effect in January, as per Keim (1983).

We perform our test on the Swedish “Small minus big” (SMB) factor and do not find a
statistically significant  (t-statistic  –1.69)  SMB monthly return in the period 1995-2019.
Therefore, we reject our first hypothesis 1a). Dividing our test sample into January/non-
January intervals, our results, however, indicate a significant  SMB  in January, which
makes us accept our hypothesis 1b). The results of our tests can be seen summarized in
Table  2  below.

A plausible alternative explanation for our  hypothesis 1a)  test result is that the effect in
January and non-January are opposites which cancel each other out. For example, we find
for months February-December, a  statistically significant SMB factor (t-statistic  –3.42)
of a mean monthly SMB return of  –0.68% between 1995-2019. Similarly, we see a
statistically significant SMB effect in January, at +3.25% (t-statistic 3.46) on average.
Since we find a small negative  monthly return in February to December, and a much
larger positive monthly return in January, these SMB effects could cancel out on average.

Overall, we find that Sweden has no statistically significant difference between the returns
of small and big firms on average  between 1995-2019.  We believe the  absence of  SMB
in Sweden, as compared to the United States (Asness et al., 2018a),  could be  due to  the
following reasons:
    a)   two opposing forces  in SMB  which cancel each other out, or
    b)  a diminishment of Swedish  SMB in Sweden having occurred before 1995, or

19
  Please see appendix section 3 to see the results  of factor robustness checks.

                                  16
 Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

    c)   systematic differences between the  two  markets resulting in a weaker effect in
       Sweden, or
    d)  a combination of the above or other factors.

   Table  2: Observed Small Minus Big (SMB) factor returns between  1995-2019

                                                   SMB
Sample                      Years                 Mean            Standard deviation           t-statistic
Longest sample              1995-2019              -0.35%                3.58%                 -1.69
January                      -                 3.25%               4.69%                3.46
February-December               -                  -0.68%                3.28%                 -3.42

 Table 2.  Describes the “Small minus big” (SMB) factor’s monthly returns in Sweden between 1995-2019,
 as well as the factor’s monthly return in different subsets of our sample.

 4.3.2 SMB Regression in Sweden
 Proceeding to test the size effect in Sweden, through regressing SMB against other
 factors, we hypothesize that  2a) when adding well-known return factors our regression
 will better explain how SMB arises  (increasing adjusted R-squared). Furthermore, we
 hypothesize that  2b) when adding QMJ as an explanatory variable, we will have a
 positive increase in SMB alpha. We expect this positive increase based on Asness et al.
 (2018a) seeing an increase of Swedish SMB alpha of +0.10% in their empirical robustness
 check on 23 international markets.

 In  Table  3,  we regress  SMB against the market factor and then stepwise add factors from
 our model to the regression. For each factor added (MKT, Lagging MKT, HML, UMD,
 QMJ), the regression’s adjusted R-squared value increases, confirming  hypothesis 2a).
 Furthermore, in the two final regressions (with the difference being QMJ), we can see
 that by including QMJ as a variable, SMB alpha increases by +0.11% to a non-significant
 SMB alpha mean of  –0.03% (t-statistic  –0.14) per month. This finding, therefore, also
 confirms our hypothesis 2b) that adding QMJ increases SMB alpha. However, throughout
 all our regressions, we find that SMB alpha is not statistically significant (with our final
 t-statistic at  –0.14). Interpreting the non-significant SMB alpha, we find that there is no
 size effect in the Swedish equity markets between 1995-2019 when controlling for the
 above factors.

 In addition to the above findings, we also find that all our explanatory factors are
 statistically significant in explaining SMB except for UMD. Furthermore, all  the
 explanatory variables have negative coefficients, except for our lagging market excess
 return factor, meaning small firms have on average:
    a)   lower systematic risk exposure (market beta) than big firms,
    b)   longer price discovery periods in response to market-impacting macroeconomic
       news,
    c)   higher likelihood of being classified as “growth” compared to big firms,
    d)  no significant difference in momentum magnitude relative to big firms, and
    e)   higher likelihood  of being classified as “junk” versus big firms.

                                   17
          Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

          Comparing the explanatory power of our regression to the regression of Asness et al.
           (2018a), we find that adding the QMJ factor to our regression raises adjusted R-squared
           relatively less than adding QMJ in  the United States. In the United States, the model of
          Asness et al. (2018a) has an R-squared of 0.37 when including QMJ, whereas our adjusted
          R-squared with QMJ is 0.25.  This result indicates that controlling for quality seems less
           important for SMB in Sweden than in the United States and suggests further factors could
           be appropriate to explain SMB in Sweden.  Interestingly, our Carhart four-factor model
           with lagging market returns shows stronger explanatory power relative to their regression
           using the same factors, with our R-squared  at  0.21  versus theirs at 0.15.

            Table  3: SMB regression against Carhart and QMJ factors between 1995-2019

                                   SMB!  =  α  +  βMKT!  +  β"#MKT!"# +  hHML! + mUMD! +  qQMJ! + ε!

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2
Sample             α      t(α)      β      t(β)      β-1     t(β-1)      h      t(h)      m      t(m)      q      t(q)     Adjusted R
Sweden 1995-2019    -0.21%    -1.05     -0.22     -5.93                                                                      10.24%
Sweden 1995-2019    -0.31%    -1.63     -0.24     -6.74     0.19      5.21                                                     17.49%
Sweden 1995-2019    -0.26%    -1.38     -0.24     -6.93     0.19      5.36     -0.15     -3.33                                      20.20%
Sweden 1995-2019    -0.14%    -0.70     -0.27     -7.27     0.19      5.51     -0.20     -3.93     -0.07     -2.07                      21.07%

Sweden 1995-2019    -0.03%    -0.14     -0.29     -8.04     0.19      5.58     -0.22     -4.48     -0.03     -0.95     -0.19     -3.89      24.68%

            Table  3.  Describes the  coefficients and explanatory power of regressing SMB against the Carhart four-
             factor model, a lagging excess market return factor, and a QMJ factor between 1995-2019.

          4.3.3 Swedish SMB alpha compared to the United States
           Comparing our non-significant Swedish SMB alpha, of  –0.03% per month (t-statistic
           –0.14), with Asness et al. (2018a) results in the United States of alpha +0.49% (t-statistic
           4.89) in Figure 1, we find the increase in SMB alpha and SMB alpha overall being larger
           in the United States. Relative to  the increase in SMB alpha of Asness et al. (2018a)  in
          Sweden  with QMJ  (+0.10%), and our increase (+0.11%), we find our results differ by
          +0.01%.  We believe this minor difference is because of differences in  our  respective
                                   20
            sampling periods.

           Interpreting the absence of a significant  size  effect in Sweden, as compared to the United
           States, we believe  the non-significant effect  could be due to a range of potential reasons,
             including that:
              a)   there is no size effect in Sweden, due to  differences  in the  equity markets of
                  Sweden and the United States, or
              b)  the QMJ factor was constructed for the United States stock market, and has not
                  been adequately adapted to the Swedish market, or
               c)   empirical errors, including potential bias in data, or
              d)  a combination of the above or other factors.

             20
                Asness et al. (2018a) use a sampling period of 1983-2012 for calculating the Swedish increase in SMB
             alpha, whereas we use the period 1995-2019.

                                           18
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

 Figure 1: Comparison of SMB Alpha between the United States (1957-2012) and
                               Sweden (1995-2019)

                          Sweden 1995 - 2019                                      USA 1957 - 2012
  1.0%                      ∆0.11%                                        ∆0.35%

  0.8%

                                                                                    0.49%
  0.6%
                                                                                                               t = 4.89

  0.4%
                                                                         0.14%
   0.2%                                                                          t = 1.23
 SMB Alpha

  0.0%
                                      -0.03%
  -0.2%                    -0.14%      t = -0.14
                               t = -0.70
  -0.4%
                      MKTt, MKTt-1, HMLt, UMDt    MKTt, MKTt-1, HMLt, UMDt, QMJt

Figure 1. The figure describes SMB alpha results with and without controlling for QMJ, in Sweden and in
the United States, as well as the change in SMB alpha after controlling for QMJ. The data  on  the United
States come from Asness et al. (2018a).

4.3.4 SMB  and QMJ in Sweden over time
Following our finding that controlling for quality results in a  non-significant  positive
increase in SMB alpha, we dissect this interaction and look at how  the relation between
quality and size  has developed over time. In plotting the various factors, we do not test
for statistical significance as previously, but instead inspect visually. By examining
Figure 2  this way, we identify general trends in the interaction of our factors over time.

In  Panel 2A, we plot 5-year moving averages of SMB alpha, SMB’s beta on QMJ
(“BetaSMB-QMJ“) multiplied by QMJ, and SMB. First, we see that SMB alpha has
periodically taken on both negative and positive values during the period 1995-2019,
which is in line with the on average  non-significant  SMB alpha in our regression.
Furthermore, we see that when SMB alpha changes sign, this tends to coincide with QMJ
✕  BetaSMB-QMJ  changing sign. For example, when QMJ  ✕  BetaSMB-QMJ  crosses the
horizontal axis from positive to negative, SMB alpha tends to cross the horizontal axis
from the opposite direction. This example indicates that time variation in QMJ ✕ BetaSMB-
QMJ is a strong determinant of the time variation in the sign of SMB alpha. This pattern
has occurred for every observed change in the sign of QMJ  ✕  BetaSMB-QMJ.

Examining the impact of QMJ on the size effect over time, we see that QMJ affects the
size effect in three ways: the magnitude of QMJ, the sign of BetaSMB-QMJ,  and the
magnitude of BetaSMB-QMJ. We plot time series of QMJ, BetaSMB-QMJ, and QMJ ✕ BetaSMB-
QMJ in Panel 2B, and find that our quality premium is consistently positive throughout the
measurement period. Therefore, changes in the sign of QMJ  ✕  BetaSMB-QMJ  result from a

                                  19
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

change in the sign of BetaSMB-QMJ. Assuming consistently positive QMJ returns, a
negative beta value can be interpreted as a higher concentration of quality among big
firms than  small firms, while a positive beta indicates an opposite effect. Comparing our
BetaSMB-QMJ  to the results of Asness et al. (2018a), they, by contrast, find a consistently
negative beta in the United States. Therefore, size seems to more reliably predict quality
over time in the United States than in Sweden.

                           //  This space  has been  intentionally left blank //

                                  20
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

               Figure 2: SMB, QMJ, and their interaction  over time

   Panel 2A: Five-year moving averages of SMB alpha, SMB and QMJ  ✕  BetaSMB-QMJ

                              SMB alpha        SMB        QMJxBeta

  1.2%

  0.8%

  0.4%

  0.0%

  -0.4%

  -0.8%

  -1.2%

  -1.6%
      2000     2002     2004     2006     2008     2010     2012     2014     2016     2018

 Panel 2B: Five-year moving averages of BetaSMB-QMJ  , QMJ, and BetaSMB-QMJ  ✕  QMJ

                                  Beta        QMJ        QMJxBeta

       1.0                                                                                            2.5%

       0.8                                                                                            2.0%

       0.6                                                                                            1.5%

       0.4                                                                                            1.0%

       0.2                                                                                            0.5%

       0.0                                                                                            0.0%
     Beta
       -0.2                                                                                                  -0.5%
                                                                                           QMJ and QMJxBeta
       -0.4                                                                                                  -1.0%

       -0.6                                                                                                  -1.5%

       -0.8                                                                                                  -2.0%

       -1.0                                                                                                  -2.5%
        2000    2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012    2014    2016    2018

Figure 2. The figure’s graphs describe the time series of SMB, SMB alpha, QMJ, and the decomposition
of the interaction between QMJ and SMB. SMB alpha is  calculated using our primary regression over
rolling 5-year windows. Here, we calculate SMB as the average of rolling 5-year periods of our SMB factor
using the zero-investment portfolio method.  Beta between SMB and QMJ follows the same pattern and is
calculated for rolling 5-year windows. Since we calculate our factors for the period 1995-2019, our use of
calculations based on 5-year windows limits the plotted period to 2000-2019.

                                  21
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

4.3.5 Size and quality in Sweden
Following  the results of  Asness et al. (2018a) that size and quality are positively
correlated, we hypothesize that the same pattern can be observed in Sweden. Since we
observe a quality premium throughout our measurement period and controlling for quality
yields an inverse relation between alpha  increase and size decile (Fig. 4), we expect a
positive relationship  between size and quality.

To further investigate this hypothesis, we graph time series with quality distributions
among the smallest and biggest firms and size distributions among the firms of the highest
and lowest quality. In  Figure 3, we see these time series distributions among  the top and
bottom 20% of firms by size and quality.  Panel 3A  shows that small firms are
predominantly junky and rarely reside in the  top-quality  decile. In  panel 3B,  we see that
the largest firms are rarely junky, and quality is more common among big firms than small
firms. This pattern is similar to the one observed in the United States by Asness et al.
(2018a).

Panel 3C and 3D  are the inverse plots of panels 3A and 3B. Panel 3C shows that the
junkiest firms are predominantly small and rarely big, and panel 3D shows that quality
firms are rarely small. Furthermore, panel 3D shows that quality firms are relatively
evenly distributed among the top four size deciles. Comparing our high-quality firms’
plots to the corresponding plots of Asness et al. (2018a), we see a tilt towards small firms
in the United States, which is surprising given a positive relationship between size and
quality. This difference indicates  that firms in the top quality-decile are more likely to be
among the largest firms in Sweden than in the United States.

                           // This space  has been  intentionally left blank //

                                  22
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

                  Figure 3: Distribution of quality across size decile

                Panel 3A: Quality distribution among the smallest firms

                                    Junk   S2   S3   S4   Quality

 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

   0%

         1995199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019

                Panel 3B: Quality distribution among the biggest firms

                                    Junk   S2   S3   S4   Quality

 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

   0%

         1995199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019

                                  23
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

                Panel 3C: Size distribution among low-quality (junk) firms

                                     Small   S2   S3   S4   Big

 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

   0%

         1995199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019

                   Panel 3D: Size distribution among high-quality firms

                                     Small   S2   S3   S4   Big

 100%

  80%

  60%

  40%

  20%

   0%

         1995199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019

Figure 3. Panel A and B show distribution of  quality over five quality quintiles (Junk, Q2, Q3, Q4, and
Quality) among the top and bottom 20% of firms by size. Panel C and D show distribution of size over five
size quintiles (Small, S2, S3, S4, Big) among the top and bottom 20% of firms by quality.

                                  24
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

4.3.6 Alpha across size deciles
Having examined quality’s relationship to size, we proceed to test the distribution of
returns alpha across firm size  deciles, hypothesizing that  6a) smaller firms will see a
larger returns alpha increase when adding QMJ  than bigger firms.  We expect this
decreasing trend  with increasing size  because of our earlier results of quality’s  positive
relationship  with size, as well as based on Asness et al. (2018a) who  found  such a result
in the  United States. Furthermore, we hypothesize that  6b) the above trend will be linear
(alpha increase becoming smaller with every size decile). We expect this linear trend,
assuming that quality is not  concentrated among extreme  observations,  as the increase in
alpha controlling for quality  should decrease  as firms get bigger and have higher quality.

In Figure 4, we test the increase in returns alpha when adding QMJ to regressions of our
model, sorting firms by their size deciles. We find  non-significant  increases  in return
alpha of +0.28% for firms in decile one and  of  –0.01% for firms in decile  10. Therefore,
we find support for our hypothesis 6a), as the increase in alpha appears to become smaller
as firm size increases.  We also find that the  increases in alpha appear weakly linearly
distributed across the size deciles, which supports hypothesis 6b). This indicates a general
linear  positive  relation between size and quality, and that quality differences are not
concentrated among  extreme observations.

 Figure 4: Differences between returns  alpha increase with QMJ across size deciles

       0.4%

       0.3%

       0.2%

       0.1%
     Change in alpha

       0.0%

      -0.1%
             Decile 1   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4   Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10

Figure 4. The graph illustrates the increase in monthly returns alpha when including the QMJ factor. Every
month, we create ten value-weighted portfolios  –  one for each size decile of firms. We regress each
portfolio’s returns on MKT, MKT lagged one month, UMD and HML. We then add QMJ to the regression
and observe the change in the regressions’ alpha values.

                                  25
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

5. Conclusion and limitations

Following our tests, we find that the SMB factor is not significant  in Sweden on average
between 1995-2019. Examining SMB controlling for  the month of  January, however, we
find a statistically significant SMB with positive mean in January and negative mean  in
February-December. Combined, these two opposing effects on SMB offer an alternative
explanation to SMB being non-significant / zero on average. When regressing our SMB
factor against Carhart’s four-factor model and lagging market returns, we find non-
significant SMB alpha, indicating the lack of a size effect without controlling for quality.

Controlling for quality through QMJ, we find that QMJ  is  statistically significant in
explaining SMB and consistently increases SMB alpha. However, adding QMJ to  our
regression brings SMB’s alpha from a non-significant negative value to an  even less
significant value, in support of no size effect in Sweden.

Examining the impact of controlling for quality in monthly returns alpha across different
size deciles, we  find a general increase in returns alpha that decreases linearly with size.
These results are in line with the negative coefficient of QMJ and indicate a positive
relationship between size and quality in Sweden. Furthermore, we also find that smaller
firms  on average being  junkier  explains most of the observed negative, yet  non-
significant, size effect in Sweden. Looking closer at the interaction between size and
quality, we find a consistent quality premium in Sweden. Despite this, we find that the
correlation between size and quality has varied over time, with SMB’s beta  on QMJ
periodically becoming positive, although generally being negative. This generally
negative  beta  is in line with QMJ’s inclusion in the regression increasing SMB alpha on
average and justifies controlling  for quality when testing the size effect.

Overall, we find that there is no size effect, positive or negative, in Sweden between 1995-
2019 when controlling for quality and  our  other  return  factors.  We believe the consistent
quality premium and a generally  positive  relationship  between size and quality,  have
previously obscured the lack of a relation between size and returns in Sweden. We suggest
further research  to  include  why a quality premium exists in Sweden,  why  its  correlated to
size,  and how this  relation  has altered time.  Additionally,  we  also  suggest exploring other
factors  potentially  explaining  SMB in Sweden, for example, a liquidity factor.

5.1 Limitations
We see a few possible limitations to our tests, and our results should be viewed in light
of these. For example,  the  slight heteroscedasticity in our derived factors, a potential bias
in Compustat’s data sampling, and the relatively low increase in adjusted R-squared when
including the QMJ factor. We have tried to reduce the impact of these limitations by
recreating all factors from  the ground up, removing as few observations as possible, and
adapting  the QMJ factor using Swedish  classifications. However,  to  take  our  results even
further, we advise to use a broader data sample in the number of firms and  time  period,
                                                                                                21
which would decrease the impact of outliers and increase statistical significance.

21
  As we use all available data from Compustat Capital IQ as accessed on 31/03/2020, we would suggest
using another database or combining multiple databases in a possible  extension.

                                  26
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

6. References

6.1 Published  papers

Alquist, Ron, et al. “Fact, Fiction, and the Size Effect.”  SSRN Electronic Journal, 2018,

doi:10.2139/ssrn.3177539.

Altman, Edward I. “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis And The Prediction Of Corporate

       Bankruptcy.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 23, no. 4, 1968, pp. 589–609., doi:10.1111/j.1540-

       6261.1968.tb00843.x.

Asness, Clifford S., et al. “Quality Minus Junk.” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2014,

       doi:10.2139/ssrn.2312432.

Asness, Clifford S., et al. “Quality Minus Junk.”  Review of Accounting Studies, vol. 24, no. 1, 2018b, pp.

       34–112., doi:10.1007/s11142-018-9470-2.

Asness, Clifford S., et al. “Size Matters, If You Control Your Junk.”  Journal of Financial Economics,

        vol. 129, no. 3, 2018a, pp. 479-509., doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.05.006.

Banz, Rolf W. “The Relationship between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks.”  Journal of

       Financial Economics, vol. 9, no. 1, 1981,  pp. 3–18., doi:10.1016/0304-405x(81)90018-0.

Barry, Christopher B, et al. “Robustness of Size and Value Effects in Emerging Equity Markets, 1985–

       2000.”  Emerging Markets Review, vol. 3, no. 1, 2002, pp. 1–30., doi:10.1016/s1566-

        0141(01)00028-0.

Berk, Jonathan B. “A  Critique of Size-Related Anomalies.”  Review of Financial Studies, vol. 8, no. 2,

       1995, pp. 275–286., doi:10.1093/rfs/8.2.275.

Berk, Jonathan B. “Does Size Really Matter?” Financial Analysts Journal, vol. 53, no. 5, 1997, pp. 12–

       18., doi:10.2469/faj.v53.n5.2112.

Campbell, John Y., et al. “In Search of Distress Risk.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 63, no. 6, 2008, pp.

       2899–2939., doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.2008.01416.x.

Carhart, Mark M. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 52,  no. 1,

       1997, pp. 57–82., doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1997.tb03808.x.

Chan, Louis K.c., et al. “New Paradigm or Same Old Hype in Equity Investing?”  Financial Analysts

       Journal, vol. 56, no. 4, 2000, pp. 23–36., doi:10.2469/faj.v56.n4.2371.

                                  27
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

Chen, Zhiwu, et al. “Liquidity as an Investment Style.”  SSRN Electronic Journal, 2010,

       doi:10.2139/ssrn.1675108.

Crain, Michael A. “A Literature Review of the Size Effect.”  SSRN Electronic Journal, 2011,

       doi:10.2139/ssrn.1710076.

Easterday, Kathryn E., et al. “The Persistence  of the Small Firm/January Effect: Is It Consistent with

        Investors’ Learning and Arbitrage Efforts?”  The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance,

       vol. 49, no. 3, 2009, pp. 1172–1193., doi:10.1016/j.qref.2008.07.001.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds.”

       Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 33, no. 1, 1993, pp. 3–56., doi:10.1016/0304-

        405x(93)90023-5.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns.”  The Journal

       of Finance, vol. 47, no. 2, 1992, pp. 427–465., doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04398.x.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. “Dissecting Anomalies with a Five-Factor Model.” SSRN

       Electronic Journal, 2014, doi:10.2139/ssrn.2503174.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. “Size, Value, and Momentum in International Stock Returns.”

       SSRN Electronic Journal, 2011, doi:10.2139/ssrn.1720139.

George, Thomas J., and Chuan-Yang Hwang. “A Resolution of the Distress Risk and Leverage Puzzles in

       the Cross Section of  Stock Returns.”  Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 96, no. 1, 2010, pp.

      56–79., doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2009.11.003.

Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd.  Security Analysis: Principles and Technique. McGraw-Hill,

       2009.

He, Jia, and Lilian K. Ng. “Economic Forces, Fundamental Variables, and Equity Returns.” The Journal

       of Business, vol. 67, no. 4, 1994, p. 599., doi:10.1086/296648.

Horowitz, Joel L., et al. “The Disappearing Size Effect.”  Research in Economics, vol. 54, no. 1, 2000, pp.

       83–100., doi:10.1006/reec.1999.0207.

Israel, Ronen, and Tobias J. Moskowitz. “The Role of Shorting, Firm Size, and Time on Market

       Anomalies.”  Journal of Financial Economics, vol.  108, no. 2, 2013, pp. 275–301.,

       doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2012.11.005.

                                  28
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman. “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:

       Implications for Stock Market Efficiency.” The Journal of Finance, vol. 48, no. 1, 1993, pp. 65–

        91., doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.1993.tb04702.x.

Keim, Donald B. “Size-Related Anomalies and Stock Return Seasonality.”  Journal of Financial

       Economics, vol. 12, no. 1, 1983, pp. 13–32., doi:10.1016/0304-405x(83)90025-9.

Knez, Peter J., and Mark J. Ready. “On The Robustness of Size and Book-to-Market in Cross-Sectional

       Regressions.”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 52, no. 4, 1997, pp. 1355–1382., doi:10.1111/j.1540-

       6261.1997.tb01113.x.

Lintner, John. “Security Prices, Risk, and Maximal Gains From Diversification.”  The Journal of Finance,

       vol. 20, no. 4, 1965, p. 587., doi:10.2307/2977249.

Mohanram, Partha S. “Separating Winners from Losers among LowBook-to-Market Stocks Using

       Financial Statement Analysis.”  Review of Accounting Studies, vol. 10, no. 2-3, 2005, pp. 133–

       170., doi:10.1007/s11142-005-1526-4.

Novy-Marx, Robert. “The Other Side of Value: The Gross Profitability Premium.”  Journal of Financial

       Economics, vol. 108, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–28., doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.01.003.

Ohlson, James A. “Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy.” Journal of

       Accounting Research, vol. 18, no. 1, 1980, p. 109., doi:10.2307/2490395.

Penman, Stephen H., et al. “The Book-to-Price Effect in Stock Returns: Accounting for Leverage.”

       Journal of Accounting Research, vol. 45, no. 2, 2007, pp. 427–467., doi:10.1111/j.1475-

       679x.2007.00240.x.

Reinganum, Marc R. “The Anomalous Stock Market Behavior of Small Firms in January.” Journal of

       Financial Economics, vol. 12, no. 1, 1983, pp. 89–104., doi:10.1016/0304-405x(83)90029-6.

Richardson, Scott A., et al. “Accrual Reliability, Earnings Persistence and Stock Prices.”  Journal of

       Accounting and Economics, vol. 39, no. 3, 2005, pp. 437–485.,

       doi:10.1016/j.jacceco.2005.04.005.

Schwert, G. William. “Chapter 15 Anomalies and Market Efficiency.” Handbook of the Economics of

       Finance Financial Markets and Asset Pricing, 2003, pp.  939–974., doi:10.1016/s1574-

        0102(03)01024-0.

                                  29
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

Schwert, G.william. “Size and Stock Returns, and Other Empirical Regularities.”  Journal of Financial

       Economics, vol. 12, no. 1, 1983, pp. 3–12., doi:10.1016/0304-405x(83)90024-7.

Sharpe, William F. “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of Risk.”

       The Journal of Finance, vol. 19, no.  3, 1964, p. 425., doi:10.2307/2977928.

Sloan, Richard G. “Do Stock Prices Fully Reflect Information in Accruals and Cash Flows about Future

       Earnings?”  The Accounting Review, vol. 71, no. 3, 1996, pp. 289-315., Available at SSRN ID

      2598

Stattman, D. “Book values and stock returns”  The Chicago MBA: A Journal of Selected Papers, vol. 4:25,

       no. 45, 1980, Available at Semantic Scholars ID 151011490

6.2 Databases

Compustat  -  Capital IQ,  2020, Available at https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/. Accessed on

      31/03/2020.

Riksbanken,  2020, Available at https://www.riksbank.se/sv/statistik/sok-rantor--valutakurser/. Accessed

      on 31/03/2020.

Swedish House of Finance, 2017, Available at https://data.houseoffinance.se/otherDB/famaFrench.

      Accessed on 31/03/2020.

Thomson Reuters Eikon, 2020, Available only with subscription. Accessed on 31/03/2020.

6.3 Presentations

Asness, C.. “Size Matters, If You Control Your Junk” Presentation at Wharton,  2018, Available at

       https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/00c7/19c3a6c20bc17d945e7d1799566ac972b648.pdf

                                  30
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

Appendix

A.1 Empirical data sampling and processing
This section describes how we process data in the empirical study, which observations
we drop and the number of observations at the various stages of the analysis. Initially, we
took all our accounting and market data from the Compustat Capital IQ database, sourcing
all data points for country code “SWE” between 1987-06 to  2020-03.

A.1.1 Fundamentals data
From 13 246 to 12 664 observations

                                                                               # of observations

 Original sample (1987-2019)                                                  13 246

 Drop duplicate observations, keep most recent accounting data by June               – 64

 Drop if fiscal year < 1995 due to limited sample size                             – 518

 Final sample (1995-2019)                                                   12 664

A.1.2 Market data
From 3 233 781 to 115 322  observations

                                                                               # of observations

 Original sample (1985-2019)                                                 3 233 781

 Drop if observations are not common shares                                  – 76 597

 Drop if shares do not have a claim on the company’s earnings                    – 361 042

 Drop if price observation is not at month-end (after calculating daily beta)           –  2 656 355

 Drop if the share class is not the primary share class of company                   – 19 173

 Drop if fiscal year < 1995 due to limited sample size                            – 5 290

 Drop if extreme monthly return (over 1000%)                                 – 3

 Final sample (1995-2019)                                                  115 322

A.2 Construction of QMJ quality metrics
This section describes the calculations of the various quality metrics used to determine
our QMJ subset portfolios. For metrics which use accounting data only, we update metrics
on an annual basis. For metrics that include both accounting and market data, metrics we
update metrics on a monthly basis.

                                  31
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

A.2.1 Profitability metrics

       GPOA = Gross profits over assets =
                      (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)

       ROE = Return on equity =
                       (𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒)  ÷  (𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦)

       ROA = Return on assets =
                            (𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒)  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)

where  shareholders equity  is equity attributable to parent, excluding minority interest

       CFOA = Cash flow over assets =
                          (𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑒  𝑐𝑎𝑠ℎ  𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤)  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)

where free cash flow is calculated as follows:
           𝐹𝐶𝐹  =  (𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒  +  𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  −  𝛥 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙  −  𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥) and
                𝛥  𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙  =  (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙)𝑡  −  (𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙)𝑡−1

      GMAR = Gross margin =
                        (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)  ÷  (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒)

      LACC = Low accruals =
             −(𝛥  𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙   −  𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)

A.2.2 Growth metrics

       G_GPOA = Growth in gross profits over assets across this year and 4 years prior=
      ((𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)*  − (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)*+Q  )  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)*+Q

       G_ROE = Growth in return on equity across this year and 4 years  prior =
         ((𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒)*  −  (𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒)*+Q  )  ÷  (𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑠  𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦)*+Q

       G_ROA = Growth in return on assets across this year and 4 years prior =
             ((𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒)*  −  (𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒)*+Q  )  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)*+Q

      G_CFOA = Growth in cash flow over assets across this year and 4 years prior =
        (−(𝛥  𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎l  −  𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)*  −  (−(𝛥  𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎l
                      − 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛))*+Q  ) ÷ (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)*+Q

       G_GMAR = Growth in gross margin across across this year and 4 years prior =
        ((𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)*  − (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)*+Q  )  ÷  (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒)*+Q

       G_LACC = Growth in low accruals across across this year and 4 years prior =
        ((𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)*  − (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  −  𝐶𝑂𝐺𝑆)*+Q  )  ÷  (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒)*+Q

                                  32
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

A.2.3 Safety metrics

      LEV = Low leverage =
          −(𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔  𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚  𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡  + 𝑆ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡  𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚  𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡  + 𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦  𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡  +
                          𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑑  𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘)  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)

       BAB = Betting against beta =
        −𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎  =  −(𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  #*2(0 !,7=L@1M !/FAS) × (𝜎 #*2(0 !  ÷  𝜎 7=L@1M !/FAS)

where  𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛)*+,- /,123456 /789:  is calculated from daily returns for the past rolling three years and
the standard deviation is calculated from daily returns for a rolling period of the past one year

       Altman Z score =
      (1.2 × 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙  +  1.4 × 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑  𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠  +  3.3 × 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇  +
           0.6 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡  𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  +  𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒)  ÷  (𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)

where Market Capitalization is calculated as ( shares outstanding × share price ) for all type of equity
securities available for a single firm in our data sample per month

       EVOL = Standard deviation of return on equity over rolling past five years =
                               𝜎  97: 2EA' *%A I.#* "!EA 5A.'#

A.3 Robustness check: Our derived factors compared to SHOF’s factors
In order for us to conduct our analysis to its full extent, we choose to calculate our model’s
monthly return factors from  the ground up. These calculations are  an extensive process,
and the derived factors are central to our study. We have therefore compared our derived
factors to the ones available for the Swedish market published by the Swedish House of
Finance (SHOF) as a robustness check. In doing this, we investigate the reliability of our
calculations.  As seen in  figure 5 below,  we find that all of our factors generally move in
conjunction with those of SHOF, but that SHOF’s factors sometimes take on very large
values, which our’s do not. From visual inspection, we consider it likely that our
calculations are robust and correct. Differences in individual months do not necessarily
indicate that either our or SHOF’s factors are incorrect. It is likely the result of differences
in the methodology used.

                           // This space  has been  intentionally left blank //

                                  33
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

    Figure 5: Comparison of our factors to Swedish House of Finance’s factors

  Panel 5A: Times series of our and SHOF’s MKT factor for the Swedish stock market

                                  MKT SHOF      MKT

  25.0%

  20.0%

  15.0%

  10.0%

   5.0%

   0.0%

   -5.0%

  -10.0%

  -15.0%

  -20.0%

  -25.0%
       1995    1997    1999    2001    2003    2005    2007    2009    2011    2013    2015    2017

  Panel 5B: Times  series of our and SHOF’s HML factor for the Swedish stock market

                                  HML SHOF      HML

  30.0%

  20.0%

  10.0%

   0.0%

  -10.0%

  -20.0%

  -30.0%

  -40.0%
       1995    1997    1999    2001    2003    2005    2007    2009    2011    2013    2015    2017

                                  34
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

 Panel 5C: Times series of our and SHOF’s UMD factor for the Swedish stock market

                                 UMD SHOF      UMD

  40.0%

  20.0%

   0.0%

  -20.0%

  -40.0%

  -60.0%

  -80.0%
       1995    1997    1999    2001    2003    2005    2007    2009    2011    2013    2015    2017

  Panel 5D: Times series of our and SHOF’s SMB factor for the Swedish stock market

                                   SMB SHOF      SMB

  30.0%

  20.0%

  10.0%

   0.0%

  -10.0%

  -20.0%

  -30.0%

  -40.0%
       1995    1997    1999    2001    2003    2005    2007    2009    2011    2013    2015    2017

Figure 5. The figure shows plots of times series of our calculated factors versus the same factors calculated
by the Swedish House of Finance. The period 1995-2017 is the complete overlap of available data on our
factors and those of the Swedish House of Finance.

A.4 Robustness check: Tests for multicollinearity, homoscedasticity, autocorrelation
Since we conduct an ordinary least squares regression, we test for multicollinearity,
homoscedasticity and autocorrelation to evaluate the validity of our model. We find that
our   regression   exhibits   some   homoscedasticity,   no   multicollinearity   and   no
autocorrelation.

                                  35
   Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

   A.4.1 Test for multicollinearity in factors
   Computing variance inflation factors,  as seen in  table 4,  we find that our regression does
   not exhibit an issue with multicollinearity.

                          Table  4: Test for multicollinearity

                                      Without QMJ                                   With QMJ
Variable                       VIF           1/VIF                         VIF           1/VIF
  UMD                        1.42            0.71                          1.54            0.65
  HML                        1.31            0.77                          1.33            0.75
  MKT                        1.14            0.88                          1.27            0.79
 MKTt-1                         1.02             0.98                            1.18             0.85
  QMJ                           -               -                             1.02             0.98
Mean VIF                        1.22                                          1.27

   Table 4.  The table illustrates variance inflation factors from our SMB regression with and without QMJ.

   A.4.2 Test for homoscedasticity in factors
   Visual inspection from plotting our error terms against our model’s fitted values indicates
   growing dispersion in error terms, hinting at a problem with heteroscedasticity, as seen
   in  figure 6 below.

            Figure 6: Residuals versus fitted values for primary regression

   Figure 6.  The graph illustrates our residuals versus our fitted values for our primary regression including
   QMJ.

   White’s test for homoscedasticity in  Table  5  confirms that heteroscedasticity is present.
   The heteroscedasticity could stem from a model specification error. In our model, we
   assume a linear relationship between SMB and the exogenous variables, but the

                                     36
Is there a Swedish Size Effect?  Controlling for Quality             Hansson, Westesson

relationship could be of any other form. We do  not find any significant relationships
between our error terms and any of our exogenous variables. Running logarithmic
regressions  between  SMB  and  the  exogenous  variables,  we  find  no  logarithmic
relationships.

We consider the omission of important variables an unlikely cause of heteroscedasticity
since our variable selection follows the method of Asness et al. (2018). Lastly, it could
stem from data and data processing errors, i.e. large observed outlier SMB values are the
result of an error. For some points in time, factors consist of only a small number of firms,
and any extreme returns can disturb the SMB factor. This likely contributes to the
heteroscedasticity since some observations of SMB are larger than  can be reasonably
expected.

                   Table  5: White’s  test for heteroscedasticity

                                 Without QMJ                           With QMJ
Source                      chi2       df        p                   chi2       df        p
Heteroscedasticity                46.4        14        0.00                   50.1        20        0.00

Table 5. The table illustrates our test for heteroscedasticity using  a White’s test.

A.4.3 Test for  autocorrelation in factors
We conduct a Breusch-Godfrey test for autocorrelation and find that our regressions do
not exhibit autocorrelation, as seen in  table  6  below.

                Table  6: Breusch-Godfrey test for Autocorrelation

               QMJ             lag           chi2           df        Prob > chi2
                Excluded            1            1.74            1            0.19
               Included            1            1.47            1            0.23
                                                        H0: no serial correlation

Table  6.  The table illustrates  a Breusch-Godfrey test for autocorrelation both with and without including
QMJ. We set lag to one, following conventional procedure.

                                  37