COMPETITION IN THE CREDIT
RATING INDUSTRY

HOW COMPETITION BETWEEN RATING AGENCIES AFFECTS
RATING QUALITY

FRANSISKA ASPEGRÉN

PHILIP JOHANSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Competition in the Credit Rating Industry: How Competition between Rating Agencies
affects Rating Quality

Abstract:

Higher levels of competition between credit rating agencies on an industry-year level have
previously been shown to decrease the rating quality of incumbent firm credit ratings after
specific changes in the credit rating industry. We successfully replicate this research and
extend it empirically, finding no evidence that this correlation holds for the time  period 2010-
2016. Specifically, we look at how the rating quality of long-term firm credit ratings issued
by Standard & Poor’s is affected by competition quantified in two ways, Fitch Ratings
market share and the Hirschman-Herfindahl Index. We conclude that our results indicate a
positive trend towards more informative firm ratings of higher quality, as the level of
competition does not have a significant impact on rating level and informativeness.

Keywords:

   Credit ratings, Credit rating agencies,  Rating quality,  Competition, Reputation

Authors:

   Fransiska Aspegrén (24229)
   Philip Johansson (24209)

Tutors:

   Adam Altmejd,  Postdoctoral Fellow,  Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Fransiska Aspégren and Philip Johansson, 2020

                                     2
1. Introduction

The financial crisis of 2008 brought credit rating agencies and their role as information
providers to the forefront of public discourse. Firm and bond ratings influence the cost of
funding, capital structure policies, and are the basis for contractual triggers. Market participants
and even regulators have for a long time relied on ratings in assessing risk (Sangiorgi and Spatt,
2017).  There are widely discussed sources of friction in the accuracy of ratings, including the
effects of competition between rating agencies on rating quality (Becker and Milbourn, 2011).
We however empirically show that during the years 2010-2016, competition in the credit rating
industry does not significantly impact rating quality. This is deemed to be a positive
development, as  the high and consistent quality of credit ratings is an essential factor for the
proper functioning of the financial system  (Stahl and Strausz, 2017).

The business model of rating agencies, known as the issuer-pay model, is a well-documented
source of friction in the determination of ratings. Issuers (entities) of bonds, as opposed  to
subscribers, pay for the issuance of their ratings. The industry is dominated by only three credit
rating agencies, Standard & Poor’s (S&P), Moody’s, and Fitch Ratings (Fitch), which makes
it vulnerable for potential rating inflation, in which the agencies provide ratings that are high
in order to attract issuers (Sangiorgi and Spatt, 2017). This has been investigated in both
empirical and theoretical papers, such as Becker and Milbourn (2011). In their empirical paper
studying the time period 1995-2006, they find that increased competition, measured as market
share by Fitch, leads to lower quality ratings by the incumbent firms S&P and Moody’s in the
market for corporate bonds.

In this paper, we examine whether the negative effects of competition on rating quality shown
by Becker and Milbourn (2011) are specific for the time period 1995-2006, or if the negative
effects still persist in a later time period. The question addressed is how the rating quality of
firms (issuers) rated by S&P has been affected by competition in the time span 2010-2016.
Rating   quality   is   measured   in   two   dimensions,   ability   to   classify   risk   and   rating
informativeness. It is in the interest of the users  of credit ratings to have stable rating levels and
risk classifications over time. Following Becker and Milbourn (2011), we therefore treat an
overarching increase in rating level (i.e. rating inflation) as a lessening of quality. Rating
informativeness is measured as a firm ratings ability to accurately predict default. Our initial
competitive measure is Fitch market share, measured as the fraction of bond ratings issued by
Fitch in a specific industry and year. We also include a second measure of competition, the
Hirschman-Herfindahl Index (HH-Index), calculated as the square of the sum of the market
shares of Fitch, Moody’s, and S&P. The effects of competition on rating quality is captured
through different intensities of competition, as the market share  varies considerably between
industries. We start with a replication of Becker and Milbourn’s  (2011)  results  before
examining  the  later  time  period  2010-2016,  testing  the  hypotheses  that  1)  increased
competition leads to higher rating levels and 2) increased competition leads to a decline in
rating informativeness.

The time period 2010-2016 differs from 1995-2006 in several ways. Becker and Milbourn
(2011) use Fitch’s market share as their independent variable,  which was growing explosively
at the time and therefore  most accurately represents the big shift occurring in the credit rating
industry. In 2010-2016, Fitch is however no longer a novel challenger to the incumbents S&P
and Moody’s. It was added to the Lehman Index in 2005, was used in regulation as a tiebreaker,
and has reached a relatively stable market share within individual industries, as seen in Figure
1 (Becker and Milbourn, 2011). As we believe that the choice of measure of competition should

                                     3
be motivated by the current market  conditions, we  also  use the  HH-Index, to not  potentially
exclude any significant  market changes  not captured by Fitch’s market share alone. The time
period we study also follows the financial crisis of 2008, for which the credit rating agencies
were partially blamed for inflated ratings in the structured product market  (Financial Crisis
Inquiry Commission, 2011). As a consequence of the financial crisis, the Dodd-Frank Wall
Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) was implemented in 2010. It
mandated the removal of regulatory reference to ratings and made the agencies liable for their
ratings (Sangiorgi and Spatt, 2017).  Although these were later not rigorously implemented,
these  regulatory changes  initially  resulted in the credit rating agencies broadly lowering their
ratings and issuing downgrades that were less informative (Dimitrov et al. 2015,  Partnoy,
2017). Taking these factors into consideration, we believe that it is of interest to explore
whether the effects of competition on rating quality  are present  in a time period subject to
different market conditions than those examined by Becker and Milbourn (2011).

Using a dataset with roughly 30,000 US corporate firm ratings and over one million bond
ratings to calculate Fitch market share and HH-Index, we perform a series of ordinary least
squares (OLS) and ordered probit regressions between firm credit rating and the two measures
of competition. Fixed effects for industries, years, and firms,  as well as firm characteristics are
included in the regressions to rule out possible omitted variable bias, such as time-trend and
cross-industry explanations. We successfully replicate Becker and Milbourn (2011) results for
1995-2006, finding that increased competition from Fitch results in lower quality ratings in the
two dimensions, both as higher rating levels and as a lower ability of the ratings to accurately
predict defaults. Contrasting these findings, the regressions using data from 2010-2016
between firm ratings and our measures of competition show no significant correlation. This
implies that competition does not affect rating quality and that the effects  shown by Becker
and Milbourn (2011) most likely  are  specific to the time period  they investigate.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the existing literature.
In section 3 we give a comprehensive overview of the credit rating industry. In section 4 we
present the data and our methodology, followed by our results in section 5. The discussions of
findings are found in section 6 and conclusions in section 7.

                      Figure 1
                               Evolution of Fitch’s market share by industry and month. Fitch’s market
                          share is computed by dividing the number of bond ratings assigned by Fitch
                             by the sum of the number of bond ratings assigned by S&P, Moody’s and
                                 Fitch. Bond affirmations are excluded. Rolling 24-month averages in the
                                 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile industries are used to estimate the trends.

                           0,8
                           0,7
                           0,6
                           0,5
                           0,4
                           0,3
                           0,2
                           0,1
                       0
                       1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

                                    25%      50%      75%

                                     4
2. Literature Review

The issuer-pay model creates friction when the buyer of the rating (the issuer) is different from
the final user of the rating (the investors) (Sangiorgi and Spatt, 2017). Although there are
benefits over an investor-pay model, both in that the problem of  information resale is resolved
and that the certificates act as a  signalling  device in the market, rating agencies are faced with
a blatant conflict of interest (Stahl and Strausz, 2017). Issuers demand high ratings, which
could naturally lead credit ratings agencies to maximise profits by overrating issuers.  Credit
ratings agencies  however  claim that reputational concerns regulate their  behaviour,  stating that
issuers will only pay for ratings if investors believe they are communicating something of value
(Pacces and Romano, 2015). Bolton et al. (2012), Pacces and Romano (2015), and others have
found that reputation is not enough to hinder the incentive of profit maximisation in the
industry, largely due to investor naivety and lack of sophistication.

Our  paper builds on prior work concerning the effects of competition on the credit rating
industry. Research on competition between  rating agencies and its impact on  rating quality is
ambiguous, where papers, both theoretical and empirical, either conclude that increased
competition leads to increased rating levels and lower informativeness, that there is no
significant relationship between competition and rating inflation, or that the effects are
uncertain.

Becker and Milbourn (2011) find in their  empirical paper that increased competition in the
credit rating industry, measured as market share by the new-entrant Fitch, leads to lower quality
corporate firm ratings by S&P and Moody’s. Using a data set from 1995-2006, they show that
Fitch’s market share, the variable used to capture the intensity of competition across industries,
is correlated with higher firm and corporate bond ratings within those industries, and hence
lead to rating inflation. Similarly, Bolton et al. (2012) find that the rating industry for structured
products is less efficient when several firms conduct ratings compared to a monopoly, as rating
inflation occurs due to  “rating shopping”, in which issuers  shops around  and pressure rating
agencies  for  more favourable ratings.  Furthermore, under the current issuer-pay model, rating
agencies are more likely to inflate ratings when facing competition (Camanho et al. 2010).
Findings also show that a firm with a rating by Fitch will often have been issued a higher rating
by S&P and Moody’s  (Jewell and Livingston, 1999).

In contrast to this, Bae et al. (2015) finds no relationship between competition and rating
quality. In their reexamination of Becker and Milbourn (2011), they simultaneously control for
industry fixed effects and firm characteristics, arguing that the effects are driven by industry
characteristics instead of competition. Sangiorgi and Spatt (2017) find that the effects of
competition on equilibrium rating inflation are ambiguous, highlighting the discipling effect of
reputation. In their model, low reputation is costly as rating agencies are concerned about their
reputation relative to other agencies. A further potential reason for ambiguous findings is that
the effects of competition on rating quality for larger credit rating agencies can be too small to
detect, even if they are present (Bae et al. 2019). Other papers find that the trend towards stricter
corporate rating standards have resulted in lower firm ratings over time, which indicates that
credit rating agencies have  become more conservative in their rating methodology and that
competition is presumably not a driver of higher firm ratings  (Blume et al. 1998, Baghai et al.
2014).

Reputation and rating shopping are the basis for most research examining rating quality.  Bar-
Isaac and Shapiro (2013) find that while credit rating agencies claim that reputation concerns

                                     5
regulate their behaviour, the true value of reputation actually differs over the business cycle
due to varying economic fundamentals. They analyse a model where reputation is endogenous
and show that when competition is high, reputational losses are lower, leading to weaker
incentives to provide accurate ratings (Bar-Isaac and Shapiro, 2013). When the rated securities
are complex, the incentives to inflate ratings are higher for rating agencies and rating shopping
becomes more severe as competition increases (Mathis et al. 2009, Skreta and Veldkamp,
2009). In contrast, our research encompasses only corporate firm and bond ratings, where
Moody’s and S&P have a  policy to rate all taxable corporate firms publicly issued in the US.
The agencies will publish a firm rating regardless of if the issuer pays for it, meaning that both
the incentives for and ability to shop for ratings decreases (Spatt, 2009, Becker and Milbourn,
2011).

Rating quality was found to have deteriorated leading up to the financial crisis, where agencies
were later blamed for providing favourable ratings to risky structured finance securities
(Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, 2011).  While structured products were severely
downgraded following the financial crisis, the market for corporate bonds was relatively stable
and the number of downgrades was low over time (Benmelech and Dlugosz, 2009).
Furthermore, the Dodd-Frank Act, introduced in 2010 as a response to the crisis, has been
shown to have had adverse effects on the accuracy and informativeness of bond ratings
(Dimitrov et al. 2015). These effects are more pronounced in markets where Fitch held a lower
market share. Examining data  from 2006 to 2012, Dimitrov et al. (2015) find that the rating
level of corporate bonds decreases, uncorrelated to their actual level of risk.

Given that the literature is divided, additional research is of importance. Corporate ratings are
also of interest as the majority of recent research has focused on structured product ratings,
where rating shopping is a more prevalent issue. We extend the work done by Becker and
Milbourn (2011) by examining a new data set from 2010-2016 and adding an additional
measure of competition, the HH-Index, to explore the effects of competition on firm ratings in
the corporate credit rating industry after the financial crisis.

3. The Credit Rating Industry

A credit rating is an assessment of the creditworthiness of a firm or security, measured along a
                                                                                        1
rating scale which differs slightly among the major rating agencies (White, 2013). Two types
of credit ratings are corporate bond ratings, which are issued for most publicly traded US bonds,
and corporate firm ratings, provided to most US public firms with outstanding debt. The rating
is used as a measure to predict the likelihood of default and the ability for a firm to repay its
debt in the case of default (Becker and Milbourn, 2011).  Firm ratings are either solicited or
unsolicited, where unsolicited ratings are not purchased or paid for by the issuer. If a firm pays
for  its  rating,  non-public  information  provided  by  the  firm  is  used  in  assessing  its
creditworthiness, while only public information is considered in unsolicited ratings. These
ratings tend to be coarser and lower, and can act as incentives for firms to pay for their ratings
in the future (Sangiorgi and Spatt, 2017).

The rating market structure is oligopolistic in nature, with three participants accounting  for
over 90% of ratings outstanding (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2018). This is
partially the result of a regulatory framework which imposed entry barriers, as credit rating
agencies needed to be “nationally recognized” to be certified by the Security and Exchange

1
 See Appendix 1 for  the rating scale used by S&P for long-term issuer credit ratings.

                                     6
Commission (SEC) as a “Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating  Organization” (NRSRO).
Achieving this without prior certification by the SEC is difficult, as reputation and credibility
are integral parts of the industry. In 2006 the Credit  Rating Agency Reform Act was passed to
encourage entry into the industry by making it easier for smaller firms to register with the SEC.
                                                                     2
The number of NRSROs subsequently grew from five to ten.  The effect of the Act was
however limited, with the market  share for the three bigger agencies remaining largely
unchanged and most of the new actors specializing in niche industries (Sangiorgi and Spatt,
2017).

References to ratings in regulation were commonplace in the United States up until the Dodd-
Frank Act  was implemented  in 2010. The law limited the use of ratings in US regulation and
mandated greater supervision of the agencies, with the hope that the risk of penalty, through
lower pleading standards and an increased ease of sanctions, would improve rating quality
(Sangiorgi and Spatt, 2017). Dimitrov et al. (2015) however show that the Act in the years
2010-2012 instead caused further deterioration in the rating quality of bonds, since the risk of
costly legal action led credit rating agencies to lower ratings more than justified. Since the
signing of the Act, Partnoy (2017) however shows that the laws pertaining to credit rating
agencies have largely remained unimplemented. Although pleading standards are lower, only
a handful of private cases have been brought against credit rating agencies for losses sustained
during the financial crisis. Furthermore, provisions removed by the Dodd-Frank Act, which
had previously allowed for the privileged treatment of the agencies, were later reinstated by
the SEC. Credit ratings are also still relied on by many institutions to provide investment
criteria (Partnoy, 2017). The impact of the Dodd-Frank Act on the credit rating industry has
thus been hampered.

There are several measures that could be used to quantify competition within the industry. The
SEC publishes annual information on the state of competition, based on the number of
outstanding credit ratings for each rating agency. It however discloses that the relative number
of ratings issued by each rating agency per period would be a better measure of competition.
This is due to some agencies being established much earlier than others, who can therefore
have rated bonds that were issued before the creation of the newer agencies  (U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission, 2018). The HH-Index is also a commonly accepted measure of
market concentration used in a variety of contexts, such as reviews of mergers and antitrust
cases by the Department of Justice (U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission,
2010).  It is calculated by summing the square of the market share of each competitor in an
industry. More competitive markets where each actor has a smaller market share will have a
lower index value, while consolidated markets will have a higher index value, where 10,000 is
the maximum value and represents a perfect monopoly. The HH-Index Inverse is also one of
the key metrics used to measure industry concentration by the SEC in their Annual Report on
NRSRO, where it is continuously concluded that the rating agency industry is concentrated
                                                                                               3
across all rating categories  (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2018).

2
  Currently there are only nine NRSROs since Morningstar withdrew from the market on November 15, 2019
after an acquisition of DBRS.
3
 HH-Index Inverse represents the number of equally sized firms that replicate the level of concentration exhibited
in a particular industry.

                                     7
4. Data and Methodology

4.1 Data
4.1.1 Mergent FISD
Mergent FISD provides details of bond issuances for over 140,000 corporate, corporate
Medium-Term  Note, supranational, U.S. agency, and U.S. Treasury debt securities (Wharton
Research Data Services, 2020). From Mergent FISD, we retrieve observations for over two
million bond ratings, spanning from 1995-2017. The data is used to calculate the market share
within a particular industry and year for the three largest credit rating agencies, which is in the
extension subsequently used to calculate the HH-Index of an industry-year cell. The variables
of interest include the credit rating a particular issue has received, the date of the rating, the
rating agency that issued the particular rating, the North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS) code of the  issuer,  the  Committee on Uniform Securities Identification
Procedures (CUSIP)  number, as well as individual database issue and issuer IDs. Bond ratings
are matched with their respective NAICS code using the database issuer IDs. Issuers with
missing NAICS codes but over 1000 observations are identified and their NAICS codes are
added  manually. Issuers with  missing NAICS codes and  less than 1000 observations are
dropped, as they only represent a very small fraction of data points. The market share of each
credit rating agency is calculated as the fraction of bonds ratings published by  the particular
firm in a specific industry and year. Following Becker and Milbourn (2011), two-digit NAICS
codes are used to categorize the bond  ratings by industry. The annual mean for Fitch market
share and an overview of the industries is provided in Appendix 2.

Ratings by Duff & Phelps, a rating agency acquired by Fitch in 2000, are dropped in accordance
with Becker and Milbourn (2011). Furthermore, there are a number of observations that are
associated with a specific rating agency, date, and firm, that have the rating “Not Rated”. The
agencies have slightly different definitions of this  term,  but it generally means that the bond is
not currently rated or is no longer rated by the rating agency (S&P Global, 2019, Fitch Ratings,
                                                               4
2020). These are included when calculating market shares. Given that we are interested in the
number of bond ratings rather than the value of the rating, it does not have an impact that the
rating is not on the AAA to D scale.

For the replication section of this paper, Fitch  market share is the independent variable.  We
extend this to include a further measure of competition, the HH-Index. The reason for this is
discussed further below. We chose to divide the value of the index by 10,000, which allows
the index to fluctuate between 0 and 1, leading to more easily interpreted regression
coefficients. Our HH-Index, based on the number of rated bonds per year, is also calculated
using only the three biggest agencies market shares and not all NRSROs due to data limitations.
However,  since  these three accounts  for over 90% of all outstanding credit ratings (U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2020), the effects of the market share of the other seven
would not affect the calculations of the HH-Index significantly. The mean HH-Index for each
industry is  shown in Appendix 2. As  Becker and Milbourn (2011) state in their paper, share of
revenue would in theory be a better indicator of market share and the state of competition
between the rating agencies.  This information is  however  not  readily available for the three
rating agencies as they are private companies.

4
 Becker and Milbourn state that they use a data  set of 1.1 million bond rating observations to calculate market
share. Dropping “Not Rated” bonds results in a dataset that only contains 921,000 bonds for the years 1995-2006,
which is why we assume that they include these. We also assume that they use multiple bond types to calculate
market share (the data set includes ratings for corporate bonds and US treasury debt securities among others),
since removing the non-corporate ratings also decreases the number of observations further.

                                     8
4.1.2 Compustat
Compustat Capital IQ provides information on all of S&P’s domestic long-term firm credit
ratings, which are rated on a scale ranging from AAA to D, as  well as the rating date, NAICS
                                 5
code, and a specific issuer ID.  See Appendix 1 for a thorough list  of rating definitions. All
firms with no rating or a rating of “N.M.” are dropped, given that the value of the rating is of
                             6
importance to the  analysis. Furthermore, only the last firm rating corresponding to the end of
the firm’s fiscal year is kept, as done by Bae et al. (2015). The ratings are then matched with
their corresponding Fitch market share or HH-Index value through the two-digit NAICS codes
and  their year of rating.

We augmented this data further with annual accounting fundamentals from Compustat. The
accounting data from the previous fiscal year is matched to the corresponding firm rating using
the database firm ID, gvkey. We remove observations that do not list all accounting data and
calculate a set of accounting ratios related to firm size, profitability, and indebtedness, that are
                                               7
used as firm controls for each specific firm.  For some firms, two sets of accounting data are
available depending on which format they report in, either financial service (FS) or industrial
format (INDL), with slightly different values. The majority of firms in the dataset report in
INDL, so in order to attain the highest degree of comparability between companies, we use
these values.

5
  Our sample only includes firm credit rating data from S&P, due to data accessibility  reasons. Becker and
Milbourn (2011) also include data from Moody’s in their dependent variable.
6
 “N.M.” stands for “Not Meaningful” and is a descriptor for a category of rating outlooks. It does not exist on the
rating scale for long-term credit ratings. Bonds with no rating and a rating of “N.M.” accounted for approximately
1.7 million out of 2 million observations.
7
  Firm characteristics are the log of sales, log of book value of assets, cash divided by total assets (and its square),
EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) divided by total assets (and its square),
cash flow over total assets (and its square), EBITDA over sales (and its square), cash flow over sales (and its
square), PPE (property, plant, and equipment) over total assets (and its square), interest expense over EBITDA
(and its square), debt over total assets (and its square), all measured at the end of the previous fiscal year.

                                     9
4.1.3 Variable Definitions
In Table 1 below, a definition of all variables used in the analysis is presented as well as the
source, either Mergent FISD or Compustat. The dependent variables used in the regressions
are shown in grey.

 Table 1
 This table includes a definition of all variables used in regressions as well as their source and name in the database. The dependent
  variables are shown in the grey boxes.
             Variable name                          Definition                Source
                                                     S&P Domestic Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating,     Compustat
              Firm credit rating
                                                             translated into a numerical scale as in Appendix 1.    (splticrm)
                                                   A dummy variable for firms identified as
                                                                                        Compustat
             Default within three years              defaulting (rating D or SD) within a three-year
                                                                                                            (splticrm)
                                                             horizon.
                                                Fraction of bonds rated by Fitch in a specific        Mergent FISD
             Fitch market share
                                                            industry and year.                                        (rating_type)
                                                    Sum of the squares of the market share of each
                                                                                        Mergent FISD
                 HH-Index                   competitor in an industry. (All calculated as for
                                                                                                          (rating_type)
                                                               Fitch market share). Divided by 10,000.
                                                                                        Mergent FISD
                                                         Dummies for industries. Industries refers to two-
                                                                                                    (naics_code)
              Industry Fixed Effects               digit NAICS code. See Appendix 2 for an
                                                                                        Compustat
                                                                overview of industries.
                                                                                                             (naics)
                                                   Dummies for years. 1995-2006 or 2010-2016,       Compustat
              Year fixed Effects
                                                    depending on which regression is performed.        (datadate)
                                                Dummies for firms. Firms are identified by their     Compustat
             Firm Fixed Effects
                                                Global Company Key.                            (gvkey)
                                                    A variable created by grouping industries and
                    Cluster_id                     years. Used in regressions  to cluster by industry-
                                                 year
                Log of sales                 Log of (Sales/Turnover (Net))                  Compustat (sale)
          Log of book value of assets           Log of (Assets - Total)                        Compustat (at)
   Cash divided by total assets (and its square)     Cash divided by Assets - Total                  Compustat (ch/at)
                                                                                        Compustat
 EBITDA divided by total assets (and its square)   EBITDA divided by Assets - Total
                                                                                                                  (ebitda/at)
                                           (Income before Extraordinary Items (Cash Flow)
                                                                                        Compustat
    Cash flow over total assets (and its square)      + Depreciation and Amortization) divided by
                                                                                                           (ibc+dp)/at)
                                           Assets – Total
                                                                                        Compustat
      EBITDA over sales (and its square)        EBITDA over sales
                                                                                                                (ebitda/sale)
                                           (Income before Extraordinary Items (Cash Flow)
                                                                                        Compustat
       Cash flow over sales (and its square)         + Depreciation and Amortization) divided by
                                                                                                           ((ibc+dp)/sale)
                                                      sales
 PPE (Property, Plant, and Equipment) over total   Property, Plant and Equipment - Total (Net)        Compustat
             assets (and its square)              divided by Assets – Total                        (ppent/at)
                                              Interest and Related Expense - Total divided by     Compustat
  Interest expense over EBITDA (and its square)
                                           EBITDA                                    (xint/ebitda)
                                                 (Long-Term Debt + Debt in Current Liabilities)     Compustat
      Debt over total assets (and its square)
                                                 divided by Assets  -  Total                          ((dltt+dlc)/at)
                                                    A dummy variable that takes the value one if firm
                                                                                        Compustat
           Investment grade dummy             credit rating is equal or higher than BBB- and
                                                                                                            (splticrm)
                                                               zero otherwise.

4.1.4 Data Distortion 2010-2016
Our extension investigates the time span  2010 to 2016.  We choose our starting year as the
financial crisis was deemed to have ended in 2009 and because the Dodd-Frank Act was passed
in 2010 (The National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010,  Dimitrov et al.  2015).  Complete
yearly data for S&P firm ratings from Compustat is only available until 2016, hence the end
date of our time period. There are differences between the data set for 1995-2006 and this
extended data set that require adaptations to Becker and Milbourn’s (2011) methodology, even
though we use the same data source. The distribution of ratings between the different rating

                                     10
agencies develops consistently over time, with Fitch accumulating an increasing number of
yearly bond ratings through their expansionary growth and acquisition strategy in 1995-2006
(Becker and Milbourn, 2011). However, according to the Annual Report on NRSROs, the
number of outstanding credit ratings for Fitch has been relatively stable 2010-2016, which
indicates that their market share  based on fraction of bond ratings should be stable as well. We
observe specific anomalies to this pattern, specifically in the years 2014, 2015, and 2016, where
our  data shows that Fitch increased the number of bond ratings from approximately 70,000 in
2013 to 102,000 in 2014. The number of bond ratings increased further from 119,000 in 2015
                                                                  8
to 211,000 in 2016, before dropping down to 51,000 in 2017. This can be compared to S&P
and Moody’s 30,000-50,000 bond ratings per year. It also stands in contrast to the 2016 Annual
Report on NRSROs, which shows that Fitch has a 13.0% market share in 2016 in terms of
outstanding ratings, something that would presumably also be reflected in the number of ratings
produced per year, even when historic bond rating differences are accounted for (U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2016). Additionally, the Securities Industry and
Financial Markets Association (2020) reported that the size of the outstanding bond market
grew at a steady pace and there were no significant large jumps or changes in size in 2014,
2015 or 2016 that would justify such a large increase in rated notes related to new issuances.
Since the number of bond ratings reported by Mergent FISD for Fitch no longer seem to be a
good representation of the actual market share that the firm holds in the different industries, it
needs to be amended to be utilized.

We find and deem that bond affirmations are the factor causing the data distortions.
Affirmations are public statements by a rating agency that the  current credit rating assigned to
an issuer or debt obligation, which is not currently under review, continues to be appropriately
positioned (Moody's Investor Services, 2020). Although this is a form of bond rating, the
quantity of these that are conducted by Fitch spike considerably to be approximately 77,000
(76% of their ratings), 96,000 (80%), and 183,000 (87 %) in 2014, 2015, and 2016 respectively,
compared to 20,000 (39%) in 2017. Since this pattern is not visible in the other rating agencies,
this indicates that affirmations were not treated the same in these years. They are therefore
dropped from the data set, leading to market share calculations that are more similar to the ones
reported in the Annual Reports on NRSROs. The market shares calculated  for Fitch based on
this data can be seen in Figure 2, which are shown both including and excluding affirmations.
We believe that this method of data cleaning provides a less noisy and more accurate reflection
                           9
of  Fitch market share.

8
 Many of the bonds are rated a higher number of times per year than average, and some are even rated repeatedly
every few days. The average rating of these specific issues did not change during this time period.
9
  Other parameters for data cleaning were also investigated, particularly bond types. No logical group of bond
types to categorically mitigate the issue could be identified since the bulk of bonds with a drastically increased
number of observations in the years 2014-2016 were varying types of corporate bonds, which were of interest to
our study. We also contacted both the database provider Mergent FISD and Fitch Ratings, who did not have any
comments on these anomalies.

                                     11
  Figure 2
                                                                                                                              th    th         th
   Evolution of Fitch’s market share by industry and month shown as 24-month rolling averages for the 25 , 50 , and 75  percentile
  industries. Fitch’s market share is computed by dividing the number of bond ratings assigned by Fitch by the sum of the number of
   bond ratings assigned by S&P, Moody’s and Fitch. In the first graph, bond affirmations are included in the calculation of market share.
   In the second graph, bond affirmations are excluded in the calculation of market share.

  0,8                                                       0,8

  0,7                                                       0,7

  0,6                                                       0,6

  0,5                                                       0,5

  0,4                                                       0,4

  0,3                                                       0,3

  0,2                                                       0,2

  0,1                                                       0,1

   0                                               0
    1997  2000  2003  2006  2009  2012  2015           1997  2000  2003  2006  2009  2012  2015

Becker  and Milbourn (2011) exploit that Fitch’s market share varies across industries to
complete their empirical analysis, as they take advantage of cross-industry variation to test the
effects of competition on rating quality. Although there is still variation  across industries, the
market share of Fitch does not vary as much over 2010-2016 as it does over 1995-2006, with
the standard deviation of the variable dropping from 0.108 to 0.063 (after adjusting for
affirmation ratings). At this point, Fitch has reached a more stable within-industry market share
and become an established actor,  as can be seen from Figure 2.  To account for this possible
problem with Fitch market share as a measure of competition, as well as possible significant
changes in the relative market shares of the incumbent firms, the HH-Index is added to verify
the validity of our findings.

4.2 Descriptive Statistics
In Table 2, we present our descriptive statistics. Compared to Becker and Milbourn (2011), our
average firm  credit rating for the period 1995-2006 is lower by 0.407 (2.25%) and the standard
deviation higher by 0.308 (7.84%). Our number of observations is also higher by 713. For
market share, the number of observations represent the number of industry-year cells (24
industries and 12 years of data). The average Fitch market share in our data set is 0.008 higher
(3.77%), with a standard deviation that is 0.025 (17.61%) lower. The mean of default within
three years is 0.014 higher than the 0.010 found by Becker and Milbourn (2011), while the
number of observations is lower by 102. This provides evidence that we have not been able to
identify every step they have taken when cleaning the data, but still have created a similar data
set.

2010-2016 only considers seven years of data, leading to overall fewer observations. Between
the two time periods of interest firm credit ratings decreased by 0.255, with the average rating
dropping from being closest to a BBB-  rating to a BB+ rating. The decrease in standard
deviation is more substantial. Fitch market share increases dramatically from 1995-2006 to
2010-2016 when all bond ratings are considered in the calculation, to an average of 0.449.
However, the variable used in the analysis drops all affirmed rating observations, resulting in
a more stable market share with a mean of 0.229 over time with a lower spread.

                                     12
 Table 2
  Each column present descriptive statistics for the variables of interests. Number of observations for Fitch market share and HH-Index
  refers to the number of industry-year cells and is based on 24 industries.
 Descriptive Statistics
 1995–2006                                       Fitch Market       HH-                     Default
                           Firm    Fitch Market        Share         Index      HH-Index     within three
                            Credit       Share          (Removing        (All      (Removing        years
                           Rating    (All Bonds)      Affirmations)     Bonds)    Affirmations)   (1995–2005)
 Mean                  17.685      0.220           0.199         0.383       0.385         0.024
 Median                  18        0.220          0.189         0.365       0.373          0
 Standard Deviation         4.238       0.117           0.108         0.062        0.050         0.154
 Number of Observations    20,343       288            288          288         287         18,549
 2010–2016                                                                      (2010–2015)
 Mean                  17.430      0.449           0.229         0.396       0.368         0.008
 Median                  18        0.447          0.226         0.370       0.359          0
 Standard Deviation         3.555       0.147           0.063         0.070        0.033         0.090
 Number of Observations    11,174       168            168          168         168         9,649
4.3 Methodology
Our paper examines two dimensions of rating quality, risk classification (through rating level)
and rating informativeness, which together provide a comprehensive  understanding of how
rating quality has been affected by competition over time, both before and after the financial
crisis. Quality can be perceived differently depending on who uses the rating. We follow the
reasoning of Becker and Milbourn (2011), who argue that the risk classification of a rating
should be stable, in that each grade has a steady meaning over time, to be easily interpretable
and understood by investors. Shifts along the rating scale leading to higher average ratings are
deemed to be negative as the least sophisticated investors might not be able to fully incorporate
information on the variation of the rating scale over time. As stated by Becker and Milbourn
(2011), an increase in rating level is a direct consequence of competition, if competition leads
to rating levels also reflecting issuer preferences for higher ratings instead of solely credit
quality. A rating performs well in terms of credit informativeness if it can predict future default
and group firms based on their credit risk, regardless of the level of competition between rating
agencies. Default rate is therefore one of the most direct ways to examine how competition
impacts rating informativeness.

4.3.1 Statistical Method
To answer the research question of how the rating quality of firm ratings issued by S&P has
been affected by competition, we perform ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions and ordered
probit regressions, in accordance with Becker and Milbourn (2011). Of  interest is to identify
whether a causal relationship exists between competition and rating quality. To empirically test
this, we employ two sets of tests and include a number of control variables to rule out possible
omitted variables bias.

4.3.1.1 Regressions on rating level

                                   (1) 𝑅!,#  =  𝛽$  + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝜀

Where:
Ri,k = Firm long-term credit rating  for a firm  k  in a specific year  i
Competitioni,j  = Fitch’s market share or HH-Index for a specific year  i  and industry  j

We first perform a series of OLS regressions to empirically test how Fitch market share as well
as HH-Index affects rating levels. Initially, the dependent variable, firm credit rating (converted
to a numerical scale, see Appendix 1), is  regressed only on the independent variable, Fitch

                                     13
market share or HH-Index, without the inclusion of controls. This is  illustrated in  Equation 1.
Each observation represents a firm-year. As this is not enough to conclude that a  causal
relationship exists between these two variables, in the subsequent regressions, different
combinations of controls are added. Following Becker and Milbourn (2011), we first include
industry and year fixed effects. Secondly, we include year and firm fixed effects as well as the
18 accounting measures as firm controls. The OLS regressions treat every step of the dependent
variable firm credit rating as equal,  which might not be representative of how firm ratings are
assigned. Given that we cannot be certain if each grade of firm credit rating is equidistant from
the adjacent grades, we also include an ordered probit regression, which allows the effects of
firm  credit rating  to vary across the rating scale  (Becker and Milbourn, 2011).  Industry and
year fixed effects are also included in this specification. Lastly, two robustness tests are
included by collapsing data on mean and median, from firm-year level to industry-year level,
which lowers the number of observations drastically. Industry-years with fewer than 25
individual firm ratings are excluded. Industry and year fixed effects as well as firm controls
are included. These OLS regressions  mitigate  concerns about error correlation and that the
same firm is repeatedly sampled  while also removing within-cell variation  (Becker and
Milbourn, 2011). An overview of the model specifications  for all OLS regressions is presented
in Appendix 3.

The first set of regressions are conducted for both of our sample periods, 1995-2006 and 2010-
2016. For 1995-2006, we run the regressions with data cleansed in two different ways. The
first is a replication of Becker and Milbourn (2011), in order to verify that their methodology
is correctly understood. The second cleaning method uses the adaptations that we found to be
appropriate for the data in 2010-2016, namely dropping affirmation ratings, to verify that this
method still produces results with similar effects. In accordance with Bae et al. (2015), we also
run the regressions when isolating the later part of the time period, 2000-2006. Since Fitch
growth was more prominent during that time, as indicated by Figure 1, the effects of
competition on rating inflation should be more visible. We expect to identify the same effects
as Becker and Milbourn (2011), both using Fitch market share and HH-Index for 1995-2006.
Using data from 2010-2016, we test the hypothesis that increased competition leads to higher
rating levels to determine if the correlation still persists in a later time period.

4.3.1.2 Regressions on rating informativeness

             (2)  𝐷!,#  =  𝛽$  + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#+𝛽(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#  + 𝜀

Where:
Di,k = Dummy variable for a firm k in a specific year  i  defaulting within a three-year horizon
Competitioni,j  = Fitch’s market share or HH-Index for a specific year  i  and industry  j
Ratingi,k  = Investment grade dummy or firm long-term credit rating  for a firm  k  in a specific year  i

The second part of the analysis quantifies the relationship between competition and rating
informativeness through a second set of OLS regressions. The dependent variable is “default
within three years” which initially is regressed on the independent variables Fitch market share,
an investment  grade dummy, and an interaction between these. In the second regression, the
investment grade dummy is replaced by the firm credit rating (the numerical rating value), as
shown in Equation 2. No controls are included.  Each observation is a firm-year in which the
firm can be identified as defaulting or not defaulting within three years. To accurately establish
if ratings predict default, we  include industry and year fixed effects as well as firm controls in
the third regression. Furthermore, since predicting default could potentially be harder in some
industries and years, we include interactions between firm credit rating and fixed effects for

                                     14
industry and years in the fourth regression (Becker and Milbourn, 2011). Lastly, a robustness
test is included, where data is collapsed to the mean values by industry-year cell. Industry and
year fixed effects as well as firm controls are also included. Both Fitch market share and HH-
Index are tested separately as independent variables. An overview of the model specification
for all OLS regressions are presented  in Appendix 3.

This set of regressions are conducted for the same sample periods as the rating level
regressions. Once again, we expect our results to yield the same effects as those found by
Becker and Milbourn (2011)  in  1995-2006. For 2010-2016, we investigated the second
hypothesis that increased competition between rating agencies leads to a decline in rating
informativeness.

4.3.1.3 Controls
Industry and year fixed effects are included in the regressions, as years exhibit different
macroeconomic trends and industries may have different average rating levels. The firm fixed
effects and firm controls account for differences in size, cash flows, and financial health. The
inclusion of these helps us determine if there is a causal relationship between competition and
the behaviour of rating agencies, since the identified effect can only be considered valid if
competition can be treated as exogenous in the regression models we study  (Becker and
Milbourn, 2011). Endogeneity exists if competition in a certain industry is correlated with other
factors also affecting the dependent variable, which we try to mitigate through the inclusion of
controls.

4.3.1.4 Robust standard errors
To account for correlated errors, the standard errors of our regressions are clustered around
each industry-year, as our variables of interest, Fitch market share and HH-Index, vary at this
level.   For   the   regressions   when   data   is   already   collapsed   at   industry-year   level,
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are also produced.

4.3.1.5 Checking for multicollinearity
Multicollinearity is also investigated as a potential issue, to establish if any of the independent
variables we study are highly correlated. High levels of correlation could lead to less precision
in our coefficient estimates and  is therefore primarily verified through the variance inflation
factor (VIF). For regressions where VIF is not applicable, a correlation matrix is used to
identify potential multicollinearity. As we are only interested in how our independent variables,
Fitch market share and HH-Index, affect firm  credit  ratings, we focus on mitigating a possible
multicollinearity issue only for these independent variables, and not the control variables. To
our knowledge, multicollinearity in the control variables will not affect our estimate for the
market share or HH-Index variable.

5. Results

5.1 Rating Level
5.1.1 Replication 1995-2006
The first test is a replication of one of Becker and Milbourn’s (2011) main findings. Following
them, we regress firm credit  rating on Fitch market share and include a number of control
variables. Our results are presented in Table 3. These results show that when Fitch market share
(i.e.  competition) increases, firm ratings issued  by S&P becomes more  favourable  for issuers
in that they generally lie higher on the rating scale. This decreases the firm’s cost of debt since
higher rated firms are deemed to be  safer and investors do not require as high of a return on

                                     15
their investments (Kisgen, 2006). In the first regression in Column 1, when no controls are
included, the effect of the positive correlation between firm rating and Fitch market share is
larger than  in subsequent tests. This test might however be unreliable since no controls are
included and omitted variable bias could be present. In Column 2 and 3 different sets of fixed
effects and controls are included in the regressions. While the positive correlation still exists
between Fitch market share and firm ratings, the effect is  modest. For a single standard
deviation change in Fitch market share (0.117), average firm rating is expected to increase by
0.17 when year and industry dummies are included and  by 0.12 when year dummies, firm
dummies, and firm controls are included. In terms of the rating scale, this is approximately
equivalent to a one step upgrade (e.g. from A-  to A) for one out of every fifth firm and one out
of every tenth firm. In Column 4 an ordered probit model is used instead of an OLS. The results
using this specification do not alter the conclusion that Fitch market share is positively
correlated with S&P firm credit rating. Collapsing data on mean yields a positive significant
estimate  for Fitch market share, with a lower magnitude compared to Column 2 (average firm
rating is expected to increase by 0.1 for a one standard deviation change). The estimate for
Fitch market share when data is collapsed by median is positive and insignificant. The
coefficient was also found to be insignificant by Bae et al. (2015).

Generally, the results are similar to those of Becker and Milbourn (2011).  Their results are
shown in  grey in Table 3. In some instances,  the significance level is different,  although still
significant. The overall effects, including the direction of the coefficients, R-square value, and
significance level, are close to those found by Becker and Milbourn (2011). The tests where
we solely examine the later part of the time period, 2000-2006, interestingly yield results that
show an insignificant correlation between competition and rating level. These  tests  are
presented in Appendix 4.

Dropping  affirmation ratings from the data set when calculating Fitch market share results in
significant positive coefficients in four tests, compared to five when affirmations are not
removed. The estimated coefficient from the ordered probit specification is now insignificant.
In the other regressions, the significance levels as well as the effects of Fitch market share on
firm credit ratings differ slightly. For a one standard deviation change in Fitch market share
(0.108),  average firm credit rating is instead  expected to increase by 0.12 when year and
industry dummies are included and 0.11  when year dummies, firm fixed effects, and firm
controls are included. Results of these regressions are presented in Appendix 5. Although there
are deviations from Table  3,  the overarching conclusion that more competition leads to higher
rating levels still holds.

                                     16
 Table 3
 In the table below, firm credit rating (S&P Domestic Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating) is regressed on Fitch market share or HH-
  Index. The dependent variable, firm credit rating, is based on a numerical scale, ranging from 1 (D) to 28 (AAA). Fitch market share
  is the fraction of bonds rated by Fitch in an industry-year cell. HH-Index is the sum of the squares of the market share  of each rating
  agency in an industry-year cell, divided by 10,000. Firm controls include 18 firm-specific accounting measures. Industries refers to
  two-digit NAICS codes. In Column 5 and 6 data is collapsed, using mean and median, on industry-year level.  Standard errors are
  clustered at industry-year level, except in Column 5 and 6. All standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and shown in
 parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Significance level is reported as *** representing 1%, ** 5%, * 10%. Becker and Milbourn
  (2011) results are shown in grey.
 Replication 1995-2006                       Dependent variable: firm credit rating
                                                            Ordered     OLS average by    OLS median
                          OLS       OLS       OLS       Probit          cell           by cell
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)               (5)                (6)
                           2.874**     1.461**    0.984**      0.349*         0.825*           0.475
 Fitch Market Share
                               2.395**      1.325**      0.784*       0.3615**         1.533***           1.754**
                               (1.309)      (0.731)      (0.441)       (0.184)           (0.47)            (0.875)
                                   (1.123)        (0.566)       (0.432)        (0.156)            (0.570)             (0.846)
 Year Fixed Effects          No        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects        No        Yes       No        Yes          Yes           Yes
 Firm Fixed Effects          No        No       Yes        No          No           No
 Firm Controls             No        No       Yes        No          Yes           Yes
                             0.005       0.139       0.881                       0.965            0.934
 R squared                                                   n/a
                                (0.004)       (0.141)       (0.900)                          (0.961)            (0,914)
 Number of Observations     20,343      20,343     20,343      20,343          188            188
 HH-Index 1995-2006
 HH-Index                 -3.617      -2.771*      -0.141      -0.783**        -2.113**          -1.037
                           (2.683)      (1.578)     (0.817)      (0.392)         (1.017)          (1.755)
 Year Fixed Effects          No        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects        No        Yes       No        Yes          Yes           Yes
 Firm Fixed Effects          No        No       Yes        No          No           No
 Firm Controls             No        No       Yes        No          Yes           Yes
 R squared                0.001       0.139      0.881        n/a           0.965          0.934
 Number of Observations     20,343      20,343     20,343      20,343          188            188
Next, we  use HH-Index instead of Fitch market share as the independent variable. Results are
presented above in Table 3.  Note that the coefficients are all negative. A negative correlation
implies that when the HH-Index increases i.e. when the industry becomes more  concentrated,
the rating level is lower. More competitive industries therefore exhibit higher rating levels,
which is consistent with the results found when Fitch market share is used.  In terms of effect,
for a one standard deviation change in HH-Index (0.062), average firm credit rating is expected
to decrease by 0.17 when industry and year dummies are included. Generally, the magnitude
of effects  is  similar or higher in comparison to Fitch market share but  is  weaker in terms of
significance level, implying that HH-Index as a measure of competition is more noisy.

Regressing firm credit rating on HH-Index excluding bond affirmations yields similar results
in terms of magnitude to when affirmations are included. When year and industry dummies are
included,  a one standard deviation increase in HH-Index (0.050) is expected to decrease
average firm credit rating by 0.17. The results are presented in Appendix 5.  The  correlations
are  also  more significant than those including affirmations.

5.1.2 Extension 2010-2016
Becker and Milbourn (2011) establish that competition between rating agencies lead to
increased rating levels, while Dimitrov et al. (2015) finds that higher levels of consolidation
displayed lower rating levels after the passing of Dodd-Frank Act. We  now  build on this
research  to study what effects are present across the entire time period 2010-2016. The results
are shown in Table 4. In Column  1 the estimated coefficient for Fitch market share is highly
significant and the effect is almost twice as large as in the time span 1995-2006, implying that
the positive correlation between our measure of competition and rating level still exists. Given
that no controls are included in this regression, we may be overestimating the effects of market

                                     17
share as an explanatory variable. In subsequent regressions, when the fixed effects and controls
are included none of the estimated coefficients are significant, which shows that the changes
in rating level can be explained through variation across industries,  years, and firms. Our
descriptive  statistics in Table 2 show that  average firm rating levels had dropped slightly from
earlier years, which is in line with the findings of Dimitrov et al. (2015), who suggest that the
drop in ratings stems from the passing of the Dodd-Frank Act. However, the general decrease
in rating level alone does not provide evidence that industry-years are affected differently based
on competition. Collapsing data by industry-year level, as in Column 5 and 6, leads to negative
and significant regression coefficient, implying that competition seems to lead to lower rating
levels. In these tests all within-industry variation is eliminated and all industries are equally
weighted. Some sectors, such as information, manufacturing of metals and machinery, and
finance & insurance are overrepresented in our firm rating sample while construction,
wholesale trade, and retail trade are  underrepresented. As an example, the finance & insurance
sector has 7.92 times more firm ratings than the construction industry. Weighting them equally
diminishes the impact of the overrepresented industries and vice versa for the underrepresented
ones. This is the most likely source of the reversed sign of the correlation. When the HH-Index
is used as  the independent variable for the period 2010-2016, the results are almost
conclusively insignificant, as seen in Table 4. This in combination with the results using Fitch
market share provide evidence that competition no  longer is a cause of rating level differences.

 Table 4
  In the table below, firm credit rating (S&P Domestic Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating) is regressed on Fitch market share or HH-Index.
 The dependent variable, firm credit rating, is based on a numerical scale, ranging from 1 (D) to 28 (AAA). Fitch market share is the
  fraction of bonds rated by Fitch in an industry-year cell. HH-Index is the sum of the squares of the market share of each rating agency
  in an industry-year cell, divided by 10,000. Affirmations are removed as bond ratings.  Firm controls include 18 firm-specific
  accounting measures. Industries refers to two-digit NAICS codes. In Column 5 and 6 data is collapsed, using mean and median, on
  industry-year level. Standard errors are clustered at industry-year level, except in Column 5 and 6. All standard errors are
  heteroskedasticity-robust and shown in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Significance level is reported as *** representing 1%,
 ** 5%, * 10%.
 Fitch Market Share 2010-2016                     Dependent variable: firm credit rating
                                                                       OLS average by     OLS median
                          OLS      OLS     OLS    Ordered Probit        cell            by cell
                                    (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)                  (5)                  (6)
 Fitch Market Share         10.011***     1.197     0.010       0.317          -1.486**         -3.414**
                           (3.321)     (0.808)    (0.575)      (0.240)          (0.590)           (1.658)
 Year Fixed Effects           No       Yes      Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects        No       Yes      No        Yes            Yes            Yes
 Firm Fixed Effects          No       No      Yes        No            No            No
 Firm Controls             No       No      Yes        No            Yes            Yes
 R squared                 0.014      0.164     0.941        n/a            0.989           0.956
 Number of Observations      11,174     11,174    11,174      11,174           108            108
 HH-Index 2010-2016
 HH-Index                 -16.150     -0.892     -0.451       -0.214          2.734***           5.191
                           (13.175)     (1.696)    (1.045)      (0.491)          (0.990)           (3.391)
 Year Fixed Effects           No       Yes      Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects        No       Yes      No        Yes            Yes            Yes
 Firm Fixed Effects          No       No      Yes        No            No            No
 Firm Controls             No       No      Yes        No            Yes            Yes
 R squared                 0.008      0.164     0.941        n/a            0.989           0.955
 Number of Observations      11,174     11,174    11,174      11,174           108            108

Overall, we are able to replicate Becker and Milbourn’s (2011) main test, showing that
increased competition measured as Fitch market share leads to higher rating levels  in 1995-
2006. The correlations are still present when bond affirmations are dropped and the same is
true when HH-Index is used (although some regressions do not yield as significant results as
we find in the replication tests). Regressions on data from 2010-2016 do not lead to significant
correlations, regardless of the measure of competition used, implying that competition between
credit rating agencies no longer is a driver  of higher rating levels.

                                     18
5.2 Rating  Informativeness
Examining rating level on its own is not enough to decisively dispute that competition no
longer affects rating quality. It is entirely possible that rating informativeness could be
systematically affected by competition between rating agencies, even though rating level has
not exhibited a correlation with competition in 2010-2016.

5.2.1 Replication 1995-2005
                                                                                                              10
We use the data from 1995-2005 to replicate the regressions of Becker and Milbourn  (2011).
In Table 5 Column 1, we first regress default within three years on an investment grade dummy,
Fitch market share, and an interaction term between these two. As expected, being rated
investment grade  has a large and highly significant negative impact on the rate of default of
the firm. The coefficient of the interaction term is significant and positive, implying that the
difference in rate of default between investment grade and speculative grade firms  falls as
competition between rating agencies in an industry-year  increase. This indicates that rating
informativeness falls, as it is more communicative to users of the rating if there is a substantial
difference in default rates at different rating levels. Most importantly, the informational content
of ratings should be independent of competition. Speculative grade firms are 5.74 times more
likely to default than firms with an investment grade rating in industries where competition is
high (75%, 0.290), 7.97 times more likely to default than investment grade firms when
competition is median (50%, 0.226), and 11.60 times more likely to default than investment
grade firms when competition is low (25%, 0.154). Our identified effects are larger than those
found by Becker and Milbourn (2011), in terms of both absolute magnitude and in spread, and
are closer to those of Bae et al. (2015).

In Column 2, the investment grade dummy is replaced by the numerical value of the firm credit
rating itself. This version still examines the linear relationship between rating and  default but
captures more detailed variation in firm ratings. All coefficients are still significant. Although
the credit rating term is negative and significant, it only has a marginal effect on default rate
relative to the interaction term, since the magnitude of the interaction term is larger and
positive. This means that as Fitch market share increases, the negative impact of credit rating
level on default rate decreases. We compare the implications of this regression for the most
common investment grade rating in our sample, BBB, and the most common speculative grade
rating, B+. Firms with a B+ rating are 3.42 times more likely to default than firms with a BBB
rating in industries where competition  is high (75%, 0.290), 3.60 times more likely to default
than a BBB-rated firm when competition is median (50%, 0.226), and 3.78 times more likely
to default than a BBB-rated firm when competition is low (25%, 0.154). The effects are still
between 55-125%  larger in magnitude than those found by Becker and Milbourn (2011), but
are much closer in absolute terms than the regression results using the investment grade
dummy.

In Column 3 we find that the magnitude of our findings  decreases  further when controlling for
                                                                       11
industry and year fixed effects as well as including  firm controls.  In Column 4 interaction

10
  The binary dependant variable, default within a three year time horizon, cannot contain non-zero values in the
last year of observations (2006 in the earlier data set and 2016 in the later one) and are therefore dropped in all
tests concerning rating informativeness.
11
  Initially the software used could not estimate a F-value for the model. We find the reason to be an outlier in the
squared cash flow over sales-variable, where the firm Seven Seas Petroleum Inc. had an extreme value in 1999.
The model is estimated properly when this observation is removed, and has almost no impact on the estimated
coefficients. To check the robustness we also try excluding the variable as a whole as well as winsorize the firm

                                     19
terms between firm credit ratings and all year and industries are added. We find that all
coefficients are insignificant, which is also what Bae et al. (2015) find. Given that the inclusion
of the additional interaction terms  leans  very hard on the data, we conclude that this test is
highly dependent on the sample.

Collapsing the data at industry-year level and regressing the fraction of firms defaulting per
industry-year on firm credit rating, market share, and an interaction term between the two,
results in non-significant coefficients for all independent variables. This indicates that even
when only plotting the percentage of defaults per industry-year cell, and therefore controlling
for the differences in number of observations per industry-year cell, competition does not affect
default rates. Our findings are shown in Column 5 and are in line with those of Bae et al. (2015),
even as Becker and Milbourn  (2011) identify coefficients significant at the 1% level. Of note
is that our sample includes a larger number of industry-year cells than the 189 that Becker and
Milbourn (2011) use.

When dropping affirmations from our sample, we find that only the variable measuring rating
level, either the investment grade dummy or the firm credit rating, is significant. Different
degrees of competition  between rating agencies in an industry therefore have no significant
impact on default rates. These results can be seen  in Appendix 6. The results of the regression
in Column 4, where further interaction terms are added, and 5, where data is collapsed, are both
insignificant, which is in line with our findings when using the entire  data set of bonds in
market share calculations. The results of these regressions indicate that  our replicated  default
results are sensitive to the inclusion of affirmations, but are still a necessary adjustment to avoid
data distortion in our sample  2010-2016.

The results of our regressions using HH-Index are shown in Table 5. Only the coefficient for
the HH-Index and the interaction term are significant, which contrasts the results when Fitch
market share is used, since all three explanatory coefficients are significant in those tests. The
positive effect of a change in credit rating level on default rate is larger in the regressions using
HH-Index than those using Fitch market share, since the magnitude of the interaction term is
approximately twice as large. The credit rating term can be expected to be insignificant as there
are no data points for which HH-Index is zero, which makes the effect of solely credit rating
difficult to estimate. The likeliness of default is overall larger than that found when using Fitch
market share, and the effect  size decreases when fixed effects are included. Neither adding the
additional interaction terms nor collapsing data to an industry-year level produces significant
results.

When excluding bond affirmations to calculate HH-Index, we once again observe the
sensitivity of the results to affirmation observations. Relative to when all bonds are included,
the regressions using firm credit rating as opposed to investment grade dummy display slightly
different levels of significance and a smaller effect size, meaning that the difference in default
rate is less  pronounced between higher and lower levels of competition. Using the investment
grade dummy does not lead to significant results. The results of these regressions can be found
in Appendix  6.

The general trends indicate that, during the years 1995-2005, higher levels of competition
between rating agencies in an industry lead to both higher and less informative S&P firm credit

controls at the 1th and 99th percentile to account for other potential outliers. However, the effects and significance-
level largely remains the same in both these cases. This is done for all subsequent regressions 1995-2006 including
firm controls, which does not change the implication of effects.

                                     20
ratings.  HH-Index generally exhibits the same correlations that Fitch  market share does.
However, the variable for firm credit rating is insignificant in these tests. Dropping affirmations
also leads to slight variations in results. It does not seem to perfectly capture the correlations
found  using the full data  set  from 1995-2005, however, it does not lead to completely
uncorrelated results. As explained, our results deviate slightly from Becker and Milbourn
(2011). We believe this is due to the inclusion of several interaction terms in the regressions,
which  lean harder on  the data.

Table 5
In the table below, coefficient estimates are shown from five OLS-regressions. The dependent variable is a dummy variable for firm default
(one if a firm is defaulted within the subsequent three years, zero otherwise) which is regressed on Fitch market share (or HH-Index), a credit
rating term, and the interaction of Fitch market share (or HH-Index) with the credit rating term. Control variables include industry and year
fixed effects,  18 firm-specific accounting measures, as  well as interactions between credit rating and year/industry fixed effects. Industries
refers to two-digit NAICS codes. In Column 5 data is collapsed, using mean, at industry-year level. Standard errors are clustered at industry-
year level, except in Column 5. All standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and shown in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported.
Significance level is reported as *** representing 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.  Becker and Milbourn’s (2011) results are shown in the grey.
Replication default tests using Fitch market share 1995-2005       Dependent: Default within three years
                                                                                              OLS, averaged by
                               OLS       OLS       OLS      OLS
                                                                                                               industry-year
                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                                                                      (5)
                                        0.132***
IG-dummy*Fitch market share
                                              0.089***
                                              (0.045)
                                                    (0.030)
                                              -0.069***
IG dummy
                                                     -0.033***
                                              (0.011)
                                                    (0.067)
                                                        0.018**       0.014**      0.012          0.003
Credit rating*Fitch market share
                                                             0.0123***       0.0123***      0.0063*         0.0070***
                                                              (0.007)         (0.006)       (0.008)          (0.009)
                                                                      (0.070)           (0.001)        (0.0038)           (0.001)
                                                               -0.011***      -0.013***                       -0.001
Credit rating                                                                     -0.009
                                                                 -0.0045***      -0.0049***                       -0.0094**
                                                              (0.002)         (0.002)                        (0.006)
                                                                              (0.005)
                                                             (0.0009)        (0.0011)                        (0.004)
                                               -0.118***      -0.360***       -0.253**       -0.210           -0.077
Fitch market share
                                                     -0.080***        -0.253***        -0.229***        -0.116            -0.121***
                                              (0.042)         (0.138)         (0.117)       (0.163)          (0.178)
                                                    (0.028)           (1.250)           (0.085)        (0.080)            (0.023)
Year Fixed Effects                     No          No         Yes        Yes          Yes
Industry Fixed Effects                   No          No         Yes        Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects*Credit rating            No         No         No        Yes          No
Industry Fixed Effects*Credit rating          No         No         No        Yes          No
Firm Controls                        No          No         Yes        No          Yes
                                           0.019          0.046         0.074        0.081           0.563
R-squared                                    0.008           0.001           0.024         0.024            0.571
Number of Observations                 18,549        18,549        18,548      18,549          242
Default tests using HH-Index 1995-2005
IG-dummy*HH-Index                     -0.250**
                                                   (0.118)
IG dummy                           0.053
                                              (0.044)
Credit rating*HH-Index                                 -0.041**       -0.037**      -0.022          -0.018
                                                      (0.019)        (0.018)      (0.023)         (0.018)
Credit rating                                       0.008         0.003       0.002          0.007
                                                      (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.010)         (0.011)
HH-Index                            0.262**       0.853**       0.691**      0.455          0.379
                                        (0.116)        (0.381)        (0.346)      (0.462)         (0.408)
Year Fixed Effects                     No          No         Yes        Yes          Yes
Industry Fixed Effects                   No          No         Yes        Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects*Credit rating            No         No         No        Yes          No
Industry Fixed Effects*Credit rating          No         No         No        Yes          No
Firm Controls                        No          No         Yes        No          Yes
R-squared                            0.019         0.046         0.074       0.081         0.566
Number of Observations                 18,549        18,549        18,548      18,549          242

                                     21
5.2.2 Extension 2010-2015
We examine the ability of competition to predict default at the three-year horizon using the
data set from 2010-2015. There is no longer a significant positive correlation between
competition and rating level in these years, but it is still of interest to  examine whether rating
informativeness could be affected by competition between rating agencies. However, there is
a low number of “default within three years” observations in these years compared to the data
from the earlier years, only 78 compared to 452, implying that the power of these tests  is
limited. In the data sample, none of the 78 firm-year observations where a firm is identified as
defaulting within three years comes from firms who were rated investment grade. The
implication of this is that the model specification in which default within three years is
regressed on an investment grade dummy, Fitch market share, and an interaction term between
these two cannot be estimated properly and is therefore excluded in the analysis for this time
period.

The results of the OLS regressions using Fitch market share are presented in Table 6.  The first
regression indicates that there is still a significant relationship between competition and default
rate. However, these correlations become insignificant once firm controls and fixed effects are
accounted for. This differs from the time period 1995-2005, where firm credit ratings together
with firm accounting data are better at predicting default than ratings alone. Credit rating level
is still a significant explanatory variable, but to a lesser degree,  and the effect size is smaller.
Furthermore, in Column 3, when interactions of firm credit ratings and both industry  and year
fixed effects are included, none of the coefficients are statistically significant. When including
these interactions, there are  over 50 coefficients to be estimated from a dataset with less than
100 defaults, implying that this  specification  is not  a good fit for the data set. The results of the
regressions using HH-Index are also presented in Table 6. All regressions lead to insignificant
results, implying that the information content of ratings is not diminished by varying the level
of competition between credit rating agencies.

Overall, our results for 2010-2015 are mixed, with some tests indicating a significant negative
correlation between firm credit rating and default rate. This is expected and positive in terms
of rating informativeness, given that it is desirable for higher rated firms to default at a lower
rate. Although Fitch market share and the interaction term initially  shows a significant
correlation with the dependent variable, these effects disappear when firm accounting controls
are  added,  and industry and year fixed effects are accounted for. Regressions using HH-Index
lead to conclusively insignificant correlations for all independent variables. While our results
do not explain what the actual cause of rating informativeness is, they show that Fitch market
share and HH-Index are not drivers of lower rating quality. In the time period examined by
Becker and Milbourn (2011), competition has a significant effect on default rates, which we
do not identify for this period. Rating informativeness has therefore, in relation to competition,
generally improved from the time period 1995-2005 to 2010-2015.

                                     22
 Table 6
 In the table below, coefficient estimates are shown from four OLS-regressions. The dependent variable is a dummy variable for firm
 default (one if a firm is defaulted within the subsequent three years, zero otherwise) which is regressed on Fitch market share  (or HH-
 Index), a credit rating term, and the interaction of Fitch market share (or HH-Index) with the credit rating term. Control variables
 include industry and year fixed effects, 18 firm-specific accounting measures, as well as interactions between credit rating and
  year/industry fixed effects.  Bond affirmations  are excluded from market share calculations.  Industries refers to two-digit NAICS
 codes. In Column  4 data is collapsed, using mean, at industry-year level. Standard errors are clustered at industry-year level, except
 in Column 4. All standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and shown in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Significance
  level is reported as *** representing 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.
 Default tests using Fitch market share 2010-2015                 Dependent: Default within three years
                                  OLS       OLS        OLS       OLS, averaged by industry-year
                                              (1)           (2)            (3)                         (4)
 Credit rating*Fitch market share        0.028*       0.018        -0.003                 0.011
                                    (0.016)      (0.016)       (0.014)                (0.008)
 Credit rating                       -0.010**     -0.008**       -0.001                  -0.002
                                    (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.003)                (0.004)
 Fitch market share                   -0.559*      -0.317        0.019                  -0.197
                                    (0.304)      (0.287)       (0.260)                (0.149)
 Year Fixed Effects                 No        Yes        Yes                 Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects               No        Yes        Yes                 Yes
 Year Fixed Effects*Credit rating        No        No        Yes                No
 Industry Fixed Effects*Credit rating     No        No        Yes                No
 Firm Controls                    No        Yes        No                 Yes
 R-squared                        0.025       0.049        0.080                 0.628
 Number of Observations             9,649       9,649       9,649                 132
 Default tests using HH-Index 2010-2015
 Credit rating*HH-Index               -0.054       -0.043        0.032                  -0.024
                                    (0.036)      (0.037)       (0.032)                (0.019)
 Credit rating                       0.016       0.011        -0.013                 0.009
                                    (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.012)                (0.007)
 HH-Index                         1.061       0.722        -0.581                 0.419
                                    (0.696)      (0.718)       (0.625)                (0.337)
 Year Fixed Effects                 No        Yes        Yes                 Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects               No        Yes        Yes                 Yes
 Year Fixed Effects*Credit rating        No        No        Yes                No
 Industry Fixed Effects*Credit rating     No        No        Yes                No
 Firm Controls                    No        Yes        No                 Yes
 R-squared                        0.023       0.049        0.080                 0.627
 Number of Observations             9,649       9,649       9,649                 132
 5.3 Multicollinearity
We find moderate multicollinearity in our data. The average VIF for the rating level regressions
1995-2006 is 4.17 for the Fitch market share variable and 3.45 for HH-Index. For 2010-2016
the average VIF is 2.71 for Fitch market share and 1.93 for HH-Index. Correlation in the
regressions is also examined through correlation matrices, which show that correlations
between our variable of interest and control variables are generally below 0.5 or above  -0.5.
Based on these results, we decide not to take any corrective measures. Between control
variables, such as between industries dummies or firm controls, high correlation is present in
some regressions. To our knowledge, multicollinearity in control variables will not affect our
estimates for Fitch market share  and HH-Index, as long as they are not correlated with each
other. We find that dropping highly correlated explanatory variables does not change the
identified effects. Part of the correlations between the firm controls are also explained by the
inclusion  of squared accounting terms. For the default tests in which interaction terms are
included, correlation between variables is a  by-product  of the model specifications.

6. Discussion of Findings

Fitch entering the corporate rating market as a new entrant led to a drop in rating quality, where
a higher market share displayed a positive correlation with rating level (Becker and Milbourn,
2011). We confirm these results to find that firm rating levels published by the incumbent

                                     23
rating agency S&P increase in the  industries where Fitch rates a larger portion of bonds in the
years 1995-2006. Rating informativeness also deteriorates, shown through the difference in
default rates between investment grade and speculative grade firm ratings decreasing. This can
be attributed to a reputational mechanism where future revenue influences current rating
decisions. The entrance of a new market player decreases future expected revenue, which
decreases the incentive to provide high quality ratings as an investment in reputation,  and
instead shifts focus to short-term profits (Becker and Milbourn, 2011).

Our results for 2010-2016 show no significant correlation between competition and rating
quality.  Therefore,  we find no evidence that our hypotheses, that increased competition leads
to both higher rating level and declined informativeness, are true for this time period.  Fitch’s
market share is stable over time in most industries throughout the period, and no large structural
shocks have been identified after the passing of Dodd-Frank. Interestingly, we find that the
correlation that Becker and Milbourn (2011) identify is largely insignificant when only the
years 2000-2006 are considered, which is also what Bae et al. (2015) find. This shows that
competition between rating agencies within an industry had already ceased to be a driver of
rating quality before  the financial  crisis and  could indicate that Fitch had at this point already
successfully integrated into the oligopoly as a credible player.

The results for 2010-2016 support the view that competition does not lead to rating inflation.
Sangiorgi and Spatt (2017) highlight that although competition may cause credit rating
agencies to focus on short-term profit, which would result in rating inflation (as discussed by
Becker and Milbourn (2011)), competition can simultaneously also counterbalance this by
reinforcing the disciplining role of reputation.  The threat of potential market share loss
originates in the credit rating agencies concern about  their  future reputation relative to other
agencies, as low reputation is more costly under more competitive conditions. We see that Fitch
has over time built up a credible reputation, illustrated by being added to the Lehman Index in
2005 and being used as a tiebreaker between S&P and Moody’s ratings (Becker and Milbourn,
2011). As Fitch has established their position in the industry by 2010-2016, S&P should be
more concerned about their reputation  relative  to Fitch  in this time period  than they  were  in
1995-2006. Decreases in their reputation relative to a more credible actor would lead to a larger
discount factor  on their future profits,  making  rating inflation more costly in 2010-2016. This
could be why we no longer see a significant correlation between competition and rating quality.
Furthermore, our results for 1995-2006 also show that competition only has modest effects on
rating quality. Bae et al. (2019) explains that the effects of competition on rating quality for
larger rating agencies, such as S&P, might be too small to detect, even if they are present.
Taking this into account, as well as that our measures of competition displays low within-
industry variation throughout 2010-2016, it could perhaps be expected that we do not identify
significant correlations.

The Dodd-Frank Act passed in 2010 after the financial crisis, which in the period 2010-2012
led  to rating agencies lowering their bond ratings in response to the threat of legal proceedings
(Dimitrov et al. 2015). There is an indication that these effects are also present in our data set,
as average firm ratings decreased by 0.255 between our two periods of interest. Dimitrov et al.
(2015) further finds that industries with a lower Fitch market share (i.e. less competition)
showed an increase in the magnitude of the effect. The incumbent firms faced higher levels of
potential legal costs as well as a  larger share of potential revenue loss in the more consolidated
industries, which provided the incentive to publish relatively lower ratings in order to protect
their reputation. The SEC has however since 2012 never taken the steps to fully implement the
relevant provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, and no major lawsuits have been filed in reference

                                     24
to actions by credit rating agencies after the financial crisis (Partnoy, 2017). The lack of action
by regulators after the threat of increasing accountability should subsequently lead to credit
rating agencies updating their expectations, with less severe effects on future reputation and
costs. This should then also diminish the incentive to issue lower ratings of inferior quality in
more competitive industries, which is a further explanation for why we do not observe any
correlation between S&P rating quality and competition.

There is a further possible mechanism affecting our results. Between the years 2010-2016,
markets experienced an overarchingly positive growth, with the S&P 500 index increasing by
more than 100 percent, from roughly 1120 to 2230 basis points (S&P Dow Jones Indices,
2020). In periods of expansion, the probability of default of a firm is relatively lower, which
makes monitoring credit rating agencies less effective and lessens the chance of legal or
reputational repercussions, which  can  lead to rating inflation (Bar-Isaac and Shapiro, 2013).
There is also less pressure to keep ratings low for the sake of preserving reputation when the
general economic outlook is positive. Many investors who are restricted in their investment
options by regulatory standards or investment guidelines actually demand higher ratings in
booms in order to be able to take on additional risk and earn higher returns (Bar-Isaac and
Shapiro, 2013). This would indicate that we would observe a decrease in rating informativeness
over time, independent of competition, which is not the case in our data. Bar-Isaac and Shapiro
(2013) however show in their theoretical model that as a boom persists, the severity of this
effect diminishes, as investments in rating quality increase again due to changing expectations.
Given that the positive market development persists throughout our data set, this could be why
we do not observe decreasing rating informativeness over time. Bar-Isaac and Shapiro (2013)
also build on the assumption  that  agencies are not paid for providing low ratings, as  issuers
will choose not to issue their debt instrument. This assumption does not hold true for firm
ratings, as they will be issued by the rating agency regardless of the input from an  issuer and
could  therefore  be  a  further  reason  for  why  we  do  not  find  the  decrease  in  rating
informativeness in our data.

A further interesting finding is that HH-Index as a measure of competition does not yield results
that are as similar to Fitch market share as expected. Replicating the regressions of Becker and
Milbourn (2011) with HH-Index shows that it is consistently less significant than Fitch market
share. 1995-2006 was a time period in which Fitch grew explosively and became a credible
challenger to the incumbents S&P and Moody’s. This structural shift  therefore seems  to  be
better captured using Fitch market share directly instead of HH-Index. The index  also  lacks
some nuance and cannot distinguish between the causes of different values of the index, i.e.
                                                                                12
similar values for the index can exist for very different market scenarios.  Therefore, even
though the value of the index changes in response to Fitch entering the market, it does not
provide as clear of a picture of the circumstances as solely Fitch market share.  Consequently,
we  reaffirm  that context is important when choosing a measure, and in these early years, the
relative market share of S&P and Moody’s is perhaps less interesting. In the later time period,
the results are insignificant. This outcome makes it difficult to judge whether the index does a
better job at describing the state of competition across this time period relative to the earlier
one.

12
  For example, a HH-Index value of circa 3000 could be achieved by an industry with one firm with a 50% market
share and 5 firms with 10% market shares, but also by an industry with 3 equally sized competitors that each have
31.5% of the market and a single smaller competitor of 5.5%.

                                     25
6.1 Limitations
There are some clear limitations to our work. Our data shows that in 2010 and onwards, Fitch
has a relatively stable year-to-year market share within most industries. There is also an
overrepresentation of firm rating observations that come from industry-years with market
shares close to the mean market share, which decreases the variance  of the market share
variable used in the regressions further. This lack of variation increases the uncertainty of our
findings as the regressions  might not be able to capture the variation in rating level and default
rate under different intensities of competition. This implies that Fitch market share might be a
weaker proxy for competition than it was previously, which is why we include a second
measure of competition, HH-Index. We however find that it actually displays an even lower
level of variance than Fitch market share does alone. Of note is that our data still displays cross-
industry variation. As previously discussed, revenue should ideally be used to represent market
share, as a measure based solely on the number of bond ratings does not account for differences
in prices that are solicited by each rating agency. Given that all three rating agencies are private
subsidiaries and do not publish this data, true market share is hard to measure to full accuracy.
Taking these factors into account, the true  effects of competition on rating quality could be
more prominent than our findings show due to measurement bias.

Bae et al. (2015) explain that clustering by industry-year can create bias in the estimated
standard errors if the time-series correlation in Fitch market share is high. As the variance in
Fitch market share has decreased over our time-period and the market shares reached a
relatively stable level, the estimated standard errors can appear to be smaller than they actually
are. One way to test this is by clustering at industry-level and comparing the resulting standard
errors. This requires the number of clusters  to be  sufficient, as clustered standard errors are
also biased when there are too few clusters (Petersen,  2009). Given that we only have 22
industries in the analysis, clustering at industry-level might still lead to biased standard errors.
A possible solution is to extend the definition of industries from two-digit to four-digit NAICS
codes, which would provide us with approximately 270  industries. However, this increases the
uncertainty  in the independent variable, as every market share calculation is based on too few
bonds to provide an accurate proxy for competition. Becker and Milbourn (2011) also state that
the narrower four-digit industries might not be competitively distinct from the perspectives of
credit ratings agencies. So, while narrower industries can be used to test clustering at industry-
level, it will not be directly comparable to the broader industries due to the  above-mentioned
reasons.  Time series correlation is therefore a potential  limitation in our paper.

Lastly, it is important to consider cases of reverse causality or omitted variable bias in the
earlier data sample. Although we control for cross-industry and year variation as well as for
firm fixed effects and controls, omitted variables may still be present and hard to fully rule out.
Furthermore, reverse causality is harder to rule out only by the inclusion of controls. Fitch
could have primarily entered markets with generally higher ratings, leading to a correlation
between rating level and market share. However, it would be more likely that issuers with lower
ratings would demand an additional rating from a new agency, which would instead bias the
results of the effect towards zero (Pacces  and  Romano,  2015). In the context of rating
informativeness, there is a risk that Fitch can establish stronger positions in industries neglected
by the other incumbent rating agencies by providing lower quality ratings. There is however
no reason to expect them to do so, and it  also does not explain the findings concerning rating
level (Becker and Milbourn, 2011). Becker and Milbourn (2011) also show in their paper
through further testing that increased credit demand and information opaqueness are both
unlikely omitted variables.  Given that the main period of interest in this paper is 2010-2016, in

                                     26
which we do not identify a conclusive correlation between competition and rating quality, we
do not consider further cases of reverse causality or omitted variable bias.

7. Conclusions

Research on the relationship between rating quality and competition of rating agencies is
inconclusive. Becker and Milbourn (2011) find that there is a significant correlation between
these two variables in 1995-2006, in the form of rating inflation by incumbent firms as a
reaction to Fitch entering the market. We confirm these findings through a replication of their
study and  extend their methodology to examine whether these effects are present after the
financial crisis and the passing of the Dodd-Frank Act. We find no evidence, when fixed effects
and controls are included, that there is a correlation between competition and S&P firm rating
quality, quantified in the dimension of rating level and rating informativeness in the years
2010-2016. This holds true even for an additional measure of competition, the HH-Index,
which  is used to  capture  any additional  nuances  in competition  stemming from the other  large
rating agencies. The insignificant relationship can be attributed to Fitch becoming an
established  and reputable actor within the credit rating industry, which makes rating inflation
more costly for S&P. The insignificance of our results can also be understood through both the
decline in concern surrounding Dodd-Frank and the persistence of the boom period throughout
the entirety of 2010-2016. We can conclude that the insignificance of the correlation is a
positive development, as the quality of ratings provided to investors should not vary depending
on the level of competition in the rating agency industry. Given the role that credit ratings play
in information transfer and  signalling, it is clear that any decrease in friction in the
determination of ratings is good for financial markets (Stahl and Strausz, 2017).

There are interesting avenues of further extending this research, such as varying the geographic
scope of the study. Other regions, such as the  European Union,  implemented their own
legislation after the 2008 financial crisis to amend inefficiencies in the credit rating industry,
which  could be used to contrast the findings of this paper  (European Commission, n.d.).  The
major  rating  agencies  that  exist  in  the  United  States  are  also  active  market  players
internationally, often holding majority market shares, which could lead to similar findings,
even when the nationally implemented regulatory measures differ (Moody's Analytics,  2019).

                                     27
8. References

Bae, K.-H., Driss, H. and Roberts, G.S., 2019. Does competition affect ratings quality?
Evidence from Canadian corporate bonds. Journal of Corporate Finance, 58, pp. 605-623.
Bae, K.-H, Kang, J.-K.  and Wang, J., 2015. Does Increased Competition Affect Credit
Ratings? A Reexamination of the Effect of Fitch's Market Share on Credit Ratings in the
Corporate Bond Market. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 50(5), pp. 1011-
1035.
Baghai, R.P., Servaes, H. and Tamayo, A., 2014. Have Rating Agencies Become More
Conservative? Implications for Capital Structure and Debt Pricing. The Journal of Finance,
69(5), pp. 1961-2005.
Bar-Isaac, H. and Shapiro, J., 2013. Ratings quality over the business cycle.  Journal of
Financial Economics, 108(1), pp. 62-78.
Becker, B. and Milbourn, T., 2011. How did increased competition affect credit ratings?
Journal of Financial Economics, 101(3), pp. 493-514.
Benmelech, E. and Dlugosz, J., 2009. The Credit Rating Crisis. NBER working paper 15045.
Blume, M.E., Lim, F. and Mackinlay, A.C., 1998. The Declining Credit Quality of U.S.
Corporate Debt: Myth or Reality? The Journal of Finance, 53(4), pp. 1389-1413.
Bolton, P., Freixas, X. and Shapiro, J., 2012. The  Credit  Ratings  Game. The  Journal of
Finance, 67(1), pp. 85-112.
Camanho, N., Deb, P. and Liu, Z., 2010. Credit Rating and Competition.  Discussion paper
653, London School of Economics.
Dimitrov, V., Palia, D. and Tang, L., 2015. Impact of the  Dodd-Frank act on credit ratings.
Journal of Financial Economics, 115(3), pp. 505-520.
European  Commission,  n.d.  Regulating credit rating agencies, Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/financial-supervision-
and-risk-management/managing-risks-banks-and-financial-institutions/regulating-credit-
rating-agencies_en  [12 May, 2020].
Financial  Crisis  Inquiry  Commission, 2011.  The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report: Final
Report of the National Commission on the Causes of the Financial and Economic Crisis in
the United  States.  pp. xv-xxviii.
Fitch  Ratings,  March, 2020., Rating Definitions. Available:
https://www.fitchratings.com/site/definitions  [28 March, 2020].
Hand, J.R.M., Holthausen, R.W. and Leftwich, R.W., 1992. The Effect of Bond Rating
Agency Announcements on Bond and Stock Prices. The Journal of Finance, 47(2), pp. 733-
752.
Jewell, J. and Livingston, M., 1999. A Comparison of Bond Ratings from Moody's S&P and
Fitch IBCA. Financial Markets,  Institutions & Instruments, 8(4), pp. 1-45.
Kisgen, D.J., 2006. Credit Ratings and Capital Structure. The Journal of Finance,  61(3), pp.
1035-1072.
Mathis, J., McAndrews, J. and Rochet, J.-C, 2009. Rating the raters: Are reputation concerns
powerful enough to discipline rating agencies? Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5), pp.
657-674.
Moody's Analytics, Nov 29, 2019, ESMA Publishes Market Share Figures for Credit Rating

                                     28
Agencies in EU. Available:  https://www.moodysanalytics.com/regulatory-news/nov-29-19-
esma-publishes-market-share-figures-for-credit-rating-agencies-in-eu  [Apr 13, 2020].
Moody's  Investor  Services,  January  2020. Rating Symbols and Definitions.
Pacces, A.M. and Romano, A., 2015. A Strict Liability Regime for Rating Agencies.
American Business Law Journal, 52(4), pp. 673-720.
Partnoy, F., 2017.  What's (still) wrong with credit ratings?  Washington Law Review,  92(3),
pp. 1407-1472.
Petersen, M.A., 2009. Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches. The  Review of Financial Studies, 22(1), pp. 435-480.
S&P Dow Jones Indices, April 13, 2020, S&P 500®. Available:
https://us.spindices.com/indices/equity/sp-500  [April 13, 2020].
Sangiorgi, F. and Spatt, C.,  2017. The economics of credit rating  agencies. Foundations and
Trends® in Finance, 12(1), pp. 1-116.
Securities Industry and Financial Market Association, 2020, Fixed Income Outstanding.
Available:  https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/fixed-income-chart/  [March 29, 2020].
Skreta, V. and  Veldkamp, L., 2009.  Ratings shopping and asset complexity: A theory of
ratings inflation. Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5), pp. 678-695.
Spatt, C., 2009. Discussion of “Ratings Shopping and Asset Complexity: A Theory of
Ratings Inflation”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(5), pp. 696-699.
Stahl, K. and Strausz, R., 2017. Certification and Market Transparency.  The Review of
Economic Studies, 84(4), pp. 1842-1868.
S&P  Global, September 2019,  S&P Global Rating Definition. Available:
https://www.standardandpoors.com/en_US/web/guest/article/-/view/sourceId/504352
[May 11, 2020].
The National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2010. Business Cycle Dating
Committee, National Bureau of Economic Research. Available:
https://www.nber.org/cycles/sept2010.html?fbclid=IwAR1-uXhuBpKdSH112H4dBbPq-
ndJrR1jPpv-zt8neuFsJSfAZPd38-VKO_o  [May  11, 2020].
U.S. Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission, 2010. Horizontal Merger
Guidelines.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2016. Annual Report on Nationally Recognized
Statistical Rating Organizations.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2018. Annual Report on Nationally Recognized
Statistical Rating Organizations.
U.S. Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  2020. Annual Report on Nationally Recognized
Statistical Rating Organizations.
Wharton Research Data Services, 2020, Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD).
Available:  https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/ds/fisd/index.cfm  [28 March, 2020].
White, L.J., 2013. Credit Rating Agencies: An Overview. Annual Review of Financial
Economics, 5, pp. 93-122.

                                     29
9. Appendix

Appendix 1
Describes how the S&P domestic long-term issuer credit rating is converted into a numerical code. Grades are a cardinal
variable measured on a scale from 1 to 28. Each class is assigned three numbers to account for positive and negative grades.
Those classes without grades are assigned the midpoint value. Based on the work of Hand et al. (1992) and used by Becker
and Milbourn (2011). The source for category definition is S&P Global  (2019).
                  Rating   Numerical
     Grade       agency     code                         Category definition
               S&P
Investment grade    AAA           28    An obligor has extremely strong capacity to meet its financial commitments.
Investment grade    AA+           26
                                                  An obligor has very strong capacity to meet its financial commitments. It
Investment grade    AA            25
                                                            differs from the highest-rated obligors only to a small degree.
Investment grade    AA-            24
Investment grade    A+             23     An obligor has strong capacity to meet its financial commitments but is
Investment grade    A             22  somewhat more susceptible to the adverse effects of changes in circumstances
Investment grade    A-              21                       and economic conditions.
Investment grade    BBB+           20      An obligor has adequate capacity to meet its financial commitments.
Investment grade    BBB           19   However, adverse economic conditions or changing circumstances are more
Investment grade    BBB-            18    likely to weaken the obligor's capacity to meet its financial commitments.
Speculative grade    BB+           17
Speculative grade    BB            16
Speculative grade    BB-            15
Speculative grade    B+             14
                                                   Obligors rated 'BB', 'B', 'CCC', and 'CC' are regarded as having significant
Speculative grade    B             13
                                                 speculative characteristics. While such obligors will likely have some quality
Speculative grade    B-              12
                                        and protective characteristics, these may be outweighed by large uncertainties
Speculative grade    CCC+           11                                                 13
                                                                 or major exposure to adverse conditions.
Speculative grade    CCC           10
Speculative grade    CCC-            9
Speculative grade    CC             7
Speculative grade    C              4
                                                  A 'D' rating is assigned when S&P believes that the default will be a general
                                                         default and that the obligor will fail to pay all or substantially all of its
                                                obligations as they come due. An 'SD' rating is assigned when S&P believes
                                                       that the obligor has selectively defaulted on a specific issue or class of
                                              obligations, but it will continue to meet its payment obligations on other
Default           SD/D            1              issues or classes of obligations in a timely manner.

 13
   The 'C' rating is no longer included in the scale by S&P. Only one observation in our data set is assigned a C
 rating in 1995.

                                     30
Appendix 2
Two-digit NAICS codes and the respective industry name. Annual mean for Fitch market share and HH-Index for respective
industry is shown for our two sample periods. The market shares and HH-Indexes for 1995-2006 are calculated including
bond affirmations and for 2010-2016 bond affirmations are excluded.
NAICS   Industry name                                             Fitch market share     HH-Index
                                                                                     1995-     2010-    1995-    2010-
                                                                       2006     2016    2006    2016
  11     Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting                           0.17      0.23     0.399    0.377
  21     Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction                        0.22      0.19     0.364    0.374
  22     Utilities                                                    0.31      0.24     0.347    0.362
  23     Construction                                                0.19      0.25     0.396    0.352
  31     Manufacturing: Food, Textile, Apparel                              0.24      0.23     0.368    0.356
  32     Manufacturing: Wood, Paper, Printing, Petroleum, Chemicals, Plastics       0.20      0.20     0.372    0.364
  33     Manufacturing: Metals, Machinery, Computers, Electrical, Furniture         0.22      0.24     0.364    0.351
  42     Wholesale Trade                                             0.20      0.22     0.373    0.361
  44     Retail Trade: Motor Vehicles, Furniture, Electronics, Food, Gas            0.18      0.23     0.388    0.355
          Retail Trade: Sporting  goods, Books, Florists, Office Supplies, Mail-
  45                                                                    0.30      0.26     0.364    0.358
        Order, Vending
          Transportation and Warehousing: Air Transport, Water Transport, Trucks,
  48                                                                    0.14      0.18     0.422    0.380
         Pipelines
  49     Transportation and Warehousing: Messengers, Storage                  0.14      0.20     0.452    0.398
  51     Information                                                 0.23      0.24     0.363    0.354
  52     Finance and Insurance                                         0.33      0.26     0.346    0.345
  53     Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                                0.25      0.23     0.368    0.360
  54     Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                        0.22      0.20     0.368    0.379
  55     Management of Companies and Enterprises                          0.25      0.22     0.369    0.357
         Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation
  56                                                                    0.21      0.23     0.386    0.368
         Services
  61     Educational Services                                           0.25      0.30     0.466    0.425
  62     Health Care and Social Assistance                                 0.21      0.25     0.379    0.359
  71     Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                                0.19      0.22     0.373    0.384
  72     Accommodation and Food Services                                0.21      0.26     0.383    0.352
  81     Other Services (except Public Administration)                        0.16      0.15     0.399    0.421
  92     Public Administration                                          0.25      0.28     0.378    0.340

                                    31
Appendix 3

Model specification of the ordinary least square regressions that are used in our research. Only new variables are defined in each regression.

Regressions on rating level
Regression 1

                                             (1) 𝑅!,#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝜀

Where:
Ri,k = Firm long-term credit rating for a firm k in a specific year i
Competitioni,j = Fitch’s market share or HH-Index for a specific year  i  and industry  j

Regression 2
                                 (2) 𝑅!,#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝛽(𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&  + 𝜀
Where:
Yeari = Annual time dummy variable for a specific year  i
Industryj = Industry dummy variable for a specific industry  j

Regression 3
                           (3) 𝑅!,#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝛽(𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚#  + 𝛽)𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠!*%,#  + 𝜀
Where:
Firmk = Firm dummy variable for a specific firm k
Controlsi-1,k = Combined term for the 18 firm-specific accounting variables (see Table 1 for the full list), for each firm k at the end of the
previous fiscal year  i-1

Regression 5
                        (4) 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑅!,&  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!+𝛽(𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&  + 𝛽)𝐶𝑜𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠!,&  + 𝜀
Where:
ColRi,j = Firm long-term credit ratings collapsed by mean per year i and industry j
ColControlsi,j = Combined term for the 18 firm-specific accounting variables (see Table 1 for the full list), collapsed by mean per year i and
industry  j

Regression 6
                     (5) 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑀𝑅!,&  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝛽(𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&  + 𝛽)𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑀𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠!,&  + 𝜀
Where:
ColMRi,j = Firm long-term credit ratings collapsed by median per year i and industry j
ColMControlsi,j = a combined term for the 18 firm-specific accounting variables (see  Table 1  for the full list), collapsed by median per year  i
and industry  j

Regressions on rating informativeness
Regression 1 & 2

                          (2) 𝐷!,#  =  𝛽$  + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#+𝛽(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#  + 𝜀

Where:
Di,k = Dummy variable for a firm k in a specific year i defaulting within a three-year horizon
Ratingi,k = Investment grade dummy or firm long-term credit rating for a firm k in a specific year i

Regression 3
   (3) 𝐷!,#  =  𝛽$  + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#+𝛽(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#  + 𝛽)𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝛽+𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&  + 𝛽,𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠!*%,#  + 𝜀

Regression 4
    (4) 𝐷!,#  =  𝛽$  + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#+𝛽(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#  + 𝛽)𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝛽+𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&+𝛽,𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#
                     + 𝛽-𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&  ∗ 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,#  + 𝜀
Regression 5
          (5) 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝐷!,&  =  𝛽$  + 𝛽%𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  + 𝛽'𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,&+𝛽(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛!,&  ∗ 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔!,&  + 𝛽)𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝛽+𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦&
                     + 𝛽,𝐶𝑜𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠!,&  + 𝜀
Where:
ColDi,j = Fraction of firms identified as defaulting within a three-year horizon (collapsed by mean) per year  i and industry  j
ColRatingi,j = Firm long-term credit ratings collapsed by mean per year i and industry j

                                     32
Appendix 4
In the table below, firm credit rating (S&P Domestic Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating) is regressed on Fitch market share. The
dependent variable, firm credit rating, is based on a numerical scale, ranging from 1 (D) to 28 (AAA). Fitch market share is the
fraction of bonds rated by Fitch in an industry-year cell. Firm controls include 18 firm-specific accounting measures. Industries
refers to two-digit NAICS codes. In Column 5 and 6 data is collapsed, using mean and median, on industry-year level. Standard
errors are clustered at industry-year level, except in Column 5 and 6. All standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and shown
in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Significance level is reported as *** representing 1%, ** 5%, * 10%.
Replication 2000-2006                     Dependent variable: firm credit rating
                                                                    OLS average by   OLS median by
                         OLS     OLS    OLS   Ordered Probit        cell            cell
                                  (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)                (5)                 (6)
Fitch Market Share         6.101***    0.351    0.312       0.075           0.825           -1.423
                          (2.072)    (0.726)   (0.479)      (0.171)          (0.612)          (1.280)
Year Fixed Effects          No      Yes     Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes
Industry Fixed Effects        No      Yes     No        Yes           Yes           Yes
Firm Fixed Effects          No      No     Yes        No           No           No
Firm Controls             No      No     Yes        No           Yes           Yes
R squared                0.013     0.125    0.902        n/a           0.970           0.954
Number of Observations     12,572    12,572   12,572      12,572          116            116

Appendix 5
In the table below, firm credit rating (S&P Domestic Long-Term Issuer Credit Rating) is regressed on Fitch market share or HH-Index.
The dependent variable, firm credit rating, is based on a numerical scale, ranging from 1 (D) to 28 (AAA). Fitch market share is the
fraction of bonds rated by Fitch in an industry-year cell. HH-Index is the sum of the squares of the market share of each rating agency in
an industry-year cell, divided by 10,000.  Bond affirmations  are excluded from market share calculations. Firm controls include 18 firm-
specific accounting measures. Industries refers to two-digit NAICS codes. In Column 5 and 6 data is collapsed, using mean and median,
on industry-year level. Standard errors are clustered at industry-year level, except in Column 5 and 6. All standard errors are
heteroskedasticity-robust and shown in  parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Significance level is reported as *** representing 1%, **
5%, * 10%.
Replication 1995 - 2006                       Dependent variable: firm credit rating
Removing affirmations                                 Ordered     OLS average by    OLS median by
                          OLS      OLS      OLS        Probit            cell              cell
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)                 (5)                   (6)
Fitch Market Share         3.566**    1.106*    1.044***       0.263          1.226***           -0.330
                          (1.600)    (0.653)     (0.379)       (0.163)          (0.391)           (0.863)
Year Fixed Effects           No      Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes
Industry Fixed Effects        No      Yes       No         Yes           Yes            Yes
Firm Fixed Effects          No      No       Yes        No           No            No
Firm Controls             No       No       Yes         No           Yes            Yes
R squared                 0.005     0.139      0.882         n/a            0.966            0.934
Number of Observations      20,343    20,343     20,343       20,343           188             188
HH-Index 1995-2006 - Removing affirmations
HH-Index                 -5.968*    -3.315**    -1.684**      -0.806**         -2.399**            2.011
                          (3.432)    (1.547)     (0.810)       (0.390)          (1.122)           (1.995)
Year Fixed Effects           No      Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes
Industry Fixed Effects        No      Yes       No         Yes           Yes            Yes
Firm Fixed Effects          No      No       Yes        No           No            No
Firm Controls             No       No       Yes         No           Yes            Yes
R squared                 0.002     0.139      0.881         n/a            0.966            0.934
Number of Observations      20,342    20,342     20,342       20,342           188             188

                                    33
Appendix 6
In the table below, coefficient estimates are shown from five OLS-regressions. The dependent variable is a dummy variable for
firm default (one if a firm is defaulted within the subsequent three years, zero otherwise) which is regressed on Fitch market share
(or HH-Index), a credit rating term, and the interaction of Fitch market share (or HH-Index) with the credit rating term. Control
variables include industry and year fixed effects, 18 firm-specific accounting measures, as well as interactions between credit rating
and year/industry fixed effects.  Bond affirmations  are excluded from market share calculations.  Industries refers to two-digit
NAICS codes. In Column 5 data is collapsed, using mean, at industry-year level. Standard errors are clustered at industry-year
level, except in Column 5. All standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust and shown in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported.
Significance level is reported as *** representing 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%.
Replication default tests using Fitch market share 1995-2005     Dependent: Default within three years
Removing affirmations                                                        OLS averaged by
                           OLS       OLS       OLS      OLS
                                                                                                       industry-year
                                             (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)
                                                                                                             (5)
IG-dummy*Fitch market share          0.049
                                        (0.054)
IG dummy                       -0.050***
                                        (0.011)
Credit rating*Fitch market share                    0.010         0.009       0.009         -0.003
                                                 (0.008)       (0.006)      (0.008)        (0.008)
Credit rating                                    -0.010***     -0.012***     -0.008         0.0002
                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.005)        (0.007)
Fitch market share                    -0.024        -0.177        -0.143      -0.143         0.044
                                   (0.052)       (0.155)       (0.120)      (0.165)        (0.158)
Year Fixed Effects                  No         No         Yes       Yes         Yes
Industry Fixed Effects               No         No         Yes       Yes         Yes
Year Fixed Effects*Credit rating        No         No         No        Yes         No
Industry Fixed Effects*Credit rating      No         No         No        Yes         No
Firm Controls                    No         No         Yes        No          Yes
R-squared                        0.017        0.044        0.073       0.081         0.563
Number of Observations             18,549       18,549       18,548      18,549         242
Default tests using HH-Index 1995-2005  -  Removing affirmations
IG-dummy*HH-Index                 -0.197
                                        (0.121)
IG dummy                       0.034
                                        (0.047)
Credit rating*HH-Index                             -0.038*       -0.037**     -0.035*         -0.017
                                                 (0.019)       (0.017)      (0.020)        (0.026)
Credit rating                                  0.007        0.004       0.008         0.008
                                                 (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.010)        (0.014)
HH-Index                         0.183        0.745*       0.681**     0.662*         0.350
                                   (0.117)       (0.382)       (0.314)      (0.392)        (0.518)
Year Fixed Effects                  No         No         Yes        Yes          Yes
Industry Fixed Effects               No         No         Yes       Yes         Yes
Year Fixed Effects*Credit rating        No         No         No        Yes         No
Industry Fixed Effects*Credit rating      No         No         No        Yes         No
Firm Controls                    No         No         Yes        No          Yes
R-squared                        0.018        0.045        0.074       0.081         0.564
Number of Observations             18,548       18,548       18,547      18,548         241

                                    34