DIRTY STOCK RETURNS IN
THE ERA OF SUSTAINABILITY

A STUDY OF THE WORLD’S LARGEST CARBON MARKET

FORBES GOLDMAN

HUGO SCHMIDT

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Dirty Stock Returns in the Era of Sustainability: A Study of the World’s Largest
Carbon Market

Abstract:

   Using a dataset on the stock returns of 65 German firms, this thesis empirically
   analyses the effect of the European Union Emissions Trading System on the biggest
   economy and carbon market in Europe. We conclude that the different allocation
   methods have resulted in large discrepancies in stock performance for the firms
   reporting under the ETS. More specifically, we find a statistically significant
   premium in stock returns for carbon emitting firms when carbon allowances are
   freely allocated. This is due to two economic mechanisms, namely the cash-flow
   effect and the carbon risk effect. When allowances are sold in auctions as opposed to
   being allocated for free, this premium dissipates, and clean firms outperform dirty
   firms. In short, this thesis contributes to the evaluation of the world’s largest carbon
   market and its effect on the financial performance of firms reporting under the
   system.

Keywords:

   European Union Emissions Trading System, Carbon Emission Allowances, Carbon
   Risk, Environmental Regulation

Authors:

   Forbes Goldman (24027)
   Hugo Schmidt (24274)

Tutor:

   Ran Guo, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Forbes Goldman and Hugo Schmidt, 2020

                                   1
Table of Contents

1. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................. 3

2. LITERATURE REVIEW ................................................................................................................. 6

3. THE EUROPEAN UNION EMISSIONS TRADING SYSTEM .................................................. 8

4. CASH FLOWS, EXPECTED RETURNS AND THE ETS ......................................................... 10

   4.1. THE EFFECT ON CASH FLOWS .................................................................................................. 10
  4.2. THE EFFECT ON EXPECTED RETURNS ....................................................................................... 11

5. DATA DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................................... 13

   5.1. SAMPLE PERIOD ....................................................................................................................... 13
   5.2. STOCK RETURNS....................................................................................................................... 14
  5.3. CARBON EMISSION ALLOWANCES ............................................................................................ 16

6. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS .............................................................................................................. 17

   6.1. A PORTFOLIO APPROACH ......................................................................................................... 17
   6.2. PORTFOLIO RETURNS ............................................................................................................... 17
   6.3. FACTOR MODELS ...................................................................................................................... 18
   6.4. THE CARBON PREMIUM ............................................................................................................ 19
   6.5. THE PRICE OF CARBON RISK .................................................................................................... 21

7. DISCUSSION .................................................................................................................................. 24

8. REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................ 27

9. APPENDIX ...................................................................................................................................... 29

                                   2
1. Introduction

The European Union Emissions Trading System, hereafter ETS, was the world’s first
greenhouse gas emissions trading scheme of significant size and remains the biggest
financial carbon market globally. The ETS serves an important role as a key weapon for
the EU to combat climate change. The flagship project was established in 2005 and aims
to reduce carbon emissions through economic incentives, see Table 1 for a detailed
timeline of events concerning the ETS. The scheme has the ambitious goal of cutting total
emission in the EU by more than 40% to 2030, compared to the levels in 2005. As of
writing, the ETS covers over 11,000 installation and 2,000 megatonnes of carbon dioxide,
which corresponds to almost half of all greenhouse emissions in the EU. The ETS is a
cap-and-trade program which allocates carbon emission allowances, i.e. polluting rights
to companies based on an annual cap. One carbon emission allowance gives the right to
pollute one tonne of greenhouse gas emissions. This cap is systematically reduced over
time to lower total emissions. During the initial two phases of the system, beginning in
2005 and ending in 2012, carbon emission allowances were granted to firms
predominantly free of charge. However, in 2009 there was an EU law passed which
established the key features of the third phase, due to start in 2013. It was in this law made
public that beginning in 2013, carbon allowances would predominantly be sold in
auctions. After this law was made public in 2009, carbon emitting firms were suddenly
expecting to have to begin purchasing carbon allowances from 2013 and onwards. This
monumental shift in how carbon allowances are allocated has led us to the following
research question:

How have the different allocation methods of carbon allowances in the ETS affected stock
returns of carbon emitting firms?

             Since the inception of the ETS, financial markets have been curious to
understand which financial consequences environmental policy of this sort would have
on the performance of the affected firms. Given the size of the ETS, small changes in
policy could have severe and long-lasting effects on those firms that are under regulation.
For instance, a new law establishing that firms have to start paying for something that
they expected to be free, or vice versa, can have significant effects on future earnings.

                                   3
This is why we are interested in researching how this shift, concerning the allocation of
carbon allowances, has affected the financial performance of carbon emitting firms.

              We answer our research question by first replicating, and then extending the
empirical analysis in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015). The authors analysed German stock
returns for a sample period beginning in November 2003 and ending in December 2012.
In this paper, we analyse a sample period beginning in November 2003 and ending in
June 2016, which is interesting for a number of reasons. Most importantly, the authors
analysed the ETS during its initial two phases, when carbon allowances were
predominantly allocated to carbon emitting firms free of charge. By extending the sample
period, we also analyse the ETS during a period of time when carbon allowances are
predominantly sold in auctions. By extending the sample period in Oestreich and Tsiakas
(2015) we contribute to the scientific community by validating the findings in the
previously mentioned paper, and also by providing novel research in a sparsely examined
field, namely where environmental economics is intertwined with finance.

             We follow the methodology in Oestreich and Tsiakas in order to answer our
research question. Firstly, we limit our data to Germany, since it is both the largest
economy and emitter of carbon emissions in Europe. Secondly, we create three stock
portfolios, which are supposed to proxy the stock performance of three categories of
firms, those receiving many carbon allowances, those receiving a few carbon allowances,
and those receiving no carbon allowances. More specifically, we create a dirty portfolio
for those firms receiving more than a million annual free carbon allowances, a medium
portfolio for those firms receiving more than zero but less than a million free carbon
allowances, and a clean portfolio for those firms receiving no free carbon allowances. We
also create a dirty-minus-clean portfolio, which implies taking a long position in the dirty
portfolio and a short position in the clean portfolio.

             There are two economic mechanisms driving the results in our empirical
analysis. The first mechanism is the cash flow effect, and by using the framework of
Goulder, Hafstead and Dworsky (2010) we show that by allocating carbon allowances for
free, carbon emitting firms can experience windfall profits as a result of the cap-and-trade
system. The framework shows that the cap-and-trade system leads to increased marginal
costs for carbon emitting firms. Carbon emitting firms respond to this increased marginal

                                   4
cost by increasing prices, decreasing output volumes, or adopting new carbon-friendly
technologies. This results in large gains in producer surplus for carbon emitting firms.
However, by using the same framework, we show that if carbon allowances
predominantly are sold in auctions, carbon emitting firms would experience large losses
in producer surplus.

             The second mechanism is the carbon risk effect. Carbon emitting firms are
more exposed to carbon risk than non-carbon emitting firms, which could for instance be
increased prices of carbon allowances or the consequences of devastating climate change
as suggested in Weitzman (2009), Litterman (2013) and Pindyck (2013). As a result of
the increased exposure to carbon risk, carbon emitting firms will demand higher expected
returns compared to non-carbon emitting firms.

             Our most important empirical findings are the following. During the initial
stages of the ETS, when carbon allowances were predominantly allocated for free, we
find that dirty firms significantly outperform clean firms, which is measured by a high
and significant abnormal excess return of the dirty-minus-clean portfolio. Therefore, we
conclude that there was a high and significant dirty carbon premium present, for the
period of time firms received free carbon allowances and expected these to be free for the
foreseeable future. However, when it is made public in 2009 that firms will have to begin
purchasing carbon allowances in auctions beginning in 2013, the dirty carbon premium
dissipates in size and significance. Analysing a sample period that begins in 2009 and
ends in 2016, we find that there emerges a high and significant clean carbon premium
shortly after it is made public that firms will have to begin purchasing carbon allowances
in auctions.

              On a separate note, we find that there is a positive and significant carbon
risk factor during the initial stages of the ETS. This explains the high expected returns
that dirty firms demand, for having a high exposure to carbon risk. However, we find that
over time, the size and significance of the carbon risk factor disappears. Analysing a
sample period that begins in 2009 and ends in 2016, we find that the carbon risk factor
becomes negative, and of little statistical significance. This could explain why after 2009,
dirty firms started performing worse, and have had negative expected returns as a result
of their high exposure to carbon risk.

                                   5
2. Literature Review

The origins of environmental economics date back to the 1960’s, when both the political
interest and the first research papers concerning environmental economics widely spread
(Pearce 2002). Environmental economics has over time studied several means of
achieving an environmental goal. Common examples include setting minimum
technological standards, introducing pollution taxes and establishing markets for tradable
permits. Some of the first scientific work on markets with tradable permits was done by
Dales (1968). He showed that if pollution without permits are forbidden, and the cost of
polluting is lower than the price of a permit, dirty firms will tend to buy permits whereas
clean firms will sell them, thus creating an equilibrium for permit prices.

             The use of tradable permits has accelerated all over the world with some
common examples of usage being acidic pollutants in the US, overfishing in Northern
Europe and water rights in Chile. There is evidence that markets for emission rights are
here to stay and according to Pearce (2002), there is reasonable consensus that tradable
emission allowances must play a key role in tackling climate change.

             Research lines that are pertinent to the ETS and relevant for our study
include the studies by Koch and Bassen (2013), Smale et al (2006) and Oestreich and
Tsiakas (2015). The first mentioned study investigated the correlation between carbon
stock prices and the price of carbon allowances. This line of research was extended by an
event study by Jong et al (2014), which showed the effect of environmental laws on the
profits of carbon-emitting firms. Moreover, Smale et al (2006) showed, using a Cournot
representation, that the introduction of the ETS generally increases expected profits for
companies in energy-intensive sectors. Finally, a third line of research, focused on the
development of the alpha depending on the cleanliness of a portfolio, was put forward in
Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015). They investigated the presence of a carbon premium in
stock returns stemming from the free carbon allowances during Phase I and II of ETS.
Moreover, the authors reached the conclusion that after the key features of Phase III of
the ETS are made public in March 2009, the carbon premium that carbon emitting firms
previously developed, completely disappeared. The authors reached this conclusion by
studying the stock performance of German firms from November 2003 to December

                                   6
2012. What is interesting is that the authors reached the conclusion before Phase III even
began trading, which started in January 2013. As a result, the authors predicted the
dissipation regarding the carbon premium, based on a period of doubt, when the public
was made aware that carbon emitting firms would have to purchase the majority of
emission rights in auctions, beginning in 2013. Even though this is a fair and reasonable
theoretic prediction, based on future cash flows being at risk as a result of increased
spending on emission rights, one cannot be sure that these predictions will hold in reality.

             This paper aims to contribute by replicating the results put forward by
Oestreich and Tsiakas and also by extending the sample period to June 2016. The
replication is important, in part to validate the extension of this paper, and in part because
similar research on other carbon markets has yielded different results. Zhang and
Gregory-Allen (2018), using the same methodology as Oestreich and Tsiakas, showed no
significant carbon premium for the Shenzhen Pilot Emissions Trading Scheme in China.
Moreover, extending the paper through more than three years of trading in Phase III
contributes to novel research.

             In short, while the ideas of academics in the field of environmental
economics often have been remarkably quickly adopted, it is not seldom that the
effectiveness of the implementation of the ideas remain unexplored. There is thus a great
need for studies that evaluate the effectiveness of environmental economic instruments.
This study does just that; and focuses on the world’s largest carbon market.

                                   7
3. The European Union Emissions Trading System

The following section provides a brief description of the ETS, for more information see
World Bank (2014) and European Commission (2015). The ETS is the world’s largest
carbon dioxide emissions trading system. The cap-and-trade program was launched in
2005 and is a cornerstone of the European Union’s energy policy. It covers all EU
member states as well as Iceland, Norway and Liechtenstein.

             The scheme allocates polluting rights to companies based on an annual cap.
This cap is systematically reduced over time so that total emissions fall. The unit used for
emissions are European Union Allowances, or EUAs, where one EUA gives the polluter
the right to emit one tonne of greenhouse gases. If an emitter wishes to pollute more than
their initial allowance, they must purchase additional EUAs from those who used less
than they received. The intuition is that the program will create incentives for firms to
reduce emissions, as they can sell excess allowances for profit.

             The ETS has been implemented in four phases. During the first phase,
which begins in January 2005 and ends in December 2007, EUAs were predominantly
given to emitters free of charge, and there was no possibility to store allowances for Phase
II. In other words, allowances lost their value if left unused after Phase I. During Phase
II, which begins in January 2008 and ends in December 2012, EUAs were also primarily
allocated free of charge, however with the possibility to bank allowances for future
phases. During these initial phases, free allowances were allocated with the
grandfathering approach. This approach essentially means that EUAs were allocated
based on historical greenhouse emissions. After facing criticism for unfairly punishing
proactive firms, the grandfathering approach was replaced with a benchmarking approach
in Phase III and onwards. The benchmarking approach allocates allowances based on
production performance (measured against specific sector benchmarks) instead of
historical emissions. This has created sounder incentives as it becomes increasingly
difficult for inefficient installations to cover their emissions with freely allocated
allowances. In Phase III, which begins in January 2013 and ends in December 2020, the
majority of the EUAs are sold in auctions. Spare allowances can be either stored for future
use or sold to other firms. Phase IV begins in January 2021 and is expected to end in

                                   8
December 2030, with the goal being that by the end of this period, total emission levels
will have been cut by 40% from 2005 levels.

             EUAs are given to individual factories, and not on a firm level. In March
every year installations receive annual allowances. For all emissions emitted by a
company, they must surrender the corresponding amounts of allowances by the end of
April the following year or else the company faces a fine. The emission level for each
separate EU country are also made public in the end of April each year. There are several
trading platforms for trading EUAs, with the biggest being the European Climate
Exchange (ECX) in London. The ETS covers more than 11,000 installations which
together stand for about 45% of total greenhouse emissions in the EU.

            The development for Carbon Emissions Futures has been volatile since
2008, this has raised questions about the stability of the system (see Figure 4). For
example, in the beginning of the year of 2012, the price was consistently under €10
compared to almost €30 per tonne in 2008. The large surplus of allowances that at times
have been present, often coinciding with general economic downturns, have driven prices
to very low levels. Criticism has thus been raised whether prices have at times been too
low to provide proper incentives for firms to reduce emissions. However, measures such
as banking of allowances have been introduced to mitigate volatility. There have also
been calls made to introduce price floors. This has, as time of writing, not been put in
place. However, one must keep in mind that the volatility levels in energy commodities
markets are relatively high compared to other types of markets. Thus, the volatility seen
in the ETS, albeit high in absolute numbers, is quite in line with comparable energy
commodities markets. Moreover, the EU has introduced the Market Stability Reserve,
MSR, to combat oversupply of allowances. In effect, the MSR is a central bank for carbon
allowances that will remove surplus inventory. The role of MSR is to create a mechanism
to regulate supply, in order to maintain the balance of the ETS which had until the
introduction of MSR been struggling with fixed supply but variable demand. The
introduction of the MSR led to a spike in prices, subsequently stabilizing at these higher
levels, around €25 per tonne.

                                   9
4. Cash Flows, Expected Returns and the ETS

4.1. The Effect on Cash Flows

The underlying component to this effect is the marginal cost of production, which
increases with the introduction of the cap-and-trade system, compared to having no
carbon regulation at all. The market value of the amount of carbon allowances required
in order to produce one unit of output is equal to the increase in the marginal cost of
production. This is the case regardless if the carbon allowances were allocated freely or
purchased in the market. This essentially means that a firm using a carbon allowance can
choose between either purchasing that unit or forfeiting one unit from the surplus carbon
allowances it could have subsequently sold.

             For the illustration and economic mechanisms taking place as a result of the
introduction of a cap-and-trade system in line with the analysis in Goulder, Hafstead and
Dworsky (2010), see Figure 1. In this figure we see the supply curve shifting up as a result
of the increased marginal cost. There is a two-fold explanation to the increased marginal
cost, namely due to having to purchase or forfeit excess carbon allowances, illustrated by
r in the figure, and due to increased costs of switching to less carbon-intensive fuels,
illustrated by c. In other words, it shows the effect of the free allocation of carbon
allowances on the profits of a perfectly competitive industry, where the initial equilibrium
is given by b. When the cap-and-trade program is in place, the new equilibrium is given
by a, with increased consumer price, exceeding the previous price by c + r, and decreased
producer output.

              The introduction of a cap-and-trade program could potentially generate
windfall profits to firms affected by the system. In a scenario where there is free allocation
of carbon allowances, area A would illustrate gain in producer surplus. If the newly
generated gain in producer surplus is greater than the loss in producer surplus, illustrated
by area B, we will find that firms receiving free carbon allowances realize greater profits
as a result of the imposed system. However, in a scenario where carbon allowances are
sold in auction, area A would represent government revenue, resulting in a net loss of
producer surplus for carbon emitting firms.

                                  10
             On a final note, even though it is expected that there would be a positive
cash flow effect on carbon emitting firms as a result of the cap-and-trade program, there
are many uncertainties surrounding this project, and therefore also the outcome. For
instance, the fact that the ETS was a pilot project, information asymmetries, volatility in
the price of carbon allowances, and so on. Therefore, our first hypothesis reads as follows:

H1: During the initial two phases of the ETS, when firms predominantly receive carbon
allowances free of charge, carbon emitting firms will experience higher cash flows and
therefore higher average returns. Thus, there will emerge a dirty carbon premium in stock
returns. However, during the third phase of the ETS, when carbon allowances are
predominantly sold in auction, the dirty carbon premium will dissipate.

4.2. The Effect on Expected Returns

Besides the cash flow effect, there is an additional more subtle effect that has to do with
the increased risk that carbon emitting firms run, for having a high exposure to carbon
risk. Carbon risk is primarily described as the risk of future cash flows being affected by
increased prices of carbon allowances. Prices of carbon allowances have experienced
considerable volatility since its inception. In addition, policy changes, such as passing
legislation implying a different method for allocating allowances, or the creation of the
MSR, have significant effects on the future expectations of cash flows. Finally,
catastrophic climate change as described in Weitzman (2009), Litterman (2013) and
Pindyck (2013), would imply an increase in prices of carbon allowances for carbon
emitting firms. Again, proving the inherent risk of having a high exposure to carbon risk.

              For the mentioned reasons, there is a general risk aversion toward investing
in carbon emitting firms. Therefore, there has to be a risk premium in carbon emitting
firms, implying that carbon emitting firms should yield higher expected returns than non-
carbon emitting firms. Therefore, our second hypothesis reads as follows:

                                  11
H2: Carbon emitting firms are subject to carbon risk and will therefore require higher
expected returns than non-carbon emitting firms, denoted by a dirty carbon premium.
This dirty carbon premium will in part be explained by a positive and significant price of
a carbon risk factor. When the dirty carbon premium dissipates, so will the size and
significance of the price of a carbon risk factor.

                                  12
5. Data Description

5.1. Sample Period

The complete sample period we analysed in this paper begins in November 2003 and ends
in June 2016. November 2003 coincides with the passing of an EU law that establishes
the two initial phases of the ETS. It is therefore made public in 2003 that the ETS will
begin in 2005, and that firms will predominantly be receiving free carbon allowances for
the foreseeable future. The sample period ends in June 2016, which considers more than
three years of trading during Phase III of the ETS, which begins in January 2013. An
additional reason for choosing June 2016 as the end date of the sample period concerns
the availability of data needed in order to analyse our research question. In particular, data
regarding Fama-French (1993) size and value factors, as well as the Carhart (1997)
momentum factor, especially constructed for the German economy ends in June 2016.
The mentioned data is provided by the Business and Economics Faculty at Humboldt-
Universität Zu Berlin and explained in detail in Brückner et al. (2015).

            In our analysis, we take three shorter sample periods into consideration. The
first two sample periods coincide with the periods analysed in Oestreich and Tsiakas
(2015). The first sample period begins in November 2003 and ends in March 2009, and
thus ends with the passing of an EU law that establishes Phase III of the ETS. It is through
the passing of this law that it is made public that beginning in 2013, firms will have to
purchase the majority of carbon allowances in auction, as opposed to receiving them for
free. As a result, this sample period only takes into consideration the period of time during
which firms receive carbon allowances for free and expect these to be free for the
foreseeable future. Through this first sample period, we analyse the stock performance of
firms during a period of time when firms were not expecting to have to purchase carbon
allowances.

             The second sample period begins in November 2003 and ends in December
2012, and therefore ends with the expiration of the second phase of the ETS. Even though
firms continue to receive carbon allowances for free until 2013, this sample period is
particularly interesting to analyse. This period of time captures the stock performance of
firms in a time of uncertainty and confusion concerning what will happen when they have

                                  13
to start purchasing carbon allowances in auctions. What is almost certain is that starting
in 2013, carbon emitting firms will have to start purchasing carbon allowances, resulting
in increased costs, and decreased future cash flows. The notion that future cash flows are
at risk is immediately reflected in the current stock price. Therefore, it is highly relevant
to analyse this sample period.

              It is through the two previously mentioned sample periods, ending in 2009
and 2012, that Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015) analyse and make conclusions concerning
the ETS’ effect and ramifications on firms trading on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
However, the end date of their sample period does not consider the period of time during
which firms actually have to purchase carbon allowances in auctions. They base their
conclusions on the period of uncertainty from 2009 to 2012. Therefore, extending the
sample period through 2016 makes an interesting extension, considering more than three
years of trading during Phase III of the ETS, as well as there being sufficient data in order
to produce relevant results. Through this extended sample period, we are able to measure
and validate the results in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015), and research how the stock
performance of carbon emitting firms has developed since the third phase of the ETS
began trading.

               Finally, we decided to include a third, shorter sample period in our analysis,
which begins in April 2009 and ends in June 2016. What makes this period interesting is
that it starts a month after the passing of the law establishing the third phase of the ETS
and ends with the end-date of our extended sample period. This sample period neglects
the period of time when firms receive carbon allowances for free and expect to receive
these for free. What is new about this sample period is that the financial distress of having
to purchase carbon allowances is reflected in the stock price of firms throughout the entire
period of time.

5.2. Stock Returns

In order to apply the same methodology as in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015), we collected
monthly stock returns from firms trading on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, from the last
day of each month. In particular, we analyse stock returns of those 80 firms which are

                                  14
either included in the DAX or MDAX stock indexes. The DAX is a blue-chip stock
market index, which includes 30 major firms trading on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange,
while the MDAX includes 60 mid-cap firms (excluding tech-sector firms) trading on the
Frankfurt Stock Exchange. However, at the time of writing for Oestreich and Tsiakas
(2015), the MDAX only consisted of 50 firms. Firms included in either of the two indexes
encompass 95% or more of Germany’s stock market cap; see Table 2 for the complete
descriptive statistics concerning firms under analysis, their respective industry
classification, and market cap. The high stock market cap of our sample indicates large
diversity concerning industry, which proves to be a good representation of the overall
economy in Germany.

             Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015) proceed to exclude all firms for which they
do not find monthly return data concerning their complete sample period from 2003 to
2012. As a result, they exclude 15 firms, leaving them with the remaining 65 firms. As
for our extension of the paper we apply the same methodology as the authors. Only one
firm, Douglas Holding, that was included in the original paper was delisted from the
Frankfurt Stock Exchange during Phase III of the ETS, prior to June 2016. As a result,
we had to carry out a portfolio rebalancing before January 2013, resulting in the exclusion
of the previously named firm from our analysis.

             We continue by calculating monthly stock returns in accordance with the
authors methodology. Therefore, we calculate monthly stock returns through the
following logarithmic formula:

                                          𝑟𝑗,𝑡+1 = ln(𝑃𝑗,𝑡+1) − ln(𝑃𝑗,𝑡),

                 where 𝑃𝑗,𝑡 is the adjusted price (accounting for dividend reinvestment and
stock splits) of stock j at time t. Data concerning stock prices, as well as market
capitalization has been downloaded from Datastream.

              In accordance with Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015), we proxy the return of the
market portfolio by using the DAX index return. However, as for the risk-free rate, the
proxy used by the authors is not available for our extended sample period, which is why
we proxy the risk-free rate by using the German ten-year government bond, which is in
line with standard practice. Finally, the Fama-French (1993) size and value factors, and

                                  15
the Carhart (1997) momentum factor for the German economy has been provided by the
Business and Economics Faculty at Humboldt-Universität Zu Berlin and explained in
detail in Brückner et al. (2015). This set of size, value, and momentum factors differs
from that employed in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015), which ends in 2012, and can
therefore not be applied in our extension of the sample period.

5.3. Carbon Emission Allowances

We have gathered data concerning each firm’s freely allocated carbon allowances by
analysing archives and results published in the German Emissions Trading Authority
(DEHSt). Each year, the DEHSt issues a publication of the results of the free allocation
of emission allowances to incumbent installations. We are then able to manually match
the free allocation of emission allowances to a particular installation, with the firm it
belongs to. Finally, we aggregate the free allocation of emission allowances issued to
each firm. See Table 2 for descriptive statistics concerning freely allocated carbon
allowances to each firm (annual average), for the three separate phases of the ETS.

             During the initial two phases of the ETS, 24 firms received free carbon
allowances. There are large discrepancies in regard to the amount of free carbon
allowances allocated to each firm, some receiving only a couple of thousand allowances
each year, while others receive tens of millions. Furthermore, in the transition to the third
phase of the ETS, we find a substantial decrease in the number of carbon allowances
allocated freely. During Phase III, only 20 firms receive free carbon allowances, and the
amount of annually allocated allowances decreases dramatically compared to the two
initial phases. The trend is generally that there is a small decrease in the amount of
annually freely allocated allowances from Phase I to Phase II, and then a substantial
decrease from Phase II to Phase III. The decrease in freely allocated carbon allowances
to the third phase is however not a surprise. As mentioned previously, the passing of an
EU law in 2009 established that beginning in 2013, the majority of carbon allowances
would be sold in auction.

                                  16
6. Empirical Analysis

6.1. A Portfolio Approach

Following the methodology applied in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015), we address our
research question by creating three portfolios: “dirty”, “medium”, and “clean”. The dirty
portfolio consists of those firms that have received on average more than one million free
carbon allowances annually. The medium portfolio consists of those firms that received
on average more than zero free carbon allowances, but less than one million annually.
Finally, the clean portfolio consists of those firms that have not received any free carbon
allowances. We furthermore analyse a “dirty-minus-clean” portfolio, DMC, which is a
zero-investment portfolio implying taking a long position in an equally weighted dirty
portfolio and a short position in an equally weighted clean portfolio.

             During the initial two phases of the ETS, 8 firms were regarded as dirty,
thus receiving annually more than a million free carbon allowances, 16 firms were
regarded as medium, and 41 firms regarded as clean, not receiving any free carbon
allowances. However, as for the third phase, and our sample period extension, some
changes were made in the categorization of firms. Starting in 2013, 5 firms were regarded
as dirty, 15 firms were regarded as medium, and 43 firms regarded as clean. The number
of firms in our analysis decreased by one due to the delisting of Douglas Holding from
the Frankfurt Stock Exchange during our extended sample period. Due to the delisting of
one firm, as well as the re-categorization of several other firms, we had to perform a
portfolio rebalancing after 2012.

6.2. Portfolio Returns

We find similar results to those in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015) concerning the portfolio
returns, see Table 3 for detailed results in regard to the annualized mean return of the
dirty, medium, clean, and DMC portfolios for the different sample periods. We find that
the DMC portfolio has an annualized mean return of 16.4% for the first sample period,
which begins in 2003 and ends in 2009. This result implies that for the first sample period,
when dirty firms receive the majority of carbon allowances for free and expect these to

                                  17
be free for the foreseeable future, the dirty portfolio outperform the clean portfolio on the
stock market. For the next sample period, which begins in 2003 and ends in 2012, we find
that the annualized mean return of the DMC portfolio is 2.9%, implying that the dirty
portfolio still outperforms the clean one, but not by as much as in the previous sample
period. For the extended sample period, which begins in 2003 and ends in 2016, we find
that the DMC portfolio has an annualized mean return of -1.6%, implying that the clean
portfolio outperforms the dirty portfolio, albeit by a small degree. Finally, we find that
for our final sample period, which begins in 2009 and ends in 2016, the DMC portfolio
has an annualized mean return of -14.9%.

             The result concerning the final sample period from 2009 to 2016 is
interesting since it suggests that after March 2009, when firms are made aware that they
will have to start purchasing carbon allowances in 2013, the clean portfolio by far
outperforms the dirty portfolio. These levels are equivalent to those in the first sample
period, when the DMC portfolio had an annualized mean return of 16.4%. From the
moment that the DMC portfolio peaked during the first sample period, the annualized
mean return of the DMC portfolio decreased by 31.3% to June 2016. The annualized
mean return of the portfolio decreased by close to a third based on the notion that firms
expected carbon allowances to be free in the foreseeable future but found out they would
have to start paying for these.

6.3. Factor Models

In order to establish the abnormal excess return of a portfolio, denoted by alpha (𝛼), which
is the main point of analysis in the next section of the paper, we use three factor models,
in line with the procedure in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015). In order to establish the alpha
of each portfolio for a given sample period we perform time-series regressions. The
constant that is yielded through each regression is the alpha of the portfolio. Our first
regression is derived from the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), and is calculated
by:

                               𝑟𝑗,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛽𝑗(𝑟𝑀,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

                                  18
𝑟𝑗,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 being the monthly excess return of portfolio j at time t, and 𝑟𝑀,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 being the
monthly excess return to the market portfolio at time t, and 𝜀𝑗,𝑡 being the normal error.

              Our second regression is derived from the Fama and French (1993) three-
factor model, which from now on we term FF3, and is calculated by:

              𝑟𝑗,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛽𝑗1(𝑟𝑀,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡) + 𝛽𝑗2𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + 𝛽𝑗3𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 being the monthly excess return of the “small-minus-big” size premium that
smaller market cap firms have over large market cap firms. Fama and French (1993) deem
this the “small firm effect” since they found in their study that small market cap firms
significantly outperform large market cap firms, which is why they have included this
factor in their stock pricing model. 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 refers to the monthly excess premium of the
“high-minus-low” value premium that firms with high book-to-market ratios have over
firms with low book-to-market ratios. The authors found that value stocks significantly
outperform growth stocks, resulting in the inclusion of this factor in their stock pricing
model.

              Our third regression is derived from the Carhart (1997) four-factor model,
which from now on we term FF4, and is calculated by:

       𝑟𝑗,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝛽𝑗1(𝑟𝑀,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓,𝑡) + 𝛽𝑗2𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + 𝛽𝑗3𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑗4𝑀𝑂𝑀𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗,𝑡,

𝑀𝑂𝑀𝑡 being the monthly return of the momentum factor, capturing the tendency of stocks
to move in the same direction as they did in the previous period.

6.4. The Carbon Premium

The carbon premium is defined as the abnormal excess return, i.e. alpha, of the DMC
portfolio; see Table 4 of the appendix for the regression results. For the first sample
period, which begins in 2003 and ends in 2009, we find that the annualized carbon
premium of the DMC portfolio can be as high as 16.2% relative to the CAPM, and highly
significant relative to all but one factor model. Therefore, during the first sample period,
there is a high and significant dirty carbon premium. This empirical finding suggests that
during the period of time when firms receive carbon allowances for free, and expect these

                                  19
to be free in the future, dirty firms significantly outperform clean firms. Our findings are
in line with those of Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015).

             However, looking at the second sample period, which begins in 2003 and
ends in 2012, we find that the annualized carbon premium of the DMC portfolio only is
as high as 2.5% relative to the CAPM, as well as not being of statistical significance. This
empirical finding suggests that once firms are made aware in 2009 that they will have to
begin purchasing carbon allowances, dirty firms seize to significantly outperform clean
firms.

               As for our extended sample period, which begins in 2003 and ends in 2016,
we find that the annualized carbon premium of the DMC portfolio becomes negative,
even as low as -5.6% relative to the FF4, and again, of no statistical significance.
Therefore, considering a period of time when firms have to purchase carbon allowances,
we find that clean firms outperform dirty firms over this extended sample period, albeit
the results are not of statistical significance.

             As for our final sample period, between 2009 and 2016, we find that the
annualized carbon premium of the DMC portfolio is between -17.2% and -18.2% relative
to the FF3 and FF4 respectively, and that they according to all factor models are highly
statistically significant. These results are interesting since they suggest that starting in
April 2009, there is a high and significant clean carbon premium, in contrast to the
previous dirty carbon premium. During this period of time, clean firms significantly
outperform dirty firms.

             These findings provide empirical support for our first hypothesis. Namely,
that when carbon allowances are allocated freely, dirty firms will experience higher cash
flows and therefore higher expected returns, which is manifested by a high and significant
dirty carbon premium. However, once firms realize in 2009 that they will have to begin
to purchase carbon allowances, the size and significance of the dirty carbon premium
dissipates. This empirical finding sheds light on the impact that changes in environmental
policy can have on the stock performance of firms reporting under the ETS. The
framework provided by Goulder, Hafstead and Dworsky (2010) explains in part how a
cap-and-trade system can result in large gains in producer surplus for dirty firms, when
carbon allowances are freely allocated. However, the same framework also shows that

                                  20
once carbon allowances are sold in auctions, the previous gain in producer surplus
realized by dirty firms, now becomes revenue for governments issuing the carbon
allowances. As a result, by auctioning carbon allowances, dirty firms begin to realize
large deficits in producer surplus. Hence, explaining why after 2009, dirty firms are
significantly outperformed by clean firms.

              On a final note, we find in line with Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015) that the
dirty carbon premium was a “one-off event” which took place between 2003 and 2009.
However, by extending our sample period we find that beginning in 2009, there emerges
a clean carbon premium, which remains of size and significance until 2016.

6.5. The Price of Carbon Risk

We estimate the price of carbon risk through cross-sectional regressions on the stock
returns of our sample firms. We are especially interested in analysing a dirty-minus-clean
factor, DMC, which is used to proxy the price of carbon risk. As previously mentioned,
the DMC factor is the expected return of a zero-investment portfolio that has a long
position in an equally weighted dirty portfolio, and a short position in an equally weighted
clean portfolio. The cross-sectional regressions are in line with the Fama and MacBeth
(1973) two-step procedure. The first step is to estimate betas concerning the DMC factor,
CAPM, FF3 and FF4 for each firm through time-series regressions. Hence, we find
through this first step each firm’s sensitivity concerning each factor for a given sample
period. The second step is to perform cross-sectional regressions on each firm’s stock
returns based on their respective betas. The cross-sectional regression yields the price of
each factor; see Table 5 for the results of the cross-sectional regressions.

              Our results are in line with Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015). During the initial
sample period, which begins in 2003 and ends in 2009, we find that the price of risk of
the DMC factor can be as high as above one, and highly significant relative to all the
factor models. However, for the second sample period, which begins in 2003 and ends in
2012, we find that the price of risk of the DMC factor decreases, although still being
positive, and highly statistically significant. This finding is essential in understanding our
previous empirical findings. The higher the price of risk of the DMC factor, the higher

                                  21
the expected return of the DMC portfolio. As a result, during the first sample period, when
firms receive free carbon allowances, and expect these to be free in the future, the price
of risk of the DMC factor is high, thus leading to high DMC portfolio returns, and the
emergence of a high and significant dirty carbon premium. However, during the second
sample period, when firms have been made aware that they will have to purchase carbon
allowances in the future, the price of risk of the DMC factor decreases, resulting in
decreased DMC portfolio returns, and the dissipation of the dirty carbon premium.

              As for our extension of the empirical analysis we find the following results.
During the extended sample period which begins in 2003 and ends in 2016, we find that
the price of risk of the DMC factor continues to decrease, although still being positive,
and of high statistical significance. For our final sample period, which begins in 2009 and
ends in 2016, we find that the price of risk of the DMC factor is negative, although of
little statistical significance.

             These finding are important in order to validate the economic mechanism
suggested in Oestreich and Tsiakas (2015), as to why the return of the DMC portfolio
decreases over time, and eventually becomes negative looking at a sample period that
begins after 2009. Our main empirical finding in this section of the paper is that for the
initial sample period, when firms receive free carbon allowances, and expect these to be
free in the future, the price of risk of the DMC factor is high, leading to high DMC
portfolio returns, and the emergence of a high and significant dirty carbon premium. As
time goes by, and firms are made aware that they will have to start paying for carbon
allowances, the price of risk of the DMC factor decreases, resulting in lower DMC
portfolio returns, and the dissipation of the dirty carbon premium. Finally, the price of
risk of the DMC factor becomes negative, taking into consideration a period of time when
firms are aware that they will have to start paying for carbon allowances, and this
knowledge is reflected in the stock price of firms. The implications of a negative price of
risk of the DMC factor is that firms that are highly exposed to carbon risk, i.e. dirty firms,
will generate negative expected returns. The negative price of the DMC factor could
explain why dirty firms realized negative returns during the sample period which begins
in 2009 and ends in 2016.

                                  22
       The mentioned empirical findings support our second hypothesis. Dirty firms are
highly exposed to carbon risk, which is why they demand higher expected returns than
clean firms. During the period of time when firms received free carbon allowances, the
high and significant dirty carbon premium could be explained by a positive and significant
price of the DMC risk factor. However, when the dirty carbon premium dissipates so does
the size and significance of the price of the DMC factor. This provides further
understanding as to why there was a high and significant dirty carbon premium in the
initial stages of the ETS.

                                  23
7. Discussion

The EU’s cap-and-trade program has been widely observed by the financial markets since
its inception in 2005. It has since become the world’s largest market for trading carbon
emission allowances, and a key tool for the EU to fight climate change. By writing this
paper, we take a closer look into the complex implications that environmental policy has
on the stock performance of firms. In particular, we analyse how the change in
methodology concerning the allocation of carbon allowances affects the performance of
firms listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. We focus on Germany since they have the
highest carbon emissions in the EU. During the initial two stages of the ETS, beginning
in 2005 and ending in 2012, carbon emitting firms predominantly received carbon
allowances for free. However, it was announced through the passing of an EU law in
2009, that beginning in 2013, carbon emitting firms would have to start purchasing carbon
allowances in auctions, since they would no longer be allocated for free. As a result, when
this is made public in 2009, carbon emitting firms experience increased concern and
uncertainty regarding their future cash flows. By analysing a wide range of sample
periods, we are able to draw conclusions concerning how the different carbon allocation
methods impacted the stock performance of firms trading on the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange.

             Our empirical analysis shows the following findings. (i) For the first sample
period, beginning in 2003 and ending in 2009 there is a high and significant dirty carbon
premium, higher than 16%. This dirty carbon premium emerges in a time when carbon
emitting firms receive carbon allowances for free and expect these to be free in future as
well. (ii) When carbon emitting firms are made aware in 2009 that they will have to start
purchasing carbon allowances from 2013, the size and significance of the dirty carbon
premium dissipates. Therefore, the dirty carbon premium disappears in a time when
carbon emitting firms expect carbon allowances to be free but find out they will have to
start paying for them. This new knowledge results in future concern and uncertainty
surrounding future cash flows, which is reflected in the current stock price. (iii) Looking
at what happens in the immediate future after carbon emitting firms are aware that they
will have to start paying for carbon allowances, we find the emergence of a high and
significant clean carbon premium that is higher than 18%. This finding could be subject

                                  24
to further discussion, since the high and significant clean carbon premium arises in a time
when firms are aware that they will have to purchase carbon allowances in the future, and
this knowledge should be reflected in the stock price at the beginning of the sample
period. A possible reason for the emergence of the clean carbon premium is that the
market by far underestimated the costs of having to purchase carbon allowances in the
future. (iv) There is a high and significant price of risk of the DMC factor during the
initial sample period, explaining the high expected returns for firms with high exposure
to carbon risk, i.e. carbon emitting firms. Over time, the price of risk of the DMC factor
decreases in size and significance to eventually become negative, which could explain
the decreasing expected returns of the DMC portfolio.

            Apart from the two key economic mechanisms that explain our findings,
namely the cash flow effect and the carbon risk effect, it is also worth discussing a third
one, concerning the method of allocation to carbon emitting firms. As previously found,
dirty firms outperform clean firms during the initial stages of the ETS, whereas the results
are reversed for the later stages. Interesting to analyse are the different approaches to the
allocation of free allowances that were taken during the different phases of the ETS. The
grandfathering approach which was used in Phase I and II were advantageous for dirty
firms whereas the benchmarking approach on the other hand is beneficial for firms e.g.
investing in R&D to lower total emissions. Therefore, we argue that the institutional
change that was made, i.e. changing allocation method to a benchmarking approach,
possibly exacerbated the decline in the DMC factor over the periods. It is important to
bear in mind, that even after trading of Phase III of the ETS began, freely allocated
allowances still account for a non-negligible amount of total allowances, see Figures 2
and 3. However, if the grandfathering method had never been replaced, it is reasonable to
assume that the DMC factor would have declined less sharply.

             Finally, another subject of discussion worth mentioning is the introduction
of the MSR, which has primarily led to (i) higher prices for carbon allowances and (ii)
price stability of carbon allowances. This has naturally disadvantageous effects for carbon
emitting firms that need to purchase large amounts of allowances, since their costs
increase when prices rise. This could have had a negative impact on the price of carbon
risk, which for extended sample periods decreased in size and significance. Furthermore,
the price stability that the MSR has created implies that the market is able to assess the

                                  25
prices of carbon allowances with greater certainty than ever before, resulting in more
reliable projections of future cash flows concerning carbon emitting firms. One could
therefore argue that after the introduction of the MSR, the effects of the ETS have been
more efficiently reflected in the current stock price of carbon emitting firms.

             On a final note, we show in this paper the great implications of changing
allocation methods of carbon allowances in the ETS. During the initial stages, when
carbon allowances were freely allocated, carbon emitting firms proved to be the system’s
beneficiaries. However, a slight modification to the allocation system resulted in reversed
roles. The notion that changes in environmental regulation can have monumental impacts
on the firms affected by a system of this kind is supported by the findings in Zhang and
Gregory-Allen (2018). What this implies for future policy makers is that the design of
how a system will function is equally as important as the overall mission of that same
system. Taking the ETS as an example, the mission is to reduce carbon emissions by 40%
until 2030, which intuitively would affect carbon emitting firms negatively. However, we
show in this paper, that the allocation method of allowances during the initial two phases
of the ETS resulted in carbon emitting firms being the large beneficiaries of this new
trading system.

                                  26
8. References

Brückner, R., P. Lehmann, M. Schmidt, and R.Stehle (2015) “Non-U.S. Multi-Factor
Data Sets Should be Used with Caution,”. Working paper.

Carhart, M. (1997). “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance
52, 57-82.
Coase R. (1960). “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics 3. 1–44.

Dales JH. (1968). “Pollution, Property and Prices.” University of Toronto Press.

European Commission (2015). “ETS Handbook”.

Fama, E., and J. MacBeth (1973). “Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607-636.

Fama, E., and K. French (1993). “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

German Emissions Trading Authority (2020). “Allocation 2013-2020”.

Goulder, L., M. Hafstead, and M. Dworsky (2010). “Impacts of Alternative Emissions
Allowance Allocation Methods Under a Federal Cap-and-Trade Program,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 60, 161-181.

Jong, T., O. Couwenberg, and E. Woerdman (2014). “Does EU Emissions Trading
Bite? An Event Study,” Energy Policy 69, 510-519.

Koch, N., and A. Bassen (2013). “Valuing the Carbon Exposure of European Utilities.
The Role of Fuel Mix, Permit Allocation and Replacement Investments,” Energy
Economics 36, 431-443.

Litterman, B. (2013). “What is the Right Price for Carbon Emissions?” Regulation,
Summer 2013, 38-43.
Smale, R., M. Hartley, C. Hepburn, J. Ward, and M. Grubb (2006). “The Impact of CO2
Emissions Trading on Firm Profits and Market Prices,” Climate Policy 6, 29-46.

Oestreich, A. and I. Tsiakas (2015). “Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Evidence
from the EU Emissions Trading Scheme”. Journal of Banking & Finance 58, 294-308.
Pearce, David (2002), “An Intellectual History of Environmental Economics.” Annual
Review of Energy and the Environment 27, 57-81.
Pindyck, R.S. (2013). “Pricing Carbon When We Don’t Know the Right Price,”
Regulation, Summer 2013, 43-46.

                                  27
Weitzman, M. (2009). “On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
Climate Change,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 1-19.

World Bank (2014). State and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2014.
Zhang, M. and Gregory-Allen, R. (2018) “Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns:
Evidence from the Chinese Pilot Emissions Trading Scheme”. Theoretical Economics
Letters 8, 2082-2094.

                                  28
9. Appendix

                       Table 1. Timeline of Events

This table provides a detailed timeline of events concerning the ETS.

 2003 November EU passes law establishing features of Phase I and II of ETS
 2005 January Phase I of ETS begins
 2005 April EUA trading begins
 2007 December Phase I of ETS ends
 2008 January Phase II of ETS begins
 2009 March EU passes law establishing features of Phase III of ETS
 2012 December Phase II of ETS ends
 2013 January Phase III of ETS begins
 2020 December Phase III of ETS ends
 2021 January Phase IV of ETS begins
 2030 December Phase IV of ETS ends

                                  29
                      Table 2. Descriptive Statistics

This table shows descriptive statistics for the 65 firms which have been analysed in this
paper. These firms are either included in the DAX or MDAX index and are therefore
listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. ME refers to the average market value of equity
measured over our extended sample period, from November 2003 to June 2016, in million
euros. Free Allowances refers to the annual average number of carbon allowances that
have been freely allocated to each firm during the first, second and third phase of the ETS,
measured in millions.

                                                               Free Allowances
           Firm Industry ME Phase I Phase II Phase III
  1 RWE Electric 24868 109.633 57.720 1.341
  2 E.ON Electric 45906 42.033 28.980 0.075
  3 ThyssenKrupp Iron/Steel 11905 24.033 24.000 16.706
  4 Salzgitter Iron/Steel 3066 10.200 12.000 6.084
  5 Heid. Cement Building Material 9029 5.500 4.780 4.176
  6 BASF Chemical 47397 4.867 5.520 7.268
  7 Volkswagen Auto Manufacturer 37297 2.504 1.986 0.417
  8 K+S Chemical 5483 1.441 1.140 0.658
  9 Suedzucker Food 3404 0.785 0.887 0.537
 10 Henkel Household Products 11176 0.560 0.491 0.088
 11 Daimler Auto Manufacturer 50525 0.383 0.376 0.269
 12 Bayer Chemical 48826 0.290 0.283 0.065
 13 BWM Auto Manufacturer 32831 0.272 0.294 0.126
 14 Merck Pharmaceutical 5738 0.141 0.108 0.061
 15 Krones Machinery 1557 0.078 0.073 0.000
 16 Continental Auto Parts 16514 0.077 0.069 0.004
 17 MAN Machinery 9985 0.055 0.024 0.027
 18 Infineon Semiconductors 7224 0.038 0.017 0.000
 19 Hochtief Construction 3827 0.034 0.033 0.000
 20 Fresenius Med. Healthcare Products 12672 0.027 0.032 0.039
 21 Lufthansa Airline 6190 0.019 0.020 0.014
 22 Siemens Manufacturing 68904 0.015 0.016 0.005
 23 Aurubis Metal 1394 0.008 0.008 0.358
 24 Heid. Druck. Machinery 1202 0.005 0.006 0.000
 25 Aareal Bank Bank 1190 0.000 0.000 0.000
 26 Adidas Apparel 10423 0.000 0.000 0.000
 27 Allianz Insurance 48904 0.000 0.000 0.000
 28 Axel Springer Media 3546 0.000 0.000 0.000
 29 Baywa Retail 922 0.000 0.000 0.000
 30 Beiersdorf Cosmetics 12756 0.000 0.000 0.000
 31 Bilfinger Berger Construction 2202 0.000 0.000 0.000

                                  30
32 Celesio Pharmaceutical 4443 0.000 0.000 0.000
33 Commerzbank Bank 11531 0.000 0.000 0.000
34 D. Bank Bank 35617 0.000 0.000 0.000
35 D. Boerse Financial 11128 0.000 0.000 0.000
36 D. Euroshop Real Estate 1243 0.000 0.000 0.000
37 D. Post Transportation 22243 0.000 0.000 0.000
38 D. Telekom Telecommunication 53540 0.000 0.000 0.000
39 Deutz Machinery 576 0.000 0.000 0.000
40 Douglas Retail 1378 0.000 0.000 0.000
41 Elringklinger Auto Parts 1150 0.000 0.000 0.000
42 Fielmann Retail 2685 0.000 0.000 0.000
43 Fraport Construction 4111 0.000 0.000 0.000
44 Fresenius Healthcare Products 8185 0.000 0.000 0.000
45 FUCHS Petrolub Oil & Gas 1224 0.000 0.000 0.000
46 GEA Food and Energy 4142 0.000 0.000 0.000
47 Gerry Weber Apparel 769 0.000 0.000 0.000
48 Gildemeister Machine Tools 941 0.000 0.000 0.000
49 Hannover Reuck. Insurance 5438 0.000 0.000 0.000
50 Hugo Boss Apparel 1691 0.000 0.000 0.000
51 KUKA Machine Tools 926 0.000 0.000 0.000
52 Leoni Electrical 948 0.000 0.000 0.000
53 Linde Chemical 17012 0.000 0.000 0.000
54 Metro Food 12110 0.000 0.000 0.000
55 Munich Re Insurance 24015 0.000 0.000 0.000
56 Prosieben Media 3334 0.000 0.000 0.000
57 Puma Apparel 3431 0.000 0.000 0.000
58 Rational Home Furnishings 1948 0.000 0.000 0.000
59 Rheinmetall Machinery 1685 0.000 0.000 0.000
60 Rhoen-Klinikum Healthcare Services 1982 0.000 0.000 0.000
61 SAP Software 54521 0.000 0.000 0.000
62 SGL Carbon Chemical 1546 0.000 0.000 0.000
63 Stada Pharmaceutical 1722 0.000 0.000 0.000
64 TUI Travel 3604 0.000 0.000 0.000
65 Vossloh Electrical 926 0.000 0.000 0.000

                                 31
                        Table 3. Portfolio Returns

This table shows the annualized mean return of the various portfolios for each given
sample period. The dirty portfolio consists of those firms that received on average more
than a million annual free carbon allowances during the initial three phases of the ETS.
The medium portfolio consists of those firms that received on average more than zero but
less than a million annual free carbon allowances during the initial three phases of the
ETS. The clean portfolio consists of those firms that did not receive any free carbon
allowances during the initial three phases of the ETS. The DMC portfolio is a zero-
investment portfolio that implies taking a long position in a dirty portfolio and a short
position in a clean portfolio. All portfolios are equally weighted.

   Nov 03 to Mar 09 Nov 03 to Dec 12 Nov 03 to Jun 16 Apr 09 to Jun 16
                               Mean Annualized Return

                                         Dirty Portfolio
         0.142 0.095 0.046 -0.025

                                   Medium Portfolio
        -0.044 0.062 0.070 0.156

                                       Clean Portfolio
        -0.022 0.066 0.062 0.124

                                   DMC Portfolio
         0.164 0.029 -0.016 -0.149

                                  32
                     Table 4. The Carbon Premium

This table shows the annualized carbon premium, denoted as alpha, for the dirty, medium,
clean and DMC portfolio for each sample period. t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
Asterisks *, ** and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
respectively.

       November 2003 to March 2009 November 2003 to December 2012
   CAPM-𝛼 FF3- 𝛼 FF4- 𝛼 CAPM- 𝛼 FF3- 𝛼 FF4- 𝛼

                Dirty Portfolio Dirty Portfolio
    0.122** 0.123** 0.125** 0.012 0.009 0.004
     (2.44) (2.53) (2.46) (0.33) (0.25) (0.12)

              Medium Portfolio Medium Portfolio
    -0.062* -0.045 -0.010 -0.021 -0.026 -0.002
      (-1.70) (-1.35) (-0.32) (-0.72) (-0.92) (-0.08)

               Clean Portfolio Clean Portfolio
     -0.041 -0.011 0.036 -0.013 -0.009 0.015
     (-0.95) (-0.31) (1.18) (-0.40) (-0.33) (0.58)

              DMC Portfolio DMC Portfolio
   0.162*** 0.134*** 0.089 0.025 0.018 -0.011
     (3.19) (2.68) (1.86) (0.60) (0.46) (-0.28)

         November 2003 to June 2016 April 2009 to June 2016
                Dirty Portfolio Dirty Portfolio
     -0.033 -0.047 -0.038 -0.156*** -0.170*** -0.155***
      (-1.03) (-1.44) (-1.11) (-4.03) (-4.31) (-3.61)

              Medium Portfolio Medium Portfolio
    -0.008 -0.013 0.019 0.045 0.035 0.070**
      (-0.34) (-0.56) (0.80) (1.51) (1.15) (2.18)

               Clean Portfolio Clean Portfolio
    -0.012 -0.016 0.017 0.023 0.002 0.027
     (-0.47) (-0.73) (0.80) (0.83) (0.08) (0.96)

              DMC Portfolio DMC Portfolio
     -0.022 -0.031 -0.056 -0.179*** -0.172*** -0.182***
      (-0.59) (-0.87) (-1.49) (-3.96) (-3.73) (-3.62)

                                  33
                    Table 5. The Price of Carbon Risk

This table shows the price of carbon risk after having performed cross-sectional
regressions based on the Fama and Macbeth (1973) two-step procedure. The numbers
below show the percent monthly factor risk premiums for the different factors. DMC is
the dirty-minus-clean factor, RmRf is the market excess return factor, SMB is the small-
minus-big factor, HML is the high-minus-low factor and WML is the momentum factor.
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Asterisks *, ** and *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.

         November 2003 to March 2009 November 2003 to December 2012
  DMC 1.04*** 1.03*** 0.70*** 0.67** 0.77*** 0.77*** 0.70*** 0.69***
            (3.08) (3.17) (2.65) (2.50) (6.69) (6.29) (5.47) (5.27)

 RmRf 0.57 0.78*** 0.66** 0.47*** 0.54*** 0.49***
                      (1.37) (2.64) (2.07) (3.24) (3.56) (3.64)

  SMB 1.27*** 1.25*** 0.58*** 0.53***
                                 (3.91) (4.07) (3.90) (3.55)

  HML 1.67 2.21* 0.21 0.22
                                 (1.61) (1.99) (1.37) (1.43)

 WML 2.13 0.21
                                            (0.73) (0.92)
          November 2003 to June 2016 April 2009 to June 2016
  DMC 0.63** 0.36*** 0.32*** 0.25** -1.10* -0.67* -0.55* -0.36
             (2.49) (3.08) (2.94) (2.43) (-1.71) (-1.68) (-1.69) (-1.51)

  RmRf 1.30* 1.32** 0.88*** -1.24 -1.42 -0.51
                        (1.80) (2.40) (2.68) (-1.01) (-0.99) (-0.43)

  SMB 1.42** 1.36** -1.52 -1.38
                                    (2.10) (2.03) (-1.36) (-1.38)

  HML 2.03* 2.67* 2.25 0.97
                                 (1.82) (1.95) (0.79) (0.45)

 WML 8.04 -1.55
                                                (0.55) (-0.56)

                                  34
                    Figure 1. The Cash Flow Effect

This figure illustrates a supply and demand diagram to show the effect of carbon
regulation on the profits of a perfectly competitive industry.

                                  35
           Figure 2. Free Allocation of Carbon Allowances

This figure shows the amount of allocated free allowances (in millions) between the
inception of the program until 2018.

2 500

                          2 153
       2 096 2 072
                                                   2 017 2 054
                                  1 972 1 998
                           1 958
2 000

1 500

                                                             1 013
1 000                                                                   939
                                                                       879
                                                                              838
                                                                                    787
                                                                                                            745

  500

    0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

            Figure 3. Auctioned or Sold Carbon Allowances

This figure shows the amount of allowances auctioned or sold (in millions) between the
inception of the program until 2018.

 1200
                                                                                       1 108

1000                                                                                            951
                                                                                                                         916

  800
                                                                                                       715

                                                                         618 633

  600

  400

  200
                                                                     125
                                   79 92 93
                            53
        0 7 2
    0
       2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

                                  36
             Figure 4. Price of Carbon Emissions Futures

This figure shows the price development of Carbon Emissions Futures from 2008 until
2020. All numbers are in euros.

                                  37