What is the Optimal Allocation
Level to Real Estate in a Swedish
Mixed-Asset Portfolio Including
both Direct and Indirect Real
Estate?

OSCAR HOLGERSSON

JACOB TINGNELL

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
What is the Optimal Allocation Level to Real Estate in a Swedish Mixed-Asset Portfolio
Containing both Direct and Indirect Real Estate?

Abstract:

We use mean-variance analysis to examine the optimal allocation to real estate for institutional
investors investing in Swedish assets and whether direct real estate provides diversification
benefits to a mixed-asset portfolio. The study takes the perspective of institutional investors
interested in dividing the real estate asset class into the two asset categories direct real estate
and indirect real estate. We compute a hedonic house price index as a representation of the
direct real estate asset based on Swedish residential transactions in metropolitan areas. The
indirect index is the real estate sectoral index designed by NASDAQ OMX Stockholm. We
include ten different stock industry specializations when computing optimal portfolios. The
study finds that the average optimal allocation level to real estate of all ten portfolios is 25.56%.
The portfolio with highest Sharpe ratio is found when the investor invests in technology stocks,
at an optimal allocation to real estate of 2.92%. In all portfolios, except when the investor
specializes in technology, we find that direct real estate provides diversification benefits in the
long run. Diversification benefits are also found to be more significant during financial crises.

Keywords:

   Capital Asset Pricing Model, Direct Real Estate, Hedonic Model, Mean-Variance
   Optimization, Mixed-Asset Portfolio

Authors:

   Oscar Holgersson (24271)

   Jacob Tingnell (24273)

Tutors:

   Anastasia Girshina, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Oscar Holgersson and Jacob Tingnell, 2020

                                     2
1. Introduction

This paper investigates real estate and its role in a mixed-asset portfolio. The study takes the
perspective of a Swedish institutional investor investing in Swedish assets. It aims to answer
following questions: What is the optimal allocation level to real estate for a Swedish
institutional investor using Swedish assets, investing in a mixed-asset portfolio including the
following asset classes: stocks, bonds, cash, residential direct real estate, and indirect real
estate? The study also elaborates on 1) how to construct an index for Swedish direct real estate
price levels, 2) which types of common stocks that are optimal for utilizing the potential
diversification benefits of including real estate in a mixed-asset portfolio, and 3) whether
residential direct real estate provides diversification benefits to the mixed-asset portfolio in the
long run. The second elaboration is investigated based on two perspectives. The first
perspective is to define “best” as the stock that makes most use of the real estate asset by
allocating the most to it. The other perspective is to define “best” as the stock that, given the
optimal allocation level to each of the asset classes used in this project, results in the highest
Sharpe ratio.

A thorough literature review helps us to draw conclusions from related research that justifies
the outline of the project’s data inputs and choices, the outline of the empirical analysis, and to
provide for a nuanced discussion about the findings in the empirical work. The review also
presents pitfalls that are paramount for not missing out on important aspects of the empirical
work.

Research made in related studies have shown that real estate is good for reducing risk when one
includes it in portfolios with low-to moderate risk profiles (Hoesli, et al., 2004). The exact level
of real estate allocation and to which extent an investor should allocate to direct and indirect
real estate within the real estate category is however a heavily researched topic (Pagliari, 2017).
Overall and beyond recessions, Sa-Aadu et al. (2010) concluded that the mean allocation target
institutional investors had on real estate between the years 1972 to 2008 was 4%. They further
concluded that this was too low. The claim that the allocation target of 4% is too low has been
widely supported. Typical studies have suggested allocation to real estate at levels around 15-
20% (Hoesli & MacGregor, 2000). More recent studies where details about property
characteristics have been considered recommend an allocation target at 10-15% (Pagliari,
2017).

                                     3
In practicality, the real estate share is lower than suggested in above studies. Current allocation
estimates – although very high in comparison to older measures – are 9.8% in 2018 and 8.5%
in 2017 for the US (Kingsley Associates, 2018). These levels are still low compared to
suggested research. However, the allocation level to real estate has increased continuously since
2004 when the allocation target averaged 2-3% for an institutional investor – which could
indicate that the previous suggested allocation levels are soon to be reached (Chun, et al., 2004).

The evolving nature of area and the historical mismatch between research and practical
applications justify an extension of current research. Specifically, an extension where Swedish
real estate data is used can shed new light on optimal allocation levels of real estate in a mixed-
asset portfolio for an institutional investor.

The empirical analysis in this paper constitutes three parts. In the first part we construct a
hedonic house price index that can represent the direct real estate asset in the portfolio. The
index integrates transaction data on Swedish residential direct real estate from Mäklarstatistik.
We use residential, and not commercial real estate due to limited data availability. Thus, all
direct real estate referred to in the empirical analysis refers to Swedish residential real estate.
We note that residential real estate is not the best representation for an institutional investor.
However, the index including residential real estate should provide similar risk-return profiles
since explanatory variables to the price such as square-meter price and year of construction
should be similar for both property types.

As the rationale behind the hedonic index methodology is to assign marginal contributions to
characters on heterogenic goods, it is important that the transaction data compose properties
that are relatively homogenous in their pricing. To accomplish this, the study compares two
indices: An aggregate data index containing all the available data, and a metropolitan data
index. This comparison proves that the metropolitan index that accounts for location
specification provides a better representation than the aggregate data index. We deseasonalize
the index and compare it to Mäklarstatistik’s house price indices, an indirect real estate index
and national square meter prices for validity control.

In the second part of the empirical analysis we compute the expected return for all asset classes
that the optimal portfolio holds. We use capital asset pricing model which, according to
prevailing literature, offers powerful and intuitive predictions about how to measure risk and
the relation between expected return and risk across industries. The model is frequently used
by institutional investors.

                                     4
In the third part of the empirical analysis we calculate optimal weights for different portfolios.
We include ten different types of stock indices in the portfolio to test for the optimal stock to
combine with real estate to shed light on diversification benefits of direct real estate and to find
optimal levels of real estate allocation in different stock choices. The study employs the
theoretical portfolio optimization framework mean-variance analysis which is commonly
applied in practical settings according to the literature.

The average optimal allocation level across all ten computed portfolios containing different
types of stocks is found to be 25.56%. The two types of stocks providing the highest Sharpe
ratios for portfolios results in 2.92% and 16.19% for Technology stocks and Consumer Services
stocks, respectively. Where OMXSPI is used as an all-share index for the Swedish stock market
the investor should optimally allocate 2.14% to real estate – which is found to be the lowest
optimal allocation level among all ten portfolios.

2. Literature Review

2.1. Optimal Allocation Level to Direct Real Estate

Typical studies suggest allocation to real estate at levels around 15-20% (Hoesli & MacGregor,
2000).

Hoesli et. al (2003) compare suggested allocations with actual institutional allocations to real
estate in four countries: U.S., U.K., Sweden, and Switzerland. They used data for the period
1986-2001. The optimal weight that should be allocated to real estate is in the 15%-20% range
and are very robust across countries (Hoesli, et al., 2003). More late studies that consider
properties’ characteristics recommend an allocation target between 10% to 15% (Pagliari,
2017). In practical applications, the real estate share is lower. Overall and through times of
recessions, Sa-Aadu et al. (2010) concluded that the mean allocation target institutional
investors had on real estate between the years 1972 to 2008 was around 4%. Current allocation
estimates are 9.8% in 2018 and 8.5% in 2017 for the US (Kingsley Associates, 2018). In other
words, the share has increased continuously since 1972-2008. This might argue for that the
previous suggested allocation levels are soon to be reached. (Chun, et al., 2004)

The discrepancy between suggested optimal allocation levels to direct real estate among
researchers but also between researchers and practitioners can be explained by that factors such
as liquidity risk, return predictability, and transaction costs are accounted for differently in asset
pricing models (Cheng, et al., 2013). Several researchers – such as Rehring (2012), Hayes et

                                     5
al. (2015), Cheng et al. (2013), and Bond et al. (2007) – try to account for above problems with
direct real estate in different ways by analyzing the relative importance of factors’ implication
on direct real estate’s risk-and return profile compared to securitized asset classes, and
followingly adjust for the additional risk contribution of these factors. The possible methods to
account for above factors are diverse and one could also assume that the factors are priced into
the property. We realize that the latter claim makes most sense if the direct property prices
consist of commercial properties since these types of properties are investments in their nature,
as opposed to residential properties that are mostly used for living. However, given our limit in
data access, we assume in this project that above factors are priced in each property transaction.

2.2. Advantages and Disadvantages with Direct Real Estate

Sa-Aadu et al. (2010) conducted an analysis with focus on timeliness of returns in a mixed-
asset portfolio originating from different asset classes. They used data from the period 1972 to
2008 which comprised several deep recessions. Most notably the financial crisis that took place
in the beginning of 2007. The study concluded that of assets in a mixed-asset portfolio, the
highest returns during periods when consumption is either exceptionally low or volatile.
Consumption is low and volatile during recessions which suggests that it is advantageous to
increase the weight of direct real estate when forecasts indicate economic downturns.

Other studies contradict the conclusion by Sa-Aadu et al. (2010) by concluding that
diversification benefits of direct real estate may be reduced during periods of financial distress,
due to increases in co-movements between direct real estate and the stock market (Moss &
Baum, 2013).

In a study examining random stochastic simulation of historical returns data from 2003 to 2012
the authors Baum and Colley (2017) concluded that it is difficult and costly to replicate direct
property market returns for an investor constructing an efficient mixed-asset portfolio due to
difficulties of diversifying idiosyncratic risk in direct real estate. Thus, an effort to include direct
real estate into the portfolio demands highly skilled investors. In contrast, indirect real estate
can be diversified without significant skills. Conclusively, direct real estate investments deliver
better returns than indirect real estate in the short run if multi-manager strategies are performed
in the fund. Such advantages are however erased according to the authors due to that multi-
manager fees negatively impact net returns.

                                     6
An issue with direct real estate connected to management skills is how to account for factors
such as illiquidity risk and return distribution named in chapter 2.1. These factors make pricing
decisions regarding direct real estate difficult to make.

Apart from potential diversification benefits, direct real estate inclusion in a mixed-asset
portfolio provides long-term benefits to institutions by matching the real estate asset with long
term liabilities. Thus, direct real estate assets enable lucrative asset-liability management
frameworks (Hoesli & Lekander, 2008).

2.3. What Is the Relationship Between Direct Real Estate and Other Asset Classes?

Investigations have been made on to what degree indirect real estate is equivalent to investments
in direct real estate or investments in regular equity, respectively. Morawski et al. (2008)
performed a correlation analysis dividing long-term and short-term results by using quarterly
observations from the years 1978 to 2006 for the US market and monthly observations from
1983 to 2006 for the UK market. In the short-run, indirect real estate exhibited similar co-
movements to that of the common stock market – especially at the beginning of the data period.
By contrast, the long-run proved significantly higher correlation between direct real estate and
indirect real estate than in the short-run.

Ling and Naranjo (2015) examined public and private commercial real estate returns for both
direct real estate and indirect real estate in the U.S. at the aggregate level from 1994 to 2012.
They found that indirect real estate reacted quicker to private market returns given their higher
liquidity and price revelation as opposed to direct real estate. This suggests that direct real estate
has lower co-movements to the stock market than indirect real estate.

2.4. How Many Direct Real Estate Properties Should Be Included in the Optimal
    Portfolio?

To calculate volatility within a mixed-asset portfolio using a mean-variance approach, one
would compute returns from property samples, simulating portfolios with equal weights but in
various sizes. An average volatility is then calculated for each of the portfolios. Byrne and Lee
(2001) showed that volatility decreases as portfolios gain in size up to 20-40 properties. After
40 properties, an addition of property is negligible for diversification. Thus, individual risk is
relatively easy solved for in a mixed-asset portfolio. Many institutional investors rarely have
less than 30 assets within one real estate portfolio. Thus, 30-40 properties constitute a good
sample size with practical application (Reid, 2019). In this study, we assume that each

                                     7
institutional investor has more than 40 potential properties in their portfolio so that the
individual risk is erased.

2.5. Selecting Asset Pricing Model for Estimating Expected Return on Mixed-Asset
    Portfolio

Prevailing literature is filled with various asset pricing models for estimating expected return
for mixed-asset portfolios. William Sharpe and John Lintner developed the Capital asset pricing
model (CAPM) which was the first proposed model for asset pricing theory. CAPM is still
widely used when evaluating the performance of managed portfolios. (Fama & French, 2004)

According to Fama & French (2004) the empirical record of CAPM is poor. The empirical
problems could have to do with difficulties implementing valid tests of the model. CAPM
proposes that the risk of a stock should be measured relative to a comprehensive market
portfolio more than traded financial assets. The authors further states that CAPM has unrealistic
assumptions about a perfect market, a constant risk-free rate, and that investors are rational.
However, even though CAPM lacks empirical success, these “unrealistic assumptions” allow
the model to offer powerful and intuitive predictions about how to measure risk and the relation
between expected return and risk across industries and different asset classes. By contrast,
researchers have tried to address the practical deficiency of the static version of CAPM (that
depends upon the single risk factor market risk). This, by developing multifactor models that
incorporates other risk factors which may affect expected returns. Opfer & Bessler (2004) cited
in Ahmad, et al. (2012) state that multifactor models are limited to a specific number of
variables. Consequently, it is not possible to predict a defined number of variables or factors
that originates from the inherent variation of economic factors in different industries.
Consequently, this ought to hold true especially when estimating expected returns of portfolios
containing a wide array of asset classes subject to different industries – which argues for the
use of CAPM in some mixed-asset portfolios (Ahmad, et al., 2012).

After the early 1990s, anomalies such as book-to-market effect and small firm effect have
seemed to undermine CAPM’s ability to explain stock and portfolio returns. Fama and French
(2004) have shown that simple firm attributes like firm size and book-to-market value can
explain the returns better than Beta.

A study conducted by Vosilov & Bergström (2010) test the Fama & French three factor model,
CAPM and Carhart’s four factor model’s explanatory abilities of the momentum effect using
Swedish stock returns. They use return of all non-financial firms listed on Stockholm Stock

                                     8
Exchange between 1997 and 2010 with a sample of 366 companies. The results of their tests
indicated that the small firm effect, book-to-market effect, and the momentum effect are not
present on the Stockholm Stock Exchange. Furthermore, the CAPM emerges as the one model
that explains stock return cross-section better than the other models. Thus, Beta is still a proper
measure of risk. (Vosilov & Bergström, 2010)

Beta is a proper method to measure risk, but the use of CAPM still rests on the assumption that
beta-values remain constant over time. Recent studies suggest that the conditional CAPM might
hold, period-by-period, and that time-variation in risk and expected returns can explain why
unconditional CAPM fails. By contrast, Lewellen and Nagel (2006) argue that variation in betas
and the equity premium would have to be implausibly large to explain important asset pricing
anomalies like momentum and the value premium. Overall, the evidence supports their
analytical results. Betas vary over time but not enough to explain observed asset-pricing
anomalies. Hence, we use the static (unconditional) version of CAPM to estimate expected
return in this project.

2.6. What Method to Use for Building Mixed-Asset Portfolio?

The mean-variance model is by far the most well-known and most developed model of portfolio
selection (Håkansson, 2009). It has been applied in many settings. For example, Olaleye (2011)
conducted a mean-variance analysis to measure the performance of asset classes in the South
African investment market and assess the diversification benefits from adding indirect real
estate into domestic mixed-asset portfolios.

Several researchers have used the mean-variance approach in direct real estate settings.
Kallberg et. al. (1996) explore the role of direct real estate investment in a portfolio context
using the mean-variance approach. Furthermore, Webb et al. (1988) also use the mean-variance
analysis to measure diversification gains from including real estate in mixed-asset portfolios.
Moreover, Hoesli et. al (2003) perform mean-variance optimizations to calculate suggested
allocation to real estate in a mixed-asset portfolio using annual data for stocks, bonds, direct
real estate, indirect real estate and cash for the U.S., U.K., Sweden, and Switzerland for the
period 1986-2001 – indicating that mean-variance approaches are also used for Swedish assets.

MacLean et al. (2011) compare mean-variance analysis versus expected utility models and
conclude that the mean-variance approach offers superior intuitive explanation for
diversification and a relatively simple computational procedure. (Hoesli, et al., 2003)

                                     9
2.7. How to Construct Price Index for Direct Real Estate?

According to Bradford et al. (1991), hedonic and repeat-sales methodologies are commonly
used to construct constant-quality housing price indices. Repeat-Sales Index Methodology was
the first method to be recognized to construct house price indices based on transactions. It is
however less evolved as it is based on sales pairs and can therefore not take into account single
property sales (Nagaraja, et al., 2010). Hedonic index methodology on the other hand, is the
most widely used index for house prices according to Bradford et al. (1991).

Repeat-sales models measure the price of the same house at several points in time. Hedonic
models relate the selling prices of residential real estate to measures of their physical and
locational characteristics and to some representation of time (Quigley, 1995).

Bradford et al. (1991) compares the weighted repeat-sales model and hedonic model and
conclude that whilst the hedonic model suffers from potential specification bias and
inefficiency, the repeat-sales model presents potentially more serious bias and inefficiency
problems. The serious biases in the repeat-sales model is mainly the inability to account for an
increasing age of the structure over the intervening period and that the model does not allow
for changes in attribute prices over time. Furthermore, the model cannot consider single
property sales that are not repeated. As a result, the model tends to exclude observations from
a local housing market database, as opposed to the hedonic model. The exclusion of
observations may result in biased measurements of price appreciation because “sales pairs
properties” – or frequently transacting properties – are not representative of a larger population.

The potential specification bias and inefficiency problems that may arise with hedonic
modelling relates to the inclusion and exclusion of relevant explanatory variables in the hedonic
equation. If certain characteristics that works as explanatory variables are expected to affect the
price of a property but are excluded from the equation, these characteristics will then have an
impact on the estimated parameters of the included characteristics in the equation. This results
in that the estimated parameters suffer from omitted variables bias. The bias carries over to the
predicted prices computed from the regression coefficients which can result in an index
specification bias. Consequently, one can draw the conclusion that in practice, some omitted
variables bias will always be present when estimating a hedonic model for housing. It is
however difficult to predict the magnitude of the bias and its impact on the price index, as it
depends on correlation between the omitted and included variables. (de Haan & Diewert, 2013)

                                     10
With regard to the Swedish housing market, Hansson and Hallin (2018) evaluate the
performance (based on accuracy and revision) of five widely accepted index techniques (three
repeat-sales indices and two hedonic indices) and conclude that the hedonic indices outperform
the repeat-sales indices. Furthermore, the authors conclude that the hedonic model that contains
more explanatory variables (eleven explanatory variables) than the other hedonic model (seven
explanatory variables) performs slightly better. Hoesli et. al. (2003) also use a hedonic index as
a representation for direct real estate. This, when computing the optimal allocation to real estate
in a mixed-asset portfolio in Switzerland. As in this project, Hoesli et. al. takes the perspective
of an institutional investor.

According to Silverstein (2014) hedonic methodology is viewed favorably among many
economists.

The main reason for not choosing the hedonic methodology is the difficulty to obtain enough
data to accurately estimate the effects of the attributes. In this project however, a large dataset
of residential real estate transactions is available including several important quality
characteristics that we present below in the theory section. Given this access, and the
recommendation in prevailing research, a hedonic model will be used in this project.

The preferred source of data is systematically collected information on actual sales prices of
individual houses along with relevant characteristics of each house (Freeman, et al., 2014).
Relevant independent variables for estimating the dependent price variable are the residential
real estate’ physical and locational characteristics. Some representation of time is also
considered relevant. (Quigley, 1995)

Wallace and Meese (1997) claim that residential properties are usually treated as heterogeneous
goods which can be defined by their set of features such as number of rooms, location, living
area among countless other attributes which can serve as a benchmark for suggested
independent variables. However, detailed information on some characteristics can be hard to
obtain. For example, location and neighborhood according to Case, Pollakowski and Wachter
(cited in de Haan & Diewert (2013)). Nevertheless, hedonic theory does not provide any
arguments in favor of a specific set of independent environmental, site specific structural or
neighborhood variables nor a specific hedonic price functional form according to Andersson
(2000) and Freeman et. al (2014). This lack of theoretical guidance makes the empirical
selection of variables less straightforward (Yoo, et al., 2012). Hence, our empirical study relies
on the characteristics we were able to obtain from Mäklarstatistik, and the previous study

                                     11
performed by Hansson and Hallin (2018) that performed robustness checks on different
methods for employing the hedonic model and other methodologies. We specify and define
these variables in the theory section below.

When it comes to both dependent and independent variables, log variables are good when the
spread of the values are larger than the marginal contribution to the property price that should
be assigned to the variable. With regard to Sweden, Song and Wilhelmsson (2010) show that
log-transformed variables work best for describing the Swedish housing market. Thus, log
variables are used instead of linear variables in this project.

3. Theory

3.1. Hedonic Model for Direct Real Estate

      3.1.1. Underlying Assumptions

The hedonic model is a regression method that can be used to construct index on heterogeneous
goods that can be described by their characteristics. A good is assumed to be a bundle of
performance characteristics, and the marginal contribution of each character can be assigned to
the price. One performanse characteristic, is the point in time of the sold good. When testing
for the marginal contribution of each point in time on a time-series, an index can be constructed
of these marginal contributions. By including several other attributes contributing to the price
a quality-adjusted price index can be obtained. (de Haan & Diewert, 2013)

The hedonic approach assumes that the price of a property is a sum of marginal contributions
of characteristics such as number of rooms, living area and location. The hedonic model
regression uses the price as a dependent variable, and the quality characteristics as independent
variables. This approach allows the index to accurately measure the changes in the value of a
home over time based on a single sale through inference using the typical value associated with
the changes in house attributes over time. Hedonic model regressions can theoretically contain
unlimited number of explanatory variables, but the general conclusion is that the marginal
benefit of adding one extra variable is diminishing. (de Haan & Diewert, 2013)

Song and Wilhelmsson (2010) show that log-transformed variables, as opposed to linear
variables, work best for describing the Swedish housing market.

The hedonic index used in this project begins with this basic equation:

                                     12
                                                  𝑃𝑖𝑡 = 𝐵𝑡𝑄𝑖𝑡𝑈𝑖𝑡

The dependent variable 𝑃𝑖𝑡 is the observed selling price of the specific property with identity 𝑖,
at a time 𝑡 that constitutes a numeric month between the beginning of 2007 and end 2017 (𝑡 =
0,1,2. . .132). The observed selling price 𝑃𝑖𝑡 is a product of the market price level 𝐵𝑡 (our
hedonic index which in the regression works as an independent variables), its quality
characteristics of the property 𝑄𝑖𝑡 (independent variables), as well as an error term 𝑈𝑖𝑡.

Take logs on both sides:

                                       𝑝𝑖𝑡 = 𝑏𝑡 + 𝑞𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡

Above equation tells us to that we must control for the quality characteristics 𝑞𝑖𝑡 to estimate
our index 𝑏𝑡. A perfect measurement of all characteristics of property is close to impossible,
and 𝑞𝑖𝑡 must be approximated:

                                                               𝐾
                                𝑞𝑖𝑡 = ∑ 𝛽𝑘𝑋𝑖𝑡𝑘 + 𝑣𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡
                                         𝑘=1

Where the variables Xitk constitute a set of dwelling characteristics, and 𝑣it is an error term.
The coefficients 𝛽𝑘 of each each characteristic 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝑘 are estimates of the marginal value of each
respective characteristic. Substitute this into the previous equation and get:

                                                                   𝐾
                             𝑝𝑖𝑡 = 𝑏𝑡 + ∑ 𝛽𝑘𝑋𝑖𝑡𝑘 + 𝑣𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡
                                            𝑘=1

                                                                                      2
Assuming that the error terms are normally distributed 𝑣𝑖𝑡~ 𝑖𝑖𝑑 𝑁(0, 𝜎 𝑣, 𝑦),

                2
𝑢𝑖𝑡 ~ 𝑖𝑖𝑑 𝑁(0, 𝜎 𝑣), 𝑦 is the year of 𝑡, and that both 𝑣𝑖𝑡 and 𝑢𝑖𝑡 are independent.

At this point, we can estimate our price coefficients 𝑏𝑡 as a time-fixed effect by running OLS
regressions. All quality characterisitcs will be seen as fixed in this model. The fixed effect
allows for that an index can be computed by taking the exponent of each fixed effect 𝑏̂ 𝑡 in the

time-series.

                                           𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡 = exp (𝑏̂ 𝑡)

The quality characteristics that are included are important as they guide marginal contribution
of each fixed effect of 𝑏̂ 𝑡 and since they are seen as fixed over time.

                                     13
      3.1.2. Quality Characteristics

This project uses a model with 14 explanatory variables, 𝑋𝑖𝑡𝑘. While it might seem excessive
to use 14 variables, the reader should know that the study borrows the variables from a previous
study in which a detailed review of the application of a similar hedonic model was picked as
the best choice for the Swedish market (Hansson & Hallin, 2018). The independent variables
for quality characteristics are: the log of living area; the log of number of rooms; a dummy
indicating if the particular dwelling is a new construction or not; a housing category
distinguishing apartments from other property types; a metropolitan dummy distinguishing
between properties located in the municipalities of Stockholm, Göteborg and Malmö from rural
properties; the five building year categories pre WW2, post-war period, the “Million
Programme” era, a period with high construction subsidies, and construction after the year 1990
when this system was abolished; three housing tenure variables that distinguish legislative
categories of the dwelling, and the log of time-to sale variable defined as the time between
advertisement and transaction.

Since the hedonic model builds on the assumption that quality characteristics are constant over
time and that their marginal contribution is equal across properties, it is important that the goods
in the model are homogenous. It has been shown that hedonic indices in Sweden (Wilhelmsson,
2009) and in France (Gouriéroux & Laferrére, 2009) are dependent on location and preferably
constructed in sub-groups on location. Furthermore, it is reasonable to assume that an
institutional investor, with limited scope of attention and management possibilities, are more
prone to hold assets in targeted areas such as large cities where the prevalence of investment
opportunities are more dense. Thus, the hedonic model that will be used in this research for
portfolio optimization is limited to metropolitan properties. However, an index on aggregate
data, meaning also including rural properties, will also be constructed for comparison purpose.

      3.1.3. Deseasonalization

A deseasonalized index is an index that has its seasonal effects removed from it. This project
will use the hedonic index to determine optimal allocation for real estate – which usually
requires adjustment for seasonal effects according to Wooldridge (2006) and Wilhelmsson
(2009).

One can perform seasonal adjustments in several different ways (Wilhelmsson, 2009). One
method used in practical applications is to use a multiplicative model that smooths the price
index series on a seasonal basis.

                                     14
The multiplicative model, can be written as this:

                                                     𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝑆𝑡𝐼𝑡

The factor 𝑆𝑡 is a seasonal effect adjusted for and 𝐼𝑡 is the remaining noise to be plotted as a
seasonally adjusted index.

3.2. Estimating Expected Returns on Financial Assets Using Asset-Pricing Model

We use CAPM model to compute the expected return of each asset class in the mixed-asset
portfolio. The assets for which we compute expected returns are the following: direct real estate
from the hedonic index regression; indirect real estate that is defined as the real estate sectoral
index designed by NASDAQ OMX Stockholm to reflect the real estate industry (OMX
Stockholm Real Estate PI); nine industry-specific stock indices that are designed to track the
constituents on NASDAQ OMX Stockholm in each selected industry; bonds defined as the 10-
year bonds issued by the Swedish government (statsobligationer); and cash that is defined as
the 3-month interest bearing papers issued by the Swedish government (statsskuldväxlar).

The CAPM builds on the model of portfolio choice that sprung from Harry Markowitz’s (1952)
modern portfolio theory. Investors are assumed to be risk averse and to only care about the
mean and variance of their investment returns – thus they will maximize return for any given
level of volatility (and hence the model is often called a “mean-variance model”). An investor’s
sentiment to increase returns will be reflected in the amount of risk-free debt included in the
portfolio. Furthermore, individual risks must be possible to remove by diversification so that
the investor is only exposed to systematic risk. With this logic, each security must be priced
(based on returns) in relation to its risk class. I.e. there is a reward-to-risk ratio for each
individual security that equals the difference between the expected return of the overall market
and the risk-free interest rate (𝑟𝑓). Thus, this relationship exists:

                                      𝐸(𝑅𝑖) − 𝑟𝑓
                                            = 𝐸(𝑅𝑚) − 𝑟𝑓
                                                                        𝛽𝑖

Where 𝐸(𝑅𝑖) is the expected return of an asset to be included in the portfolio, 𝑟𝑓 is the risk-free
rate, 𝐵𝑖 is the beta value of the asset in relation to the market and 𝐸(𝑅𝑚) is the expected return
of the market.

By rearranging above equation, we obtain the capital asset pricing model:

                                  𝑅𝑖 = 𝑟𝑓 + 𝛽𝑖(𝑅𝑚 − 𝑅𝑓)

                                     15
The risk-free rate can be calculated by subtracting inflation from the yield from 10-year
government bonds that matches the investment horizon. However, the government yields today
are historically low which makes the method difficult. Since this project is about finding
optimal portfolio allocation in an institutional investor’s perspective in Sweden, it is relevant to
use risk-free rates that are currently used by this group of practitioners. A study performed
annually by PWC, concluded that a normalized risk-free rate is usually calculated by
considering historical yields on 10-year government bonds (statsobligationer). Thus, we
calculate the risk-free rate in this project by an arithmetic average of yields for the 11-year
period in this study. (Pricewaterhousecoopers, 2019)

There are three different concepts related to determining the market risk premium. Required
market risk premium, historical market risk premium, and expected market risk premium. For
required market risk premium and for expected market risk premium, the investor needs to take
the cost related to acquire the investment into consideration. The CAPM assumes that the
required market risk premium is equal to the expected market risk premium. For these two
concepts, the market risk premium is different for different investors. Because this study aims
to examine the general market risk premium that can be applied to any institutional investor, it
is more appropriate to use the historical market risk premium concept. We calculate the
expected market return with the arithmetic average of historical return during the 11-year period
in this study. Our broad market index is set as OMXSPI as it is an all-share index and should
be the best reflection of the Swedish market.

The beta 𝛽𝑖 is a measure of a security’s relative sensitivity to the broad market index. Beta of
each security 𝑖 is in its simplest form defined as:

                                                         𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝑟𝑖, 𝑟𝑚)
                                    𝛽𝑖 =
                                                           𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑟𝑖)

Where 𝑟𝑖 represents the return of the security in each point in time and 𝑟𝑚 represents the return
of the market in each corresponding point in time.

3.3. Mean-Variance Analysis for Constructing Mixed-Asset Portfolio

The study will apply the mean-variance analysis as approach for analysing and optimally
constructing the mixed-asset portfolio. Mean-variance analysis relates to modern portfolio
theory. Mean-variance analysis makes assumptions about that investors make rational decisions

                                     16
about investments given complete information access. Mean-variance analysis is conducted by
optimizing the relationship between risk and expected return. (Markowitz, 1952)

The portfolio used in the mean-variance analysis in this project includes the five asset classes
stocks, direct real estate, indirect real estate, bonds, and cash.

In the study’s applied mean-variance analysis, the investor chooses fraction weights
𝑊1, 𝑊2, … 𝑊5 invested in each asset class in the portfolio. These weights are subjected to the
following constraints:

                                          5
                              ∑ 𝑊𝑖 = 1
                                                 𝑖=1
                                𝑊𝑖 > 0, 𝑖 = 1, 2, … 5

We suppose that the return on individual assets, defined as 𝑟1, 𝑟2, … 𝑟5, are jointly distributed
random variables, and that the return of our portfolio is:

                                              5
                                     𝑅𝑝 = ∑ 𝑊𝑖𝑟𝑖
                                                     𝑖=1
From CAPM expected returns on assets have been defined as 𝑅𝑖. Thus, the expected return on
the portfolio is given by:

                                                5
                                   𝐸(𝑅𝑃) = ∑ 𝑊𝑖𝑅𝑖
                                                       𝑖=1

                        2
The variance of return 𝜎𝑝 on the portfolio is:

                                       5     5
                                 2
                               𝜎𝑝 = ∑   ∑ 𝑊𝑖𝑊𝑗𝜎𝑖 𝜎𝑗𝜌𝑖𝑗
                                            𝑖=1    𝑗=1

Where 𝜎 is the sample standard deviation of the monthly returns on the assets, and 𝜌𝑖𝑗 is the
correlation coefficent between the returns on assets 𝑖 and 𝑗. The volatility of the portfolio 𝜎𝑝 is

                                                    2
easily obtained by the square-root of the expression 𝜎𝑝 .

Since the investor can choose degree of risk according to the individual risk sentiment by
choosing between risky investments and the risk-free investment, one can regard investors as
homogeneous in determination of the optimal underlying portfolio. Since the risk can be
adjusted according to preference, the rationale is that the optimal portfolio is the one with the

                                     17
highest possible expected excess return given each unit of volatility. This measurement is called
the Sharpe Ratio, and is defined as (Sharpe, 1966):

                                                  𝐸(𝑅𝑝) − 𝑅𝑓
                             𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑝𝑒 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =
                                                                                 𝜎𝑝

The highest Sharpe Ratio obtained is the optimal portfolio according to Modern Portfolio
Theory.

4. Data

4.1. Direct Real Estate

The hedonic model comprises raw data that we gathered from Mäklarstatistik for the years 2007
beginning to 2017 end constituting approximately 90% of Swedish residential direct real estate
transactions (Svensk Mäklarstatistik AB, 2019). The study includes Residential real estate data,
and not Commercial real estate data due to the limit in data availability and access provided
from Mäklarstatistik. Exclusion of commercial properties is further justified by the fact that the
study uses Hedonic modelling. The intuition of Hedonic modelling is to explain market prices
by assigning marginal contribution of categories such as living area, construction time era, and
location. The nature of such factors on private properties are more homogeneous than for
commercial properties since commercial properties have factors that varies heavily dependent
on the nature of the business application of the individual property. Furthermore, commercial
properties have different factors overall that guides the valuation of the property compared to
residential real estates. E.g. close distance to a high-way and certain equipment installed on the
property could increase the value of some commercial properties – factors that would not likely
increase the value of a property used for residential real estate. This ambiguity would make the
Hedonic modelling less coherent with commercial property included in the dataset.

The dependent variable used in hedonic regressions is the logarithmic transaction price (SEK).
Independent variables can be either quality characteristics or time series variables. Quality
characteristics are either numeric variables or binary dummy variables. Time series variables
are all dummy variables. Table 1 below explains all independent quality characteristic variables
that the study uses to construct the hedonic regressions.

                                     18
 Table 1: Quality characteristics for hedonic regression on residential direct real estate in
 Sweden
 Variable name Variable type Explanation
                                                   Log of the living area measured in square
 log_living_area numeric
                                                     meters

 log_number_of_rooms numeric Log of number of rooms in the property

                                                          Returns 1 if the year of construction is before
 built_before_1900 dummy
                                             1900
                                                          Returns 1 if the year of construction is in the
 built_years_19001939 dummy              pre-war era (somewhere between the years
                                                  1900 and 1939)
                                                          Returns 1 if the year of construction is in the
 built_years_19401959 dummy              post-war period (somewhere between the
                                                    years 1940 and 1959)
                                                          Returns 1 if the year of construction is in the
 built_years_19601975 dummy             "Million Programme" era (somewhere
                                                    between the years 1940 and 1959)
                                                          Returns 1 if the year of construction is in the
 built_years_19761990 dummy             "Subsidy era" (somewhere between the years
                                                  1976 and 1990)
                                                          Returns 1 if the year of construction is in the
 built_after_1990 dummy              time after the Subsidy was abolished (after
                                                  year 1990)
                                                  Returns 1 if the type of housing is any
 type_of_housing2 dummy             dwelling type that is not an apartment such as
                                                      houses, apartment blocks and terraced houses
                                                        Returns 1 if the dwelling is placed in one of
                                                     the metropolitan areas, defined as the
 metropolitan dummy
                                                      municipalities of either Stockholm, Malmö or
                                               Gothenburg
                                                          Returns 1 if the property is sold for the first
 new_production dummy
                                                  time

                                                          Returns 1 if the property is in the legislative
 housing_categoryB dummy
                                                   category "bostadsrätt"

                                                          Returns 1 if the property is in the legislative
 housing_categoryV dummy
                                                    category "villa"

                                                 Log of the number of days between
 time_between_sales numeric
                                                       advertisement and contract date
We exclude observations that lacked information about any of the above listed parameters. We
also dropped one duplicate transaction that probably comprise an error in the raw data.
Furthermore, the data was filtered for outliers and other general groups of data that have been
regarded as erroneous or inconsistent with the nature of a dwelling transaction. More thorough
explanations of this can be seen in Table 2 below.

                                     19
 Table 2: Raw data cleaning variables and explanations for hedonic regression on residential
 direct real estate in Sweden
 Variable name Explanation of data cleaning
                                 The study includes only transaction prices above 50,000 SEK
 contract_price                      since transactions at or below that value are likely not to represent
                                     true market prices

                                 Housing types that the study excludes: Övrig bostad, Övrig
                                 hyreslokal, Avstyckad gård, Gård, Industrifastighet, Tomt. These
                                    categories are excluded due to that the nature of these assets are
 type_of_housing2
                                    different from the nature of a house or an apartment so that an
                                 inclusion of either would work against modelling a coherent
                                   marginal contribution of each parameter

                                    Properties that have a contract date, transaction date, that is
 time_between_sales
                                    before the date of advertisement are dropped

After the cleaning process a total of 1,010,636 observations remained in the aggregate dataset.
The metropolitan index that we obtained after dropping observations that are not metropolitan,
consists of a total of 266,065 observations.

4.2. Indirect Real Estate

Indirect real estate index is the real estate sectoral index designed by NASDAQ OMX
Stockholm to reflect the real estate industry (OMX Stockholm Real Estate PI). We obtained
Daily last-close price (SEK) data from NASDAQs website.

4.3. Stocks

The study obtained the nine industry specific indices (more than the real estate sectoral index)
that are designed to track the industry specific constituents on NASDAQ OMX Stockholm from
NASDAQs website as daily last-close price data (SEK). The nine indices are: OMXS Basic
Materials; OMXS Consumer Goods; OMXS Consumer Services; OMXS Financials; OMXS
Industrials; OMXS Oil & Gas; OMXS Technology; OMXS Telecommunications; and OMXS
Utilities. Furthermore, we collect last-close price data (SEK) for the all-share OMXSPI index
to represent the Swedish market.

4.4. Bonds and Cash

The study obtained data for bonds, defined as the 10-year bond issued by the Swedish
government (stadsobligationer), from SCB in a yearly yield format for each month. The study

                                     20
also obtained data for cash, defined as the 3-month interest bearing papers issued by the
Swedish government (statsskuldväxlar) from SCB in a yearly yield format for each month.

5. Empirical Analysis

5.1. Direct Real Estate Index Modelling

We perform hedonic regression on residential real estate transactions in Sweden for the period
between 2007 beginning and 2017 end to construct the direct real estate index. We use OLS
regression where the dependent variable logarithmic price is regressed on the independent
variables constituting all quality characteristics and the time-fixed effect (a total of 146
independent variables). We perform OLS regression for both aggregate data and metropolitan
data. The metropolitan data represents transactions within the city locations Malmö, Stockholm,
and Gothenburg municipalities. The aggregate represents all transactions in our dataset. The
first timepoint, January 2007, will take on value 0 to constitute the base of the index. We
summarize the output from the hedonic regressions in Table 3.

 Table 3: Output from logarithmic hedonic regression on residential direct real estate
 transactions in Sweden between 2007 and 2017 end
                                  Adjusted R-squared Observations

 Aggregate data 0.4097 1,010,636

 Metropolitan 0.5172 266,065

The metropolitan regression results in a higher R-squared value compared to the aggregate,
indicating that the quality characteristics and the time-fixed effect explain the price better with
metropolitan data compared to aggregate data. This is in line with our hypothesis, and de Haan
& Diewert (2013), that transactions from metropolitan residential properties are better to use
than transactions from residential properties in rural areas. However, the sample size is close to
five times larger for the aggregate data. The difference in sample size should not impose any
problems since the number of 266,065 in the metropolitan data set should be large enough for
statistical significance.

The exponents of the coefficients for the time-fixed effect (the marginal contribution for the
time-point to the price level) that results from the hedonic regression create an index
representing the price development in percentage points for each month throughout the whole

                                     21
period, with the base date January 2007. See Figure 1 that exhibits the two indices presented in
Table 3.

Figure 1: Unadjusted direct real estate indices from hedonic regressions on residential direct
real estate in Sweden between 2007 beginning and 2017 end

220% Direct RE hedonic index - metropolitan data

200%                Direct RE hedonic index - aggregate data

180%

160%

140%

120%

100%

 80%

Both indices are under influence of seasonal effects. Looking at the vertical gridlines, the index
appreciates at the beginning of most years, especially around spring, to depreciate during the
summer and later appreciate throughout the fall. Figure 1 makes it evident that price levels for
both indices appreciate over the period 2007 beginning to 2017 end. Also, the metropolitan
index shows a more aggressive positive price development than the aggregate index. This is
true also in the 95% confidence interval (Figure 4A in Appendix).

We adjust for the seasonal effects apparent in Figure 1 by applying the multiplicative equation
for deseasonalization. We use centred moving average (CMA) of each month, with six lagging
variables and six leading variables. Thereafter, we calculate the average index-to-CMA-ratio
for each month to receive an unadjusted seasonality factor for each month. We adjust the
unadjusted factors to correspond to the full year of 12 months by multiplying the unadjusted
factors with the division of the number 12 with the sum of the seasonality factor for each month
in a year. Consequently, we rebase the index to 100% at the time January 2007. For comparison
purposes Figure 2 presents the three indices metropolitan index, the aggregate index, and a
square meter price index (from Mäklarstatistik raw data on monthly averages).

                                     22
Figure 2: Deseasonalized direct real estate indices from hedonic regressions on residential direct
real estate and deseasonalized square meter prices in Sweden between 2007 beginning

220% Direct RE hedonic index - metropolitan data
                          Direct RE hedonic index - aggregate data
200%
                          Square meter prices

180%

160%

140%

120%

100%

 80%

In Figure 2, one can see that the seasonality has been erased. As in the non-deseasonalized
Figure 1, one sees that the price development has been higher in the metropolitan locations than
in the rest of the country. Square meter prices take a similar value at the end of the period to the
metropolitan index which adds to the legitimacy of using the metropolitan index, rather than
the aggregate index, as the square meter index is used by Mäklarstatistik for their presentations
of historical residential price development. Looking at Figure 2, it is easier to note a decline
during the year 2008 which one can expect from the financial crisis, compared to the not yet
deseasonalized Figure 1. It appears as if all three indices in Figure 2 are correlated to some
extent without any obvious leading or lagging indices.

One way to check whether the deseasonalized indices provides a better representation of the
financial profile of direct real estate compared to the not deseasonalized indices is to check how
the indices compare to a securitized index. It is thus of interest to plot the rebased indirect index
to be used in the portfolio optimization choice together with the deseasonalized hedonic indices.
See Figure 3 below.

                                     23
Figure 3: Deseasonalized direct real estate indices from hedonic regressions on residential direct
real estate and indirect real real estate in Sweden between 2007 beginning and 2017 end

220% Direct RE hedonic index - metropolitan data

200%               Direct RE hedonic index - aggregate data
180%              Indirect RE (OMXS PI RE)

160%

140%

120%

100%

 80%

 60%

 40%

Looking at Figure 3, it is evident that the price drops around the financial crisis 2008 negatively
impacted price levels of indirect real estate to a larger degree than direct real estate. That it is
good to have higher weight in direct real estate has also been suggested by Sa-Aadu et al.
(2010). The price level of indirect real estate reached almost same price level as that of
metropolitan direct real estate in the end of the period in December 2017 despite the large drop
during the financial crisis.

Performing a linear regression with direct real estate as the dependent variable and indirect as
the independent variable suggests there are no large co-movements between the indices, as
indicated by Table 4 below.

 Table 4: Relationship between residential direct real estate and indirect real estate returns in
 Sweden between the years 2007 beginning and 2017 end
                                  Coefficients R square Observations P-value

 Direct RE / Indirect RE 0.0878 0.0492 130 0.0122

5.2. Expected Return Computations

We compute expected returns on each asset class by using the capital asset pricing model. We
use the model on monthly historical returns during the time 2007 beginning to 2017 end for
each asset class.

                                     24
For direct real estate we use the deseasonalized metropolitan index. For all sectoral stock
indices, including the market index and indirect real estate index, we have converted daily last-
close price levels into monthly price levels by calculating arithmetic averages of each month.
For bonds and cash, we use publicly available yield levels for each month. We have not
accounted for inflation since all price data originates from the same currency.

The method for computing risk-free rate is a topic for dispute since many types of methods are
used in practical applications. In this project, the risk-free rate to use for calculating expected
returns of securities using CAPM is derived from a historical average of annual 10-year bond
(statsobligationer) yields for the period between 2007 beginning to 2017 end. This resulted in
a risk-free rate of 2.18%. One thing to consider is that the prevailing bond yields at the time
2017 are low compared to previous historical yields. Thus, use of a longer time-horizon would
overstate, and use of current bond yields would understate, the risk-free rate. Furthermore, the
rate of 2.18% is relatively close to the normalization long-term risk-free rate of 2.30% published
in a report by PWC that is a representation of the normalized mean risk-free rate used by
institutional fund managers in Sweden. We have thus concluded that 2.18% is a reasonable risk-
free rate.

We have estimated the expected annual return of the market using the arithmetic average return
of the all-share market index OMXSPI for the period 2007 beginning to 2017 end.

We have obtained the beta values for each security based on monthly returns, using OMXSPI
as the market index.

Finally, we have computed the expected annual return for each asset with the use of CAPM
formula incorporating above risk-free rate, expected annual market return and beta values for
each security. We present the outcome in Table 5 below.

                                     25
 Table 5: Capital asset pricing model computations of beta values, expected return and volatility
 on individual securities
                                                      Expected Annual       Standard
                                      Beta Values
                                                   Return          Deviation

 OMXS Basic Materials 1.31 11.90% 15.33%
 OMXS Consumer Goods 1.05 10.03% 11.74%
 OMXS Consumer Services 0.66 7.10% 8.63%
 OMXS Financials 1.16 10.84% 12.70%
 OMXS Industrials 1.33 12.08% 14.75%
 OMXS Oil & Gas 0.77 7.94% 12.70%
 OMXS Technology 0.61 6.75% 9.68%
 OMXS Telecommunications 0.55 6.29% 8.12%
 OMXS Utilities 0.45 5.50% 14.38%
 OMXSPI (The market) 1.00 9.62% 10.55%
 Direct RE metropolitan 0.03 2.39% 2.21%
 Indirect RE (OMXS PI RE) 0.04 2.45% 5.57%
 Bonds 0.00 2.18% 1.27%
 Cash 0.00 2.16% 1.50%

Basic materials, industrials and financials are the sectoral indices that have beta values higher
than 1 – meaning that they have relatively large co-movements with the market. This implies a
higher expected return for those securities. Consumer services, oil and gas, technology,
telecommunications, and utilities have betas lower than one – implying less movements along
the all-share market. The direct real estate index, showing a beta of 0.03, indicates that direct
real estate shows low co-movement along the stock market. The same holds true for indirect
real estate.

As one can be seen in Table 5, cash provides lower return than the risk-free rate from bonds of
2.18% which implies that the portfolio weight of cash will be 0.00% in all optimal portfolios.

5.3. Portfolio Optimization

In total, we solve for optimal weights for ten different portfolios. In each of the ten portfolios
the following asset classes are similar: direct real estate, indirect real estate, bonds, and cash.
What separates the portfolios from each other is the type of stock that are included. We do not
adjust any security return for inflation since all securities are Swedish asset classes denominated
in the same currency.

                                     26
We have automated an excel sheet that allows for switching stocks and solving for the optimal
solution for each portfolio containing different types of stocks. We do this by first picking the
stock to include, then maximize the Sharpe ratio by changing security weights with the
constraints outlined in chapter 3.2 by using a GRG nonlinear program in excel (solver plug-in).

The solver plug-in in excel is by default not perfectly accurate as its built-in constraint variables
have low precision. However, the solver plug-in allows for changing this precision. In this
project the constraint precision has been changed from 0.00001 to 1𝐸 − 12. Furthermore, the
solver function works by an iterative process converging towards a solution. This solution can
have different precisions. We adjusted the precision from 1𝐸 − 10 to 1𝐸 − 30 to ensure that
the precision is close to perfect. We performed three rounds of the solver to optimize all
portfolios, and the largest discrepancy between the Sharpe ratios obtained in the different
rounds was in the order of 1𝐸 − 7. We conclude the result of the portfolio optimization in Table
6 and Table 7 below. Note that there exists one individual variance-covariance matrix for each
stock that is connected to the solver function. Each covariance matrix is based on historical
return profiles on the asset classes for the period 2007 beginning to 2017 end. These matrixes
are not reported here but can be found for each Sharpe ratio maximization solution in the
replication files by running the solver.

 Table 6: Modern portfolio theory – optimal portfolio allocation weights for ten type of stocks
                          Direct Real   Indirect Real
  Stock index                              Stocks Cash Bonds
                           Estate         Estate
 All-share market
 index 0.70% 1.44% 79.83% 0.00% 18.03%
 Materials 5.06% 13.69% 47.05% 0.00% 34.21%
 Consumer goods 33.34% 2.73% 40.34% 0.00% 23.59%
 Consumer services 16.19% 0.00% 71.65% 0.00% 12.16%
 Financials 31.54% 2.28% 45.89% 0.00% 20.29%
 Industrials 31.77% 9.70% 27.35% 0.00% 31.18%
 Oil and Gas 39.24% 4.37% 33.24% 0.00% 23.15%
 Technology 0.00% 2.92% 92.03% 0.00% 5.05%
 Telecom 23.44% 7.72% 50.15% 0.00% 18.69%
 Utilities 2.59% 26.86% 47.08% 0.00% 23.47%
 Average 18.39% 7.17% 53.46% 0.00% 20.98%
 Weight SD 15.35% 8.10% 20.89% 0.00% 8.45%

As we expected, allocation to cash is 0.00%. According to these results, the average allocation
to real estate amounts to 25.56%. However, the optimal allocation level varies significantly

                                     27
between the different portfolios containing different types of stocks. The variance between
optimal weights in direct real estate varies almost two times more than indirect real estate and
bonds. However, among all asset classes optimal allocation weights to stocks varies most
between the portfolios – which one can expect given that stocks vary more in its risk-return
profile (see Table 5).

The lowest optimal allocation level to real estate can be seen when the stocks constitute the all-
share market index or the technology index. Technology index suggests 0.00% to direct real
estate which is slightly more than 1.00% for the all-share market index. However, technology
stocks should be combined with slightly more indirect real estate than the all-share index
should. Direct real estate shows slightly lower expected annual return (0.06%) and significantly
lower standard deviation (3.36%) than indirect real estate. Thus, disregarding diversification
benefits from co-movements, direct real estate should prove to be superior to indirect real estate
in most cases. That indirect is superior in the case of e.g. technology stocks could be explained
by that technology stocks are less correlated to direct real estate than to indirect real estate. If
this hypothesis is true, the opposite should be true in the case of all-share market. To reach any
conclusions regarding co-movements it is relevant to conduct a simple linear regression with
both the real estate asset types respectively as dependent variables, and both stock types as
independent variables, respectively.

Real estate reaches its highest allocation level when the portfolio includes industrial stocks. On
second place comes consumer goods. In both cases, the allocation level to stocks is below the
average while the allocation to bonds is higher than average. Looking at Table 5 one notice
both high expected returns and high standard deviations in both stocks. Thus, a low return-risk
relationship cannot alone explain why much real estate is allocated to these asset classes. To
reach any conclusions regarding co-movements, regressions are useful to track co-movements
between real estate and stocks.

                                     28
 Table 7: Some linear regressions that shed light on co-movement between direct real estate
 indices and a selected number of stocks for the period 2007 beginning to 2017 end
                                  Coefficients R square Observations P-value

 Direct RE / Technology 0.0468 0.0421 130 0.0191
 Indirect RE / Technology 0.0189 0.0011 130 0.7106
 Direct RE / OMXSPI 0.0294 0.0197 130 0.1108
 Indirect RE / OMXSPI 0.0365 0.0048 130 0.4342
 Direct RE / Industrials 0.0199 0.0178 130 0.1305
 Indirect RE / Industrials 0.0094 0.0006 130 0.7779
 Direct RE / Consumer Goods 0.0157 0.0070 130 0.3432
 Indirect RE / Consumer goods 0.0356 0.0056 130 0.3967

The direct real estate shows higher correlation to technology stocks than all other stocks in
Table 7. This provides a good explanation to why allocation to direct real estate is at its lowest
when technology stocks are used in the portfolio. Using the same logic, industrial stocks which
has the highest allocation level to indirect real estate also shows lowest correlation to indirect
real estate among the stocks in Table 4. The same argument can be made for all stocks above.
I.e. our results support the hypothesis above that co-movements explains why indirect real
estate is preferable to direct real estate in some cases, despite the better risk-return profile of
direct real estate.

The expected portfolio return, the portfolio standard deviation and the Sharpe ratio of each
portfolio is summarized in Table 8 below.

 Table 8: Modern portfolio theory – expected portfolio return, portfolio volatility and Sharpe
 ratio for the mixed-asset portfolio using ten types of stocks
                              Expected Portfolio      Portfolio Standard
                                                                              Sharpe Ratio
                                 Return               Deviation
 All-share market index 8.13% 8.40% 0.71
 Materials 5.93% 7.24% 0.52
 Consumer goods 4.25% 4.85% 0.43
 Consumer services 8.42% 6.18% 1.01
 Financials 4.90% 5.93% 0.46
 Industrials 3.53% 4.22% 0.32
 Oil and gas 3.65% 4.41% 0.33
 Technology 11.13% 8.88% 1.01
 Telecom 3.92% 4.17% 0.42
 Utilities 5.62% 6.75% 0.51
 Average 5.95% 6.10% 0.57

                                     29
In Table 8, we find the highest Sharpe ratios when including either consumer services or
technology in the portfolio (where the latter has a higher Sharpe ratio with a 0.002 discrepancy).
The interesting feature of this result is that inclusion of technology stocks implies an optimal
portfolio with no allocation to direct real estate, and little allocation to indirect real estate
(2.92%). On the other hand, inclusion of consumer services implies an optimal portfolio with
no allocation to indirect real estate, and substantial allocation to direct real estate (16.19%).
Thus, the best portfolios are obtained when including only one kind of real estate. Furthermore,
in both the case of technology stocks and consumer services, the optimal allocation to real estate
is lower than average (2.92% for technology, and 16.19% for consumer services compared to
the average of 25.56%). To elaborate more on this finding, one can compare the Sharpe ratio
on stocks that suggests most real estate allocation to those that suggest lesser allocation. See
Table 9 below.

 Table 9: Relative allocation weight to real estate in relation to relative Sharpe ratio for ten types
 of stocks
                                                     Above mean real    Above mean
                          Optimal real     Portfolio Sharpe
 Stocks                                    estate allocation     Sharpe ratio
                          estate allocation         ratio
                                                       (W>30.31%)      (SR>0.57)

 Oil and Gas 43.61% 0.33 Yes
 Industrials 41.47% 0.32 Yes
 Consumer Goods 36.07% 0.43 Yes
 Financials 33.82% 0.46 Yes
 Telecom 31.16% 0.42 Yes
 Utilities 29.45% 0.51 Yes
 Materials 18.75% 0.52 Yes
 Consumer Services 16.19% 1.01 Yes
 Technology 2.92% 1.01 Yes
 OMXSPI 2.14% 0.71 Yes
 Mean 30.31% 0.49

Table 9 provides a presentation of relative optimal allocation to real estate for each portfolio
with each type of stock included and compare this to Sharpe ratios for each portfolio. If the
portfolio suggests an allocation to real estate that is above the mean suggested allocation, it is
marked with “Yes”. If the portfolio has a Sharpe ratio that is above the mean, it is marked with
“Yes”. Looking at deviation from the mean on the two columns to the right, there is a negative
relationship between optimal allocation level to real estate and portfolio performance in all ten
portfolios.

                                     30
6. Major Findings and Result Interpretation

6.1. Direct Real Estate Index Modelling

One of the major challenges have been to compute an index for direct real estate. It has been
important to do this work meticulously since the index has been used as a representation of the
risk and return profile of the direct real estate asset class used in portfolio optimizations.
Construction of a hedonic price index can never be perfect. It is thus useful to shed some light
on how the empirical work – resulting in the above presented metropolitan index – have
impacted the risk and return profile of the direct real estate asset class used in the portfolio
optimization choices.

Beginning with the variable choice, specification bias is an issue. A strong bias could have
resulted in that some parameters have been assigned wrong explanatory values. For this reason,
we have made the hedonic model relatively complex by incorporating 14 quality characteristics,
i.e. independent variables. It is well documented that location is an important parameter for the
property price (de Haan & Diewert, 2013). In this project, location quality characteristics have
not been detailed in the modelling. At its most, there has been a division between metropolitan
residential properties and the rest of Sweden. The two indices computed by the hedonic model
show different historical return patterns but similar volatility, as can be seen in Figure 1. The
fact that the return profiles differ so much when location is accounted for indicates how
important it is to make choices regarding location for direct real estate index modelling, and
followingly for portfolio optimization. Thus, we are aware that we could get an even more
accurate index if we could incorporate more precise location characteristics in the model such
as postal code or specific coordinates of properties as has been done by Hansson and Hallin
(2018).

Another aspect that is important is to account for is seasonality. Looking at Figure 1 it is easy
to spot seasonal trends. The choice of deseasonalization method is important not only to reduce
the predictive seasonal patterns, but also to not take away too much volatility. The choice of
using monthly trend adjustments, instead of e.g. weekly or quarterly adjustments, to account
for seasonality in this project appears somewhat arbitrary. We have used several time frames
and methods which resulted in that adjusting for monthly seasonality using a multiplicative
method worked best as it reduced seasonality and made the index look more similar to those
indices done by other studies and institutes such as Hansson & Hallin’s (2018) and Svensk
Mäklarstatistik AB (2019). Furthermore, the deseasonalization successfully made the direct real

                                     31
estate index mimic the pattern of the indirect real estate index – which is to be expected (See
Figure 2 and Table 10A in Appendix). However, looking at Figure 3, it is apparent that the
volatility of the indirect real estate index is high compared to the deseasonalized indices because
of the financial crisis 2008. One can explain this by the fact that indirect real estate is securitized
and thus more volatile with the stock market as opposed to direct real estate which is based on
the price development of the actual square meter price and did not decline near as much as
property securities during the crisis. This difference tells us more about the difference between
the asset classes direct real estate and indirect real estate than it does about the quality of the
direct real estate modelling.

When performing an OLS regression and testing for the explanatory power of our hedonic
index, we found that the Metropolitan data had a higher R-Squared value, 0.5172, than the
Aggregate data R-Squared value, 0.4097 (see Table 3). This result suggests that it is
advantageous to use metropolitan data rather than aggregate (or rural) data when constructing
a hedonic index because the quality characteristics and the time-fixed effects seem to explain
the price movements better. We can conclude from these results that it is easier for an index to
plot price index movements and price index developments in areas and neighborhoods where
properties lie more closely to each other compared to rural areas. This can also tell that a more
concentrated area of transaction sales with less transactions sales in total gives the hedonic price
index a better explanatory and predictive performance compared to a larger but less dense area
with more transaction sales in total. This argues for that the metropolitan index is a better
representation of residential direct real estate prices compared to the aggregate index.

A potential issue when performing time dummy hedonic modelling is that the quality
characteristics are held constant over time. However, quality characteristics in metropolitan
areas should be consistent over a ten-year period due to the homogeneity of residential
properties in cities.

Looking at Figure 2 it appears as if the hedonic metropolitan index closely follows the index
used by Mäklarstatistik – square meter prices – which argues for that time-fixed effect and the
issue with constant quality characteristics have been of minimal issues in this project and
followingly that the hedonic metropolitan index is a good representation of residential direct
real estate prices.

The square meter index also provides some support into above arguments for using
metropolitan index to combat specification bias and constant quality characteristics. That is

                                     32
because the square meter price development is measured in the country on aggregate – and
despite this seems to better fit the metropolitan index than the aggregate index.

Given that the metropolitan index is a better representation of the price development index used
by Mäklarstatistik, that location is important to account for to reduce specification bias, and
that R-square can be used to explain the precision of the hedonic model, we consider the choice
to use the metropolitan index for the portfolio optimization problems as successful.
Furthermore, the deseasonalization resulted in an index that more closely mimics the indices
presented by other direct real estate index modelling attempts and makes the direct real estate
index act more like indirect real estate. Followingly, we conclude that hedonic index, as a
representation of residential direct property price development, is good enough for a mean-
variance analysis. To what degree one can use the metropolitan index based on residential
properties as a good representation is somewhat supported by the study made by Hoesli et al.
(2003) that shed light on that residential real estate is usually used for direct real estate
investments in Schweiz (this was however not the case for Sweden, the UK and the US).

6.2. Preferable Common Stocks to Use with Real Estate

The answer to the question of what type of common stock that is best to include in a mixed-
asset portfolio including the two types of real estate used in this project (direct real estate and
indirect real estate) has two perspectives. The first perspective is to define “best” as the stock
that makes most use of the real estate asset by allocating the most to it. The other perspective
is to define “best” as the stock that, given the optimal allocation level to each of the asset classes
used in this project, results in the highest Sharpe ratio.

Taking the first perspective, looking only at the highest allocation weights to real estate, the
answer should be straightforward. Oil & Gas followed by Industrials and Consumer Goods
makes the most use of real estate by allocating more to these asset classes since it is considered
optimal (see Table 5). Regarding the Oil & Gas stock, the risk-return profile is generally bad,
making it less desirable than most asset classes looking at the period 2007 to 2017. This alone
could explain why the Oil & Gas stock pick results in more allocation to other asset classes.
What we find interesting with all three of these stocks is that they are optimal to combine with
a relatively large portion of direct real estate as opposed to indirect real estate in comparison to
most other stocks (Table 6). This could be an indication that the inclusion of direct real estate
index provides more diversification benefits for these types of stocks, compared to the other
stock types. We will elaborate this further in chapter 6.3.

                                     33
Looking at the second perspective where the “best” stock is defined as the stock that allows for
the highest Sharpe ratio, Table 9 provides this insight. We find it clear that the stocks providing
highest Sharpe ratios among the ten portfolios are those that allocate the least weight to the real
estate asset classes. This inverse correlation should however not be taken as a given causal
relationship where types of stocks that make least use of direct real estate are best and following
mistakenly lead to the conclusion that high levels of allocation to real estate is bad. We could
explain this relationship by claiming that types of stocks using less allocation to real estate are
good performers with advantageous risk-return profiles and that these also provide good
diversification benefits to the other asset classes within the portfolio. Whatever interpretation
one makes of this relationship, the stocks that deliver the best Sharpe ratios are the sectoral
indices Technology, Consumer Services, and Materials (in named order).

6.3. Does Direct Real Estate Provide Diversification Benefits to Mixed-Asset Portfolio?

Diversification benefits of direct real estate to a mixed-asset portfolio is true if there is allocation
weight dedicated to direct real estate in the mean-variance analysis. Allocation level is
dependent on the return and risk relationships on each asset class in isolation, and potential co-
movements of direct real estate to other asset classes in the portfolio.

The fact that direct real estate, on average, shows slightly lower expected annual return, 0.06%,
but significantly lower standard deviation, 3.36%, than indirect real estate indicates that direct
real estate has better risk-return profile (Table 5). Thus, if one disregards diversification benefits
and co-movements, direct real estate could be considered superior to indirect real estate
according to our results. This analysis is however not complete before accounting for co-
movement between the two real estate asset classes themselves, and co-movement between the
two real estate asset classes respectively with other stocks.

Looking at Table 7, and the whole period 2007 beginning to 2017 end, we find it apparent that
direct real estate exhibits co-movement with the stock market that is lower compared to the
indirect real estate’s co-movement with the stock market in the long run. This is supported by
the study performed by Morawski et al. (2008). Furthermore, Table 6 shows that all portfolios
except the one with technology stocks allocates capital to direct real estate. Thus, we conclude
that one can obtain diversification benefits when including direct real estate in a mixed-asset
portfolio.

Figure 3 shows a significant drop in price level for the indirect index as opposed to the direct
index during the period January 2007 to January 2009 in which the financial crisis took place.

                                     34
This result supports the research performed by Sa-Aadu et al. (2010), and opposes Moss &
Baum’s (2013) research, that direct real estate is more stable during financial crisis than indirect
real estate. Also, the significant difference in price drop between the indices during the crisis
suggests that the co-movement between the two asset classes is low during financial crisis. This
supports the claim from prevailing literature that indirect real estate is more volatile than direct
real estate and indirect real estate further exhibits similar co-movements with common stock
market as a result of that indirect real estate reacted quicker to private market returns given their
higher liquidity and price revelation as opposed to direct real estate (Ling & Naranjo, 2015).
This seems to hold true not only in our study for the period 2007-2017 in Sweden, but also
during 1978-2006 for the U.S. market and 1983-2006 for the U.K. market (Morawski, et al.,
2008)

Another supporting claim from prevailing literature is that whilst indirect real estate exhibits
more similar movement with common stock than direct real estate in the short-run, indirect
correlates more with direct real estate in the long-run compared to common stock market, which
seems to hold true for our results as well; they have similar long-term patterns over the period
(also, see Table 4 and Table 7 indicating that the co-movement is higher between the two real
estate types than between the real estate types and other stocks for the period 2007 to 2017).
(Sa-Aadu, et al., 2010)

Looking at Table 6 that presents optimal allocation weights, it is obvious that direct real estate
provides some diversification benefits that are superior to the diversification benefits of indirect
real estate since more capital is allocated to the direct real estate class (specifically, we optimize
the portfolio by allocating more than twice the weight to direct real estate compared to indirect
real estate).

Practically however, direct real estate brings several drawbacks that indirect real estate does
not. Examples are liquidity problems, information asymmetry and time-to-market (Cheng, et
al., 2013). Another important aspect is the high requirement of special knowledge in
management of direct real estate investments. Furthermore, only institutional investors can
make use of direct real estate since capital is required to build a diversified portfolio of real
estate properties – compared to securitized property investments that requires less initial capital
Baum and Colley (2017). This cost is not only due to that properties are capital heavy, but also
because large investments are required to acquire the specialist knowledge and perform research
required to successfully build a direct real estate portfolio. This is however assumed to be priced
in the property transactions. This assumption is important, and if it did not hold it would have

                                     35
severe consequences on our outcome. If not priced, these attributes connected to residential
direct real estate would have to be adjusted for in the expected return for the portfolio
optimization choice. Making such an adjustment would result in decreased optimal allocation
levels to direct real estate, implying that diversification benefits of including direct real estate
could be mitigated.

There are also some practical advantages that indirectly affect diversification benefits such as
that direct real estate inclusion in a mixed-asset portfolio provides long-term benefits to
institutions by matching the real estate asset with long-term liabilities. I.e. direct real estate
assets enable lucrative asset-liability management frameworks that can be used to invest in
other assets (Hoesli & Lekander, 2008). Note however, that this does not bring any theoretical
advantage since the analyses in this project are made on assumptions about perfect capital
markets where the investor is assumed to be able to borrow.

With above empirical analysis in mind, given the index construction with the hedonic model,
the empirical results from the portfolio optimization analysis suggests that direct real estate is
beneficial and preferable to include in a mixed-asset portfolio as it provides a decent risk-return
profile with additional diversification benefits compared to indirect real estate – which is true
especially during financial crisis. Prevailing literature also supports these results. However, the
practical issues regarding direct real estate inclusion in a mixed-asset portfolio are large when
compared to indirect real estate asset classes. To get a clearer picture more research would have
to be done on the exact effect of the practical issues – and one would have to be more detailed
about to what degree issues such illiquidity are priced in historical residential direct property
transactions. The conclusion is that direct real estate is indeed beneficial as a portfolio
diversifier. But this can only be said to hold true in perfect capital market conditions.

6.4. Optimal Allocation Level to Real Estate

The optimal allocation level to real estate depends on the types of stocks included in the
portfolio. The answer to this question can structurally be divided into three parts. One part is an
average allocation level to real estate of the 10 different portfolios constructed in this project.
The other part is to pick the portfolio with highest Sharpe ratio, and tell how much allocation
to real estate that is optimal given the unique inclusion of the type of stock. The third part is to
look at the optimal allocation level to real estate given the inclusion of the market representation
(OMXSPI) of all stocks.

                                     36
For the first part of this analysis, Table 6 shows an average allocation to real estate among the
ten different portfolios amounting to 25.56%. The optimal allocation level to real estate varies
significantly between the different portfolios containing different types of stocks, in the range
from 2.14% to 43.61%. Looking at prevailing literature where studies such as Hoesli &
MacGregor (2000) and Hoesli et. al (2003) have suggested allocation to real estate at levels
around 15-20% and a more recent study with a recommended allocation target at 10-15%
(Pagliari, 2017), one could say that the average number of 25.56% is unusually high. This could
indicate that the important assumption made in this study, that inefficiencies related to direct
real estate such as illiquidity and management skills requirements are priced in the transaction,
are flawed. It could also be an indication that Swedish real estate performs better in a mixed-
asset portfolio than has been showed for other countries studied in previous research.
Furthermore, this could be an indication on that the deseasonalization decreased the volatility
on direct real estate unjustifiably much.

However, looking at Table 9, one notices a negative relationship between a high Sharpe ratio
and allocation level to real estate, which argues for that an institutional investor is better off not
allocating capital to real estate. However, the latter result is only true given that the institutional
investor does not have any preference for types of stocks to hold. If the investor has preference
for a type of stock, the optimal allocation level depends on the types of stocks. Interestingly,
one notices that the variance between optimal weights in direct real estate varies more than
indirect real estate and bonds looking at Table 6.

Looking at the second part of this analysis, Table 9 shows that Technology stocks Consumer
Services stocks provides highest Sharpe ratios. Technology stocks have slightly higher Sharpe
ratio. Interestingly, inclusion of Technology stocks imply that the investor should allocate
second least to real estate among all portfolios containing different types of stocks at 2.92%.
Consumer Services suggests third least allocation among the portfolios, at an optimal allocation
level of 16.19%.

The third part of the analysis, also looking at Table 9 and where OMXSPI as a Swedish stock
market representation is assumed to be takeaway for choosing an optimal allocation level, the
investor should allocate no more than 2.14% to real estate – which is the lowest optimal
allocation level among all portfolios.

The three parts show very varying suggestions on optimal allocations to real estate. The average
optimal allocation level of all ten portfolios is 25.56%, of the portfolio with highest Sharpe ratio

                                     37
2.92%, and the market portfolio 2.14%. This suggests that the optimal allocation choice must
be dependent on assumptions about the investor and the skills possessed by the institution
investing. If perfect market assumptions hold and modern portfolio theory is to be used, the
highest Sharpe ratio should dictate the choice. In such case, Technology stocks should be used
with an allocation level at 2.92% to real estate.

6.5. Conclusion

The computed metropolitan hedonic index based on Swedish residential real estate transactions
over an 11-year period is a good representation of direct real estate investments in Sweden for
a mean-variance analysis, given that the institutional investor possesses management skills
needed to maneuver a portfolio with residential properties. However, this depends on the
assumption that illiquidity issues with direct real estate (especially residential real estate), as
opposed to indirect real estate, are already priced in the transactions. This assumption, and the
method used for deseasonalization, might have impacted the results for optimal allocation levels
to real estate positively. Comparing prevailing literature to the average optimal allocation level
at 25.56% (compared to 10-20% in the literature) the latter proposition seems reasonable.
However, looking at optimal allocation level suggested from a portfolio optimization choice
where technology stocks provide the optimal portfolio at optimal allocation level 2.92% it does
not seem as if the volatility have been understated by deseasonalization, and the price return
have been overstated in general, in the computed metropolitan hedonic index.

The answer to the question of what type of common stock that is best to include in a mixed-
asset portfolio including the two types of real estate assets used in this project – direct real estate
and indirect real estate – has two perspectives. The first perspective is to define “best” as the
stock that makes most use of the real estate asset by allocating the most to it. The other
perspective is to define “best” as the stock that, given the optimal allocation level to each of the
asset classes used in this project, results in the highest Sharpe ratio. Oil & Gas followed by
Industrials and Consumer Goods makes the most use of real estate by allocating more to these
asset classes since it is considered optimal. Types of stocks that provides high Sharpe ratios to
the portfolio tend to make least use of real estate. The stocks that deliver the best Sharpe ratios
are the sectoral indices Technology, Consumer Services, and Materials (in named order).

When answering the question of whether direct real estate provides diversification benefits to
a mixed-asset portfolio, we reach interesting conclusions by comparing empirical results to
prevailing literature. The empirical results from the portfolio optimization analysis suggests

                                     38
that direct real estate is beneficial and preferable to include in a mixed-asset portfolio as it
provides a decent risk-return profile with additional diversification benefits compared to
indirect real estate – which is true especially during financial crisis. Prevailing literature also
supports these results. However, practical issues regarding direct real estate inclusion in a
mixed-asset portfolio exist as opposed to inclusion of indirect real estate. To get a clearer picture
more research would have to be done on the exact effect of the practical issues – and we would
have to be more detailed about to what degree issues such illiquidity are priced in historical
residential direct property transactions. However, all types of portfolios except technology
stocks suggests some allocation to direct real estate. Thus, we conclude that direct real estate
provides diversification benefits for most portfolios in the long run, given perfect market
conditions that prices of previous transactions have priced inefficiencies regarding managing a
portfolio with residential real estate.

The study analyzed the question regarding optimal allocation level to real estate in three parts
which showed varying suggestions on optimal allocation levels. The average optimal allocation
level of all ten portfolios is 25.56%, of the portfolio with highest Sharpe ratio 2.92%, and the
market portfolio 2.14%. This suggests that the optimal allocation choice must be dependent on
assumptions about the investor and the skills possessed by the institution investing. If perfect
market assumptions hold and one applies modern portfolio theory, the highest Sharpe ratio
should dictate the choice. In such case, Technology stocks should be used with an allocation
level at 2.92% to real estate. If the investor invests in a market portfolio, the optimal allocation
level is 2.14%. If one bases the optimal allocation level on the assumption that different
institutional investors have different segmented choices of types of stocks, the average optimal
allocation level among these investors is 25.56%.

                                     39
7. References

Ahmad, W., Hamid, K., Usman, Y. M. & Hassan, M., 2012. Capital asset pricing model in
unconditional and conditional framework: empirical evidence from emerging economy of
Pakistan. Elixir Online Journal, Volume 58, pp. 14958-14981.

Andersson, D. E., 2000. Hypothesis testing in hedonic price estimation – On the selection of
independent variables. The Annals of Regional Science , 34(-), pp. 293-304.

Baum, A. & Colley, N., 2017. Can Real Estate Investors Avoid Specific Risk. A Journal of
Accounting, Finance and Business Studies, 53(3), pp. 395-430.

Bond, S. A., Hwang, S., Lin, Z. & Vandell, K. D., 2007. Marketing Period Risk in a Portfolio
Context: Theory and Empirical Estimates from the UK Commercial Real Estate Market.
Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 34(4), pp. 447-461.

Bradford, C., Pollakowski, H. O. & Wachter, S. M., 1991. On Choosing Among House Price
Index Methodologies. Real Estate Economics, 19(3), pp. 286-307.

Byrne, P. J. & Lee, S., 2001. Risk Reduction and Real Estate Portfolio Size. Managerial and
Decision Economics, 22(7), pp. 369-379.

Cheng, P., Lin, Z. & Liu, Y., 2013. Is There a Real Estate Allocation Puzzle?. Journal of
Portfolio Management, 39(5), pp. 61-74.

Cheng, P., Lin, Z. & Liu, Y., 2013. Liquidity Risk of Private Assets: Evidence from Real Estate
Markets. The Financial Review, 48(4), pp. 671-696.

Chun, G. H., Sa-aadu, J. & Shilling, J. D., 2004. The Role of Real Estate in an Institutional
Investor's Portfolio Revisisted. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 29(3), pp. 295-
320.

de Haan, J. & Diewert, E., 2013. Hedonic Regression Methods. In: Handbook on Residential
Property Price Indices. Luxembourg: Eurostat, pp. 50-64.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 2004. The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Theory and Evidence.
Journal of Economic Perspectives , 18(3), pp. 25-46.

Freeman, A. M., Herriges, J. A. & Kling, C. L., 2014. The Measurement of Environmental and
Resource Values: Theory and Methods. 3rd Edition ed. Abingdon: RFF PRESS.

                                     40
Gouriéroux, C. & Laferrére, A., 2009. Managing hedonic house price indexes: The French
experience. Journal of Housing Economics , 18(3), pp. 206-213.

Hoesli, M. & MacGregor, B. D., 2000. Property Investment: principles and practice of portfolio
management. 1st Edition ed. Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.

Håkansson, 2009. Capital Growth and the Mean-Variance Approach to Portfolio Selection. The
Journal of Finance, 6(1), pp. 517-557.

Hansson, A. & Hallin, O., 2018. Decomposing the Term Structure of Housing Risk:
Implications of Market Segmentation and Liquidity, Stockholm: Department of Finance.

Hayes, M., Primbs, J. A. & Chiquoine, 2015. A Penalty Cost Approach to Strategic Asset
Allocation with Illiquid Asset Classes. Journal of Portfolio Management, 41(2), pp. 33-41.

Hoesli, M. & Lekander, J., 2008. Real estate portfolio strategy and product innovation in
Europe. Journal of Property Investment & Finance, 26(2), pp. 162-176.

Hoesli, M. & Oikarinen, E., 2012. Are REITs Real Estate? Evidence from International Sector
Level Data, St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis.

Hoesli, M., Lekander, J. & Witkiewicz, 2003. Real Estate In the Institutional Portfolio: A
comparison of Suggested and Actual Weights. The Journal of Alternative Investments, 6(3), pp.
53-59.

Hoesli, M., Lekander, J. & Witkiewicz, W., 2004. International Evidence on Real Estate as a
Portfolio Diversifier. Journal of Real Estate Research, 26(2), pp. 161-206.

Kallberg, L. G., 1996. The role of real estate in the portfolio allocation process. Real Estate,
24(3), pp. 359-377.

Kingsley Associates, 2018. Institutional Investors Real Estate Trends, San Ramon: Institutional
Real Estate, Inc..

Lewellen, J. & Nagel, S., 2006. The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain Asset-Pricing
Anomolies. Journal of Financial Economics, 82(2), pp. 289-314.

Lin, Z. & Liu, Y., 2008. Real Estate Returns and Risk with Heterogeneous Investors. Real
Estate Economics , 36(4), pp. 753-776.

                                     41
Lin, Z. & Vandell, K. D., 2005. Illiquidity and Pricing Biases in the Real Estate Market,
Madison: University of Wisconsin – Madison.

Ling, D. C. & Naranjo, A., 2015. Returns and Information Transmission Dynamics in Public
and Private Real Estate Markets. Real Estate Economics, 43(1), pp. 163-208.

MacLean, L. C., Zhao, Y. & Ziemba, W. T., 2011. Mean-variance versus expected utility in a
dynamic investment analysis. Computational Management Science , 8(1-2), pp. 3-22.

Markowitz, H., 1952. Portfolio Selection, s.l.: The Journal of Finance, 7(1), pp. 77-91.

Morawski, J., Rehkugler, H. & Füss, R., 2008. The nature of listed real estate companies:
property or equity market?. Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, 22(2), pp. 101-126.

Moss, A. & Baum, A., 2013. The use of listed real estate securities in asset management: a
literature review and summary of current practical applications, Brussels: European Public
Real Estate Associaten.

Nagaraja, C., Brown, L. & Wachter, S., 2010. House Price Index Methodology, St. Louis:
Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis.

Olaleye, 2011. The effects of adding real estate into mixed-asset portfolios in South Africa.
Journal of Financial Management of Property and Construction, 16(3), pp. 272-282.

Pagliari, J. L., 2017. Another Take on Real Estate's Role in Mixed‐Asset Portfolio Allocations.
Real Estate Economics, 45(1), pp. 75-132.

Pagliari, J. L., Scherer, K. A. & Monopoli, R. T., 2005. Public Versus Private Real Estate
Equities: A More Refined, Long-Term Comparison. Real Estate Economics, 33(1), pp. 147-
187.

Pricewaterhousecoopers, 2019. Riskpremien på den svenska aktiemarknaden, Stockholm:
PWC.

Rehring, C., 2012. Real Estate in a Mixed-Asset Portfolio: The Role of the Investment Horizon.
Real Estate Economics, 40(1), pp. 65-95.

Reid, B., 2019. Risk Reduction and Tracking Error in Small Commercial Real Estate Portfolios.
The Journal of Portfolio Management , 45(7), pp. 130-140.

                                     42
Sa-Aadu, J., Shilling, J. & Tiwari, A., 2010. On The Portfolio Properties of Real Estate in Good
Times and Bad Times. Real Estate Economics, 38(3), pp. 529-565.

Sharpe, W. F., 1966. Mutual Fund Performance, s.l.: The Journal of Business.

Silverstein, J., Elul, R. & Stark, T., 2014. Understanding house price index revisions,
Philadelphia: Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Song, H.-S. & Wilhelmsson, M., 2010. Improved price index for condominiums. Journal of
Property Research, pp. 39-60.

Svensk Mäklarstatistik AB, 2019. www.maklarstatistik.se. [Online]
Available at:
https://www.maklarstatistik.se/omrade/riket/?fbclid=IwAR00j8nXuAGiX4cfg5UqzVevddz2L
vKDRsgS5Y_8Ro0UlDq6XHA7lGJFOK4#/bostadsratter/arshistorik
[Accessed 1 March 2020].

Vosilov, R. & Bergström, N., 2010. Cross-section of Stock Returns: Conditional vs.
Unconditional and Single Factor vs. Multifactor Models, Umeå: Umeå School of Business.

Wallace, N. E. & Meese, R. A., 1997. The Construction of Residential Housing Price Indices:
A Comparison of Repeat-Sales, Hedonic-Regression, and Hybrid Approaches. The Journal of
Real Estate Finance and Economics , Volume 14, pp. 51-73.

Webb, C. R., 1988. Diversification Gains From Including Real Estate In Mixed-Asset
Portfolios. Decision Sciences, 19(2), pp. 434-452.

Wilhelmsson, M., 2009. Construction and updating of property price index series. Property
Management, 27(2), pp. 119-137.

Wooldridge, M. J., 2006. Introductory econometrics. 3rd ed. New York: Thomson.

Yoo, S., Im, J. & Wagner, J. E., 2012. Variable selection for hedonic model using machine
learning approaches: A case study in Onondaga County, NY. Landscape and Urban Planning,
107(3), pp. 293-306.

                                     43
8. Appendix

 Table 1A: A standard deviation, beta value, historical return and expected return comparison
 of real estate indices

                                        Standard       Beta to      Historical      Expected
 Securities
                                   Deviation     OMXSPI      Return       Return

 Not deseasonalized RE metropolitan 5.04% 0.12 7.83% 3.04%
 Not deseasonalized RE aggregate 6.95% 0.22 7.96% 3.85%
 Deseasonalized RE metropolitan 2.21% 0.03 7.16% 2.39%
 Deseasonalized RE aggregate 2.57% 0.07 6.60% 2.69%
 Indirect RE 5.57% 0.04 8.61% 2.45%
 Deseasonalized square meter prices 3.04% 0.06 7.38% 2.65%

Figure 1A: A comparison between two indices – metropolitan index with a 95% confidence
interval and an aggregate index – based on deseasonalized direct real estate indices from hedonic
regressions on residential direct real estate in Sweden and indirect real estate between 2007
beginning and 2017 end

220% Direct RE hedonic index - metropolitan data
                       Lower interval
200%               Upper interval
                        Direct RE hedonic index - aggregate data
180%

160%

140%

120%

100%

 80%

                                     44