POLITICIANS FOR RENT

AN INVESTIGATION OF THE FINANCIAL VALUE OF RENT
SEEKING ACTIVITIES  IN HONG KONG

JACOB LANGE

MARTIN LANS

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of  Economics

2020
Politicians for Rent: An Investigation of the Financial Value of Rent Seeking
Activities in Hong Kong

Abstract:

   The 2019 pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong brought about a period of political
   turmoil in the city-state, with considerable effects on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange.
   In this paper, we use stock market data to investigate the degree to which investors
   have reassessed their valuations of rent seeking activities following the protests.
   Building on previous research on rent seeking and political connectedness of firms, we
   categorize firms as either connected or not connected to the incumbent political
   leadership and compare the stock market valuations of the two groups. We find that
   politically connected firms have outperformed non-connected firms over the research
   period. This implies that there has been an increase in the stock market's valuation of
   rent seeking activities. We argue that this reflects the tendency of investors to turn to
   politically connected firms as a result of the inconclusive and uncertain outcome of the
   pro-democracy movement.

Keywords:

  Rent seeking, Hong Kong, Protests, HKEX, Macrofinance

Authors:

   Jacob Lange  (24194)
   Martin Lans  (24213)

Tutors:

   Anastasia Girshina, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

  Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, Stockholm School of
  Economics

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jacob Lange and Martin Lans, 2020

                                   1
Acknowledgements

We would like to extend our deepest gratitude to everyone who has helped us
along the way in writing this thesis. Our biggest thanks go to our advisor
Anastasia Girshina for continuous support throughout the writing process. A
big thank you also to Brown University PhD student Oscar Wahlstr¨om for
valuable input on our methodology and modelling. Furthermore, we would like
to express our gratitude to the LATEX community, without which this thesis
would not be as pleasant to read. Lastly, we would like to thank our friends
and family who have supported us throughout this spring.

                                  2
1 Introduction

Despite the advancement and sophistication of our contemporary institutions,
corruption and rent seeking remain as some of the most pervasive issues faced
by societies around the world. Every year, substantial amounts of resources are
devoted to rent seeking, i.e., the pursuit of people and particular groups to gain
added wealth without the reciprocal creation of any new wealth. Incentives
for rent seeking remain whenever decisions of other people influence personal
outcomes, or more broadly, when resources can be used to affect distributional
outcomes. Thus, rent seeking continues to represent a significant destruction of
value across different economies (Aidt 2016).
   One common approach for opposing this skewed distribution of wealth has
been for citizens to take to the streets and protest en masse. In recent times,
the Arab Spring and the uprisings against Yanukovych’s government in Ukraine
have shown how citizens can rise against corruption and favoritism. The at-
tempts have been successful in some respects, with unpopular leaders unseated
and rent seeking reduced. For instance, Acemoglu, Hassan & Tahoun (2018)
used protestor data to show that politically connected firms in Egypt experi-
enced proportionally larger losses of market value as Hosni Mubarak’s reign was
dismantled in 2011. In a similar paper, Dang, So & Yan (2018) showed that
approximately 22.4% of firm value of these connected firms could be derived
solely from the benefits of their connection to the dissolved Mubarak regime. In
other words, the street protests served as a check on rent seeking and reduced
the extent to which public resources were unfairly channeled to connected firms.
   In this paper, we adopt a similar approach by using stock market data to
                                                        1
study the degree to which the pro-democracy movement  that took place in
Hong Kong in the second half of 2019 reflects the existence of corruption and
rent seeking. With a ranking of 16/180 in Transparency International’s 2019
ranking of the least corrupt countries, ahead of peers such as Japan (20/180)
and the United States (23/180), Hong Kong is considered relatively progressive
in combating corruption. Despite this, high-level instances of corruption have
occurred in the past, exemplified by former Chief Executive Donald Tsang,
who was found guilty of misconduct in public office and subsequently jailed
                   2
in 2017 (Wu 2017).   Another similar example concerns former Chief Secre-
tary of Administration Rafael Hui, the second-highest ranking public official in
Hong Kong. He was jailed for seven years in 2013 after being convicted of a
series of charges, including receiving corporate bribes of HK$11 million (Lau

   1
    In this paper, we adopt the term pro-democracy movement to denote the civil unrest that
has caused extensive protests following the introduction of the Fugitive Offenders Amendment
Bill. We use this term given that we find it to be widely used, although we recognize that
alternative terms exist.
   2
     It had been revealed that he received private refurbishment services worth nearly HK$3.8
million from property tycoon Bill Wong Cho-bau. At the same time, his cabinet discussed,
and eventually approved, a digital broadcasting license for listed company Wave Media, in
which Mr. Wong was a major shareholder.

                                  3
2014). These examples illustrate the presence of rent seeking in Hong Kong
and highlight why this event-driven study can provide interesting insights into
the financial value of political connectedness of firms in Hong Kong.
   Our primary approach to investigate the impact of the protests is to study
their influence on the stock market valuations of politically connected vis-`a-
vis non-connected firms. We establish a list of current and recent politicians
belonging to the incumbent pro-establishment sphere of political influence and
identify firms in which members of this list were board members at the onset of
the protests. We then compare the cumulative stock returns of the connected
firms and non-connected firms. As an additional robustness check, we look at
the daily variations in the number of protestors to analyze how the intensity of
protests affects daily returns for the two groups. In the absence of successful
rent seeking activities, the stock returns of these two groups of firms should
theoretically be equal. This follows from the implication that absent rent seek-
ing, the political connections of a firm should have no influence on its valuation
in the event of a change in political leadership.
    Naturally, it would also be of interest to investigate the corresponding effect
on firms connected to the opposite political alignment, i.e., the pro-democracy
faction of Hong Kong politics. However, our data collection process only iden-
tified one such connected firm, compared to the nearly 100 pro-establishment
connected firms in our dataset. This illustrates the close connection between
the corporate sector and the pro-establishment alignment.
   We find that, on average, politically connected firms exhibit higher cumula-
tive abnormal stock returns than non-connected firms. These results are robust
to a set of controls, including the effects of size, leverage and industry. Over
the entire research period, the abnormal returns of politically connected firms
exceed abnormal returns of non-connected by more than 5%.
    On a daily basis, we find that protests were received negatively by investors,
as more intense protests resulted in lower daily abnormal returns for the stock
market overall. However, firms that were politically connected experienced
significantly higher abnormal returns on days with very intense protests. As a
result of this, the net effect on the abnormal returns of politically connected
firms on these days is positive.
   The fact that politically connected firms have benefitted from the street
protests is not in line with previous literature, such as Acemoglu, Hassan &
Tahoun (2018) and Dang, So & Yan (2018). However, this can be explained
by the nature of the Hong Kong pro-democracy movement in comparison to its
counterpart in Egypt and other similar contexts. Whereas the protest move-
ment in Egypt had a clear outcome with the incumbent regime being ousted,
the protests in Hong Kong have failed to create any de jure institutional change,
and their long-term effects remain unclear. Given this, a possible interpreta-
tion of our results is that investors perceive the protests as a cause of political
uncertainty for an indefinite time period. This, in turn, favors firms that have

                                  4
board members who are part of the current political leadership, as they could
potentially use their influence to help the firm navigate and benefit from the
political uncertainty.

2 Background

This section serves as an overview of the political system in Hong Kong and
the recent pro-democracy movement that has impacted many aspects of the
city-state’s societal structure. It is provided as an explanation of the basis for
our methodology and data collection process. The information contained in this
section is based mainly on available information found on the official websites
of several Hong Kong public institutions, as well as numerous media outlets
reporting on the protests. For a more comprehensive review of the political
system in Hong Kong, we refer to, for example, Scott (2010).

2.1 Hong Kong’s Political System
To establish an understanding of the context and methodology of this paper, we
provide a brief overview of the current structure and dynamics of the political
system in Hong Kong. The overarching foundation for how Hong Kong is
governed lies within the Basic Law (Albert 2019), the city-state’s constitutional
document. This document designates a system of governance led by a Chief
Executive and their appointed Executive Council, with a two-tiered system of
representative government consisting of the Legislative Council and the District
Councils, and finally an independent judiciary.
   Overall, the political environment can be considered relatively dichotomous,
mainly consisting of two opposing political alignments. These alignments in-
clude the pro-establishment (sometimes referred to as pro-Beijing, pro-China, or
loyalist) camp, who are by and large pro-business supporters and generally sup-
port the policies of the central government in Beijing towards Hong Kong. On
the other hand, the pro-democracy (sometimes referred to as pan-democracy)
alignment supports incremental democratic reforms, particularly the universal
suffrage of the Chief Executive and Legislative Council (Albert 2019). As we
empirically show in Section 4.1, the pro-democracy alignment lacks the type of
strong connection to the corporate sector which is one of the defining features
of the pro-establishment alignment. Despite normally receiving less than 50%
of the popular vote, the pro-establishment alignment has managed to maintain
a legislative majority due to the indirectly elected nature of the Legislative
Council.
   Thus, although Chinese Communist Party (CCP) officials do not preside
over Hong Kong the way they do in the mainland provinces and municipal-
ities, they still exert considerable, albeit indirect, influence through the pro-
establishment alignment. This alignment dominates the region’s political sphere

                                  5
while maintaining strong ties with the corporate sector. In our paper, it there-
fore forms the basis for our categorization of firms as politically connected.

2.1.1 Chief Executive
The Chief Executive is the official head of the Hong Kong Special Administra-
tive Region (Government of HKSAR 2020a). They are elected by the Election
Committee and appointed by the (Chinese) Central People’s Government. In
turn, the Election Committee consists of 1,200 members, with 300 members
(individuals and firms) from each of the following four sectors: (1) industrial,
commercial and financial sectors; (2) the professions; (3) labor, social services,
religious, and other sectors; and (4) members of the Legislative Council and
representatives of district-based organizations and several other political bod-
   3
ies.  Given the previously discussed tendency of the corporate sector to favor
the pro-establishment alignment, the Election Committee tends to elect pro-
establishment candidates (Fong 2015). This, coupled with the fact that the
Chief Executive has to be appointed by the Chinese government, has histori-
cally led to a series of loyalist Chief Executives.

2.1.2 Executive Council
The Executive Council (ExCo) is responsible for assisting the Chief Executive
in policy-making and advises the Chief Executive on matters relating to the
introduction of bills and subsidiary legislation (Government of HKSAR 2020c).
In other words, the ExCo serves as a core policy-making organ of the government
of Hong Kong, currently consisting of 16 principal officials and 16 non-official
members.
   The members of the ExCo are appointed at the discretion of the Chief
Executive. Some of the seats on the ExCo have traditionally been assigned
to high-ranking pro-establishment members of the Legislative Council, which
reflects the incentive of the Chief Executive to assemble a cabinet that will be
able to get legislation through the legislative body. Provided that the Chief
Executive appoints the ExCo and that its composition reflects the persisting
pro-establishment majority of the Legislative Council, it plays a central role in
the political establishment of Hong Kong. As such, all members of the ExCo
are part of the list of people which we use to categorize firms as politically
connected.

   3
    In general, business interests have a dominant role in the Election Committee, particu-
larly in the first and third sectors. Corporate votes elect the vast majority of the members
of these sectors, i.e., a few hundred corporate executives representing a relatively limited
electorate base. The second and fourth sectors, however, tend to represent a larger electorate
base. For more detailed information on the composition of the Election Committee, we refer
to Fong (2015).

                                  6
2.1.3 Legislative Council
The Legislative Council (LegCo) is the law-making body of Hong Kong (Gov-
ernment of HKSAR 2020d). Its responsibilities encompass enacting, amending
or repealing laws, approving budgets and appointing the judges of the judiciary.
Hence, the function of the LegCo largely resembles the one of parliaments in
conventional parliamentary democracies.
   It comprises 70 members, of which 35 are elected directly by geographical
constituencies while the other 35 are elected by functional constituencies. There
are five geographical constituencies, which elect their representatives based on
universal suffrage, using the largest remainder principle. The functional con-
stituencies, on the other hand, consist of professional or special interest groups,
which may include natural persons as well as other designated legal entities
such as corporations. They are intended to represent economic sectors that are
considered important to Hong Kong, such as the financial, legal, and tourism
sectors. Their representatives are elected on the basis of limited suffrage, given
that the eligible voters in these constituencies often only represent a very small
share of the stakeholders and that their votes are mostly cast by means of cor-
porate voting. In other words, the popular mandate of the industries is, in
many cases, only extended to the very owners and senior management of the
largest corporations. Many analysts maintain that the system thus gives certain
groups disproportionate influence, as discussed by Martin (2019).
   The functional constituencies have traditionally elected pro-establishment
candidates, whereas the geographical constituencies have favored pro-democracy
candidates. The pro-establishment alignment has with few exceptions retained
a majority in the LegCo, and has therefore been able to exert substantial leg-
islative influence. In our methodology, we include current and previous LegCo
members of this alignment in the list of people used to categorize firms as
politically connected.

2.1.4 District Councils
The District Councils are primarily concerned with local affairs across Hong
Kong’s 18 districts, but also play a significant role in the elections of the Chief
Executive and the LegCo (Government of HKSAR 2020b). For more informa-
tion on the District Councils, we refer to Appendix A.1.

2.2 Pro-Democracy Movement
Civil unrest has been a frequent occurrence in Hong Kong, particularly follow-
ing the handover from Great Britain to China in 1997. The city-state has had
an increasingly complicated relationship with the central government in Beijing
ever since. A large part of the hostility can be explained by different interpre-
tations of the fundamental One Country, Two Systems principle embedded in

                                  7
the Basic Law (Albert 2019).
   The trigger for the 2019 pro-democracy movement was the introduction
of the Fugitive Offenders Amendment Bill, more commonly referred to as the
Extradition Bill. Its origin and details are outlined in Appendix A.2.
    Criticism of the extradition bill quickly intensified following its introduction,
and efforts from the government to modify the bill failed to appease critics. Af-
ter a series of minor demonstrations, the Civil Human Rights Front launched a
protest march on the government headquarters on 9th of June. The reported
number of protestors varies, but figures have been estimated to one million
people at the peak of the march (Davidson 2019). This date is significant for
this paper, as it represents the commencement of our research period. This is
because it marked the beginning of a series of similar events, many of which
culminated in violent protests and widespread destruction of property. No-
table examples of such events include the subsequent 12th of June protests,
the storming of the Legislative Council on 1st of July, the occupation of the
Hong Kong Airport on 14th of August, the 70th anniversary of China on 1st
of October, the protest-connected death of university student Chow Tsz-lok on
8th of November and the sieges of the Polytechnic and Chinese universities of
Hong Kong.
   The protests became less intense in the days preceding the District Council
elections on 24th of November, in which the pro-democracy side experienced a
landslide victory. The weeks that followed the elections were characterized by
a lack of significant protests. In the last weeks of 2019, there was a gradual
but relatively negligible resumption of protests before the COVID-19 crisis put
a halt to physical gatherings. Therefore, our research period ends on 22nd of
November, the last trading day prior to the District Council elections.
   Although the initial objective of the protests was the withdrawal of the ex-
tradition bill, the pro-democracy movement quickly adopted the “five demands,
not one less” slogan, with more far-reaching demands including universal suf-
                                            4
frage and amnesty for all arrested protesters.  Despite only achieving the first
demand, the 2019 protests have had a substantial impact on the economy of
Hong Kong and the prospects for its governance, which presents an increasingly
complicated environment for firms operating in the city-state (Rapoza 2020).
The aim of this paper is thus to study the effects of this changing environment
on firm valuations.

   4
     The five demands are (1) full withdrawal of the extradition bill, (2) an independent com-
mission of inquiry into alleged police brutality, (3) retracting the classification of protesters
as “rioters,” (4) amnesty for arrested protesters, and (5) dual universal suffrage, meaning for
both the Legislative Council and the Chief Executive.

                                  8
3 Literature Review

The interconnection between politics and business is a widely debated topic in
the social sciences, yielding a rich literature of analyses from various contexts.
The first part of this section presents the reader with a brief overview of the
literature on rent seeking. This is followed by a review of relevant research on
how financial markets can be used to investigate the prevalence and magnitude
of rent seeking.

3.1 Brief Overview of Literature on Rent Seeking
An overview of the literature on rent seeking is provided in Congleton, Hillman
& Konrad (2008), in which the authors give an account of the development
of the literature since the nascence of rent seeking as an academic topic. The
starting point is considered to be Tullock’s (1967) paper on the “Welfare Costs
of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft.” Tullock’s central observation was that if
inefficient public policies, such as trade policies, were politically endogenous,
part of the social cost of those policies would be the use of scarce personal
abilities and resources in efforts to influence these policy decisions. This marked
the establishment of a formalized theoretical framework for the concept of rent
seeking, which would constitute the foundation for forthcoming research on the
topic.
   The literature that followed focused on quantifying the amount of resources
that were devoted to rent seeking activities. More recent research has increas-
ingly gravitated towards applications of rent seeking in practice. This has re-
sulted in numerous papers investigating the role of rent seeking in contexts such
as regulation, trade, economic development and growth, politics, migration and
institutions. For a more comprehensive review of the literature on rent seeking,
we refer to Congleton, Hillman & Konrad (2008).

3.2 Rent Seeking and Financial Markets
The past two decades have seen several influential papers that have used fi-
nancial markets to examine the prevalence and magnitude of rent seeking. As
evident from the discussed papers below, a common approach has been to con-
duct event-driven studies to assess the impact on financial markets. This has, in
turn, been used to derive conclusions regarding the characteristics of potential
rent seeking.
   In a seminal study on the Indonesian stock market of the mid-1990s, Fis-
man (2001) used rumors about Indonesian President Suharto’s health and found
that approximately 23% of the value of firms with special connections to the
regime could be accounted for by these political connections alone. Given In-
donesia’s highly centralized and stable political structure, based on Suharto’s
reign, the rumors of his deteriorating health provided conducive circumstances

                                  9
for an event study into how firms connected to his regime were affected vis-`a-vis
non-connected firms. This methodology is highly analogous to our approach of
using the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong as the basis for an event
study of connected firms.
   The paper closest to our methodological approach is Acemoglu, Hassan &
Tahoun (2018), which examines how the Arab Spring of 2011 affected firms in
Egypt based on their connections to different incumbent political groups. The
authors find that more intense protests are associated with lower stock mar-
ket valuations for firms connected to the group currently in power relative to
non-connected firms, suggesting that street protests serve as a partial check on
political rent seeking. This finding is confirmed by Dang, So & Yan (2018), who
found that 22.4% of firm value of politically connected firms could be derived
from their political connection to the ruling autocrat Hosni Mubarak. These pa-
pers provide evidence that protests played an important role in curtailing rents
captured by politically connected firms in Egypt. Interestingly, the effect of
street protests on rents also holds in periods when there were no actual changes
in formal institutions or government and when no such changes appeared to be
forthcoming. This finding is of particular interest in the chosen context of this
paper, as the 2019 protests in Hong Kong have failed to produce any de jure
institutional changes.
   Ferguson & Voth (2008) showed that the tendency of corporations to estab-
lish close relationships with politicians and to benefit from these is not only a
recent development, but can be traced back as far as to Nazi Germany. The
authors find that firms that had ‘bet on Hitler’ in his struggle for power saw
their stock price rise by 5 to 8 percent faster than comparable firms during
Hitler’s rise to power between January and March 1933.
   Similarly, a study on firms listed in China by Yan, Chan & Dang (2011)
found that firms in which top management or the board had political connec-
tions seemed to face no financing constraints, whereas less connected firms had
worse access to credit. A reduction in financing constraints naturally implies a
significant benefit and hence enhances the value of the company in question.
   Johnson & Mitton (2003) studied how politically connected listed firms were
impacted by the late-90s Asian financial crisis in Malaysia and the subsequent
imposition of capital controls. Their paper finds that in the initial stage of the
crisis, firms with strong political connections suffered more, presumably because
the expected value of subsidies declined with the impending crisis. Conversely,
these firms enjoyed a disproportional rebound in the period that followed, as
the introduction of capital controls allowed the government to channel more
resources to firms with strong political connections to the Prime Minister. The
interaction of shocks and institutions thus had a large impact on the distribution
of outcomes at the firm level, which is relevant given that this paper revolves
around the considerable shock that the protests have caused Hong Kong.
   Politicians’ board membership in corporations has also been used as a proxy

                                 10
for political connectedness by Mian (2005). In this paper, the author finds
that politically connected firms receive substantial preferential treatment from
lenders, and more specifically, from government banks. Additionally, the results
show that firms with more prominent politicians obtain even greater preferential
access to credit. This paper is particularly interesting from a methodological
standpoint, as it successfully establishes board membership as a legitimate basis
for classifying firms as politically connected.
   Our paper primarily builds on and extends past research on how rent seeking
can be identified and quantified by using the performance of certain groups of
listed firms in response to an exogenous shock. We extend this approach to the
2019 pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong. To our knowledge, such a study
has never been undertaken. As such, this paper aims to provide knowledge
on the value of connectedness and rent seeking in Hong Kong using financial
markets.

4 Data Collection

4.1 Connected Firms
To establish a group of firms connected to the political establishment of Hong
Kong, we have used official government information to obtain a list of peo-
ple who belong to the ruling faction of Hong Kong politics, i.e., the pro-
establishment politicians. To reflect the fact that past members of the leg-
islative body can still maintain close ties to the political establishment, we have
included in the list all current and previous pro-establishment members of the
Legislative Council and the Executive Council, dating back to 2000.
   Using Refinitiv’s Eikon database for financial information, we have then
screened this list of names against the current boards of directors of all firms
listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX). This yields a list of 90
connected firms, which are specified in Appendix B.1 and B.2.
   We also recognize that shareholding is an appropriate and commonly used
proxy for connectedness (for instance, we refer to Johnson & Mitton (2003)).
However, there is a methodological obstacle arising from the issue that in in-
stances where individuals are major shareholders, they often use holding com-
panies which are difficult to tie to the person in question. This makes it chal-
lenging to establish connections with the same consistency as when using board
membership as a proxy. We elaborate on this limitation in Section 7.1.
   Naturally, it would also be of interest to study the corresponding effect
on firms connected to the opposing political faction, i.e., the pro-democracy
alignment. However, when performing the same screening procedure on pro-
democracy politicians, we only find one such connected firm. This reflects
the interconnected nature of the corporate sector and the pro-establishment
alignment and highlights why this paper focuses on this political faction.

                                 11
              Table 1: Firm Characteristics by Connectedness

                   (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
                      Share Mean
                 N Market Cap Size Leverage β
All 2,070 1.00 12,641 0.20 0.59
s.d. 85,137 0.29 0.38
Connected 90 0.20 59,175 0.24 0.66
s.d. 125,091 0.19 0.33
Non-connected 1,980 0.80 10,526 0.20 0.59
s.d. 82,287 0.29 0.38
The table presents means and standard deviations of firm characteristics. Share Mar-
ket Cap refers to the share of each firm group of the total stock market capitalization
on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange as per the beginning of our research period, i.e.,
9th of June. Size denotes the market capitalization in millions of Hong Kong Dollars
(HK$). Leverage refers to total debt over total assets. β denotes the firm’s market
beta with respect to the Hang Seng Index, the main indicator of the overall stock
market performance in Hong Kong, calculated using an estimation period spanning
the calendar years of 2017 and 2018.

    Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the firms in our dataset. We refer to
non-connected firms as those that do not fall into our definition of connected
firms. The table presents the means and standard deviations of firm charac-
teristics, where the values for size and leverage are as of the beginning of our
research period. The beta values are based on our estimation period, as out-
lined in Section 4.3. On average, connected firms have a market capitalization of
HK$59,175m, and are thus significantly larger than the average non-connected
firm. They also have a slightly higher average leverage and market beta. The
variation in size reflects the fact that the HKEX is comprised of many small
firms alongside a number of large multinational conglomerates.
   Table 2 further shows the distribution of the firms in our dataset in terms
of industries. Our firms are classified according to the NAICS two-digit sec-
tor codes. As illustrated in the table, some sectors have a particularly strong
presence on the HKEX, including manufacturing, construction and finance and
insurance. This is indicative of the many Chinese manufacturing and construc-
tion companies that have their stock listed in Hong Kong. Consequently, these
types of firms are also common in the list of connected firms.

                                 12
                   Table 2: Firm Characteristics by Sector

                                         (1) (2) (3)
                                   Connected Non-connected All

Accommodation and Food 7 70 77
Administrative Support Services - 38 38
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing - 12 12
Arts and Entertainment - 21 21
Construction 17 231 248
Educational Services - 21 21
Finance and Insurance 10 165 175
Healthcare and Social Assistance - 19 19
Information 4 101 105
Management of Companies - 2 2
Manufacturing 20 652 672
Mining and Oil and Gas Extraction 2 61 63
Other Services - 18 18
Professional and Scientific Services 1 119 120
Public Administration - - -
Real Estate and Leasing 8 101 109
Retail Trade 8 103 111
Transportation and Warehousing 5 48 53
Utilities 4 43 47
Wholesale Trade 4 155 159

Total 90 1,980 2,070
The table presents the distribution of the firms in our dataset between different sectors.
The sector definitions are taken from the North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS), which classifies firms according to their economic activities. The
NAICS codes for each company were identified through the Eikon database.

4.2 Protestors
We construct a series using text analysis of a number of English-language news-
papers, which is presented in Table 3. For each day of the research period, on-
line news outlets were scanned for the number of protestors. One challenge was

                                 13
                     Table 3: Sources for Protestor Data

    Source N
     Hong Kong Free Press 25
     South China Morning Post 23
     Radio Television Hong Kong 12
    NY Times 6
     The Guardian 6
    BBC 2
     Washington Post 2
     Wall Street Journal 1
    CNN 1
    Time 1

    Total 79
       This table presents all our sources for daily protests. Source indicates
      from which news outlet we have obtained the figure and N denotes the
        number of times we have used each source. For a full list of obsevations,
       we refer to Appendix B.3.

judging the different sources’ biases and potential political affiliations, as con-
flicting figures could potentially corrupt our data. However, the actual number
of protestors is not particularly interesting for our analysis, as we are primarily
examining the effect of variation in protest intensity.
   Most news outlets tend to report protestor numbers on a discrete basis,
using categories such as “hundreds,” “thousands” or “hundreds of thousands.”
This reflects the imprecise nature of estimating the number of protestors. In
our model, this is reflected by a set of dummy variables. Fortunately, our
sources are highly uniform in their reports of the number of protestors based
on this categorization. Only in a few isolated cases was the reported number of
protestors in conflicting categories. In these instances, we favor the outlets for
which we have more data, as this leads to a more consistent dataset. Generally,
we collect protestor data from a set of established and reputable newspapers
to minimize the effects of any potential bias. We further discuss this issue in
Section 7.1.
   As shown in Table 4, protests were a common occurrence through our re-
search period, as 79 of the 167 days recorded protests. Nearly half of these days
of protests had protestors in the “thousands” category.

                                 14
                          Table 4: Protestor Data

     Protest Magnitude N

     Missing 88
     Hundreds 21
     Thousands 31
     Tens of thousands 17
     Hundreds of thousands 7
      Millions 3
     Share of days with protests 47.3%

     Total 167
      The categorization of the number of protestors for each respective day
       is based on our text analysis of news outlets, as outlined in Section 4.2.
      Days where there were no reports of protests, or when protest numbers
       were negligible (e.g. tens, dozens), have been classified as missing.

4.3 Financial Data
All stock market data is collected from the Eikon database. This includes daily
closing prices for all 2,354 listed firms on HKEX for our research period, which is
9th of June to 22nd of November 2019. Furthermore, we also collect data for our
control variables. The first variable is leverage, which is defined as the ratio of
total debt to total assets at the beginning of the period for each respective firm.
Given that leverage policies tend to be stable over shorter periods, the value at
the beginning of the period serves as an appropriate measure of leverage for the
research period. Secondly, we collect the market capitalization of all firms at
the beginning of the period, as well as the NAICS sector code for each firm in
order to control for sector fixed effects. Additionally, we collect data for total
asset value of each individual firm as an alternative control for size. In order
to calculate expected returns through CAPM, we use stock data corresponding
to an estimation period spanning the calendar years 2017 and 2018. We also
obtain daily yields for Hong Kong three-month government bonds over the same
period to estimate the risk-free rate as the average yield. For our data, this
figure is 0.46%.
   We drop stocks for which there are missing values for any of our variables.
Finally, we also screen for extreme outliers in our dataset. Consequently, we
                                                                                    5
remove two stocks from our regression, which results in 2,070 stocks in total.

   5
     The two dropped firms are SingAsia Holdings Limited and Evershine Group Holdings
Limited, which lost approximately 99% and 97% of their market value respectively over the

                                 15
5 Method

Our primary analytical approach is the standard event study approach devel-
oped by Ball & Brown (1968), which is analogous to the analysis conducted by
Acemoglu, Hassan & Tahoun (2018). We begin this section by discussing the
timeline of our data. Following this, we elaborate on our empirical model and
its econometric implications. Finally, we develop our main hypothesis.

5.1 Timeline
The protests are still ongoing as of early 2020, which poses a challenge to our
approach. We have defined the start of the period to be 9th of June since that
was, in many respects, a springboard from which the entire pro-democracy
movement evolved. There are several accounts of this being the largest ever
protest since Hong Kong was returned to China from Britain in 1997 (Fowler
2019; Griffiths, Cheung & Lee 2019). More importantly, it was from this point
in time that the protests became a prevalent occurrence in everyday Hong Kong
life and spurred into a substantial movement, as discussed in Section 2.2. We
recognize that there were a few minor occurrences of protests regarding the
extradition bill before 9th of June. However, these types of minor protests
have occurred sporadically since the Umbrella Movement of 2014. Thus, these
incidents should already be incorporated into stock market valuations at the
beginning of our research period.
   We set the end date of the research period to 22nd of November, the final
trading day anterior to the District Council elections, which are widely regarded
as an informal referendum on the protests (Leung, Talmazan & Flanagan 2019).
After this, the protests substantially declined in magnitude, which would po-
tentially allow for stock market valuations to evolve in a manner less connected
to the protests. Furthermore, this end date allows us to delimit the time frame
from the COVID-19 crisis, as this would significantly limit the scope of inter-
pretation of our results.

5.2 Model
5.2.1 Cumulative Abnormal Returns
Our dataset consists of 2,070 companies and their stock performance together
with a set of control variables. As a measurement of a firm’s performance, we
estimate its cumulative abnormal return for the research period. We run the
regression
                                               M kt
                       Rit − rf = βi(Rt − rf ),

research period. We refer to Appendix B.4 for a visualization of our dataset adjusted for
outliers.

                                 16
where Rit is the natural log of the ratio of closing prices at day t and t − 1 for
          M kt
firm i. Rt is the corresponding measure for the Hang Seng Index. The risk
free rate, rf , is defined as the average yield on a three-month government bond
for our estimation period. Through this regression, we obtain individual βi
for all companies. With that information, we define the cumulative abnormal
return of firm i between day n and m as

             ∑m
                                                         M kt
               CAR[n, m]i =    Rit − rf − βi(Ri − rf ).
                              t=n
In other words, the abnormal return is the difference between the realized return
and the return predicted by CAPM. We then introduce a dummy variable Ni
denoting whether or not firm i is politically connected via a pro-establishment
politician. This dummy takes the value of 1 if a firm is connected and 0 other-
wise. Our first empirical specification then becomes

                                                                                         ′
                   CAR[n, m]i = Niγ + Xi ν + ηs + i, (1)
where Xi is a control vector with market data for leverage, measured as to-
tal debt to total assets, and size, measured as market capitalization. We use
market capitalization as our primary control for size, given that more firms
have available data for this variable compared to asset value. ηs is a vector
which encompasses 19 sector fixed effects. The γ coefficient will be the rele-
vant term to analyze in our results, as it captures the difference in cumulative
abnormal return between connected and non-connected firms over the research
period. This analysis requires the standard identification assumption to hold
where CoV (Ni, i|Xi, ηs) = 0. This is ensured by the inclusion of our control
variables, which should mitigate any systematic effect on stock performance not
captured by the political connectedness of the individual firm. The inclusion of
sectoral dummies and controls for leverage and size is motivated by the poten-
tially different impacts of political turmoil on firms active in different sectors
or with varying leverage policies and size. Furthermore, only robust standard
errors are reported to adjust for potential heteroscedasticity.

5.2.2 Daily Abnormal Returns
In addition to investigating the cumulative abnormal returns over the entire
period, we also analyze daily returns for each individual trading day. This
analysis is based on the variation in the number of protestors on a categorical
scale of “moderate,” “intense” and “very intense”, as outlined in Appendix B.5.
Given that our protest data collection process has demonstrated that nearly all
protests took place during evenings, we lag the number of protestors to the
following trading day. For weekends and national holidays, we have attributed
the greatest category of protests that have taken place over the non-trading
days to the next trading day. This follows from the difficulty of aggregating

                                 17
protests using our scale, but also because the aggregation of protests will likely
fall into the same category as the highest protest day. Therefore, by taking
the maximum of the previous non-trading days, we get a good proxy for the
intensity of protests leading up to the next trading day. Thus, we get a second
specification in the form of

                                                                                                  ′
                                          p
          ARit = Niγ + Ptφ + (Pt × Ni)γ + Xi ν + δt + ηs + it, (2)
where ARit is defined as the abnormal return in relation to CAPM for firm
i on trading day t. Pt is a factor variable reflecting the number of protestors
attributable to trading day t. The effect of protests on stock performance is thus
captured in vector φ. Pt is also interacted with the connectedness variable Ni
to capture the differential effects between connected and non-connected firms.
                                                                                      ′
                                        p
This effect is reflected in the vector γ . Xi and ηs are still defined as control
vectors as outlined in the first specification. δt is a vector of time dummies
for each week. The rationale behind weekly time dummies is the fact that the
protest movement to a large extent followed a weekly cycle with intense protests
during the weekends and less intense protests on weekdays. Thus, the inclusion
of these dummies allows us to differentiate between the effect of the protests
and other events occurring these weeks which could affect abnormal returns.
                               p                                        p
   In this specification, φ and γ  are the coefficients of primary interest. γ  al-
lows us to specifically evaluate the differential effects of the intensity of protests
on connected vis-`a-vis non-connected firms. This specification also assumes that
there are no omitted variables varying over time and affecting both the number
of protestors and the stock returns such that CoV (Pt × Ni, i|Xi, δt, ηs)  6= 0.
    Furthermore, we need to assume that there is no reverse causality, i.e., that
the stock returns do not affect the intensity of protests. This assumption is
justified for multiple reasons. Firstly, the demonstrations have not had any
origin in the stock market returns. Rather, the protest movement is political
by nature. This is confirmed by the fact that any potential effects of stock prices
on street protests are undocumented as far as we are aware, suggesting that the
stock market returns did not, in themselves, motivate people to protest. Also,
since the effects of protests on returns are lagged, the risk of reverse causality is
virtually eliminated. However, the long-run trends in protest intensity present
the potential issue of identifying the effects they have on daily returns. As most
protests took place during weekends, the week leading up to the protest likely
provided clues to the future intensity of protests, which should then have been
incorporated into stock prices continuously.

5.3 Hypothesis Development
As shown by Acemoglu, Hassan & Tahoun (2018) and Fisman (2001), exoge-
nous shocks to the political leadership can lead to a reallocation of resources
through revaluation of the extractable rents from political connectedness. We

                                 18
hypothesize that the pro-democracy movement in Hong Kong should be suffi-
ciently significant for such a reallocation. If investors believe that the value of
pro-establishment connections will increase as a result, the value of these firms
should increase relative to non-connected firms and vice versa. Given that pre-
vious literature has suggested both positive and negative relative performance
of connected firms following changes in the political landscape, we adopt a two-
sided hypothesis. Thus, with our model, we test H0 : γ = 0 against a two-sided
alternative for our first specification. For our second empirical model, we test
      p
H0 : γ  = 0 against a two-sided alternative. In summary, we investigate the
following hypothesis:

    The stock performance of politically connected firms differs from that of
      non-connected firms in the period of the 2019 Hong Kong protests.

6 Results and Analysis

In this section, we present our results and analysis for the two empirical models.
Section 6.1 corresponds to Equation 1 for cumulative abnormal returns. Section
6.2 presents the results and analysis for Equation 2 using daily returns. Finally,
we conclude this section by an analysis of the total implications of our results.

6.1 Cumulative Abnormal Returns
6.1.1 Empirical Results
Table 5 presents our results for Equation 1. Column 1 shows our most parsi-
monious specification, which excludes our control variables. It shows a highly
significant coefficient at a 1% level. This suggests that there is a significant
difference in stock market performance between politically connected and non-
connected firms. More specifically, the effect is positive, implying that con-
nected firms exhibited 7.3% higher abnormal returns on average during the
period between 9th of June and 22nd of November 2019. In column 2, we
add our controls for size and leverage. Column 3 further adds the sector-fixed
effects, and thus represents our baseline specification.
    We find that the effect of political connectedness is robust to these controls
and that the coefficients are still significant at a 5% level in columns 2 and 3.
Although the values of the coefficients decrease somewhat in absolute terms,
the coefficients are still highly significant. As illustrated in Appendix B.6, the
p-value of our full specification is less than 3%. Furthermore, the low correlation
between the regressors, which are presented in Appendix B.7, mitigates the risk
of multicollinearity. With all of our controls, the political connectedness of the
firm explains 5.32% of the difference in performance between the connected and
non-connected firms on average. These results are also robust to controlling for
asset size instead of market capitalization, as can be seen in Appendix B.8.

                                 19
                Table 5: Ordinary Least Squares Regression

                               Cumulative Abnormal Return
                              (1) (2) (3)

    Connected Firm 0.0709*** 0.0612** 0.0585**
                           (0.0254) (0.0260) (0.0264)
    Leverage -0.0447 -0.0381
                                       (0.0291) (0.0306)
    Market Cap 2.32e-07** 2.41e-07**
                                       (1.14e-07) (1.19e-07)

    Observations 2,070 2,070 2,070
    Adjusted R-squared 0.001 0.004 0.007
    Sector Fixed Effects No No Yes
     This table presents the empirical results of our first specification for cumu-
     lative abnormal returns. Connected Firm follows our definition outlined
     in Section 4.1. Leverage is total debt to total assets and Market Cap is
     the firm’s market capitalization in millions of Hong Kong Dollars. Sector
     fixed effects treats the industry classification of firms as a factor variable.
     Robust standard errors are specified in parentheses.
                   *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

   One apparent feature of our results is the relatively low R-squared values.
However, given our model specification, this is expected. Variables such as size,
leverage and sector will only explain a small share of the variance in abnormal
stock performance. These are used solely as robustness checks on the effect of
political connectedness in our model. Thus, the only variable explaining the
variation in stock performance is the political connectedness.

6.1.2 Analysis
The fact that politically connected firms have performed better during our
research period implies that investors have positively revised their valuation of
such connections. In general, the main obstacle to untangling this correlation
is the fact that the pro-democracy movement has not had a clear outcome.
Although we cannot conclude the exact reasons for why investors positively
reassessed their valuation of political connectedness, we present below a number
of potential explanations as to why this would happen.

                                 20
   One possible scenario is that Hong Kong, as a result of the pro-democracy
movement, will become more independent. Its close ties with China currently
play an important role in Hong Kong politics and business. Hence, a loosening
of these ties would have far-reaching implications. According to figures from the
Hong Kong Trade and Industry Department, more than 50% of Hong Kong’s
trade in 2018 was with mainland China. The second biggest trade partner was
the USA, which represented 6.6% of total volume. Thus, it goes without saying
that any change in trade policy made by Beijing following changed diplomatic
relations would have severe consequences for Hong Kong-based companies. In
such a scenario, political connections to the pro-establishment alignment, and
by extension mainland China, could be of great value to ensure that supply
chains, distribution channels and financing remain intact under the new cir-
cumstances. This could be achieved through rent seeking through politically
connected board members.
    However, there is also a possibility that the opposite scenario materializes,
i.e., that the pro-democracy movement induces repressive measures from the
central government in Beijing, ultimately causing a loss of independence. A
chain of events along these lines could increase the value of political connect-
edness. This type of development would likely imply greater integration of
China and Hong Kong, meaning that Hong Kong firms would operate under
an economic environment similar to the one of the Chinese internal market. As
discussed in Section 3.2, previous literature has shown that by having politically
connected managers, firms operating in China receive preferential treatment.
It is possible that investors attribute some likelihood to this scenario as a result
of the pro-democracy movement.
   The final and most likely interpretation is that the outcome of the protests
is highly unclear and that firms, therefore, will have to operate under political
uncertainty for an indefinite time period. In such circumstances, it is certainly
beneficial to have board members who are familiar with the political environ-
ment. It is of particular benefit if these members are part of the current political
leadership, as they could use their influence to extract rents and thus help the
firm navigate and benefit from the political uncertainty.

6.2 Daily Abnormal Returns
6.2.1 Empirical Results
Table 6 presents our results for Equation 2 using a random effects panel data
regression. This specification includes all control variables previously outlined.
Before we run the regression, we test for autocorrelation and find that there
is no evidence for that, as shown in Appendix B.9. We find two statistically
significant coefficients in φ, indicating that the overall stock returns were neg-
atively affected by the presence of intense and very intense protests. Stocks
experienced, on average, 0.17% and 0.40% lower abnormal returns on days

                                 21
                 Table 6: Random Effects Regression

                                    Daily Abnormal Return

Connected Firm -8.15e-05
                                              (0.000348)
Moderate Protests -0.000219
                                              (0.000272)
Intense Protests -0.00170***
                                              (0.000316)
Very Intense Protests -0.00398***
                                              (0.000980)
Connected Firm × Moderate -6.52e-05
                                              (0.000578)
Connected Firm × Intense 0.000471
                                              (0.000799)
Connected Firm × Very Intense 0.00581**
                                               (0.00284)
Leverage 2.38e-06
                                                 (3.22e-06)
Market Cap 3.40e-09***
                                                 (1.32e-09)

Observations 242,190
Number of Companies 2,070
Sector Fixed Effects Yes
Time Dummies Yes
This table presents the empirical results of our second specification for daily
abnormal returns. Connected Firm follows our definition outlined in Section
4.1. Leverage is total debt to total assets and Market Cap is the firm’s mar-
ket capitalization in millions of Hong Kong Dollars. Furthermore, we have
included the dummy variables relating to the intensity of protests. Finally,
we have also included the interaction term between political connectedness
and the intensity of protests. Sector fixed effects treats the industry classifi-
cation of firms as a factor variable and time dummies are weekly dummies as
described in our method. Robust standard errors are specified in parentheses.
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                               22
with intense and very intense protests, respectively. We only find one statisti-
                                 p
cally significant coefficient in γ . This is the interaction term between political
connectedness and very intense protests, which is significantly positive at a 5%
level. This indicates that, on average, politically connected firms performed
0.58% better than non-connected firms on trading days following protests at-
tended by millions of people. Thus, the net effect on connected firms on days
with very intense protests is 0.18%.

6.2.2 Analysis
These results show that the protests had a statistically significant impact on
stock market performance. The more intense the protests, the lower the ab-
normal returns. This implies that, in general, the protests and the uncertainty
surrounding them have adversely affected stock performance. Furthermore, the
significant coefficient for the interaction term is in line with our previous re-
sults, suggesting that connected firms have performed better in response to
the protests. Interestingly, the only significant coefficient refers to the cate-
gory associated with the most intense protests. It is reasonable to assume that
the instances with the largest protests were more likely to surprise the market.
Thus, the fact that this specific coefficient is significant serves as a robustness
check to our findings for cumulative abnormal returns. In other words, con-
nected firms performed significantly better on the trading days on which the
impact of protests was the most concentrated. On these days, the connected
firms experienced a net positive abnormal return on average.
   One important aspect to consider is the potential market expectations of
protests, as outlined in Section 5.2.2. There is some reason to believe that
there were clues to the intensity of the protests before they took place. For
instance, many of the protests at the beginning of the research period took
place on weekends, with expectations of upcoming protests surfacing in the
weekdays before. Generally, this information would be incorporated in stock
prices before the protests transpired and would thus obfuscate some of our
results. This should be mitigated by our weekly time dummies, which adjust
for positive or negative sentiment on the market each week on a general level.
   Furthermore, daily protests became a considerably frequent occurrence in
the later stages of the research period. It is plausible that this led to a senti-
ment of protests being a constantly present element in the calculations of firms’
valuations and, as such, reduced the impact of protests on daily returns. Al-
together, these arguments are strengthened by comparing the results from our
two specifications. Politically connected firms exhibit higher abnormal returns
than non-connected firms over the entire research period, although this is only
reflected on individual trading days with protests sufficiently intense to surprise
the market.

                                 23
6.3 Conclusion
The pro-democracy movement has undoubtedly had a considerable impact on
Hong Kong, including its financial markets. In this paper, we provide evi-
dence that the protests have had a statistically significant and positive effect
on the stock market valuations of firms with a connection to the incumbent
pro-establishment political alignment. These results are robust to a number of
control variables. However, this difference is less clear in the daily returns of
connected and non-connected firms, apart from on trading days that followed
days of very intense protests. This suggests that there was a tendency for
information to be incorporated over a set of adjacent trading days.
    The totality of this evidence motivates our interpretation, which is that over
the research period, the value of political connectedness and, by extension, the
value of rent seeking activities, has increased.

7 Limitations and Suggestions for Future Re-
   search

7.1 Limitations
There are a few possible limitations to our study, which are outlined below.
Most of these have been addressed throughout this paper and are explained in
detail in this section. Although we have taken measures to reduce the effects
of these limitations, we believe that forthcoming papers could benefit from an
even more rigorous approach to these.
    Firstly, the results build on our classification of firms as connected or not
connected. We believe that our classification of firms as politically connected
is rather conservative. Numerous other proxies could be used to extend the
group of connected firms. Shareholding is an example of such a proxy which
could be used to extend this group of firms, although the methodological ap-
proach proved to be outside the scope of this paper as discussed in Section
4.1. This conservative approach should, however, create a bias towards zero for
the γ-coefficients, as there is a limited correlation between Ni and the control
variables. Thus, we can expect the actual effect of political connectedness to
be even stronger in reality than predicted by our models as long as we can
assume that the firms we do identify are randomly drawn from the total set of
connected firms.
    Secondly, our estimation of daily protestor data is subject to consideration.
Some of the problems are outlined in Section 4.2, such as biased estimates
and conflicting figures. However, the broad categorization made through our
modelling mitigates the issue of bias. Although reports on protests might vary
slightly between different sources, there needs to be a very extensive bias present
to misclassify the data point. As all measurements are on the order of ten, the

                                 24
impact of minor biases is thus reduced.
   Despite reducing the impact of bias, this scale of measurement also has
limitations. For instance, a continuous numerical scale would allow for a more
dynamic analysis of the variations in protests over time. However, this would
likely be difficult to achieve, given the nature of the reporting of these events.

7.2 Suggestions for Future Research
In this paper, we have investigated the specific case of the 2019 Hong Kong
pro-democracy movement and its effects on the financial markets. However,
this movement is only one of many in recent times, and it would be of interest
to also study the corresponding effects resulting from other recent civic move-
ments (e.g., Chile or Iraq). Such a comparative study could provide a better
understanding of our results and generate additional insights into the nature
and effects of different civic movements.
   Furthermore, little time has elapsed since the event of our study and the
writing of this paper, and the protests are, to a large extent, still ongoing
without any conclusive outcome. Given this, future research on the Hong Kong
case would benefit from allowing more time to pass to provide for a clearer
analysis of the events. Additionally, it is also feasible that future periods of
protests could differ significantly from the ones we have studied in terms of
political and institutional impact. In such a case, it would be of interest to
study the effects of the different periods of protests.

                                 25
References

Acemoglu, D., Hassan, T. A. & Tahoun, A. (2018), ‘The Power of the Street:
  Evidence From Egypt’s Arab Spring’, Review of Financial Studies 31(1), 1–
  42.

Aidt, T. S. (2016), ‘Rent Seeking and the Economics of Corruption’, Constitu-
  tional Political Economy 27(2), 142–157.

Albert, E. (2019), ‘Democracy in Hong Kong’, https://www.cf r.org/backgr
  ounder/democracy-hong-kong. Council on Foreign Relations. Accessed:
  2020-05-11.

Ball, R. & Brown, P. (1968), ‘An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting Income
  Numbers’, Journal of Accounting Research 6(2), 159–178.

Congleton, R., Hillman, A. & Konrad, K. (2008), ‘Forty Years of Research on
  Rent Seeking: An Overview’.

Dang, V. Q. T., So, E. P. K. & Yan, I. K. M. (2018), ‘The Value of Political
  Connection: Evidence From the 2011 Egyptian Revolution’, International
  Review of Economics & Finance 56, 238–257.

Davidson, H. (2019), ‘Clashes in Hong Kong After Vast Protest Against Ex-
  tradition Law’, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/jun/09/vast-pro
  test-in-hong-kong-against-extradition-law-china. The Guardian. Accessed:
  2020-05-11.

Ferguson, T. & Voth, H.-J. (2008), ‘Betting on Hitler - The Value of Polit-
  ical Connections in Nazi Germany’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  123(1), 101.

Fisman, R. (2001), ‘Estimating the Value of Political Connections’, The Amer-
  ican Economic Review 91(4), 1095–1102.

Fong, B. C. H. (2015), Hong Kong’s Governance Under Chinese Sovereignty,
  Vol. 2, 1. publ. edn, Routledge, London [u.a.].

Fowler, E. (2019), ‘Why the Extradition Law Will Pass, Despite the Largest
  Protest in Hong Kong History’, https://www.hongkongfp.com/2019/06/11/
  extradition-law-will-pass-despite-largest-protest-hong-kong-history/. Hong
  Kong Free Press. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Government of HKSAR (2020a), ‘Official Webpage of The Chief Executive of
  Hong Kong SAR’, https://www.ceo.gov.hk/eng/. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Government of HKSAR (2020b), ‘Official Webpage of The District Councils
  of Hong Kong SAR’, https://www.districtcouncils.gov.hk/index.html.
  Accessed: 2020-05-11.

                                 26
Government of HKSAR (2020c), ‘Official Webpage of The Executive Council of
  Hong Kong SAR’, https://www.ceo.gov.hk/exco/eng/index.htm. Accessed:
  2020-05-11.

Government of HKSAR (2020d), ‘Official Webpage of The Legislative Council
  of Hong Kong SAR’, https://www.legco.gov.hk/index.html. Accessed:
  2020-05-11.

Griffiths, J., Cheung, E. & Lee, C. (2019), ‘More Than 1 Million Protest in Hong
  Kong, Organizers Say, Over Chinese Extradition Law’, https://www.cnn.co
  m/2019/06/08/asia/hong-kong-extradition-bill-protest-intl/index.html.
  CNN. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Hong Kong Trade and Industry Department (n.d.), ‘Hong Kong’s Principal
  Trading Partners in 2018’, https://www.tid.gov.hk/english/trade relations
  /mainland/trade.html. Accessed: 2020-04-22.

Johnson, S. & Mitton, T. (2003), ‘Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence
  From Malaysia’, Journal of Financial Economics 67(2), 351–382.

Lau, S. (2014), ‘Rafael Hui ’Received Secret HK$11 Million Payment from
  Beijing’’, https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1598661/rafael
  -hui-got-secret-hk11m-payment-beijing-after-top-mainland. South China
  Morning Post. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Leung, J., Talmazan, Y. & Flanagan, E. (2019), ‘Pro-Democracy Candidates
  Win Big in Election Viewed as Referendum on Protests’, https://www.nbcn
  ews.com/news/world/hong-kong-turns-out-huge-numbers-vote-viewed-refe
  rendum-protests-n1090206. NBC News. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Li, J. (2019), ‘Hong Kong-China Extradition Plans Explained’, https://www.
  bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-47810723. BBC. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Martin, M. F. (2019), Hong Kong’s Legislative Council (Legco), Technical re-
  port, Congressional Research Service.

Mian, A. (2005), ‘Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent Provi-
  sion in an Emerging Financial Market’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  120(4), 1371–1411.

Rapoza, K. (2020), ‘Latest Data Shows Protests Sucking The Life Out Of Hong
  Kong Economy’, https://www.forbes.com/sites/kenrapoza/2020/01/03/late
  st-data-shows-protests-sucking-the-life-out-of-hong-kong-economy/#33351
  7c944f9. Forbes. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Scott, I. (2010), The Public Sector in Hong Kong, Hong Kong University Press.

                                 27
Tullock, G. (1967), ‘The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft’, Eco-
  nomic Inquiry 5(3), 224–232.

Wu, V. (2017), ‘Ex-Hong Kong Leader Jailed in Fall from ‘Such a Height’’, http
  s://www.reuters.com/article/us-hongkong-politics-tsang-idUSKBN16108R.
  Reuters. Accessed: 2020-05-11.

Yan, I., Chan, K. & Dang, V. (2011), ‘Chinese Firms’ Political Connection,
  Ownership, and Financing Constraints’, IDEAS Working Paper Series from
  RePEc .

                                 28
Appendix A Additional Background Information

A.1 District Councils
As of the 2019 District Council elections, there are 18 councils, comprising a
total of 479 council members. Of these, 452 are elected by universal suffrage in
                                                              6
the different districts. The remaining 27 are ex officio members.  The councils
undertake improvement projects and promote recreational, cultural and com-
munity activities in their respective district. They also advise the government
on issues pertaining to the well-being of its residents and serve as a channel for
citizens to pass their opinions up the official chain.
    Moreover, the district councils play a significant role in the elections of the
Chief Executive and the LegCo. This follows from the fact that they constitute
roughly 10% of the Election Committee and retain five of the seats in the
LegCo through their functional constituency. Thus, the district councils exert
considerable influence over the legislative and executive bodies of the political
system. However, their main purpose is to take part in matters that directly
affect the well-being of people in their district.

A.2 The Fugitive Offenders Amendment Bill
The purpose of the bill was to allow Hong Kong to detain and transfer people
wanted in countries with which Hong Kong has no formal extradition agree-
ments. Most noteworthy, these countries include China and Taiwan. It was
introduced following the remarkable murder case of Poon Hiu-wing, and quickly
received criticism from opponents claiming that it would allow China to arbi-
trarily detain political dissidents (Li 2019).
   Chang Tong-kai’s murder of girlfriend Poon Hiu-wing gained worldwide at-
tention after it became clear that it put Hong Kong in an unprecedented legal
situation. Shortly after killing Poon in a hotel in Taiwan while on vacation,
Chan flew back to Hong Kong. Despite confessing to the crime, Chan could
not be charged with murder in Hong Kong, given that it had occurred on Tai-
wanese territory. However, the lack of an extradition agreement also prevented
him from standing trial in Taiwan.

   6
    The 27 ex officio members of the District Councils represent the chairmen of the 27
rural committees in the Heung Yee Kuk. The Heung Yee Kuk is a statutory advisory body
safeguarding the welfare of the indigenous residents in the New Territories of Hong Kong.
The Legislative Council also has a seat dedicated to this body, given that it constitutes one
of the functional constituencies.

                                 29
Appendix B Summary Statistics and Supplemen-
              tary Tables

B.1 Connected Firms

                        Table 7: Connected Firms

      Ticker Company Name
      0001.HK CK Hutchison Holdings Limited
      0002.HK CLP Holdings Limited
      0003.HK Hong Kong and China Gas Co Limited
      0004.HK Wharf Holdings Limited
      0010.HK Hang Lung Group Limited
      0011.HK Hang Seng Bank Limited
      0016.HK Sun Hung Kai Properties Limited
      0020.HK Wheelock and Co Limited
      0023.HK Bank of East Asia Limited
      0040.HK Gold Peak Industries Holdings Limited
      0041.HK Great Eagle Holdings Limited
      0051.HK Harbour Centre Development Limited
      0057.HK Chen Hsong Holdings Limited
      0062.HK Transport International Holdings Limited
      0066.HK MTR Corp Limited
      0069.HK Shangri-La Asia Limited
      0081.HK China Overseas Grand Oceans Group Limited
      0083.HK Sino Land Co Limited
      0095.HK LVGEM (China) Real Estate Investment Co Limited
      0099.HK Wong’s International Holdings Limited
      0101.HK Hang Lung Properties Limited
      0123.HK Yuexiu Property Limited
      0131.HK Cheuk Nang Holdings Limited
      0135.HK Kunlun Energy Company Limited
      0179.HK Johnson Electric Holdings Limited
      0180.HK Kader Holdings Co Limited
      0181.HK Fujian Holdings Limited
      0199.HK ITC Properties Group Limited
      0207.HK Joy City Property Limited
      0230.HK Minmetals Land Limited
      0236.HK San Miguel Brewery Hong Kong Limited
      0247.HK Tsim Sha Tsui Properties Limited
      0259.HK Yeebo (International Holdings) Limited
      0270.HK Guangdong Investment Limited

                                 30
0291.HK China Resources Beer Holdings Limited
0293.HK Cathay Pacific Airways Limited
0298.HK Chuang’s China Investmentments Limited
0303.HK Vtech Holdings Limited
0315.HK Smartone Telecommunications Holdings Limited
0345.HK Vitasoy International Holdings Limited
0367.HK Chuang’s Consortium International Limited
0369.HK Wing Tai Properties
0388.HK Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited
0393.HK Glorious Sun Enterprises Limited
0406.HK Yau Lee Holdings Limited
0440.HK Dah Sing Financial Holdings Limited
0480.HK .HKR International Limited
0558.HK LK Technology Holdings Limited
0595.HK AV Concept Holdings Limited
0608.HK High Fashion International Limited
0617.HK Paliburg Holdings Limited
0620.HK DTXS Silk Road Investment Holdings Co Limited
0622.HK Oshidori International Holdings Limited
0659.HK NWS Holdings Limited
0662.HK Asia Financial Holdings Limited
0698.HK Tongda Group Holdings Limited
0762.HK China Unicom Hong Kong Limited
0817.HK China Jinmao Holdings Group Limited
0822.HK Ka Shui International Holdings Limited
0831.HK Convenience Retail Asia Limited
0872.HK TUS International Limited
0908.HK Zhuhai Holdings Investment Group Limited
0981.HK Semiconductor Manufacturing International Corp
0988.HK Silk Road Logistics Holdings Limited
1052.HK Yuexiu Transport Infrastructure Limited
1097.HK I-Cable Communications Limited
1128.HK Wynn Macau Limited
1212.HK Lifestyle International Holdings Limited
1221.HK Sino Hotels Holdings Limited
1270.HK Langham Hospitality Investment Limited
1299.HK AIA Group Limited
1313.HK China Resources Cement Holdings Limited
1367.HK Sfund International Holdings
1660.HK Zhaobangji Properties Holding Limited
1668.HK China South City Holdings Limited
1788.HK Guotai Junan International Holdings Limited
1929.HK Chow Tai Fook Jewellery Group Limited

                           31
1962.HK Evergreen Products Group Limited
1982.HK Nameson Holdings Limited
1997.HK Wharf Real Estate Investment Company
2007.HK Country Garden Holdings Co Limited
2083.HK Nature Home Holding Company Limited
2383.HK Tom Group Limited
2638.HK .HK Electric Investments Limited
2689.HK Nine Dragons Paper (Holdings) Limited
3800.HK GCL-Poly Energy Holdings Limited
3836.HK China Harmony New Energy Auto Holding Limited
3903.HK Hanhua Financial Holding Co Limited
8109.HK Kirin Group Holdings Limited
8372.HK Grand Brilliance Group Holdings Limited
This list includes all firms which are classified as politically connected as
per our categorization method, which is outlined in Section 4.1. Ticker
refers to the official HKEX ticker of the firm, whereas Company Name
refers to its full name.

                           32
                   2012-  2017-                 2012-       2017-2017-  2004-                     2017-2012-2000-2012-
               Position
                2005-20122005-20122004-20162000-20042000-20042005-20122000-20042005-20122000-20082002-2012 1998-20082000-2004     2005-20121998-20082000-20042005-20122000-20042000-2004 2000-20042000-20042005-20122005-20122012-20162005-2012
                                                   2017- LegCo:           2017- LegCo:
                                     2002-2007; 2012-           2002-2007; 2012-           ExCo: 2002-2012        ExCo: 2002-2005
           Tenure in Political                     ExCo: 2002-2012;       ExCo: 2002-2012;  LegCo: 2000-2016       LegCo: 2000-2008;
                                                               ExCo: 2012- LegCo:





           Political PositionMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council





           Tenure in Company2015-2012-1984-1993-2014-2000-2009-2018-2003-2009-1997-1995-2016-2012-2004-  1998-2017-2017-2011-2010-2005-2005-  1999-Present2004-2012-2019-2010-2012-2003-2010-1995-2018-1991-2005-1997-  1998-









      Table 8: List of Politicians in Connected Firms

           Role in CompanyNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive Deputy Chairman of the BoardExecutive ChairmanIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorExecutive ChairmanIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive Vice ChairmanIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive Director











           Connected Person(Charles) Lee Yeh-kwong(Fanny) Law Fan Chiu-fun(David) Li Kwok-po(Vincent) Fang Kang(Martin) Liao Cheung-kong(Eric) Li Ka-Cheung(Eric) Li Ka-Cheung(Henry) Fan Hung Ling(Kenneth) Ting Woo-shou(Arthur) Li Kwok-cheung(David) Li Kwok-poLui Ming-wah(Ambrose) Lee Siu-kwong(Frankie) Yick Chi-Ming(Bernard) Charnwut Chan(Eric) Li Ka-Cheung(Frank) Chan FanJames Henry Lau(Arthur) Li Kwok-cheung(Jeffrey) Lam Kin-fungRonald Arculli(Bernard) Charnwut Chan(Eric) Li Ka-CheungRonald Arculli(Ambrose) Lau Hon-chuen(Kenneth) Ting Woo-shou(Jasper) Tsang Yok-sing(Joseph) Yam Chi-kwong(Kenneth) Ting Woo-shou(Christopher) Cheung Wah-fung(Abraham) Shek Lai-Him(Ambrose) Lau Hon-chuen(Fanny) Law Fan Chiu-fun(David) Li Kwok-poRonald ArculliTien Pei-chun(David) Li Kwok-po

List of Politicians in Connected Firms

          Ticker0001.HK0002.HK0003.HK0004.HK0010.HK0011.HK0016.HK0016.HK0020.HK0023.HK0023.HK0040.HK0041.HK0051.HK0057.HK0062.HK0066.HK0066.HK0069.HK0081.HK0083.HK0095.HK0099.HK0101.HK0123.HK0131.HK0135.HK0179.HK0180.HK0181.HK0199.HK0207.HK0230.HK0236.HK0247.HK0259.HK0270.HK
B.2

                                              33
                   2012-         2004-2002-         2004-       2012-2000-2012-2008-2000-       2012-2012-2012-2012-         2004-2004-2000-

     1998-20082000-20041998-20082000-20042000-20042000-20042005-20122000-2004   2000-20041998-20082005-20122005-20122000-20082000-2008     2012-20171998-20082000-20042002-20072000-20042007-20122000-20082000-2004     2005-2012
  2017- LegCo:2017- LegCo:                     2017- LegCo:                     2017- LegCo:

ExCo: 2002-2012;ExCo: 2002-2012;                ExCo: 2002-2012;                ExCo: 2002-2012;
                             ExCo: 2012- LegCo:                                                      ExCo: 2012- LegCo:ExCo: 2012- LegCo:



Member of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council

                                     2006-12,



2006-  2003-2018-  1997-2001-1996-1997-1994-2013-2018-Director:Chairman: 2018-1997-2000-  2017-2017-2005-2004-1996-2019-2002-2015-2017-2004-2019-     2004-2012-2007-2007-2014-2017-1998-2018-2009-1996-2017-2009-2004-2005-








Independent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive Independent DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive Independent Director; ChairmanIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorChief Executive OfficerPresident, Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive Director













(Bernard) Charnwut Chan(Eric) Li Ka-Cheung(Bernard) Charnwut Chan(David) Chu Yu-lin(Michael) Tien Puk-sun(Eric) Li Ka-CheungNg Leung-sing(David) Li Kwok-po(David) Chu Yu-lin(Jeffrey) Lam Kin-fung(Laura) Cha Shih May-lung(Ambrose) Lau Hon-chuen(Bernard) Charnwut Chan(Andrew) Leung Kwan-yuen(Henry) Fan Hung LingRonald ArculliLui Ming-wahLui Ming-wah(Felix) Chung Kwok-pan(Abraham) Shek Lai-Him(Fanny) Law Fan Chiu-fun(Gary) Chan Hak-kan(Abraham) Shek Lai-Him(Eric) Ma Siu-cheung(Bernard) Charnwut Chan(Christopher) Cheung Wah-fung(Fanny) Law Fan Chiu-fun(Ambrose) Lau Hon-chuenLo Wai-kwok(Sarah Mary) Liao Sau-tungElizabeth Quat(David) Chu Yu-lin(Lawrence) Lau Juen-yeeChoy So-yuk(Ambrose) Lau Hon-chuen(Jeffrey) Lam Kin-fung(Jeffrey) Lam Kin-fung(Abraham) Shek Lai-HimRonald Arculli


0291.HK0291.HK0293.HK0298.HK0303.HK0315.HK0315.HK0345.HK0367.HK0369.HK0388.HK0393.HK0406.HK0440.HK0480.HK0480.HK0558.HK0595.HK0608.HK0617.HK0620.HK0622.HK0659.HK0659.HK0662.HK0698.HK0762.HK0817.HK0822.HK0831.HK0872.HK0908.HK0981.HK0988.HK1052.HK1097.HK1128.HK1212.HK1221.HK

                                              34
  2017-2012-2012-2004-  2004-2016-2012-2004-2000-         2016-        Political

2007-20172002-2007 2007-2017       2002-20052012-20172005-20122000-20042000-20122000-20042012-20162000-2004

                                     2002-2007; 2012-
                ExCo: 2012- LegCo:ExCo: 2017- LegCo:



Member of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive Council;Member of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Executive CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative CouncilMember of Legislative Council

                                                                 specifies the period during which the person has had this role.
                                       refers to the official HKEX ticker of the company in which the connected


2018-2017-2008-2014-2019-2009-2018-2011-2017-Present2018-2017-2006-2011-2003-2013-2013-2007-2019-2013-2015-2018-Ticker


                                         Tenure in Company




Independent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive ChairmanIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorNon-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive DirectorIndependent Non-Executive Director

                                                   represents the political position the person has possessed and during which period, respectively.

                                                specifies what their role in the company is, and








                                                       Role in Company


                                                         Tenure in Political Position
Chan Ka-keungChow Chung-kong(Stephen) Ip Shu Kwan(Felix) Chung Kwok-panMa Fung-kwok(Andrew) Leung Kwan-yuenChan Ka-keung(Jeffrey) Lam Kin-fung(Kenneth) Lau Ip-keung(Fanny) Law Fan Chiu-fun(Andrew) Leung Kwan-yuenYeoh Eng Kiong(Abraham) Shek Lai-Him(Arthur) Li Kwok-cheung(Anna) Wu Hung-yukRonald ArculliNg Leung-sing(Raymond) Ho Chung-tai(Edward) Lau Kwok-fanNg Leung-sing(Christopher) Chung Shu-kunNg Leung-sing
                            and

1270.HK1299.HK1313.HK1367.HK1660.HK1668.HK1788.HK1929.HK1962.HK1982.HK1997.HK1997.HK2007.HK2083.HK2383.HK2638.HK2689.HK3800.HK3836.HK3903.HK8109.HK8372.HKThis list includes all politicians that are involved in firms which we have identified as connected.person is involved.Position

                                              35
B.3 Daily Protest Data

                    Table 9: Data Points for Daily Protests

    Date Category Source
  9-Jun-19 Millions Hong Kong Free Press
 10-Jun-19 Missing
 11-Jun-19 Missing
 12-Jun-19 Tens of thousands Hong Kong Free Press
 13-Jun-19 Missing
 14-Jun-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
 15-Jun-19 Missing
 16-Jun-19 Millions South China Morning Post
 17-Jun-19 Missing
 18-Jun-19 Missing
 19-Jun-19 Missing
 20-Jun-19 Missing
 21-Jun-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
 22-Jun-19 Missing
 23-Jun-19 Missing
 24-Jun-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
 25-Jun-19 Missing
 26-Jun-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
 27-Jun-19 Hundreds Hong Kong Free Press
 28-Jun-19 Hundreds Hong Kong Free Press
 29-Jun-19 Missing
 30-Jun-19 Missing
  1-Jul-19 Hundreds of thousands Hong Kong Free Press
  2-Jul-19 Missing
  3-Jul-19 Missing
  4-Jul-19 Missing
  5-Jul-19 Thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
  6-Jul-19 Tens of thousands Hong Kong Free Press
  7-Jul-19 Hundreds of thousands The Guardian
  8-Jul-19 Missing
  9-Jul-19 Missing
  10-Jul-19 Missing
  11-Jul-19 Missing
  12-Jul-19 Missing
  13-Jul-19 Tens of thousands South China Morning Post
  14-Jul-19 Tens of thousands South China Morning Post
  15-Jul-19 Missing

                                 36
16-Jul-19 Missing
17-Jul-19 Thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
18-Jul-19 Missing
19-Jul-19 Missing
20-Jul-19 Missing
21-Jul-19 Hundreds of thousands BBC
22-Jul-19 Missing
23-Jul-19 Missing
24-Jul-19 Missing
25-Jul-19 Missing
26-Jul-19 Tens of thousands South China Morning Post
27-Jul-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
28-Jul-19 Tens of thousands Wall Street Journal
29-Jul-19 Missing
30-Jul-19 Missing
31-Jul-19 Missing
1-Aug-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
2-Aug-19 Tens of thousands NY Times
3-Aug-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
 4-Aug-19 Hundreds of thousands South China Morning Post
 5-Aug-19 Hundreds of thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
 6-Aug-19 Missing
7-Aug-19 Thousands The Guardian
8-Aug-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
9-Aug-19 Thousands NY Times
10-Aug-19 Hundreds Radio Television Hong Kong
11-Aug-19 Missing
12-Aug-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
13-Aug-19 Missing
14-Aug-19 Missing
15-Aug-19 Missing
16-Aug-19 Tens of thousands Hong Kong Free Press
17-Aug-19 Tens of thousands South China Morning Post
18-Aug-19 Millions Radio Television Hong Kong
19-Aug-19 Missing
20-Aug-19 Missing
21-Aug-19 Hundreds Hong Kong Free Press
22-Aug-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
23-Aug-19 Hundreds of thousands South China Morning Post
24-Aug-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
25-Aug-19 Tens of thousands NY Times
26-Aug-19 Missing

                                37
27-Aug-19 Missing
28-Aug-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
29-Aug-19 Missing
30-Aug-19 Missing
31-Aug-19 Tens of thousands BBC
 1-Sep-19 Hundreds NY Times
 2-Sep-19 Tens of thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
 3-Sep-19 Missing
 4-Sep-19 Missing
 5-Sep-19 Missing
 6-Sep-19 Missing
 7-Sep-19 Missing
 8-Sep-19 Thousands Time
 9-Sep-19 Missing
10-Sep-19 Missing
11-Sep-19 Thousands The Guardian
12-Sep-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
13-Sep-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
14-Sep-19 Missing
15-Sep-19 Thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
16-Sep-19 Missing
17-Sep-19 Missing
18-Sep-19 Missing
19-Sep-19 Missing
20-Sep-19 Missing
21-Sep-19 Hundreds Radio Television Hong Kong
22-Sep-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
23-Sep-19 Missing
24-Sep-19 Missing
25-Sep-19 Missing
26-Sep-19 Missing
27-Sep-19 Tens of thousands South China Morning Post
28-Sep-19 Tens of thousands NY Times
29-Sep-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
30-Sep-19 Missing
 1-Oct-19 Tens of thousands The Guardian
 2-Oct-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
 3-Oct-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
 4-Oct-19 Thousands The Guardian
 5-Oct-19 Thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
 6-Oct-19 Tens of thousands Washington Post
 7-Oct-19 Missing

                                38
 8-Oct-19 Missing
 9-Oct-19 Hundreds South China Morning Post
10-Oct-19 Missing
11-Oct-19 Missing
12-Oct-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
13-Oct-19 Missing
14-Oct-19 Tens of thousands Hong Kong Free Press
15-Oct-19 Missing
16-Oct-19 Missing
17-Oct-19 Missing
18-Oct-19 Hundreds Hong Kong Free Press
19-Oct-19 Missing
20-Oct-19 Hundreds of thousands Hong Kong Free Press
21-Oct-19 Missing
22-Oct-19 Missing
23-Oct-19 Missing
24-Oct-19 Hundreds Washington Post
25-Oct-19 Hundreds Radio Television Hong Kong
26-Oct-19 Hundreds NY Times
27-Oct-19 Missing
28-Oct-19 Hundreds Hong Kong Free Press
29-Oct-19 Missing
30-Oct-19 Missing
31-Oct-19 Missing
 1-Nov-19 Missing
2-Nov-19 Thousands Radio Television Hong Kong
 3-Nov-19 Missing
 4-Nov-19 Missing
5-Nov-19 Hundreds Hong Kong Free Press
 6-Nov-19 Missing
 7-Nov-19 Missing
8-Nov-19 Hundreds The Guardian
9-Nov-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
10-Nov-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
11-Nov-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
12-Nov-19 Thousands CNN
13-Nov-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
14-Nov-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
15-Nov-19 Thousands Hong Kong Free Press
16-Nov-19 Thousands South China Morning Post
17-Nov-19 Missing
18-Nov-19 Missing

                                39
 19-Nov-19 Missing
 20-Nov-19 Missing
 21-Nov-19 Hundreds Radio Television Hong Kong
 22-Nov-19 Missing
 This table presents all individual days in our research period and the intensity of
 protests for those days. Source indicates which news outlet we have obtained the
  figure from.

B.4 Dataset With and Without Extreme Outliers

                          Figure 1: With Outliers

                              Logarithmized Cumulative Returns
                          2


                          0


                               -2

                        Cumulative Abnormal Return


                               -4

                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                       Connected Firm

                     This figure visualizes the distribution of logarith-
                   mized cumulative returns for connected and non-
                   connected firms.

                                 40
                        Figure 2: Without Outliers

                              Logarithmized Cumulative Returns
                          2


                          1


                          0


                               -1


                          Cumulative Abnormal Return-2


                               -3
                       0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
                                                       Connected Firm

                     This figure visualizes the distribution of logarith-
                   mized cumulative returns for connected and non-
                    connected firms after dropping our two outliers as
                     specified in Section 4.3.

B.5 Categorization of Protestor Data

                 Table 10: Categorization of Protestor Data

     Raw Data Category
     Missing Missing
     Hundreds Moderate
     Thousands Moderate
     Tens of Thousands Intense
     Hundreds of Thousands Intense
     Millions Very Intense
       This table presents our categorization of protest data as outlined Sec-
       tion 5.2.2. The purpose of this categorization is to obtain a better
       estimate of the influence of protest intensity on stock market valua-
       tions. In our paper, it is not the specific number of protesters that is
        central to our analysis, but rather the general intensity of the protests.

                                 41
B.6 P-values of Table 5

                            Table 11: P-Values

                                 (1) (2) (3)
                     P-Value 0.005 0.019 0.027
                      This table shows p-values for γ in
                         our first regression seen in Table 5
                         as reported by Stata.

B.7 Correlation Matrix

                        Table 12: Correlation Matrix

                      Connected Firm Market Cap Leverage
      Connected Firm 1.0000
      Market Cap 0.1166 1.0000
      Leverage 0.0249 -0.0037 1.0000
      This table presents the correlation matrix for our variables. Con-
      nected Firm refers to politically connected firms as defined in Sec-
      tion 4.1. Market Cap is the market capitalization of the firm in
      millions of Hong Kong Dollars and Leverage is the ratio of total
       debt to total assets.

                                 42
B.8 Asset Value as Control for Size

          Table 13: Regression on Specification 1 Using Asset Value

                               Cumulative Abnormal Return

     Connected Firm 0.0640**
                                              (0.0261)
     Leverage -0.0389
                                              (0.0306)
     Asset Value 6.05e-05**
                                              (2.97e-05)

     Observations 2,070
     Adjusted R-squared 0.005
     Sector Fixed Effects Yes
      This table presents the empirical results for our first specification con-
     cerning cumulative abnormal returns, using asset value instead of market
     capitalization as a control for size. Connected Firm refers to politically
     connected firms as defined in Section 4.1. Leverage is the ratio of total
     debt to total assets and Asset Value is the firm’s total value of assets in
     Hong Kong Dollars. Sector Fixed Effects treats the industry classifica-
      tion of firms as a factor variable. Robust standard errors are specified in
     parentheses.
                    *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

B.9 Test for Autocorrelation

        Table 14: Wooldridge Test for Autocorrelation in Panel Data

                H0: No First-Order Autocorrelation
            F(1, 2069) 1.051
          Prob > F 0.3054
              This table shows the results of a Wooldridge’s test for
             autocorrelation in our panel data. We can conclude
             that there is no clear evidence that autocorrelation
           exists since Prob > F is not significant.

                                 43