BETTER OFF WITHOUT YOU?

A STUDY ON CAPITAL ALLOCATION EFFICIENCY OF
SPIN-OFFS IN THE UNITED STATES

ALEXANDER RIBRANT

ALICE ASKENSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Better off Without You? A Study on Capital Allocation Efficiency of Spin-offs in
the United States

Abstract:
Through this paper we examine the internal capital allocation efficiency of spun-off
entities, before and after completing spin-offs from their respective parent companies.
The study involves a collection of 78 public, corporate spin-offs in the US during the
time period 2005-2016. Although indicating that the firms’ sensitivity to investment
opportunities, measured by industry median Tobin’s Q, increases, we find no significant
evidence in our thesis supporting that spun-off entities from diversified firms improve
their capital allocation efficiency post spin-offs. However, statistically significant
evidence is obtained specifically supporting that large spun-off entities and single-
segment spun-off entities operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in
industry median Q, indeed improve their capital allocation efficiency post spin-offs.
Conclusively, our findings indicate that the undertaking of spin-offs may have a positive
effect on the internal capital allocation of the spun-off entities, being larger for entities
with specific characteristics.

Keywords:

   Spin-offs, Capital Allocation Efficiency, Investments, Tobin’s Q

Authors:

   Alexander Ribrant (24285)
   Alice Askenström (24106)

Tutor:

   Håkan Thorsell, Visiting Researcher, Department of Accounting

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Alexander Ribrant and Alice Askenström, 2020

                                   1
1. Introduction

A spin-off is a type of divestiture where the parent company distributes new shares of
an existing division or business, pro rata to its existing shareholders, and creates a new
independent company. Studies on spin-offs’ effect on shareholder wealth have
concluded a positive relationship and driven a trend of an increased amount of spin-offs
within the corporate world during recent years. The shareholder wealth from a spin-off
is generated through an increased market valuation, that stems from expectations of
value creation (Miles and Rosenfeld 1983). Less research has been conducted regarding
the internal implications of spin-offs. Comment and Jarrell (1995) provide evidence that
greater corporate focus results in increased efficiency and shareholder wealth, which
also is a common motive for conducting spin-offs. Similar to Gertner, Powers and
Scharfsten (2002) we aim to investigate the effects on internal capital allocation and
investment efficiency for spun-off entities after conducting a spin-off from its parent
company.

Subsequently, this thesis undertakes to address the following main question: Do spun-
off entities from diversified firms improve capital allocation efficiency post spin-off?
Similar to Gertner et al. (2002) and Ahn and Denis (2004) this study is conducted for
listed companies in the US, but for a more recent time period, 2005-2016. This specific
time period is interesting due to the lack of recent research and the observed increase in
spin-offs during the period. In addition to the aforementioned baseline question, other
contingencies are tested that previously have been left unaddressed: Do larger spun-off
entities and single-segment spun-off entities operating in industries with a low volatility
in investment opportunities, improve their capital allocation efficiency relatively more
post spin-off? It is interesting to investigate if the size of the spin-off and the volatility
of the industry’s investment opportunities have an effect on the internal capital
allocation, since this can provide guidance for management whether a spin-off would be
beneficial for the specific entity and the parent company’s shareholders.

Central to studies conducted by Ahn and Denis (2004), Gertner et al. (2002) among
others is Tobin’s Q. Tobin’s Q ratio is calculated through dividing the market value of a
firm’s capital stock by its replacement value. Consequently, in this thesis Tobin’s Q is
used as a proxy for investment opportunities, basing the lack of investment efficiency
on a suboptimal allocation of investments in high and low Q businesses. In order to gain
insight in how a spin-off affects the spun off entity’s allocation of internal capital, the
sensitivity of investment to Q is observed.

                                   2
To investigate the aforementioned research questions, fixed effect panel data
regressions are constructed. Time fixed effects are used to control for changes in
investment ratio over time and macroeconomic shocks. The investment ratio of a spun-
off entity represents the dependent variable and is defined as capital expenditures
normalized by assets. The interaction term consists of the independent variable Industry
Median q measuring the investment opportunities in the industry, and the dummy
variable pre indicating the years before and after the spin-off. This term is expected to
have a negative and significant alignment with the dependent variable investment ratio.
Consequently, it would indicate that the sensitivity to Q increases within spun-off
entities after spin-offs are conducted, which would provide supporting evidence that
spin-offs allocate their internal capital more efficiently as independent units, rather than
part of their parent companies. Further, we investigate if the spun-off entities’
differences in size and experienced volatility of industry median Q have an effect on
their internal capital allocation by separating the firms into different groups.

In this thesis, we find no significant evidence supporting that spun-off entities from
diversified firms improve their capital allocation and investment efficiency post spin-
offs. The value signs of the coefficients in the model are although in line with Gertner et
al. (2002), indicating that the sensitivity to Q increases for post spin-off periods relative
to pre spin-off periods. However, due to statistical insignificance this indiciation should
be interpreted carefully. The relatively small sample size and use of industry median Q
as a proxy for investment opportunities are potential reasons for loss of statistical
significance.

For the second hypothesis we find significant results supporting that larger spun-off
entities allocate their capital more efficiently post spin-offs. On the other hand, we find
that the sensitivity to Q for smaller spun-off entities increases before spin-offs. These
results are, however, not significant and should therefore be interpreted with caution.

Regarding the third hypothesis we find significant results supporting that single-
segment spin-offs operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in industry
median Q allocate their capital more efficiently post-spin-offs. This is in line with our
predictions and of potential interest to companies in the spin-off decision making
process.

The thesis is structured in the following way: Section two starts off with an overview of
theories and concepts, followed by a literature review of the most important research

                                   3
findings within the area. Section three presents the empirical background consisting of
the data collection process, our hypotheses and methodology. Tests of the model
assumptions are also included to assess the robustness of the regression model. Section
four further builds on the data and presents the results as well as analysis of the
conducted regressions. This is followed by a discussion of the findings and limitations
of our research. Lastly, section six concludes our findings briefly and presents proposed
directions for future research.

                                   4
2. Theoretical Framework and Literature Review
2.1 Theoretical Framework
Diversification/Conglomerate Discount
The Diversification Discount is a financial concept describing how the stock market
values a diversified firm less than the sum of the different parts and assets it consists of.
A diversified firm is defined as a firm that operates or owns a number of unrelated
business segments or firms (Maksimovic, Phillips 2002 and Laeven, Levine 2007).
Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000) provide evidence supporting the diversification
discount and find that diversified firms incur lower benefits and higher costs compared
to more focused firms. Burch and Nada (2003) argue that this discount partly occurs due
to the increased difficulty of effectively managing an array of different segments and
divisions, compared to only operating a single-segment or more focused firm. The
aforementioned researchers further study this area in connection to spin-offs, where a
conclusion is drawn indicating that the diversification discount is an explanatory factor
in the loss of value for a diversified firm. Furthermore, Laeven and Levine (2007)
provide evidence that large diversified firms incur additional agency costs and internal
conflicts, resulting in a situation where the costs of diversification exceeds the related
benefits.

Tobin’s Q
The Tobin’s Q concept was created in 1961 by James Tobin. The Q ratio is calculated
by dividing the market value of a company by the replacement value of its assets. In
financial research, Tobin’s Q has previously been used with a variety of purposes, such
as explaining the relationship between investments, the capital stock and diversification
(Jose, Nichols, Stevens 1986) as well as examining the effect of ownership structure on
firm value (Cho 1998). Should a firm’s Tobin’s Q ratio equal one, the market value
precisely reflects the recorded assets of the company. Should the ratio exceed one, the
market value is consequently higher than the recorded assets, implying that the firm
holds value that is not measured in the assets. Tobin’s Q can further be related to
investments. A Q larger than one implies that the firm has greater prospects to make
capital investments, and the opposite if Q subceeds one. Scharfstein (1988) found that
multi-segment firms have lower Q ratios than single-segment firms, and that they also
tend to invest more in low-Q industries compared to high-Q industries.

Gertner et. al (2002) and Ahn and Denis (2004) use a proxy for Q when studying this
particular area. The calculation of the proxy is calculated through dividing the market
value by the book value, instead of the replacement value, since it is difficult to measure

                                   5
the actual replacement value of assets. This proxy is considered to have no significant
effect on the results (Perfect and Wiles, 1994) and is therefore applied in our thesis as
well.

2.2 Literature Review
Internal Capital Markets and Inefficient Investment Allocation
The internal capital market is an important mechanism managing decisions with regards
to capital allocation and investment efficiency. This includes internal corporate
questions such as how a diversified firm should distribute its capital between different
business units in order to exploit the best possible investment opportunities?
(Scharfstein, 1998).

Scharfstein (1998), Shin and Stulz (1998) and others, have studied the efficiency and
functionality of internal capital markets by studying the correlation between firms’
capital expenditures and the investments opportunities that exist in the industries where
they operate, usually measured by the industry median Tobin’s Q. The industry median
Q is in the aforementioned research defined as the median Q for all companies operating
in the same industry, which is usually defined as companies possessing identical three-
digit SIC codes. The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) is a system for classifying
industries by specific four-digit codes. See Appendix 1 for further guidance.

Scharfstein (1998) found that conglomerate firms tend to invest more in low Q-
divisions, and less in high Q-divisions, compared to more focused firms. Research by
Rajan et al. (2000) further supports Scharfstein’s argument by finding that
conglomerates invest more in industries carrying poor investment opportunities.
Additionally, this is supported by Shin and Stulz (1998) who found that there is no
systematic way in how firms allocate the capital to divisions experiencing superior
investment opportunities. The aforementioned arguments provide support for potential
inefficiency problems related to internal capital allocation within diversified firms.

Rajan et al. (2000) further conclude that an increased diversity in opportunities and
resources between different divisions decrease investment efficiency, compared to more
homogenous divisions. This can partially explain the diversification discount, reflecting
how the stock market tends to value diversified firms lower than its more focused peers.
Further, it indicates a positive correlation between the firm’s size and its experienced
diversification discount.

                                   6
Spin-Offs: Motivation and Value Creation
A spin-off is, as previously mentioned, a type of divestiture where the parent company
distributes new shares of an existing division or business, pro rata to its existing
shareholders, creating a new independent company. The diversification discount can
drive diversified firms to conduct spin-offs in order to increase firm value and reach a
more focused operational structure. Miles, Rosenfeld (1983) and Daley, Mehrotra and
Sivakumar (1997) among others present data proving that both parent companies and
the spun-off entities experience cumulative positive abnormal excess returns at the
announcement of spin-offs, as well as in the long-run. Miles and Rosenfeld’s (1983)
findings show that the increased shareholder wealth is more substantial for larger spin-
offs, compared to its smaller peers. Daley et al. (1997) further conclude that spin-offs
create excessive value when unrelated businesses are divested, since it allows managers
to focus on the company’s core operations.

Spin-offs: Investment Allocation Efficiency
Gertner et. al (2002) examine the spun-off entities’ sensitivity to Q pre and post spin-
off, to evaluate the changes in their investment allocation efficiency. The sensitivity
term represents the firms’ ability to detect changes in Q, resembling investment
opportunities, and adapt the corporate investments accordingly. Thus, a spin-off
experiencing an increase in its relevant industry median Q, i.e. investment opportunities,
and that subsequently increases its investments can consequently be regarded as more
sensitive to Q, compared to an identical firm holding its investments flat, although
experiencing an equal increase in investment opportunities.

Gertner et. al, (2002) found that spun-off entities improve their internal capital
allocation efficiency post spin-offs. They also saw an overall increased sensitivity of
investment to Q after the spin-off, with the results being most observable for spin-offs
operating in unrelated industries to their parents, as well as when there is a positive
reaction to the spin-off announcement. These findings are further supported by Ahn and
Denis (2004) who provide evidence that spin-offs will reduce the discount of diversified
companies and improve the allocation of capital expenditures across divisions, which
creates excess value. Ahn and Denis (2004) and Gertner et. al (2002) studied this topic
from different perspectives, but collectively concluded that spin-offs may lead to an
improved capital allocation efficiency both for parents and spun-off entities.

                                   7
Spin-offs: Industry-specific Investment Opportunities and Volatility
As stated previously, Gertner et. al (2002) find an overall increased sensitivity of
investment to Q after the spin-off, where the results are most observable for spin-offs
that operate in industries unrelated to those of their respective parents, indicating that
industry-specific characteristics is an explainable factor when studying internal
investment efficiency. However, defining a measure of relatedness is problematic and
acted as a limitation to Gertner et. al’s paper (2002). Kallapur and Trombley (2001)
argue that industry-specific investment opportunity sets are primarily determined by
factors such as barriers to entry, product life-cycles and competitive environment.
Furthermore, they emphasize a huge variation in these factors between, and over time
also within, different industries, as well as the effect they may have on firms’
investments.

Since market valuations are the main drivers of changes in the industry median q ratios,
and thus investment opportunities, the effect of stock market volatility on spun-off
entities’ internal investment efficiency ought to be examined. Zuliu Hu (1995) found
that excessive volatility might weaken the stock market’s role as a forecasting
mechanism and cause firms to systematically ignore volatile short-run changes and
instead opt for long-term investment decisions.

                                   8
3. Empirical Background
3.1 Data
3.1.1 Data Collection - Spin-offs and Parent Companies
The first step in collecting the relevant data includes extracting a list covering all the
spin-offs in the United States during the time period 2005-2016 from the SDC Platinum
Merger and Acquisitions Database. SDC Platinum is a software application owned by
Thomson Reuters and used as a database for analyzing spin-offs and other types of deal
activity. From the aforementioned database we collect the name of the parent company,
spun-off entity, the SIC-codes, the tickers, the size of the spin-off as well as the
effective year of completion. The sample was restricted by only including parent
companies with a public status and spin-offs with a transaction value greater than zero.
These two restrictions are appropriate since we are only interested in public parents and
spin-offs, and the transaction value is an important variable for our second research
question. The restriction for transaction value removed 316 of 518 spin-offs, which left
us with a sample of a total of 202 spin-offs. Afterwards, the sample was restricted
manually by removing companies with SIC-codes between 6000-6799, including
companies within the financial sector, such as banks and insurance companies, which
are often highly levered and therefore inappropriate when using Tobin’s Q.
Furthermore, financial and non-financial companies are usually separated in accounting
due to the different financial reporting methods implemented. This screening left us
with a sample of 162 spin-offs.

The sample was further restricted and adjusted by only including tax-free spin-offs, as
well as manually ensuring that the transaction actually was a spin-off. A spin-off is
generally tax-free when the spun-off entity becomes a publicly owned, independent
company with its own ticker symbol and management team. This can occur if the parent
company distributes at least 80 % of its shares to existing shareholders on a pro rata
basis or by issuing an exchange offer to current shareholders. Other requirements to
classify a spin-off as tax-free is that the separating entity has been an active operation of
the parent company for at least five years prior to the spin-off, and that this entity, as
well as the parent company, is an active business immediately after the spin-off (Section
355, Internal Revenue Code). To ensure fulfillment of the aforementioned requirements,
the sample has been manually restricted by reading relevant news articles and SEC
filings. If a spin-off is classified as tax-free in an SEC filing, one can assume that the
criterias are fulfilled. Furthermore, spin-offs and parent companies that have partaken in
or experienced certain events that affect comparability, such as loss of independence
directly after merger, tracking stock issues or consecutive bankruptcy, have been

                                   9
removed. These spin-offs are classified as “complex transactions” in our study. An
example of a complex transaction is the spin-off of Motorola Inc, Motorola Mobility,
which merged with Google immediately after the spin-off had occurred. After executing
the aforementioned adjustments, we are left with a sample of 105 spin-offs.

The final step in adjusting the sample of spin-offs includes removal of parent companies
without any firm level Compustat financial data available three years preceding and
following the spin-off, as well as spun-off entities missing the equivalent data for at
least one year preceding and following the spin-off completion. Compustat is a database
including financial information, such as income statements and balance sheets, for more
than 24,000 publicly held companies. Compustat is accessed through Wharton and
extensively used globally, both within research and the corporate world. The variables
obtained from this database are selected to contribute in testing our research questions.
This includes identification variables, such as tickers, company names and SIC codes,
as well as financial data, such as sales, total assets and market value of equity. After
manually checking the relevant companies we are left with a final sample of 78 spin-
offs between 2005-2016. The manual screening in accordance with set criterias is
essential in order to extract a useful and comparable sample preventing the study from
yielding misleading and incorrect results. Moreover, these criterias are very similar to
those used by Gertner et al. (2002) and Ahn and Denis (2004).

Table 1 below presents the cleaning process for the spin-off sample and clearly states
the number of spin-offs removed in each step, in accordance with set criterias. Removed
companies are only included in one of the categories below, although some overlap
might be present. For example, a company considered “Complex Transaction” due to a
consecutive merger, could also classify as “No Data on Compustat”. Therefore,
conducting the cleaning process in a different order would result in other amounts of
spin-offs removed in each step, however, the total number of removals would end up
identical regardless.

                                  10
                                        Table 1
                          Cleaning Process for Spin-off Sample
Table 1 presents the cleaning process of the SDC Platinum Data for public spin-offs during 2005-
2016 in the US. The total number of spin-offs from the SDC Platinum Database after restrictions is
presented followed by the number of spin-offs eliminated manually in accordance with set
criterias.

In this sample, there are 78 Parents undertaking the 78 spin-offs. Should a parent have
conducted more than one spin-off, each spin-off would be treated as a specific event.
However, in our sample there is an equal amount of both. On the other hand, there is
one entity that has both acted as a parent company and a spin-off during the time period.
These events are separated by the variable “type” in the data set, which defines whether
the company was a spun-off entity or a parent company during that specific event year.
Thus, they are therefore treated as individual observations.

The yearly number of spin-offs fluctuates significantly during the observed years, with a
majority of the spin-offs occurring at the end of the sample period. This supports our
interest in conducting a replication of Gertner et. al’s (2002) study for a more recent
time period. The total transaction value also fluctuates substantially and is partly driven
by the number of spin-offs, but also the difference in actual size of each specific spin-
off. The number of conducted spin-offs is the greatest in 2015, being 15 and
accumulating a total transaction value of 94,738 million US dollars. Table 2 presents the
total number of spin-offs and the total transaction value each year.

                                  11
                                       Table 2
              Number of Spin-offs and Total Transaction Value per Year
Table 2 presents the number of spin-offs and the total transaction value each year for our final
sample. The year represents the effective fiscal year of the spin-off completion and the total
transaction value is the market value of the spin-off on the first day of trading on the stock
exchange.

For all the parent companies and spun-off entities in our final sample, firm level
financial data is gathered from Compustat for the three years preceding and following
the spin-offs. In some cases, due to consecutive mergers, bankruptcies or other reasons,
financial data is not available for the entire relevant time period. The existing financial
data is then used in the creation of all the relevant variables applied in the regressions.

3.1.2 Data collection of single-segment firms and weighting of spin-off segments
The final sample representing all the relevant spin-offs and their respective parent
companies is now complete. The second step is to collect data for single-segment firms
in order to calculate the Industry median Q for all the spin-offs in the sample. This
variable is essential for the regressions, since it represents the experienced investment
opportunities of the spun-off entities. The reason we calculate an industry median Q
rather than a firm-specific measure is because the spin-offs are not publicly traded when
part of their parents, which hinders us from obtaining all necessary data for the variable.
It would be possible to use a firm-specific Q for the period following the spin-off
completion, but similar to Gertner et.al (2002) we use the industry median Q for both
periods to avoid differences between the two. Both Gertner et al. (2002) and Ahn and
Denis (2004) provide evidence that their results are robust for other measures of
industry median Q as well.

Since spun-off entities themselves might operate in several industries before or after the
spin-off occurs, we also include these segments’ four digit SIC-codes and calculate a
weighted average of the various industries in which the spin-off operates. The weighting

                                  12
is based on the ratio of assets the firm reports in each four digit SIC-code segment. In
order to conduct the weighting, segment data is downloaded from Compustat for all the
spun-off entities. For example, the spun-off entity Avanos Medical is divided into two
segments, “Medical Devices” and “Surgical & Infection Prevention”, with the four digit
SIC-codes 3845 and 3842, respectively. For 2016, the year after its spin-off was
completed, 47% of the company’s assets was reported in Medical Devices, whilst 53%
was reported in Surgical & Infection Prevention. Thus, Avanos Medical’s Q for 2016
will equal 0.47*3845 industry median Q 2016 + 0.53*3842 industry median Q 2016.
The industry median Q for the four digit SIC-codes 3845 and 3842 was 4.69 and 2.49
respectively. Consequently, the Q for Avanos Medical in 2016 was 3.52 (0.47*4.69 +
0.53*2.49 = 3.52). The weighting process is a replicated process from Gertner et al.
(2002) and crucial to the study by yielding a reasonable estimation of the spin-offs’
investment opportunities.

For the majority of the spin-offs included in the sample, segment data prior to year -1 is
unavailable. In those cases the segment weighting for year -2 and -3 are therefore
conducted by adopting the same method as Gertner et al. (2002), which is using the
segment weights from the earliest available year as proxies. However, even though
weights in some cases are proxies, the industry median Q’s are always from the correct
years. Should the case instead be that the firm has turned single-segment after being
spun-off, causing segment data to be unavailable in any of the years +1,+2 or +3, the
primary SIC-code of the firm is used to identify the correct industry median Q to be
used in calculation of the spin-off’s Q ratio.

Table 3 shows the distribution of the maximum number of segments i.e. industries each
spun-off entity operates in during the three years preceding and following the spin-off,
as well as the effective year of completion. 55 spun-off entities are single-segment firms
and 23 are multi-segment firms.

                                  13
                                        Table 3
                    Spin-offs’ Maximum Distribution of Segments
Table 3 presents the distribution of the maximum number of segments i.e. different industries
based on SIC-codes that the spin-offs in the sample operate in. 55 spin-offs operate in only one
industry, 15 in maximum two industries, 5 in maximum three industries, 2 in maximum four
industries and 1 in maximum five industries.

To construct the final sample including all the spun-off entities’ SIC codes and
operating segments, we extract segment data from Compustat for all 2-digit SIC-codes.
The data for 2-digit SIC codes naturally also includes all available 3-digit and 4-digit
SIC codes. All parent companies and spun-off entities are excluded. Further, since we
only use single-segment firms in the industry median Q calculation, all multi-segment
firms are removed. Similar to Gertner et al. (2002), the definition of single-segment is a
firm that reports all of its sales in a certain SIC code.

After constructing the aforementioned dataset consisting of single-segment firms
operating in the spin-offs’ industries, firm level annual financial data based on tickers is
gathered from Compustat. Variables necessary to calculate Q are also downloaded. Q is
calculated as (Book value of assets + market value of common equity - book value of
equity - deferred taxes) / Total Assets. This proxy of Q is used by Gertner et. al (2002)
among others and therefore considered an appropriate definition. Since Q is essential in
the analysis, companies that display missing data for Q are removed. Using this sample,
industry median Q is calculated for all the spun-off entities in our sample. Similar to
Gertner et. al (2002) we require at least five firms to calculate the industry median Q.
Thus, we start by screening 4-digit SIC-codes and consequently move down one digit at
a time, to 1-digit SIC codes if necessary, until five applicable firms are attained. Finally,
we have obtained the industry median Q’s for the spun-off entities in our sample and
merge this data with all other relevant financial data.

                                  14
In order to obtain sufficient data to test our third hypothesis, we calculate the volatility,
proxied by the standard deviation, of the industry median Q for all the industries i.e.
SIC codes that the spin-offs operate in. This is further constructed as a variable taking
on the value of 1 for spin-offs operating in industries with a high volatility in industry
median Q, and the value of 0 for spin-offs operating in industries with a low volatility in
industry median Q. For our sample, we could conclude that the predominantly high
volatility industries were manufacturing and services, whilst the low volatility industries
consisted of transportation, communication, electricity, gas and sanitary service as well
as wholesale trade.

3.1.4 Summary Statistics
Table 4 provides summary statistics for the parents and spun-off entities in years -1, 0
and +1. The variables for the two panels are defined in accordance with Gertner et al
(2002). Investment ratio is defined as capital expenditures divided by total assets and
Operating profit ratio is defined as operating income before depreciation and
amortization divided by total assets. Industry median Q represents the median Tobin’s
Q for the industries in which the spin-offs operate. In order to avoid problems with the
data and risk drawing misleading conclusions, missing variables for Investment ratio
and Operating profit ratio are dropped. This results in a drop of 37 missing
observations, which ought to be considered acceptable since it equals less than 5 % of
the total number of observations. Furthermore, the dependent variable investment ratio
is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile to avoid outliers causing biased regressions.

The variables included in table 4 are total assets, sales, investment ratio, operating profit
ratio and industry median Q. Regarding interpretation of the table statistics, the median
can generally be considered a more appropriate measure for the variables, since the
mean includes outliers that have significant effects on the descriptive statistics. In panel
I and II in Table 4 it is shown that the median, of both total assets and sales for all
included years, for parent companies are around two and a half to four and a half times
the size of the corresponding medians for the spin-offs. Thus, one can conclude that the
parent companies are of much larger size than the spun-off entities. Table 4 further
displays a close similarity in median investment ratio of parents and spin-offs, as well as
in operating profit ratio. Even though the median is the most suitable measure, it should
however be noted that the mean operating profit ratio of spin-offs is lower than the
parents’ during all years, indicating that undertaking spin-offs might be a strategy for
parent companies to dispose of less profitable divisions or divisions in need of
additional funding.

                                  15
Lastly, panel I in Table 4 also includes industry median Q ratios for the spin-offs, which
represents the investment opportunities that exist in the industries where the spin-offs
operate. The table allows us to conclude that the median of the industry median Q is
higher before the spin-off completions, and lower thereafter. Furthermore, both the
median and mean exceeds 1 for all periods, indicating that the companies theoretically
possess greater prospects to make capital investments compared to firms operating in
industries with a Q below 1.

                                        Table 4
      Summary Statistics for Spun-off Entities and Parents in Years -1, 0 and +1.
Table 4 shows descriptive statistics for parents and spun-off entities in years -1, 0 and +1. Year -1
represents the last full fiscal year preceding the spin-off and year +1 represents the first full fiscal
year following the spin-off. Year 0 represents the fiscal year when the spin-off is completed. Panel I
provides summary statistics on the sample of spun-off entities and Panel II provides summary
statistics on the sample of parents.

                                  16
3.2 Methodology
3.2.1 Hypotheses
The hypotheses have been formulated based on previous research within the area, which
is further described in the Literature Review section, including our area of interest.

Hypothesis 1: Spun-off entities from diversified firms improve capital allocation
efficiency post spin-off. This hypothesis is supported by research from Gertner et al
(2002), Ahn and Denis (2004) among others. It implies that we expect that the spun-off
entities’ investments are less sensitive to Q when part of diversified firms, compared to
when they are operating as independent entities. Consequently, the hypothesis implies
that the capital allocation efficiency will improve for spun-off entities after the spin-off
from their respective parent companies are completed.

Hypothesis 2: Larger spun-off entities improve their capital allocation efficiency
relatively more post spin-off. This hypothesis is partly supported by research
conducted by Miles and Rosenfeld (1983) and Daley et. al (1997) among others, which
have concluded that the increase in shareholder wealth is more substantial for larger
spin-offs, compared to smaller ones. Furthermore, allocating capital efficiently is said to
naturally become more difficult when companies grow in size and diversify (Comment
and Jarrell 1995). Several segments and investment opportunities then emerge within
the corporation, who all require a part of the limited cash balance and managerial focus
of the parent company. The internal capital market mechanism in many large
companies, where capital allocation decisions are taken on a higher corporate level

                                  17
further away from each specific investment opportunity, logically creates challenges in
efficiently allocating the internal capital. For example, a large spin-off requiring a
significant amount of capital expenditures might be overlooked when being part of a
corporation required to allocate capital to several other large segments, or possibly a
multitude of smaller segments. Consequently, we believe that larger spun-off entities
will improve their capital allocation more efficiently compared to their smaller peers.

Hypothesis 3: Single-segment spun-off entities operating in industries experiencing
low volatility in industry median Q improve their capital allocation efficiency
relatively more post spin-off. The association between stock market volatility,
consequently causing volatility in industry median Q, and corporate capital investments
has been thoroughly documented by Fama (1990) and Cochrane (1991), amongst others.
Furthermore, Hu (1995) found that excessive volatility might weaken the stock market’s
role as a forecasting mechanism and cause firms to systematically ignore volatile short-
run changes and instead opt for long-term investment decisions. Additionally, we find it
logical that firms experiencing volatile changes in investment opportunities might have
a more difficult time grasping and efficiently acting on them. The aforementioned
findings intrigues an examination of which effects the volatility in investment
opportunities has on the spun-off entities’ capital allocation efficiency after becoming
independent and advancing the decision making to management closer to the firms’
operative industries. This question forms the basis of our third hypothesis testing if
single-segment spun-off entities operating in industries experiencing low volatility in
industry median Q will improve their capital allocation efficiency relatively more post
spin-off. Due to difficulties in correctly estimating the volatility in industry median Q
for multiple-segment firms, only single-segment firms are included in the hypothesis
sample.

3.2.2 Fixed Effect Regression Model
To empirically investigate our hypotheses, we will use panel data. Panel data is
necessary since we possess observations for the sample companies over repeated time
periods. All observations are constructed in a seven-year panel for each specific spin-
off, representing the three years preceding the spin-off, the fiscal year when the spin-off
is completed as well as the three years following the spin-off. The dataset is unbalanced
due to the fact that we do not have full time period data for all spin-offs. This is because
some spun-off entities do not report any financial data, are consecutively merged,
acquired or bankrupt, or for other reasons do not display complete financial data for all
relevant years. Worth noting, this does not necessarily have an effect on the regressions

                                  18
conducted. Using panel data, we run fixed effect regressions similar to Gertner et al.
(2002).

3.2.3 Variables
To determine whether spin-offs affect investment behavior, we study changes in the
sensitivity of investment to Q, for the spun-off entities before and after spin-off
completion. The dependent variable, Investment Ratio (Capital Expenditures/Total
Assets), will therefore represent investments. Capital Expenditures can be seen as the
measure of investment, which then is normalized by assets. There are other possible
measures that could be used to measure investments, and the potential implications of
the chosen definition will be examined in the discussion section.

The key independent variable is Industry Median Q, which is calculated as the median
Tobin’s Q for all single-segment firms operating in the same industries as the spun-off
entities. This variable is used to measure the investment opportunities available to the
specific spun-off entity during the period before and after spin-off completion.

The second key independent variable is Pre, which is a dummy variable taking on the
value of 1 for the three years preceding the spin-off and the value 0 for the three years
following the spin-off. The fiscal year when the spin-off occurs is not included in the
regressions. This variable is important in order to draw conclusions about changes in
capital allocation decisions after a spin-off is completed.

The third independent variable is the interaction term Industry Median Q * Pre, which
is the product of the two aforementioned variables. Consequently, the variable is
interesting to include in the model to enable an examination of the relationship between
the two previous variables, and further also their relationship with the investment ratio.

Further, it is essential to include control variables that are expected to affect the
investment ratio. The firm-specific control variables included are Operating profit ratio,
in accordance with Gertner et. al (2002), and Net Income. The operating profit ratio is
defined as operating income before depreciation and amortization divided by assets. It
represents the annual cash flows of the spun-off entities available to capital
expenditures, which naturally ought to affect the level of investments. The variable is
constructed as a continuous variable. The second firm-specific control variable is net
income. It is important to control for since a negative net income might entail financial
problems. If a company has a negative net income or is in financial distress it is highly

                                  19
likely that its investment ratio will be affected. Net income is constructed as a dummy
variable, taking on the value of 1 if succeeding zero and the value of 0 if exceeding
zero.

Furthermore, we include fiscal year dummy variables to control for fiscal year fixed
effects. Year dummy variables are included for 2003-2019, where Dummy 2003 equals
1 when the effective date is 2003 and 0 otherwise, and so on for all the years included in
the sample. The dummy variables should account for changes in investment ratio over
time and macroeconomic happenings. The regressions also include Firm fixed effects,
which is included in the intercept of the model. Firm fixed effects are used to control for
firm characteristics that are unobserved and can cause biases.

3.2.4 Estimated Regression Models
Hypothesis 1
For our first hypothesis and baseline question the regression examines whether there is a
change in the sensitivity of investment to Q, reflecting a potential change in the
investment behavior of a spun-off entity after completing a spin-off from its parent
company. The regression includes the control variables operating profit and net income,
as well as time dummies and firm fixed effects.

                                   Equation 1

With the regression above, our main focus variable is the interaction term
IndMedianQ*Pre. For hypothesis one to be supported, the coefficient for this variable
should be negative and statistically significant, which would imply an improvement in
the capital allocation efficiency of spun-off entities in the post spin-off period relative to
the pre spin-off period.

Hypothesis 2
The interesting addition relevant to hypothesis two is the size of the spin-offs. As
argued before it is likely that the size of the spin-off affects the change in capital
allocation efficiency. Equation 1 will be used to test this hypothesis as well, however
the groups consisting of small and large spin-offs will be regressed separately. Large
spin-offs are defined as those with a transaction value above the median and small spin-
offs are defined as those with a transaction value below the median.

                                  20
For this regression, we expect that the coefficient for the focus interaction variable
IndMedianQ*pre will be negative and statistically significant for large spin-offs. Thus,
the coefficient is therefore expected to be lower for small spun-off entities.

Hypothesis 3
For the third hypothesis we only include the 55 single-segment spin-offs from our main
sample. As discussed earlier, the reason for this is the difficulty in estimating the
volatility in industry median Q for multi-segment firms.

Equation 1 will be used to test this hypothesis as well, however the groups consisting of
spin-offs operating in industries experiencing a high and low volatility in industry
median Q respectively will be regressed separately. Spin-offs operating in industries
experiencing an industry median Q volatility below the median are defined as low
volatility Q, and the opposite for high volatility Q.

For this regression, we expect that the coefficient of the interaction term
IndMedianQ*pre will be negative, statistically significant and larger in absolute size for
spun-off entities operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in industry median
Q.

3.2.5 Test of Model Assumptions
It is important to control for common problems arising when conducting fixed effect
panel regressions in order to ensure robust regression results and thus correct
conclusions. Robustness checks are conducted for the assumptions regarding no
autocorrelation, homoscedasticity in error terms and no multicollinearity in the
independent variables. A significance level of 5 % has been chosen for all the tests.

Homoscedasticity
An important assumption is that the regression model should experience
homoscedasticity, which occurs when a group of random variables have a mean of 0
and are constant along the line of fitted values. Consequently, heteroscedasticity occurs
if these requirements are not met. Heteroscedasticity can be highly problematic since it
can negatively impact the validity of the regression model and produce distorted P-
values (Carlson, Newbold, Thorn, 2013). In order to test for heteroscedasticity, we
conduct Breush-Pagan tests for each regression. The test results imply the presence of
heteroscedasticity in our error terms. To correct for heteroscedasticity, we run robust
standard error regressions clustered by spin-off firms.

                                  21
Autocorrelation
The second assumption tested is the absence of autocorrelation. A regression model
should not contain autocorrelation, which means that the error terms are correlated over
time. Consequently, autocorrelation can cause standard errors to be measured
incorrectly and not experience constant variance. Since autocorrelation is more common
when using panel data, it is essential to test for in our model (Carlson et. al 2013). To
test for autocorrelation, a Wooldridge test is conducted. The test implies that there is no
autocorrelation in our error terms. Since we use robust standard errors clustered by spin-
off firms, potential autocorrelation would have been accounted for in the regressions.

Multicollinearity
Multicollinearity occurs when two or more independent variables are correlated. This
does not necessarily imply that the model is wrong but makes it more difficult to
distinguish the contribution of certain independent variables (Carlson et. al 2013). Since
we introduce an interaction term in our model, the relevant input variables have to be
centered to mitigate multicollinearity. In this case only Industry Median Q is centered,
since it is a continuous variable. It makes no sense to center the dummy variable pre. In
order to test for multicollinearity, it is appropriate to calculate the variance inflation
factors (VIF). The results from these calculations are shown in Appendix 2.
Historically, there has been a debate regarding which maximum level of VIF that is
considered appropriate. According to Kennedy (2008), the maximum acceptable level of
VIF is 10. Therefore, we can conclude that there is no serious concern regarding
multicollinearity in our model.

                                  22
4. Empirical Findings
4.1 Change of capital allocation for spun-off entities after spin-off
This part presents the regression results from the regression concerning hypothesis one
and discusses the assumptions with regards to the coefficients.

The results are presented in table 5 below.

                                        Table 5
                         Regression results Hypothesis 1
                    Table 5 presents the regression results for Hypothesis 1.

The positive coefficient for industry median Q implies that the investment ratio
increases when industry median q increases, further implying that firms invest more
when experiencing superior investment opportunities. This result is consistent with
Gertner et. al (2002). However, the coefficient is very small and not statistically
significant, therefore it does not provide sufficient evidence to conclude that the effect
in fact is positive nor negative.

The negative coefficient for the interaction term Industry Median Q*Pre implies that the
sensitivity to Q increases for post spin-off periods relative to pre spin-off periods. This

                                  23
is also in accordance with research conducted by Gertner et al. (2002). However, this
coefficient is also not statistically significant, thus creating uncertainty regarding
whether it has a positive, negative or no effect.

The control variable operating profit ratio is statistically significant on the 1 % level and
the negative coefficient implies that when the operating profit ratio increases by 10
percentage points, the investment ratio decreases by 0.152 percentage points. Naturally,
this result can be considered interesting, since one could argue that increased cash flows
should result in increased investments, which is what Gertner et al. (2002) found, and
not vice versa.

The dummy variable Net income is statistically significant on the 10 % level, and the
negative coefficient implies that companies with a net income loss executes a relatively
lower investment ratio, which is in line with our predictions.

All time dummy variables have negative coefficients and are statistically significant at
the 1 % level. The negative coefficients imply that the annual average investment ratios
in the sample are lower than the investment ratio for the base year 2003. Interestingly,
we can also identify an increase in the coefficients for these dummy variables after the
financial crisis in 2008, indicating an increase in the investment ratio since that year.

Since none of the independent variables are statistically significant, we cannot find any
evidence supporting our first hypothesis. The absence of significant variables might be
derived from our relatively small sample size. Furthermore, we are studying a different
time period compared to previous research conducted by Gertner et. al (2002), Ahn and
Denis (2004) among others, which might affect the results. In addition, industry median
Q could be considered an uncertain proxy for investment opportunities, which will be
further conferred in the discussion section.

Divergent residuals are not deemed to be influential on the results since removal of
these observations do not change the results substantially or prompt statistical
significance for the main variables. Therefore, these observations are kept in the
regressions. Furthermore, running regressions without firm fixed effects do not affect
the results significantly and are therefore included in all regressions.

                                  24
The adjusted R-squared for our model is 0.272, which means that it explains 27.2 % of
the variability in the investment ratio. This adjusted R-squared is very similar to those in
previous research conducted by Ahn and Denis (2004) and thus validates the model.

4.2 Small vs. large size of spin-offs
This part presents the regression results and discussions of the coefficients with regards
to hypothesis two. Consequently, the spin-offs are separated into two groups based on if
their respective transaction value is below or above the sample median. Furthermore,
the same regression as for Hypothesis 1 is conducted, however each group is regressed
separately. Table 6 below presents the regression results for these two groups.

                                        Table 6
                         Regression results Hypothesis 2
  Table 6 presents the regression results when dividing the spun-off entities into a large and small
                         group based on the size of their transaction value.

The positive coefficient for industry median Q for the large spin-offs implies a
corresponding increase in investment ratio when industry median q increases, further
implying that large spin-offs invest relatively more when experiencing superior
investment opportunities. This is consistent with the coefficient for the overall sample.
However, for small spin-offs the coefficient for industry median Q is negative, implying
a negative relationship between investment ratio and investment opportunities. Neither

                                  25
group’s coefficient is statistically significant and should therefore be interpreted
carefully.

The interaction term for large spin-offs is positive and statistically significant at the 5 %
significance level. These results imply a statistically significant increase in sensitivity to
Q for larger sized spun-off entities after spin-off completion, relative to the prior period
as part of a diversified parent company. Furthermore, it indicates a possible
improvement in the capital allocation efficiency of large spun-off entities post spin-off.

The aforementioned conclusion is not applicable to smaller spin-offs, for which our
findings instead entail an insensitivity to Q after spin-off completion and rather higher
sensitivity to Q before the spin-off occurs. These results are similar to those attained by
Gertner et. al (2002), who found that spun-off entities operating in industries that are
unrelated to their parents are more sensitive to Q before the spin-off. Yet they are
unable to provide any sufficient explanation for this, which calls for a further
investigation of these two phenomena in future research. However, this coefficient is
not statistically significant and should therefore be interpreted with caution.

The operating profit ratio is statistically significant for both larger and smaller spin-offs.
For large spin-offs the coefficient is positive and statistically significant on the 10 %
level, which implies that an increase in operating profit ratio of 10 percentage points
results in an increase in the investment ratio of 0.58 percentage points. This is in line
with our predictions and research conducted by Gertner et. al (2002). However, for
small spin-offs the coefficient is negative and statistically significant at the 1% level,
implying that an increase in operating profit ratio of 10 percentage points results in a
decrease in the investment ratio of 0.148 percentage points. Consequently, the
aforementioned results are in line with the results for the first hypothesis.

The second control variable net income is not statistically significant for any of the
groups. However, the signs on the coefficients imply that spin-offs with a net income
loss executes a lower investment ratio, which is in line with the results for the overall
sample.

The adjusted R-squared for the large spin-offs is 0.261, which means that the model
explains 26.1% of the variability in the investment ratio. For the small spin-offs, the
adjusted R-squared amounts to 0.329. Conclusively, the adjusted R-squared is very

                                  26
similar for the two regressions and also in line with the adjusted R-squared for the first
hypothesis, which covers the full sample. Thus, the model can be considered valid.

4.3 Volatility in industry median Q
This part presents the regressions results and discussions of the coefficients with regards
to hypothesis three. Consequently, the single-segment spin-offs are separated into two
groups based on whether they operate in industries experiencing a high or low volatility
in industry median Q. The same regression as for Hypothesis 1 is conducted, however
each group is regressed separately. Table 7 below presents the regression results for
these two groups.

                                        Table 7
                         Regression results Hypothesis 3
   Table 7 presents the regression results when dividing the single-segment spun-off entities into
    spin-offs operating in industries experiencing a high or low volatility in industry median Q.

The positive coefficient for industry median Q for the “Low Volatility Q” single-
segment spin-offs implies that the investment ratio increases when industry median Q
increases, further implying that the aforementioned spin-offs invest relatively more
when experiencing superior investment opportunities. This is consistent with the
coefficient for the overall sample as well as for larger spin-offs. The opposite is true for

                                  27
the “High Volatility Q” single-segment spin-offs. However, none of these coefficients
are statistically significant and should therefore be interpreted carefully.

The coefficient for the interaction term Industry Median Q * Pre is negative for both
groups, implying an increase in sensitivity to Q after the spin-off is completed. For
single-segment spin-offs operating in low volatility Q industries, the coefficient is
statistically significant on the 5 % level. Thus, it indicates that they experience a
statistically significant improvement in capital allocation efficiency after completing a
spin-off from their respective parent companies, which provides support for our
hypothesis.

The operating profit ratio is statistically significant for both groups. For spin-offs
operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in industry median Q the coefficient
is positive and statistically significant on the 5 % level, implying that a 10 percentage
points increase in operating profit ratio results in a 0.875 percentage points increase in
investment ratio. For spin-offs operating in industries experiencing a high volatility in
industry median Q the coefficient is negative and statistically significant on the 1 %
level, implying that a 10 percentage points increase in the operating profit ratio results
in a 0.155 percentage points decrease in the investment ratio.

The coefficient for the control variable net income is negative for both groups,
indicating that single-segment spin-offs with a net income loss also experience lower
investment ratios. However, the coefficients are not statistically significant and should
therefore be interpreted with caution.

The adjusted R-squared is 0.309 and 0.413 respectively, indicating that the regressions
for single-segment spun-off entities operating in industries with a low volatility in
industry median Q explains 30.9 % of the variability in the investment ratio, and single-
segment spun-off entities operating in industries with a high volatility in industry
median Q explains 41.3 % of the variability in the investment ratio. Although rather
similar to previous regressions, these adjusted R-squared are fairly higher.

                                  28
5. Analysis and Discussion
5.1 Discussion of results and Limitations
Although the results from our study indicate that the 78 firms’ sensitivity to investment
opportunities increases, we find no statistically significant evidence in our thesis
supporting that spun-off entities from diversified firms improve their capital allocation
efficiency post spin-offs. However, statistically significant evidence is obtained
specifically supporting that large spun-off entities and single-segment spin-offs
operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in industry median Q, indeed
improve their capital allocation efficiency post spin-offs. Our study contains several
limitations possibly explaining some of the statistically insignificant results, which are
discussed together in the following paragraphs.

5.1.1 Time period and sample companies
Compared to earlier research, such as Gertner et al (2002), our study is based on a more
recent time period and thus a completely different sample of companies from various
industries. Logically, market dynamics and characteristics have undergone tremendous
changes between 1981-1996 and 2005-2016 (Malerba 2007). Such characteristics could
consist of structural changes in corporate investment behaviour, entailing that
companies disregard short-term changes in investment opportunities and rather invest
more long-term, or volatile investment opportunities. For instance, Malerba (2007)
explains that the fast-paced technological development has caused volatile internal
movements in the majority of industries, causing many companies to struggle grasping
intra-industry changes, which logically should reduce the sensitivity to investment
opportunities. This might have hindered the firm’s in our sample from correctly
estimating and consequently acting on their investment opportunities. Thus, a possible
limitation of our study is the observation period of three years pre- and post spin-off. In
the case of a delay in the improvement of capital allocation efficiency post spin-off due
to volatile investment opportunities, it might have been preferable to observe the spun-
off entities during a longer time period such as five years pre- and post spin-off.
However, this long time period would lack access to data since it is only possible to
obtain data for the spun-off entities for a maximum of three years before their respective
spin-off occurs.

Another possible explanation to our statistically insignificant results in hypothesis one
could be found at firm and industry level in our sample. Compared to Gertner et al.
(2002), our sample could consist of a larger ratio of more modern companies, primarily
from the technological and pharmaceutical industry that has thrived since the beginning

                                  29
of the 2000s, instead of firms from traditional industries such as industrial and
consumer. The structural investment behaviour in these two industry groups are very
different. For the former, immediate profitability is not often the goal, but significant
investments are however required along the way. This differs from the assumed
predominant industries in Gertner et al.’s sample, where corporate investment is to a
larger extent driven by profitability and free cash flow. The aforementioned information
could contribute in explaining our statistically significant evidence supporting a
negative correlation between operating profit ratio and investment ratio.

Hu (1995) found that excessive volatility might weaken the stock market’s role as a
forecasting mechanism and cause firms to systematically ignore volatile short-run
changes and instead opt for long-term investment decisions. The US stock market was
significantly more volatile during the period 2005-2016 than 1981-1996, which for our
overall sample could have caused a reduction in sensitivity to changes in investment
opportunities for spun-off entities, and thus help explain our statistically insignificant
results for hypothesis one. However, the aforementioned findings by Hu (1995) along
with Malerba’s (2007) paper on fast changing industry dynamics could provide
fundamental backing to our statistically significant evidence supporting an increase in
investment efficiency for single-segment spun-off entities operating in industries
experiencing a low volatility in industry median Q. Although providing an interesting
research angle, estimating the investment opportunity volatility for each industry also
acts as a limitation, being based on the rather weak assumption that all firms in a
specific industry face identical investment opportunities.

5.1.2 Tobin’s Q and different measures of investments
Using Tobin’s Q as a proxy for investment opportunities is certainly a limitation to this
study, since it assumes that all single-segment firms within an industry experience
similar investment opportunities. Furthermore, it is assumed that firms should increase
investments when industry Q increases. Since the book value is used as a proxy for
“replacement value”, the firm-specific Q ratios can also be affected by aggressive or
conservative accounting. This could be consistent with research conducted by Whited
(2001) who finds that the use of Tobin’s Q indicates measurement errors. All of the
aforementioned uncertainties might be explanatory factors for loss of significance in our
results. However, should there be a measurement error when using industry median
Tobin’s Q it is likely present in both the pre and post spin-off periods, and one might
therefore argue that the effect on the results only should be minor.

                                  30
Furthermore, a firm's investments and capital expenditures are not solely driven by
value-adding investments but may also consist of R&D or so called “maintenance
capex”, which are investments necessary to keep the business going. Thus, there is an
underlying behavioral difference between for example investing in an additional
manufacturing machine to increase output and investing in a machine to replace a
malfunctional one in order to maintain flat output levels. The inability to define the
different investment types in our sample acts as a limitation, since it creates uncertainty
regarding whether the companies are acting on present investment opportunities or if the
investments consist of maintenance capex, bound to be carried out regardless.

Peters and Taylor (2017) find that Tobin’s Q, at firm-level, explains total investments
well. However, compared to tangible capital, intangible capital adjusts more slowly to
changes in investment opportunities. They further conclude that Tobin’s Q as a proxy
for investment opportunities performs better in firms and years with more tangible
capital. These findings highlight a limitation in our study, which is based on total
investments, regarding the unavailability of information about the ratio of
tangible/intangible investments in total investments each year.

5.1.3 Sample Size
Another potential limitation to our study is the small sample size, which is less than half
the size of that used by Gertner et. al (2002). In order to examine the particular research
questions, the data sample needs to be constricted according to certain criterias, which
results in a large loss of spin-offs that occurred during the time period. Generally, when
a study includes a small sample, a large effect is necessary to achieve statistical
significance. Thus, the relatively small sample size might act as an explanatory factor to
the loss of statistical significance in our results.

Another important limitation with regards to the sample is that we only investigate
companies involved in spin-offs, and not a random sample. This results in a certain bias
which makes it difficult to draw any general conclusions about the functionality of
internal capital markets. Furthermore, only public spin-offs are examined which can
bias and affect the results, as the inclusion of private companies might cause other
implications.

Lastly, some companies conduct spin-offs with the primary motive to increase the
capital allocation efficiency. Naturally, these companies should be considered more
probable to achieve this, which creates a natural bias in the sample and consequently

                                  31
results in a difficulty to draw general conclusions about an increased capital allocation
efficiency post spin-off as a generic effect. The aforementioned issue certainly acts as a
limitation to the study and is furthermore difficult to control due to unavailability of
information regarding the underlying reasons and motives to each spin-off.

5.1.4 Omitted Variables
The omitted variable bias is present in many statistical regressions, including ours, and
acts as a possible limitation. There is a constant risk of existing factors that have an
effect on the regressions but are not captured in the included variables. In order to
mitigate the problem, we have included firm and time fixed effects as well as control
variables that we expect to affect the dependent variable. However, there is always a
risk that some important factors are left out.

                                  32
6. Conclusion
This paper documents and discusses the change in internal capital allocation efficiency
of spun-off entities, before and after completing spin-offs from their respective parent
companies. Although indicating that the firms’ sensitivity to investment opportunities,
measured by industry median Tobin’s Q, increases, we find no significant evidence in
our thesis supporting that spun-off entities from diversified firms improve their capital
allocation efficiency post spin-offs. However, statistically significant evidence is
obtained specifically supporting that large spun-off entities and single-segment spin-offs
operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in industry median Q, such as
transportation, communication and wholesale trade, indeed improve their capital
allocation efficiency post spin-offs.

Our findings indicate that the undertaking of spin-offs may have a minor positive effect
on the internal capital allocation of the spun-off entities, being larger for entities with
specific characteristics. Thus, one can argue that increased capital allocation efficiency
of spun-off entities could impact the underlying value creation occurring in connection
to spin-offs, taking the final form of abnormal positive shareholder return. Furthermore,
the desired increase in investment efficiency might therefore act as an explanatory
factor to the undertaking of spin-offs for diversified firms. However, our findings do not
support the conclusion of a constant inefficient internal capital market within diversified
firms, since firm-specific reasons for spin-offs are likely to have biased our sample with
spin-offs operating in an inefficient internal capital market.

The research questions discussed in our paper, and the results obtained from our study,
leaves room for future research to further examine the subject and seek answers to
questions left unanswered by our paper. Firstly, the main question to investigate would
be the possible reasons as to why spun-off entities would become more efficient in
allocating their capital post spin-off. Could it be derived from more knowledgeable and
smart decisions being made as an independent firm, with decision-making management
closer to both the relevant operating market and stock market? Or does it stem from
increased manager incentives in the independent spun-off entities? Furthermore, it
would be of interest to examine the underlying reason for an increased improvement in
capital allocation efficiency in specifically large spin-offs and single-segment spun-off
entities operating in industries experiencing a low volatility in industry median Q,
compared to its opposite group peers. Lastly, analysing and questioning the underlying
bias, of not only our sample, but those of all papers examining spin-offs, would be of

                                  33
high interest - What are the characteristics of inefficient internal capital markets in
diversified firms, that are causing the underlying rationale to conduct spin-offs?

                                  34
7. References
Ahn, Seoungpil, and Denis, David J., 2004, Internal capital markets and investment
policy: Evidence from corporate spinoffs. Journal of Financial Economics 71, 489-
516.

Burch, Timothy R., and Nanda, Vikram, 2003, Divisional diversity and the
conglomerate discount: evidence from spinoffs, Journal of Financial Economics 70, 69-
98.

Carlson, Newbold, Thorn, 2013, Statistics for Business and Economics (Pearson
Education Limited).

Cho, Myeong-Hyeon, 1998, Ownership structure, investment, and the corporate value:
An empirical analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 47, 103-121.

Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link Between Stock
Returns and Economic Fluctuations, The Journal of Finance 46, 209-237.

Comment, Robert, and Jarrell, Gregg A., 1995, Corporate Focus and Stock Returns,
Journal of Financial Economics 37, 67-87.

Daley, Lane, and Mehrotra, Vikas, and Sivakumar, Ranjini, 1997, Daley Corporate
Focus and Value Creation evidence from Spin-offs, Journal of Financial Economics 45,
257-281.

Fama, Eugene, 1990, Stock Returns, Expected Returns and Real Activity, Journal of
Finance 45, 1089-1108

Gertner, Robert, and Powers, Eric, and Scharfstein, David, 2002, Learning about
Internal Capital Markets from Corporate Spin-offs, The Journal of Finance 57, 2479-
2506.

Hu, Zuliu, 1995, Stock Market Volatility and Corporate Investment, International
Monetary Fund Working Paper no 95/102.

Jose, Manuel L., and Nichols, Len M., and Stevens, Jerry L., 1986, Contributions of
Diversification, Promotion, and R&D to the Value of Multiproduct Firms: A Tobin's q
Approach, Financial Management 15, 33-42.

Kallapur, Sanjay and Trombley, Mark A., 2001, The Investment Opportunity Set:
Determinants, consequences and measurement, Managerial Finance 27, 3-15.

                                  35
Kennedy, Peter, 2008, A Guide to Econometrics. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.

Laeven, Luc, and Levine, Ross, 2007, Is there a diversification discount in financial
conglomerates?, Journal of Financial Economics 85, 331-367.

Maksimovic,Vojislav, and Phillips, Gordon, 2002, Do Conglomerate Firms Allocate
Resources Inefficiently Across Industries? Theory and Evidence, The Journal of
Finance 57, 721-767.

Malerba, Franco, 2007, Innovation, Industrial Dynamics and Structural Transformation
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg).

Miles, James A., and Rosenfeld, James D., 1983, The Effect of Voluntary Spin-off
Announcements on Shareholder Wealth, The Journal of Finance 38, 1597-1606.

Perfect, Steven B., and Wiles, Kenneth W., 1994, Alternative constructions of Tobin's
q: An empirical comparison, Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 313-341.

Peters, Ryan H., and Taylor, Lucian A., 2017, Intangible Capital and the Investment-q
relation. Journal of Financial Economics 123, 251-272.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Servaes, Henri, and Zingales, Luigi, 2000, The Cost of Diversity:
The Diversification Discount and Inefficient Investment. The Journal of Finance 55, 35-
80.

Scharfstein, David S., 1998, The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets II: Evidence
from Diversified Conglomerates, NBER Working Paper 6352.

Shin, Hyun-Han, and Stulz, René, 1998, Are Internal Capital Markets Efficient?, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 531-552.

Whited, Toni M., 2002, Is it inefficient investment that causes the diversification
discount, The Journal of Finance 56, 1667-1691.

                                  36
8. Appendix
Appendix 1: SIC Codes
The following table displays the classification of industries into SIC-codes.

Appendix 2: Variance Inflation Factors (VIF)
The following table displays all the VIF-factors for the variables in each regression.

                                  37