PRIVATE EQUITY AND CAPITAL
EXPENDITURES

WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THE IPO?

GUSTAV WIDUSS

OLIVER HAGMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Private Equity and  Capital Expenditures:  What Happens After the IPO?

Abstract:
   Using a  sample of 1023 Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) in Europe between 2007 to
   2017, we  analyse  how capital expenditures (capex) change following an IPO for
   Private Equity backed (PE-backed) IPOs compared to other IPOs. We find that PE-
   backed IPOs experience significantly more positive change in capex from the third
   year and forward compared to other IPOs, and no significant difference the first two
   years. For the capex to sales ratio, we only observe this significant result in the third
   year. The motive for  analysing  this is the criticism PE-firms have received in the
   media, claiming that they “flatter the books” before an IPO. The result to some
   extent supports the criticism, but we cannot prove causally  that the results originate
   from “flattering of the books”, as the effect could be a result from other factors.  This
   paper  is relevant for both investors considering participating in PE-backed offerings,
   as the projected capex levels are important in the firm valuation, and for the further
   discussion about the governance of PE-backed firms.

Keywords:

   Private Equity, Capital Expenditures, Initial Public Offering

Authors:

   Gustav Widuss  (24284)
   Oliver Hagman  (24212)

Tutor:

   Adam Altmejd,  Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Gustav Widuss and Oliver Hagman, 2020

                                   1
1. Introduction

This paper analyses  differences in the change in capex following an IPO  for PE-backed
firms relative to other firms. We find  that PE-backed IPOs experience a more positive
change  in capex  from the third year and forward. For capex to sales, this is only true in
the third year  following an IPO.  The absence of significant differences in the first two
years  might  indicate some lag in the effects.

“I am not against private equity in general, but when it comes to IPOs  they are in the
business to get the highest price for their investors. This means there is a tendency to
flatter the books to make the investments look a lot better than it is.”  -  James Laing

Comments like James Laing’s  -  deputy head of pan-European equities at Aberdeen Asset
Management,  one of the world’s largest investment companies with EUR 574b under
management (Aberdeen, 2020)  -  sparked our interest for private equity and long-term
investments. He claimed in an interview with Financial Times (2014) that some investors
believe that PE-firms “flatter the books” before an IPO  -  meaning that they claim the
assets to be better than they in reality are  -  leading to some fund managers rarely buying
PE-backed offerings. In the article, investment bankers disagree with Laing’s view and
instead  claim that PE-backed IPOs are sensibly priced with the motivation that PE-firms
otherwise would find it difficult to exit their other assets in the public market later on. In
the academic literature, Laing’s view has some support. Kaplan and Strömberg (2009)
summarize many of the studies done on private equity firms and leveraged buyouts (LBO)
and raise the question whether the decrease in capex following an LBO found in some
studies increase immediate cash flows at the expense of future cash flows. The rationale
being that companies choose to  not  invest in positive net present value projects as the
investments  would benefit the company after the PE-firm has  left the firm.

We interpret  two sides  of the claim  that PE-firms “flatter the books”. First, that the PE-
firm through their control of the company have systematically forced the company to
“underinvest” in long-term investments in order to increase their own current cash flow.
The consequence being that the companies need to increase capex in order to sustain their
                                                                                     1
level or quality  of output. Secondly,  that  the PE-firm sell a better business plan than the
assets  actually  can deliver and understate the required future capex investments required
to realize that plan. To provide context to the discussion,  we believe that the change in
capex following an IPO would be an indicator that could capture some of these effects.
We formalize our hypothesis as the following:

        H: PE-backed firms experience a more positive change in capex
         following an IPO compared to IPOs backed by other owners.

This paper tests the hypothesis by  analysing  the change in capex following an  IPO  for
1023 IPOs in Europe. We compare the logarithmic (log) change in capex and capex to
sales before and five years after the IPO between PE-backed companies and other
companies undergoing an IPO. The main statistical method used are Ordinary Least
Square (OLS) regressions with controls for firm characteristics and fixed effects.

1
 How the business will develop in the coming years with growth scenarios etcetera.

                                   2
Relevant papers studying private equity and  long-term  investments have focused on the
effect when a private equity firm takes ownership (Kaplan, 1989, Long and Ravenscraft,
1993, Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009 and Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar, 2011). Our paper
studies the effect when PE-firms exit their investment through an IPO and thus focuses
on the period that stakeholders such as Liang, an investor in the public market, are
interested in. As the forecasted capex levels have a material impact on the free cash flow
which is the base for company valuation when doing discounted cash flow analysis
(Rosenbaum and Pearl, 2013), the result from our paper is relevant for investors in their
projections, expectations and decision about PE-backed offerings.

When studying  IPOs,  we consider that they represent a selective sample since PE-firms
can choose other exit strategies. The contribution from this paper is not intended to be
applicable on all PE-owned firms due to this selectiveness, thus only applicable on PE-
owned firms exiting through an IPO. An IPO is the process of selling equity to the public
for the first time (Berk and DeMarzo, 2016) and represents a common exit route for PE-
                                                                               2
firms, accounting for around 14 percent of exits between 1970 to 2007  (Kaplan and
Strömberg, 2009).

The paper is structured to begin with relevant literature that provides context. The section
is followed by a description of the data our study is based on. We then present the method
of analysis, a presentation of our results and finish the paper with a conclusion. In
addition, a section of references and appendix are provided.

2. Literature Review and Contribution

The effects arising from different  settings of governance  has been of great interest for
researchers, with specific focus on PE-firms and their structure with their LBOs that
differs dramatically from how a firm normally is run. Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) show
that PE-activity in the US has increased exponentially since its inception in the 1980s and
today represent a fair proportion of overall market activities. For this paper, there are
primarily three areas of relevance from existing literature. First, how PE-firms are
structured,  and the  organizational  differences compared to public firms. Secondly,
regarding private equity and  long-term  investments. Thirdly concerning IPOs and the
effects that arise from it.

2.1. Private Equity and  Organizational  Differences

Ever since Jensen (1989) argued that the public  organization had outlived its usefulness
in many sectors, there has been a discussion about which type of  organization  is superior
for the long run performance of a firm. The privately held LBOs, Jensen argues, is
superior due to its emphasis on concentrated ownership, strong management incentives,
better corporate governance and a more efficient capital structure compared to the public
organization. This type of investors Jensen calls “active investors”  that  often hold large
equity or debt positions, sit on the boards of directors, are involved in the long-term
direction of the firm and have the power  to  dismiss management. The main conflict
between the management (agents) and the shareholders (principals) is over the free cash

2
 Kaplan and Strömberg (2009): Type of exit 1970 to 2007: Bankruptcy (6%), IPO (14%), Sold to strategic buyer (38%), Secondary
Buyout (24%), Sold to LBO-Backed firm (5%), Sold to management (1%) and Other/unknown (11%)

                                   3
flow, the cash flow in excess  of that required to fund all positive net present value
projects, Jensen (1986) further explains. This agency cost of free cash flow is reduced in
an LBO due the high proportion of debt and the construction of management incentives
aligning the interests.  With a high equity stake for management, usually about 15 to 20
percent of equity (Jensen, 1986), and the highly levered structure with equity subordinate
to debt, the management shares both the upside and downside and are forced to avoid low
return projects to generate cash flow to service the debt and increase the value of their
equity. As Jensen (1989) explains:

       “More than any other factor, these organizations’ resolution of the
       owner-manager conflict explains how they can motivate the same
      people, managing the same resources, to perform so much more
       effectively under private ownership than in the publicly held corporate
       form.”  -  Michael Jensen

After Jensen, several papers have  analysed  the effect of different  organizational  forms
and types of ownership. Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) explain how PE-firms and LBOs
are structured. PE-firms are lean  organizations  organized  as a partnership or limited
liability corporation that raises capital through private equity funds to invest  in private
equity. The PE-firms are general partners who manage the fund and the limited partners
-  typically institutional investors  -  invest in the  funds but  have limited influence on the
investments. The typical fund has a fixed life of around ten years, with some five years
to invest and some five years to “exit” - realize the investment (Berk and DeMarzo, 2016)
-  and return capital to the  investors. The typical LBO is financed with a debt proportion
of around 60 to 90 percent,  hence the name  leveraged  buyout. The remaining 10 to 40
percent is financed by equity from the private equity funds. This highly  leveraged setup
enables the PE-firms to control majority positions with less equity than it otherwise would
have needed.

Cohn, Mills and Towery (2014) found that the highly leveraged capital structure in an
LBO remains, even if they generate excess cash flow. This is based on a sample of 317
LBOs in the U.S. Accordingly, the initial highly levered structure of  an  LBO transaction
is not only an initial, but a sustained change of capital structure. This highly leveraged
setup combined with the decline in capex after an LBO found in some studies raise the
question whether PE-firms in their LBOs increase current cashflow, but hurt future cash
flows (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). To test if this truly is the case, one way is to consider
the performance of PE-backed IPOs. Cao and Lerner (2009) looks at  the performance of
496 LBOs after they have gone public again, named Reverse Leveraged Buyouts
(RLBOs), and find that the industry-adjusted share performance of RLBOs outperforms
other IPOs and the whole market. This indicates that the previous decreases found in
capex after an LBO might not be due to unwillingness to invest long term and increase
current cash flows at the expense of future cash flows, but rather an unwillingness to
invest in low return or negative net present value projects, in line with the agency cost of
free cash flows discussed by Jensen (1986 and 1989). In a report focusing on private
equity, Bain & Company (2020) found that the previous premium returns the PE-firms
have shown in their funds have converged in the U.S. to match the returns of the public
market for the last decade, which is not what the investors expect and are paying for when
they lock their investments for a period of years. In Europe, the ten-year performance for
PE-firms is still overperforming compared to the public  market.

                                   4
2.2 Private Equity and Long-term Investments

The shareholders of a firm  exercise  their control through electing the board of directors
of a firm, which have the ultimate decision-making authority in a firm (Berk and
DeMarzo, 2016). The shareholders with most voting rights have the most influence in
electing the board of directors and could either choose to put themselves on the board of
directors or appoint someone. The board of directors appoint managers and  decide on
their compensation as well as  monitor  their performance. The Chief Executive Officer
(CEO), that has been appointed by the board, is responsible for and manages the day-to-
day activity in the firm. The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is the most senior financial
manager in a firm and has three main responsibilities.  Making investment decisions,
making financial decisions and managing the firm’s cash flow.  Because the  shareholders
appoint  the board, and the board appoints the management team who in turn make the
investment decisions, it is actually the shareholders that are in control of the investments.
As there are many shareholders in a public firm, there are also many different goals,
interests and priorities on how these investments should be made, with the strongest
shareholders in voting having the most influence. For PE-firms, this is different due to
the more concentrated ownership (Jensen, 1989) with a more active monitoring from the
board, lowering the agency costs between the shareholders and management.

The high level of debt in an LBO might imply that PE-firms need to  prioritize  service of
the debt instead of long run investments (Kaplan, 1989). Kaplan (1989) analyses the
effects on operating performance originating from 48 large management buyouts (MBOs)
-  which is a type of investment strategy  for  PE-firms  -  in the United States and concludes
that MBO-targets increase their profitability by cutting down on capex, selling off assets
and still increasing operating income, measured up to three years after the MBO. In
addition to  Kaplan, Long and Ravenscraft (1993) find that PE-firms cause research and
development (R&D) intensity to drop by some 40 percent following an LBO. On the other
hand, Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2011) based on 839 French LBOs, find that PE-firms
relaxes credit constraints which allows the LBOs to take advantage of earlier unexploited
opportunities. For these firms, the relaxed credit constraints increase capex the years after
the LBO. Ivashina and Kovner (2011) found that PE-firms through their repeated
transactions develop a favourable relationship with the banks, reducing inefficiencies
from information asymmetries and allow more  favourable  terms with reduced cost and
more  favourable  covenants, supporting  the  view that PE-firms rather could be a source
for capital for additional investments.

For investors, historical levels of capex are often a general proxy for projecting future
levels, but the company's strategy, sector or phase can lead to deviations from the
historical  pattern.  Management often discuss future capex plans in the financial reports to
investors, and analysts covering the firms also provide estimates for the near period. In
absence of guidance, the capex is often forecasted as a percentage of sales from historical
levels, as sales growth  often needs to be supported by growth in the assets (Rosenbaum
and Pearl, 2013).

Kaplan (1989) noted that it is not possible to determine whether increases or decreases in
capex truly is value-creating or value-destructing for the firm. It could rather be dependent
on the level of  attractive investment projects available, or something else such as agency
costs of free cash flow. In addition to Kaplan, Porter (1992) argues that some firms have

                                   5
efficiency difficulties regarding the capital investment systems. He argues that some firms
invest   too   little,   particularly   in   intangible   assets   and   capabilities   crucial   for
competitiveness, and that some firms waste capital on investments that have limited or
no financial rewards as well as use a too high cost of capital in their capital planning. This
variegates Kaplan’s discussion regarding the role of capex as value-creating or value-
destructing for a firm, as there is no clear answer.

As another form of long run investments, Lerner, Sorensen and Strömberg (2011) analyse
investments in innovation, measured in patenting activity from 472 LBOs globally. They
find no evidence that LBOs sacrifice long term investments in order to service debt or in
any other way increase short term cash flows. Instead, they find that LBO  firms patents
are more cited, which is a proxy for economic importance. To conclude, there are different
views on PE-firms and their effects on long term investments.

2.3 Initial Public Offerings

Why firms undergo an IPO differs. As an IPO is a way to raise capital, companies may
undergo an IPO in order to raise funds for investing in capex, which is the primary
motivation found by Kim and Weisbach (2008). However, other literature does not agree
on the sentiment that firms undergo IPOs to fund future investments. Zingales, Panetta
and Pagano (1998) studied Italian IPOs and concluded that companies appear to go public
not to finance future investments and growth, but to rebalance their accounts after high
investment and growth. A study of Swedish IPOs in the 1980s concluded that companies
were taken public by their owners who wanted to liquidate their investment to finance
personal consumption or portfolio diversification (Rydqvist and Högholm, 1995). In
addition, a survey of CFOs concluded that the main motivation for going public is to
create public shares in a liquid market for use in future acquisitions (Brau and Fawcett,
2006).

Following an IPO, the ownership becomes more dispersed and, in most  IPOs, the pre-
existing shareholders are subject to a (often) 180-day lockup period where they cannot
sell their shares. This in order to reduce the moral hazard issues associated with the
information asymmetry at the IPO (Brav and Gompers, 2003). Field and  Hanka (2001)
found that during the time of lookup, there is little selling by insiders, but immediately
when the lookup expires the trading volume increases by some 40 percent and the
following trading days are associated with a statistically significant  abnormal negative
share return. Also, after the lookup expires, it normally takes some years for the PE-firm
to fully exit their investment, as Cao (2011) reports. Further, Cao shows that the pre-IPO
ownership is around 60 percent of the equity for PE-firms in PE-backed IPOs, decreasing
to around 40 percent immediately after the IPO and later decreasing subsequently until
the “full exit” is  finalized  after some years. This implies that also the period after the IPO
is important for the PE-firms return, with the IPO as only a “partial exit”, and not as clear
change in ownership as in an LBO that happens instantly.

2.2. Contribution

By  analysing  capex  for PE-backed firms following an IPO we contribute to the research
by expanding the scope from  analysing  what happens to long term investments when a
company undergoes an LBO, to what happens when a PE-firm exits or are exiting their

                                   6
investment through an  IPO.  We aim to  provide further understandings of the different
ownership-types implications on long run investments, which would both help investors
in their projections for PE-backed offerings and give context to the general discussion.

3. Data

3.1. Data  Construction

Our sample consists of 1023 IPOs reported by  FactSet. To obtain the sample, we begin
with a screen based on (1) all the IPOs (no spin-off, change of list etc.) in (2) Europe that
               3
(3) are priced  and (4) took place between January 2007 to December 2017.  FactSet
reports 3104 IPOs based on these parameters. Then, we exclude IPOs that either (A) did
not take place during our timeline, even though they previously achieved the parameter
(140 IPOs excluded), (B) have no capex the year before the IPO  (1379 IPOs excluded).
Then, (C) have total assets below EUR 10m the year before the IPO (1775 IPOs excluded)
and (D) where firm age at IPO is below two years (1038 IPOs excluded). Finally, (E) the
sector Miscellaneous is excluded as it is a residual capturing all companies that are not
classified to a specific sector (154 IPOs excluded). Due to overlapping of the excluding
parameters, we end up with 1065 as the total number of IPOs in our sample, and thus
excludes 2081 IPOs. See the appendix for a more detailed table of the exclusions.

We chose these excluding parameters in order to be able to do a meaningful analysis of
our hypothesis. In (A), we chose the parameter because we only want the IPOs to be
within our timeframe. We chose 2007 to 2017 since it represents a recent and wide
sample. In (B), because we want to  analyse  the effects of capex, in which we require data
for capex before the IPO to calculate a change and the year immediately before the IPO
is a good proxy for this. In (C), because we want to  exclude the smallest firms in order to
get the sample with different IPO-types more comparable since PE-firms are not
interested in too small firms (due to the size of the funds) and the EUR 10m is similar to
Cohn, Mills and Towery (2014) USD 10m as cut-off. There are no higher bound due to
there not being a clear higher bound in practice for either PE-backed firms or Other firms.
In (D), because we want to measure change in capex after an  IPO,  we require data points
before the IPO which newly established firms do not have. In addition, recently founded
firms do not compare to PE-backed firms as PE-firms invest in mature businesses (Kaplan
and Strömberg, 2009). We acknowledge that an existing firm can be restructured in a new
legal entity which in our data then appears as a recently founded firm even though they
have existed before the restructuring. In (E) because we want to control for Sector Fixed
Effects, which the residual sector Miscellaneous naturally do not have, as there are no
inherent similarities between the firms. Also, when including the observations from the
sector in the regressions, our model generates a missing F-value due to there being too
few observations when clustering the standard errors on IPO-year-sector.

3
 FactSet definition: Offering has closed and has been purchased by investors

                                   7
Figure 1. Number of IPOs (l.h.s.) and % PE-Backed IPOs (r.h.s) per year between 2007 to 2017.

Of these 1065 IPOs, 304 (29%) are  labelled  “Private Equity-Backed” by  FactSet. The
remaining is labelled “Founders & Others” and “Venture Capital-Backed” (VC), with 688
                                             4
(65%) and 73 (7%) IPOs respectively . These two types are bundled together and labelled
“other firms”, in the rest of the paper. Even if both PE-  and VC-firms are sponsors, we
focus on PE-backed IPOs in this paper. The arrangement of a PE-investment is, according
to Kaplan and Strömberg (2009), distinct from a VC-investment considering the maturity
of the business and share of ownership. In addition, PE-backed IPOs are the protagonist
in the theme we  analyse. Figure 1 shows the distribution of IPO-types for each year in
our sample, with the proportion of PE-backed IPOs having an increased share over our
time frame until a decline in the last two years. Notable from Figure 1, is how the
proportion of PE-backed IPOs during different states of the economy changes, with a low
in 2009 after the Great Recession and a high in 2015 when markets are booming. This is
in line with the  Market Timing Hypothesis, that Cao (2011) finds evidence for, where PE-
firms seems to shorten the duration of the LBOs in order to take advantage of  favourable
IPO market conditions. As explained below in Section 4. regarding the Method, we use
Year Fixed Effects in our regressions to account for the effects arising from the state of
the economy.

3.2. Data Geography

Our data is gathered from all exchanges in Europe; thus, the conclusions are based on and
should further be applied on European firms. Figure 2 shows the distribution between
geographical areas, with the British Isles having most IPOs and Southern Europe the
fewest. As the data covers a large area one can speculate about the differences of each

4
 FactSet  definition: Private Equity-Backed: Owned by or major sponsored by a private equity firm. Founders & Others: Company
owned by founders and other investors, such as, hedge funds, government, other financing sources. This offer type excludes
financing from venture capital and private equity firms. Venture Capital-Backed: Original financing provided by venture capital
firms for new higher risk ventures such as start-up companies. Over time, the term has expanded to also include investment in
management buyouts and other situations in which venture capitalists invest.

                                   8
region, despite all being listed in Europe. Table 1 shows that there appears to be
differences in the sample regarding the size of companies measured in capex, sales, assets
and leverage at the year before IPO. We refrain from deep diving in each region since this
is  a  European study. But when performing a robustness check controlling for the fixed
effects from the geographical area within Europe, we show that this has no significant
effect on the results (reported in the appendix).

                            Capex             Assets               Sales              Leverage
 Area                 Median   Average     Median    Average     Median    Average     Median    Average      IPOs
 British Isles               4,9     47,0      107,7     1 510,7       79,0      826,5       27%      33%        242
 Eastern Europe             2,1     27,0       79,7      670,9       56,7      346,8       23%      25%        239
 Northern Europe            3,0     15,9      124,7     488,6       74,0      344,4       33%      33%        194
 Southern Europe            4,9     42,5      130,6     3 442,9       86,1      691,9       33%      32%        127
 Western Europe            3,4     57,3       79,2     2 521,2       62,8      817,4       28%      37%        221
 Average area             3,7     37,9      104,4     1 726,9       71,7      605,4       29%      32%       204,6

Table 1.  Key financials of different regions in the year before IPO. Capex, Assets and Sales in EURm. Leverage as Debt to Assets,
in percentage. IPOs being the number of IPOs.

                                                                5
Figure 2.  Number of IPOs (l.h.s.) and % PE-Backed IPOs (r.h.s) per region between 2007 to 2017.

5
 British Isles: UK, Ireland, Channel Islands. Eastern Europe: Poland, Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Belarus, Ukraine, Czech
Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Moldova, Russia, Romania, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia, Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, Bulgaria,
Macedonia, Albania, Turkey. Northern Europe: Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Iceland. Southern Europe: Portugal, Spain,
Malta, Cyprus, Italy, Greece. Western Europe: France, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Austria, Germany

                                   9
3.3. Data Panels

 Variable                 Median      Average       S.D.         Q1         Q3         IPOs
 Panel A: PE-backed
 Capex                     5,6         23,3         53,7         1,4         21,2         262
 Assets                    181,9       2 407,6      17 957,9        49,2         948,8         262
 Sales                     145,8        661,6       2 032,9        39,6         505,6         262
 Debt                      64,5        437,5       1 139,2        11,9        357,5         261
 EBITDA                  16,7         64,2        120,2         4,1         70,5         246
 EBITDA-margin            12,2%       16,0%       16,9%        7,1%        23,2%        235
 Leverage                 38,0%       39,5%       28,1%       19,6%       56,6%        261
 Age                      15,0         25,1         31,7         6,3         28,0         262

 Panel B: Other
 Capex                     2,8         37,9         237,6         0,6         14,8         761
 Assets                     62,2        1 257,0       7 216,3        20,4         263,8         761
 Sales                      44,2         506,1       3 763,5        14,7         189,3         761
 Debt                      13,0         392,7       2 962,1        3,0         85,4         758
 EBITDA                   5,1         54,9        237,9         1,1         22,4         705
 EBITDA-margin            11,7%       10,6%       37,1%        5,1%        22,8%        646
 Leverage                 24,6%       29,7%       38,2%        8,8%        43,8%        758
 Age                      14,0         23,2         30,4         7,0         23,0         761

Table 2.  Sample of IPOs by IPO-type. For each firm in the sample, the three years prior to the IPO is averaged for the financial
variables. The table shows the distribution for the variables Capex, Assets, Sales, EBITDA and Debt in EURm. The EBITDA-margin
as EBITDA to Sales and Leverage as Debt to Assets, both in percentage. Firm age at IPO is the actual age at IPO. *Firms excluded in
calculation if EBITDA-margin below  -300%.

Table 2 provides the distribution of the variables that represent the three-year average
before the IPO for both PE-backed firms (Panel A) and Other firms (Panel B). The median
capex, assets, sales and EBITDA for PE-backed firms ranges about 2,0 to 5,0 times other
firms. Also, leverage is 1,6 times other firms for the PE-backed firms. The median age of
the firms that undergo an IPO differs by one year, and on average some two years, with
PE-firms being older. The number of IPOs for each descriptive differs due to  FactSet  not
having data for all measures, firms not having the financial measure (such as no Debt)
and that firms with EBITDA-margins below  -300 percent are excluded.

The differences in the  descriptive  originate from the bias in firm characteristics that PE-
firms  favour  when it comes to their LBOs (discussed in section 4.3.). To check  for
robustness in our original model, we add dummy variables controlling for non-linear
effects depending on the firm size and observe similar results as the original model.

3.4. Sector Classification

We use Sector Fixed Effects in the regression models to  account for the differences in the
sectors. For example, the Finance and Health Technology sectors are substantially  more
capital-intensive than other sectors such as the Retail Trade and Distribution sectors,
measured as total assets over total sales, as Table 3 shows. Figure 3 shows the distribution
of IPOs between FactSet's defined sectors, with Communications, Retail Trade and
Health Services as the most PE-intensive sectors from the sample, with 53%, 52% and
42% respectively. Utilities, Transportation and Process Industries are the least PE-
intensive sectors with 15%, 11% and 6% respectively.

                                  10
Figure 3.  Number of IPOs (l.h.s) and % PE-backed IPOs (r.h.s) per sector between 2007 to 2017. Ranked in descending order based
on % PE-backed IPOs.

3.5. Capital Expenditure Measures

                                                                           6
We use FactSet’s defined financial measures in our analysis . The measure for Capex
represents total capital expenditures for the period. This includes all new capex, both
tangible and intangible, and excludes all acquisitions and disposals of assets. Following
the financial forecast practices (Rosenbaum and Pearl, 2013), we also look at capex to
sales. Sales represents sales of goods and services, earned from the company’s core and
recurring operations, reduced by cash and trade discounts, allowance for sales return and
pass-through taxes, such as sales and excise taxes. The capex to sales ratio is the capex
divided by sales the same year.

In practice there is a distinction between maintenance capex and growth capex, as some
capex is only in order to maintain the firm's capabilities and output at their current level
and some are in order to get new capabilities, expanding the asset base (Rosenbaum and
Pearl, 2013). With our data, we cannot separate these two  distinctions of capex and
instead treat them as only one type.

Although long-run investments can be expressed in other measures, this paper focuses
solely on capex. Other types of long run investments include, but are not limited to,
acquisitions, R&D spending’s, competence development for employees and other
operational changes. PE-firms and the other firms have some different approaches to these
activities, with a clear example in one of the widely used value creation strategy

6
 FactSet Formulas: FF_CAPEX and FF_SALES. Also, the FF_ASSETS, FF_DEBT and FF_EBITDA_OPER formulas are used in
the analysis.

                                  11
                       IPOs as count of IPOs.

                              tal Assets to total Sales, in

                     Sample of IPOs by sector for the year before the IPO. Capital Intensive as to

                          Table 3.percentage. Capex, Assets and Sales in EURm. Leverage as Debt to Assets, in percentage.

12
PE-firms in a “Buy and Build” acquisition strategy for the portfolio companies, which is
part of the value  creation strategy in around 30  percent  of the deals and not as frequent
for other firms (Bain & Company, 2019).

4. Method

4.1. Statistical Tests

For both capex measures, we (1) begin by performing a two-tailed T-test comparing the
mean log change for PE-backed and other IPOs. By performing this  test,  we can
determine if the means differ, but since the statistical model is simple and does not
account for fixed effects such as sector and year of IPO as well as other control variables,
this is only our starting point for further analysis.

After the T-test, following Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2011), we (2)  formalize  the
analysis with OLS regressions to  analyse  if the change in the post-IPO numbers to the
pre-IPO numbers statistically differ for the two groups  when including control variables.
As Kaplan (1989) notes, these cash flow variables are reported before tax, which makes
the analysis robust and puts the focus on managerial operational changes, unaffected by
taxes and financial decisions. Unlike the previous authors Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar
(2011), we use the pre-IPO average as the base for our regressions and not only the year
immediately before the IPO (LBO in their case). This is due to the more volatile nature
in capex compared to the return on assets, which is their main measurement. As Kaplan
(1989) further notes, the year of the IPO (Management Buyout in his case) is difficult to
interpret as a pre or post year and is therefore not presented or  analysed. Furthermore, it
is also affected by IPO related fees and preparations, which could bias the analysis. Later,
we (3) compare the results with literature and (4) conduct a series of robustness checks
to  generalize  and verify the results. Finally, we (5) draw conclusions.

4.2. Multivariate  Regression

  logCapexChangeMeasurej  = PE-backed + IPOyearj  + Sectorj  + Assetsn1  + Salesn1  +
                       Debtn1  + EBITDAn1  + Leveragen1  + e

We estimate the above OLS regression and adjust for IPO-year-sector-cluster standard
errors to allow for within year-sector-correlations. When doing this, we handle possible
intragroup correlation and relaxes the usual requirement that the observations be
independent. Thus, the observations are still independent across  clusters, but not
necessarily within  clusters. Since the different capital structures across the sectors vary
systematically in a way that we likely do not fully capture in our model, we cluster the
standard errors by sector. But since only clustering on sector’s would not give us enough
clusters, minimum 42 clusters (Angrist and Pischke, 2008), we cluster separately for each
IPO-year-sector cluster. This approach allows for intragroup correlation within sectors in
these specific years, but not across time.  Therefore,  we make the implicit assumption that
our model does not suffer from any substantial serial correlation. Another approach,
reported in the appendix, is to cluster by IPO-area-sector. With this approach, the standard
error terms are allowed to covary within the sectors and across time, but  not within
geographical areas. Both approaches yield similar results, so we defer this other
specification to the appendix and focus on the IPO-year-sector in the main analysis.

                                  13
In the regression, j is a firm index and  n1  represents the “negative 1”-year relative to the
IPO-year, thus the year before the IPO. Each section of the regression is further explained
below.

4.2.1. Dependent Variables

Our dependent variables are log change in capex and log change in capex to sales. Thus,
we perform two different  types of regressions. We use log changes to reduce the effects
from outliers. We motivate using log instead of dropping observations as we believe that
each observation provides value for the analysis, despite being an outlier, and thus that
log is a better approach than excluding these observations.

For log change in capex, the change is calculated as:

                𝑙𝑜𝑔  𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥  𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒  =  𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥!"/  𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥!#$%&'()              (1)

where  px  equals either the first, second, third, fourth and fifth year post the IPO and  pre-
avg  represents the  three-year  pre-IPO average.

For log change in capex to sales, the change is calculated as:

𝑙𝑜𝑔  𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥  𝑡𝑜  𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠  𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒
               =  𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥!"/ 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠!")  −  𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥!#$%&'(/ 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠!#$%&'()   (2)

where  px  equals either the first, second, third, fourth and fifth year post the IPO and  pre-
avg  represents the  three-year  pre-IPO average as with the log capex change.

4.2.2. Dummy Variable Representing Private Equity Ownership Before IPO

To  analyse  the effects originating from the IPO being either PE-backed or not, we use a
dummy variable based on IPO-type  labelled  PE-backed. The dummy equals 1 for PE-
backed and 0 for other firms.

4.2.3. Fixed Effects

Our regressions include fixed effects regarding both IPO-year and sector. The Year Fixed
Effects  is to reduce the differences originating from different states of the economy  and
the regression to only regress changes during the same years. With the  Sector Fixed
Effects,  this reduces the fixed differences originating from the firm's different sectors and
only compares firms within the same sectors.

4.2.4. Firm Control Variables

The regression includes firm control variables in order to control for differences amongst
firms. The control variables include the  Assets, Sales, Debt, EBITDA  and  Leverage  for
                                                       7
the year immediately before the IPO, year  n1 .

7
 Due to the business model of Banks and some Insurance companies with no EBITDA in the profit and loss statement, these
industries become excluded in the Finance sector in the regressions when controlling for EBITDA.

                                  14
4.3. The Selection Bias Undermines the Causal Link

There is a selection bias in the choice of firms that undergo an LBO, which makes the
causality difficult to link. PE-firms look for the typical LBO-firm characteristics in (1) a
strong cash flow generation, (2) leading and defensible market positions, (3) growth
opportunities, (4) efficiency enhancement opportunities, (5) low capex requirements, (6)
a strong asset base and (7) a proven management team (Rosenbaum and Pearl, 2013).

In addition to the initial selection bias, PE-firms choose to exit only some of their
investments through an IPO. Hence there may also be an additional selection bias in the
“exit”-step. This eventual selection bias might indicate that the other firms are not fully
comparable to the PE-firms since the PE-firms might be “over-characterized” by the
above characteristics of a strong LBO-candidate compared to the overall firms. Thus, it
would not be possible to estimate a single firm's capex investments post-IPO as if it would
have been PE-backed due to the selection bias undermining the causal effects, that is, PE-
firms are only interested in some type of firms.  However, our study aims to investigate if
the change in capex differs for PE-backed and other firms after an IPO and not the
underlying causal effects resulting in a potential difference.

5. Results

5.1. Capex Change

We find a significant more positive change in capex for PE-backed IPOs the third, fourth
and fifth year following the IPO.

5.1.1. T-test

 T-Test: Capex Change (log)             P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 Absolute difference                     0,073           0,102          0,296**          0,368**          0,513**
  PE-Backed                          0,454           0,450           0,577           0,649           0,711
  Other                             0,528           0,348           0,281           0,281           0,198

 Observations                         989            903            783            662            515
  * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
  ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
  *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 4: T-test for change in log capex. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as
three-year average before the IPO. Significance level reported for the absolute difference.

As a starting point, we begin the analysis by comparing the mean log change in capex
before and one, two, three, four and five years after the IPO between PE-backed IPOs and
other IPOs. The two-tailed T-test indicates a statistically significant positive difference
between the means for the third, fourth and fifth year following an IPO. This indicates
that PE-backed firms see a more positive change in capex. Although not tested in a
statistical model, we observe different trends in the sample where the mean change for
PE-backed  companies  increases  each  year  while  the  change  decreases  for  other
companies.

The test  acts as a starting point for our analysis since we cannot derive robust conclusions
from it. The test is biased due to the natural differences between the groups in the sample,

                                  15
which are outlined in section 3.3. Therefore, in the further analysis we use multivariate
regression models to verify if the difference persists after including controls.

5.1.2. Multivariate Regression

 Capex Change (log)                 P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
 Original                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,139          0,020          0,279**         0.338**          0.377*
  Robust standard error                   0,103           0,110           0,123           0,159           0,212
 Constant                            0,968           0,317           0,660           0,976           0,719
  Robust standard error                   0,175           0,293           0,270           0,255           0,222

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       915           835           723           608           473
 R-squared                           0,063           0,062           0,091           0,116           0,147
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 5.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex. All regressions  include
Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise. P1, P2,
P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO. Regressions
include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Significance level reported for the PE-backed
dummy variable.

As observed in Table 5, applying an OLS regression and controlling for IPO year, sector
and firm characteristics yield a similar result to the earlier T-test. For the third, fourth and
fifth year after an IPO, the dummy variable representing PE-backed IPOs is significant
and has a positive coefficient which indicates that when compared to IPOs backed by
other owners, the log capex change is more positive for PE-backed companies. Also, we
observe the same absence of significant difference between the groups the two first years
following an IPO.

All observations do not have data for the full five-year period post IPO, partially due to a
large share of observations not having been listed for the whole five-year period.
Companies listed in 2014 and forward are not represented in all years. The consequence
is that the number of observations drop for each year after the IPO, thus leading to a
smaller sample the longer after the IPO. Year five has 473 observations compared to year
one with 915. The effect observed is that the standard error doubles from year one to year
five, likely due to the reduced number of observations which weakens the statistical
strength, potentially leading to a lower P-value in the later years. This complication is
present in all our original tests, but we do a robustness check using only firms that
underwent an IPO before 2014 to see if including IPOs from 2014 and after affect our
results in the earlier years. This yields similar results as when using all the observations.

5.2. Capex to Sales Change

We find a significant more positive change in the capex to sales ratio for PE-backed IPOs
the third following the IPO.

                                  16
5.2.1. T-test

 T-Test: Capex to Sales Change (log)         P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 Absolute difference                     0,048           0,118          0,307**          0.312**          0.388**
  PE-Backed                          0,037           -0,085           -0,048           -0,096           -0,107
  Other                              -0,011           -0,203           -0,355           -0,408           -0,495

 Observations                         957            877            759            640            495
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 6. T-test for change in log capex to sales. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-
AVG as three-year average before the IPO. Significance  level reported for the absolute difference.

The T-test presented in Table 6 indicates a significant difference the third, fourth and fifth
year following an IPO. Because the change in the ratio for PE-backed companies is less
negative than for other companies, this means that the capex to sales ratio decreases less
for PE-backed companies, which is consistent with our findings in previous tests.

Similar to the T-test for capex change the results are biased and we perform multivariate
regressions to produce  more reliable results and then find that only the third year is
significant.

5.2.2. Multivariate Regression

 Capex to Sales Change (log)            P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
 Original                               (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,010          0,056          0,309***          0,216           0,198
  Robust standard error                   0,092           0,103           0,110           0,138           0,168
 Constant                            0,283           -0,151          -0,065           0,176           0,111
  Robust standard error                   0,158           0,239           0,184           0,209           0,254

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       883           809           699           587           454
 R-squared                           0,056           0,069           0,095           0,129           0,142
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 7.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex to Sales. All regressions
include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise.
P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO.
Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Significance level reported for the
PE-backed dummy variable.

When  analysing  the change in the capex to sales ratio we observe no difference in the
change between the groups the first two years as the dummy variable for a company being
PE-backed is not significant. The third year we observe a significant positive dummy
variable which imply that PE-backed IPOs see a more positive change in the capex to
sales ratio compared to other IPOs. The coefficient in the fourth and fifth year is positive,
indicating the same previous mentioned implication, but not significant (P-value 0,120
and 0,242) which implies that we cannot observe a significant difference between the
groups.

The findings are mostly in line with previous tests for the change in capex as the
significant observations in both tests imply that PE-backed companies experience a more
positive change in respective capex measure whether it is stand-alone capex  or as a

                                  17
fraction of yearly sales. A contrast between the regressions of the measures is that in the
capex to sales regressions we do not observe a significant result the fourth and fifth year.
This does not necessarily pose a problem as it only implies that dividing the capex with
sales diminishes the effects. Also, as previously mentioned the statistical strength
decreases each year following the IPO as the number of observations decrease which may
affect our result.

The multivariate regression differs some from the T-test regarding capex to sales. In the
T-test, the difference is significant in the fourth and fifth year, but when controlling for
fixed effects and firm characteristics the difference is not significant.

5.3. Discussion

The significant positive change in capex for the PE-backed firms from the third year and
forward supports our hypothesis: the PE-backed firms see a significantly more positive
increase in capex following an IPO. This could be a result of “flattering of the books”
before an IPO, as the new investor would need to increase the investments, either in order
to uphold the business plan or to  uphold  competitiveness. However, there can be other
explanations such as increased agency costs of free cash flow following the more
dispersed  ownership when the PE-firm are completing their exit (Jensen, 1986). Another
reason could be the bias for PE-backed firms discussed earlier, because they are
characterized  by being more competitive and less risky since PE-firms mostly are
interested in firms with certain characteristics (Rosenbaum and  Pearl, 2013). If PE-
backed firms are more competitive and less risky, there might be a bias where capex
would increase more for these firms because they are healthier, and not because they have
been managed by a PE-firm, which could be the reason for the results.

Under an assumption that capex relative to sales remains at a fixed ratio, as is a common
assumption in financial modelling, this could be a reason for the less significant results
related to the capex to sales ratio (Rosenbaum and Pearl, 2013). If both groups of firms
indeed grow their capex in line with the sales growth, there would not be a significant
difference in  the ratio, but the change in capex by itself could differ.

As the differences between the groups appear significantly only from the third year and
forward, this indicates that there might be  a lag for the effects of capex following an IPO.
The reason for this lag may partially be explained by the process that shareholders through
their voting rights influence the board to convince or replace the management in order to
change the firm’s  behaviour, which is a formal process that takes time (Berk and
DeMarzo, 2016). Another reason could  be that the PE-firms still own shares for a period
after the IPO (Cao, 2011),  hence  having  significant control and  the  effects of being PE-
backed may remain.

Another possibility for the lag is that the insignificant differences the first years occur
because some firms undergo an IPO to fund future investments (Kim and Weisbach,
2008) while PE-firms mostly use IPOs as vehicles for liquidating investments (Kaplan
and Strömberg, 2009). Liquidating  investments should not increase capex, while raising
funds in order to finance investments would. The findings of Zingales, Panetta and
Pagano (1998), Rydqvist and Högholm (1995) and Brau and Fawcett (2006) does
however  not support Kim and Weisbach’s (2008) findings.  But  as none of the authors

                                  18
separate their argument for different types of owners, we cannot be certain that other firms
have differing motives without further investigation.

5.4. Robustness Checks

When performing robustness checks on the results (reported in section A.3. in the
appendix), we  end up with similar results as in the original model. The differences are
described below for each section of robustness check. We perform four robustness
checks. (1) Including IPO-area fixed effects. (2) control for  nonlinear  effects of asset size
using dummy variables. (3) Perform the original regression using only observations from
2007 to 2014. (4) Perform the regressions with IPO-area-sector clustered standard errors.

With (1) IPO-area Fixed Effects included in the regressions, the results support the
robustness in the original model. We do this to account for fixed differences in the
different geographical areas within Europe. We observe identical results regarding the
sign of the coefficient and significance of the dummy variable PE-backed for both capex
and capex to sales change with the exception of the  fourth-year  capex to sales change.
This year the result is however not that different from the original  model, with a weak
significance only just under the 10% level including IPO-area Fixed Effects (P-value
0,096) compared to the original model (P-value 0,120).

When (2) including dummy variables to control for  nonlinear  effects of size we observe
identical results regarding if the dummy variable PE-backed is significant and has a
positive coefficient. This check is made to also consider non-linear effects  related to
company’s size.

Using only firms that underwent an IPO  before 2014 (3), the results are identical to the
original regressions in all but the fourth and fifth year for the log capex change. These
results have a weaker significance than in the original mode but are still significant. Since
our sample consists of  firms that underwent an IPO between 2007 and 2017, only firms
that underwent an IPO before 2014 have financials for all five years in the  analysing
period. Hence, with this sample there are the same observations included throughout the
whole period of analysis, and not like the original model where some observations drop
out.

Finally, the (4) robustness check using IPO-area-sector clustered errors yields similar
results as the original model with IPO-year-sector clusters. As there is a possibility that
there could be serial correlation when clustering on IPO-year-sector, we cluster on IPO-
area-sector which allow the error terms to covary within sectors and across time, but not
geographical areas.

6. Conclusion

The changes in the operational settings following an LBO does seem to lead to  necessary
increases in  capex investments  in the future  when the PE-firm  exits  their  investment
through an IPO. Our results confirm the hypothesis that PE-backed firms experience a
more positive change in capex following an IPO. This is true from the third year after an
IPO and forward when only looking at the change in capex, but only true in the third year
considering the capex to sales ratio. We observe a lag in the effects on capex changes

                                  19
following an IPO the first two years.  This could  support  Laing’s  claim  about PE-firms
“flattering of the books” before an IPO,  and that  an investor should consider this when
projecting capex and pricing the  offering. But our result is not strong enough evidence to
support the claim as it cannot prove the causal link since there could be several other
reasons for this result, the most critical being the inherent selection bias related to which
companies  PE-firms choose to invest in.

To collect more and stronger evidence for the claim that PE-firms “flatter the books”, we
suggest further research to (1)  see if the effects we observe  remain  further in time.  (2)
Control for changes in private equity ownership post-IPO and test if the lag is a result
from PE-firms remaining as a significant shareholder during the lagging period. (3)
Perform analysis on the company’s mediated message in the prospectus  to  more clearly
separate the effects from the different motives in an IPO. (4) Lastly, because of the
inherent selection bias in which companies PE-firms invest in, try to perform experiments
that include  both  PE-owners and other owners and adjust for the bias by for example
randomly distributing companies for the different groups to manage. Suggestions (1), (2)
and (3) would likely not prove a causal link but increase the understanding of capex
development after IPOs. However, an experiment  like in  (4) would be more likely to
prove  causality  but  would be  difficult to design.

                                  20
References
Aberdeenstandard.com. 2020. Who We Are | Aberdeen Standard Investments. [online]
Available at: <https://www.aberdeenstandard.com/en/who-we-are> [Accessed 27 April
2020].
Angrist, Joshua D., and Pischke, Jörn-Steffen, 2008, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist’s Companion (Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey).
Bain   &   Company.   2019.   Private   Equity   Report   2019.   [online]   Available   at:
<https://www.bain.com/contentassets/318bc95c5ddb4c10a5e00a46a58c3f28/bain_repor
t_private_equity_report_2019.pdf> [Accessed 17 April 2020].
Bain   &   Company.   2020.   Private   Equity   Report   2019.   [online]   Available   at:
<https://www.bain.com/globalassets/noindex/2020/bain_report_private_equity_report_2
020.pdf  > [Accessed 17 April 2020].
Berk, Jonathan, and DeMarzo, Peter, 2016. Corporate Finance, Global Edition (4th ed.
Harlow,  United Kingdom: Pearson Education Limited.).
Brau, C. James, and Fawcett, E. Stanley, 2006. Initial Public Offerings: An Analysis of
Theory and Practice, The Journal of Finance 61, 399-436.
Brav, Alon, and Gompers, Paul A., 2003, The Role of Lockups in Initial Public Offerings,
The Review of Financial Studies 16, 1-29.
Boucly, Quentin, and Sraer, David, and Thesmar, David, 2011, Growth LBOs, Journal of
Financial Economics 102, 432-453.
Cao, Jerry, 2011, IPO Timing, Buyout Sponsors’ Exit Strategies, and Firm  Performance
of RLBOs, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 1001-1024.
Cao, Jerry, and Lerner, Josh, 2009, The performance of reverse leveraged buyouts.
Journal of Financial Economics 91, 139-157.
Cohn, Jonathan B., and Mills, Lillian F., and  Towery, Erin M., 2014, The evolution of
capital structure and operating performance after leveraged buyouts: Evidence from U.S.
corporate tax returns, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 469-494.
Field, Laura C., and Hanka, Gordon R., 2001, The Expiration  of IPO share lookups, The
Journal of Finance 56, 471-500.
Financial Times, 2014, Rush to get to the front of the IPO queue, February 18.
Ivashina, Victoria, and Kovner, Anna, 2011, The Private Equity Advantage: Leveraged
Buyout Firms and Relationship Banking, Review of Financial Studies 24, 2462-2498.
Jensen, Michael C., 1989, Eclipse of the Public Corporation, Harvard Business Review,
Sept.-Oct. 1989.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
Takeovers,  American Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Kaplan, Steven N., The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and
value, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 217-254.

                                  21
Kaplan, Steven N., and Strömberg, Per, 2009, Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 121-146.
Kim, Woojin, and Weisbach, Michael S., 2008, Motivation for Public Equity Offers: An
international perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 281-307.
Lerner, Josh, and Sorensen, Mørten, and Strömberg, Per,  2011, Private Equity and Long-
Run Investment: The Case of Innovation, The Journal of Finance 66, 445-477.
Long, F. William, and Ravenscraft, J. David, 1993, LBOs, debt and R&D intensity.
Strategic Management Journal 14, 119-135.
Pagano, Marco, and Panetta,  Fabio, and Zingales, Luigi, 1998. Why Do Companies Go
Public? An Empirical Analysis, The Journal of Finance 53, 27-64.
Porter, Michael E., 1992, Capital Disadvantage: America’s Failing Capital Investment
System, Harvard Business Review, Sept.-  Oct. 1992
Rosenbaum, Joshua, and Pearl, Joshua, 2013. Investment Banking: Valuation, Leveraged
Buyouts, And Mergers & Acquisition (2nd ed. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley &
Sons).
Rydqvist, Kristian, and Högholm, Kenneth, 1995. Going public in the 1980s:  Evidence
from Sweden, European Financial Management 1, 287-315.

                                  22
Appendix
A.1.  Supplemental Information
A.1.1.  Key Definitions

 Expression               Definition
 IPO                    Initial Public Offering
 LBO                 Leveraged Buyout
 MBO               Management Buyout
 PE                   Private Equity
 PE-firm                 Private Equity Sponsor
 PE-backed IPO           IPO backed by a Private Equity Sponsor
 PE-owned               Owned by a Private Equity Sponsor
 PE-fund                 A fund with a fixed life managed by a Private Equity Sponsor
 EBITDA               Earnings Before Interest Taxes Depreciation and Amortization

Table A.11. Key Definitions
A.1.2. Number of Years with Capex for Each Firm

 Number of years with capex pre-IPO                  1                2                3
 Proportion of firms                            15,0%             20,2%             64,8%

Table A.1.2. Proportion of firms with Capex in one, two or three years before the IPO.
Table A.1.2. reports that 91,8% of the firms had capex for at least two years before the
IPO. The pre-IPO average is calculated as the average for the years that have a value. If
there are values for all three years before the IPO, the average is a  three-year  average. If
there are values in two or one year before the IPO, the average is calculated on those
years.
A.1.3. Detailed Data for Excluding’s

 Excluding parameter                                      Total excludings              Excluded due to
                                                                               Not meeting criteria        No data
 (A) IPOs that did not took place during our timeline                    140             115              25
 (B) Firms that have no capex the year before the IPO                   1 379             99             1 280
 (C) Fims with total assets below EUR 10m the year before the IPO           1 775             663             1 112
 (D) Firms with age at IPO below two years                         1 038             834             204
 (E) Firms in the Miscellaneous  sector                             154             154              0
 Total                                                  4 486            1 865            2 621

 Due to overlapping of the excluding parameters, total number of excludings are 2081 IPOs

Table A.1.3.  Firms excluded per excluding parameter, shown in total and excluded due to either not meeting criteria or  FactSet  not
having data. Total number of exclusions also included in the table.

                                  23
A.2.  Detailed Data for the Figures
A.2.1. Table  with values  in Figure 1

 IPO-year             Founders & Others    Private Equity     Venture Capital        Total        % PE-backed
 2007                     179            37             12            228            16%
 2008                     66             7             2             75            9%
 2009                     17             2             4             23            9%
 2010                     63             20             3             86            23%
 2011                     55             16             3             74            22%
 2012                     31             7             3             41            17%
 2013                     49             22             7             78            28%
 2014                     60             64             12            136            47%
 2015                     55             63             10            128            49%
 2016                     54             32             7             93            34%
 2017                     59             34             10            103            33%
 Total                     688            304             73            1065            29%

Table A.2.1.  Values as input to Figure 1. IPO-year as year of IPO. Founder & Others,  Private Equity and Venture Capital as IPO-
type. Total as sum of IPOs. % PE-backed as % PE-backed out of total IPOs per year.
A.2.2. Table  with values  in Figure 2

 IPO-area              Founders & Others    Private Equity     Venture Capital        Total        % PE-backed
 British Isles                 180             90             7             277            32%
 Eastern Europe               209            29             1             239            12%
 Northern Europe              107            73             13            193            38%
 Southern Europe               86             39             3             128            30%
 Western Europe               106            73             49            228            32%
 Total                     688            304             73            1065            29%

Table A.2.2. Values as input to Figure 2. IPO-area as geographical area of IPO. Founder & Others, Private Equity and Venture Capital
as IPO-type. Total as sum of IPOs. % PE-backed as % PE-backed out of total IPOs per area.
A.2.3. Table  with values  in Figure 3

 Sector                Founders & Others    Private Equity     Venture Capital        Total        % PE-backed
 Communications               8             10             1             19            53%
 Retail Trade                 24             34             7             65            52%
 Health Services               10             12             1             23            52%
 Commercial Services            24             27             4             55            49%
 Consumer Services             37             26             1             64            41%
 Producer Manufacturing          57             34             4             95            36%
 Consumer Durables             30             15             0             45            33%
 Technology Services            40             21             5             66            32%
 Consumer Non-Durables          36             16             0             52            31%
 Distribution Services            21             9              1             31            29%
 Finance                   153            46             1             200            23%
 Non-Energy Minerals            30             8              0             38            21%
 Electronic Technology           14             6             10             30            20%
 Industrial Services              49             12             3             64            19%
 Health Technology             26             11             29             66            17%
 Energy Minerals               21             4              0             25            16%
 Utilities                    27             5              1             33            15%
 Transportation                39             5              2             46            11%
 Process Industries              42             3              3             48             6%
 Total                     688            304             73            1065            29%

Table A.2.3. Values as input to Figure 3. IPO-sector as the sector of the firm that undergoes an IPO. Founder & Others, Private Equity
and Venture Capital as IPO-type. Total as sum of IPOs. % PE-backed as % PE-backed out of total IPOs per sector.

                                  24
A.3.  Robustness Check Regressions
A.3.1. Overview of the PE-backed Dummy Variable

 Regression                      P1 to Pre-AVG    P2 to Pre-AVG    P3 to Pre-AVG    P4 to Pre-AVG    P5 to Pre-AVG
   Overview PE-backed dummy variable          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 Capex Change
 Original                            -0,139          0,020          0,279**         0.338**          0.377*
  With IPO-area Fixed Effects                -0,136          -0,002          0.280**         0.338**          0.369*
  With AssetsN1 EUR 50m dummy            -0,071          0,083          0.333**         0.367**         0.384*
  With AssetsN1 EUR 100m dummy           -0,088          0,056          0.319**         0.353**         0.374*
  Only IPOs before 2014                   0,013           0,228          0.372**          0.336*          0.377*
  With IPO-area-sector clustered errors           -0,139          0,020          0,279**         0,338**          0,377*

 Capex to Sales Change
 Original                            -0,010          0,056          0,309***          0,216           0,198
  With IPO-area Fixed Effects                0,004           0,060          0.333***         0.239*          0.225
  With AssetsN1 EUR 50m dummy            0,028           0,078         0.319***         0,219           0,187
  With AssetsN1 EUR 100m dummy            0,002           0,053         0.301***         0,214           0,199
  Only IPOs before 2014                   0,075           0,129          0.342**          0,129           0,198
  With IPO-area-sector clustered errors           -0,010           0,056          0,309**          0,216           0,198
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.1.  Overview of the PE-backed dummy variable’s coefficient. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth
years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO. Significance level reported for the PE-backed  dummy variable.

                                  25
A.3.2. With IPO-area Fixed Effects

 Capex Change (log)                 P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With IPO-area Fixed Effects                  (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,136          -0,002          0.280**         0.338**          0.369*
  Robust standard error                   0,107           0,114           0,130           0,166           0,217
 Constant                            1,043           0,412           0,857           1,416           0,911
  Robust standard error                   0,199           0,329           0,304           0,277           0,281

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       915           835           723           608           473
 R-squared                           0,065           0,069           0,099           0,134           0,150
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.2.1.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex. All regressions
include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise.
P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO.
Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes IPO-area
Fixed Effects. Significance level reported for the PE-backed dummy variable.

 Capex to Sales Change (log)            P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With IPO-area Fixed Effects                  (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          0,004           0,060         0.333***         0.239*          0.225
  Robust standard error                   0,095           0,106           0,116           0,143           0,172
 Constant                            0,245           -0,190          -0,072           0,370           0,159
  Robust standard error                   0,186           0,274           0,221           0,260           0,307

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       883           809           699           587           454
 R-squared                           0,060           0,073           0,098           0,134           0,147
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.2.2.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex to Sales. All
regressions include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and
0 otherwise. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before
the IPO. Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes IPO-
area Fixed Effects. Significance level reported for the PE-backed dummy variable.

                                  26
A.3.3.  With Assets the  Year Before IPO  over EUR 50m Dummy Variable

 Capex Change (log)                 P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With AssetsN1 EUR 50m dummy              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,071          0,083          0.333**         0.367**          0.384*
  Robust standard error                   0,106           0,111           0,128           0,158           0,209
 Constant                            1,090           0,420           0,752           1,057           0,747
  Robust standard error                   0,182           0,302           0,275           0,261           0,215

 Assets more than EUR 50m                -0.380***        -0.334***        -0.303**         -0.322**         -0,136
  Robust standard error                   0,190           0,121           0,144           0,151           0,173

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       915           835           723           608           473
 R-squared                           0,078           0,071           0,098           0,123           0,147
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.3.1.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex. All regressions
include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise.
P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO.
Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes a dummy
variable for AssetsN1 equal to 1 for IPOs over EUR 50m and 0 otherwise. Significance level reported for the PE-backed and Asset
dummy variables.

 Capex to Sales Change (log)            P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With AssetsN1 EUR 50m dummy              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          0,028           0,078          0.319***          0,219           0,187
  Robust standard error                   0,094           0,105           0,119           0,138           0,172
 Constant                            0,352           -0,115          -0,047           0,181           0,083
  Robust standard error                   0,162           0,245           0,183           0,212           0,258

 Assets more than EUR 50m                -0.210**          -0,112          -0,057          -0,021           0,148
  Robust standard error                   0,103           0,130           0,154           0,152           0,170

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       883           809           699           587           454
 R-squared                           0,061           0,070           0,095           0,129           0,143
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.3.2.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017.  OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex to Sales. All
regressions include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and
0 otherwise. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before
the IPO. Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes a
dummy variable for AssetsN1 equal to 1 for IPOs over EUR 50m and 0 otherwise. Significance level reported for the PE-backed and
Asset dummy variables.

                                  27
A.3.4.  With Assets the Year Before IPO  over EUR  100m Dummy Variable

 Capex Change (log)                 P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With AssetsN1 EUR 100m dummy             (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,088          0,056          0.319**         0.353**          0.374*
  Robust standard error                   0,109           0,115           0,126           0,158           0,209
 Constant                            1,012           0,362           0,705           0,996           0,727
  Robust standard error                   0,177           0,293           0,270           0,253           0,218

 Assets more than EUR 100m               -0.270**          -0,204          -0.241*          -0,190          -0,163
  Robust standard error                   0,109           0,130           0,135           0,151           0,183

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       915           835           723           608           473
 R-squared                           0,071           0,065           0,095           0,119           0,148
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.4.1.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex. All regressions
include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise.
P1, P2, P3, P4  and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO.
Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes a dummy
variable for  AssetsN1 equal to 1 for IPOs over EUR 100m and 0 otherwise. Significance level reported for the PE-backed and Asset
dummy variables.

 Capex to Sales Change (log)            P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With AssetsN1 EUR 100m dummy             (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          0,002           0,053          0.301***          0,214           0,199
  Robust standard error                   0,097           0,109           0,116           0,139           0,171
 Constant                            0,294           -0,155          -0,064           0,174           0,106
  Robust standard error                   0,160           0,239           0,184           0,210           0,255

 Assets more than EUR 100m                -0,064           0,018           -0,005           0,024           0,122
  Robust standard error                   0,105           0,133           0,135           0,144           0,177

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       883           809           699           587           454
 R-squared                           0,056           0,069           0,095           0,129           0,142
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.4.2.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex to Sales. All
regressions include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and
0 otherwise. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before
the IPO. Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes a
dummy variable for AssetsN1 equal to 1 for IPOs over EUR 100m and 0 otherwise. Significance level reported for the PE-backed and
Asset dummy variables.

                                  28
A.3.5. Including only IPOs before 2014

 Capex Change (log)                 P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  Only IPOs before 2014                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          0,013           0,228          0.372**         0.336*          0.377*
  Robust standard error                   0,147           0,155           0,163           0,181           0,212
 Constant                            1,033           0,156           0,729           1,003           0,719
  Robust standard error                   0,195           0,374           0,339           0,288           0,222

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       634           607           586           556           473
 R-squared                           0,104           0,095           0,105           0,122           0,147
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.5.1.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex. All regressions
include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise.
P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years  after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO.
Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes only IPOs
before 2014. Significance level reported for the PE-backed dummy variable.

 Capex to Sales Change (log)            P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  Only IPOs before 2014                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          0,075           0,129          0.342**          0,129           0,198
  Robust standard error                   0,134           0,152           0,148           0,151           0,169
 Constant                            0,295           -0,300           0,031           0,163           0,111
  Robust standard error                   0,148           0,318           0,231           0,217           0,254

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       610           587           566           535           454
 R-squared                           0,091           0,091           0,103           0,134           0,142
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.5.2.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex to Sales. All
regressions include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and
0 otherwise. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before
the IPO. Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-year-sector-clusters. Regression includes only
IPOs before 2014. Significance level reported for the PE-backed dummy variable.

                                  29
A.3.6. With IPO-area-sector  Clustered  Standard  Errors

 Capex Change (log)                 P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With IPO-area-sector clustered errors            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,139          0,020          0,279**         0,338**          0,377*
  Robust standard error                   0,113           0,108           0,134           0,150           0,202
 Constant                            0,968           0,317           0,660           0,976           0,719
  Robust standard error                   0,144           0,201           0,223           0,339           0,262

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       915           835           723           608           473
 R-squared                           0,063           0,062           0,091           0,116           0,147
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.6.1.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex. All regressions
include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and 0 otherwise.
P1, P2, P3, P4  and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before the IPO.
Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-area-sector-clusters. Significance level reported for the
PE-backed dummy variable.

 Capex to Sales Change (log)            P1 to Pre-AVG     P2 to Pre-AVG     P3 to Pre-AVG     P4 to Pre-AVG     P5 to Pre-AVG
  With IPO-area-sector clustered errors            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 PE-backed                          -0,010          0,056          0,309**          0,216           0,198
  Robust standard error                   0,108           0,101           0,119           0,144           0,165
 Constant                            0,283           -0,151          -0,065           0,176           0,111
  Robust standard error                   0,159           0,155           0,184           0,295           0,238

 Sector Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Year Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 Number of IPOs                       883           809           699           587           454
 R-squared                           0,056           0,069           0,095           0,129           0,142
 * Statistically significant at the 10% level.
 ** Statistically significant at the 5% level.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table A.3.6.2.  Sample of IPOs. Sample period: 2007 to 2017. OLS estimates of an IPO on log change in Capex to Sales. All
regressions include Sector Fixed Effects and Year Fixed Effects. PE-backed is a dummy variable, equal to 1 for PE-backed firms and
0 otherwise. P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 as first, second, third, fourth and fifth years after the IPO. Pre-AVG as three-year average before
the IPO. Regressions include robust standard error calculated within the combined IPO-area-sector-clusters. Significance level
reported for the PE-backed dummy variable.

                                  30