FAMA AND FRENCH
REVISITED:

VALUE VERSUS GROWTH IN AN INTERNATIONAL SETTING

ARTUR GIWERCMAN

HENRIK NYSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Fama and French Revisited: Value versus Growth in an International Setting

Abstract:
This Thesis is a replication and prolonging of the paper  Value versus Growth: The
International Evidence  written by Kenneth French and Eugene Fama in 1992. This
paper aims to provide further evidence on the  value  premium, meaning  value stocks
outperform growth stocks, using a more recent time period and more Nordic countries
than used in the 1992 paper. Furthermore, the study aims to determine whether or not
the results are affected by the cyclicality of markets. The results document a
consistently solid  value  premium in the timeframe of 1975-2019, explicitly during times
of market turmoil. Our conclusions state that it remains relevant to choose value
strategies since they, on average, still outperform the market as well as growth
strategies. During volatile times, the value strategies are still clearly the better
alternative.

Keywords:
Fama and French, value premium, value stocks versus growth stocks, international
value versus growth, market turmoil

Authors:

Artur Giwercman  (24247)
Henrik Nyström  (24259)

Tutors:
Olga Obizhaeva, Department of Finance

Examiner:
Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Artur Giwercman, Henrik Nyström

                                   1
I.  Introduction

The general consensus in financial doctrine  has  for a long time  been  that a value
premium on stocks only  can  be achieved by taking on additional risk. That is, if it is
even possible to outperform the market in the long run. According to the capital asset
pricing model (CAPM), there is a linear correlation between expected returns on stocks
and their beta coefficient. The validity of the CAPM model has been challenged in the
past, by Roll (1977),  Banz (1981)  and  Hansen and Richard (1987). Such critique has
motivated scholars and investment professionals to search for alternative models to
estimate stock returns and formulate optimal investment strategies.

To  that end, researchers have inquired into the strategies predicated on investing in
stocks with low vis-à-vis high ratios of P/E, D/P, B/M, and other measures of value.
Investment strategies with portfolios composed of assets with high ratios of such
measures were denominated ‘value strategies’ and portfolios composed of assets with
low ratios were denominated ‘growth strategies’. For quite some time it has been
consistently observed that these value portfolios outperform growth portfolios as well as
the market in general (Graham and Dodd (1934) and Dreman (1977)). This discovery is
not surprising in itself seeing as the anomaly could be explained by systematic risk.
However,  Fama and French (1992) produced findings wherein the CAPM model was
unable to explain differences in returns provided by value contra growth portfolios.
They find that variations in stock prices are correlated with the difference in return of
high book-to-market and low book-to-market stocks (HML) as well as the difference in
return of high market capitalization and low market capitalization stocks (SMB). The
conclusion was that these stocks must bear additional risk that is unexplained by the
beta coefficient. Although the Fama-French three-factor model was tested and proven to
be proficient at explaining stock returns in the United States, the underlying economic
mechanism behind the additional risk that gives rise to variations in stock returns, was
left  unproven.

                                   2
Building on their previous research, Fama and French (1998) further examine the
validity of the CAPM model on an international stage. The study finds that the CAPM
model cannot explain the value premium internationally either, instead showing
variations in stock returns between growth portfolios, with high book-to-market stocks,
and value portfolios, with low book-to-market stocks. Rather, a two-factor model that
includes a risk factor for relative distress is able to capture the value premium in
international returns. Although there is extensive evidence for the Fama and French
(1998) findings, more than two decades have passed since they were made. Water has
flown under the bridge since then, and the world does not look the same. The time
horizon of the study is only 20 years, which could very well influence the results.
Furthermore, accounting practices have changed since then, which could have an effect
on the values that were used in the research. Another factor is the rapid growth of listed
companies from the medical  technology  and IT industries that did not exist  to the same
extent  during the earlier time period. Assets in these industries are typically valued
differently than other assets, with larger emphasis placed on factors other than the
common financial ratios.  It could be a factor that has potentially affected the general
patterns of the market to an extent that has affected the value premium on value
strategies, as well.

As such, the aim of this paper is to arrive at conclusions in two parts:

    1.   To replicate their research and prolong it to 2019 with a greater number of
        countries, in order to examine if their findings still hold, and
    2.   To extend their research and examine whether or not their findings are affected
        by the short-term market turmoil.

                                   3
II.  Literature review

The Capital Asset Pricing Model

Markowitz  (1959) marks the first step in asset pricing theory wherein the mean-variance
model was developed. The model proposes that investors are risk averse and maximize
expected portfolio return, given variance, and minimize variance of portfolio return,
given expected return. Based on that proposition, modern finance theory is built on the
assumption that markets are rational. Developed by Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965),
the CAPM model extends Markowitz’s framework by providing two additional
assumptions for a  portfolio to be mean-variance efficient; that there is complete
agreement on the joint distribution of returns with the distribution being the right one,
and that there is unrestricted borrowing and lending at a risk-free rate for all investors.
Using those assumptions, The CAPM model provides a tool to measure the relationship
between risk and expected return on an investment, with the risk being represented by
the covariance of its returns with returns on the overall market. After initial empirical
testing, the applicability of the model was invalidated by several researchers. There
were attempts to improve on it, notably by Black (1972) who developed a version
without the assumption of unrestricted investment at the risk-free rate, instead adding
unrestricted short sales of risky assets. The Black version of the CAPM model produced
a mean-variance efficient portfolio that was successful in empirical testing. Since then,
although the model is still extensively taught and used, it has been proven that its
applicability is still restricted by its assumptions being unrealistic. This has been
empirically confirmed in regard to the first version of the model by Douglas (1968) and
Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972). Evidence that the Black version of the CAPM model
is also lacking in its applicability has also been found by Blume and Friend (1973),
Fama and MacBeth (1973), as well as by Fama and French (1992).

                                   4
Value versus Growth

Fama and French (1992)  made great progress  in a since then extensive row of studies on
the topic of  value  vs  growth  stocks. The aim of the study was to identify a value
premium by investing in either of the portfolio types. Although there is no commonly
established way to classify those stocks, Fama and French sorted them into portfolios
based on the financial ratios B/M, E/P, leverage, and size of assets in the companies.
The portfolios with the lowest book-to-market in relation to equity were regarded as
value stocks. Those with the highest book-to-market in relation to equity were
denominated  growth stocks, although there are those who believe they would be more
aptly called  glamour stocks  due to observing results that they are trending rather than
outperforming the market in regard to growth. Fama and  French  produced results that
suggested a significant discrepancy in value premium between the portfolios. The
largest effect was observed in the portfolios sorted based on P/B where the average
return was 21.4% for value portfolios with the lowest P/B contra 8% for growth
portfolios with  the highest P/B.

The difference could not be explained by value portfolios carrying more risk in regard
to higher beta coefficients. Since it could not be explained by other factors either, it was
proposed that the difference between the portfolios represented a risk premium. One
theory, however, is that the variation arises due to the mechanisms explained by the
Arbitrage Pricing Theory (Cox,  Ross, 1976). Lakonishok et al. (1994) and Haugen
(1995) suggest that the value premium stems from the market generally undervaluing
distressed stocks and overvaluing growth stocks. On the contrary, Fama and French
(1993, 1995, 1996) found evidence that there is  a  variation in the earnings of distressed
firms that is unexplained by market earnings, as well as variation in the returns on
distressed stocks that is unexplained by market return. Thus, they propose that the value
premium rather stems from compensation for risk that is not captured by the CAPM. By
adding a risk factor for relative distress to the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing
Model (ICAPM) (Merton, 1973) or the Arbitrage Pricing Theory, the value premium on
U.S. returns was captured.

                                   5
A few years later, Fama and French (1998) replicated the study on European and
emerging markets, with stocks in a total  of 13 countries. Once again, the results
indicated superior returns for value portfolios. As previously, the higher return could
not be explained by higher beta coefficients in the value portfolios. The results were
therefore once more proposed to have arisen due to a probable risk premium whose
underlying economic mechanisms were left  unproven, reinforcing the notion that the
CAPM was insufficient in explaining stock returns. Since then, there have been
extensive studies on value contra growth strategies.  In general, the results show that
value portfolios outperform their growth counterparts over longer time periods,
(Rouwenberg et al.  (2003),  Athanassakos (2009)).

Despite this general consensus, the findings have also been questioned. A commonly
raised critique is that the investigated time periods have been insufficiently long.  It has
also been theorized  by  Bourguignon  and  De Jong  (2003)  that  the  premium arises due to
contrarian investments  wherein  investors buy  losers  and  sell winners due to an
expectation of  shifting trends.  However, the  dispute that has garnered the most attention
is  the question of  whether or not the risk has been fully accounted for.  Most critics
believe that the value premium is a  result of  taking on additional risk.

Value Premium

Although most researchers agree that value strategies yield greater returns than growth
strategies, the reasons as to why are more controversial. There are two generally held
views whose arguments contend with each other: the rational and the  behavioural  view.

The rational view,  with  Fama and French  at the forefront, contends that value stocks
either have worse future outlooks that are taken into account in price, or the finances of
the companies are flawed in some way that motivates a risk premium for eventual
financial distress. This risk is referred to as fundamental risk and is unaccounted for by
the beta coefficient in the CAPM model making it insufficient in explaining the value
premium.

                                   6
Another factor that was found to have explanatory power in regard to expected return, is
that many value stocks in the study are small companies. Fama and French observed
that these stocks had lower beta values on average yet yielded higher returns than larger
stocks. The phenomenon was attributed to smaller companies inherently carrying higher
risk. Other researchers (Elfakhani, Zaher, (1998)) have proposed that smaller companies
are less transparent, carrying with it a required compensation.

The  behaviourist  view instead contends that there is no evidence for fundamental risk.
Lakonishok (1994) argues that value portfolios outperform growth portfolios because
they exploit the suboptimal  behaviour  of the average investor and not because they are
fundamentally riskier. They suggest that value strategies are contrarian  to “naive”
strategies that overreact to past events by overbuying stocks that have done well in the
past due to extrapolating historical earnings growth too far into the future and
overselling those stocks that have seen temporary losses.

The  Duration-Based Explanation

Lettau and Wachter (2005) propose another, dynamic risk-based model that captures the
value premium. The  duration-based  model uses a cross-section of assets differentiated
by the timing of their cash flows. The risk perceived by investors  in these cash flows is
modelled using a stochastic discount factor for the economy. In addition to taking into
account the cross-section of stocks sorted on price ratios, the model also accounts for
aggregate dividend and stock market behavior. It manages  this by assuming a log
dividend growth that is normally distributed with a mean that varies over time. The
results suggest that value firms covary with cash flows to a greater extent than growth
firms, whereas growth firms covary with the discount rate to  a greater extent than value
firms. Most importantly, the model produces expected returns that match the actual
returns in the data, explains the high Sharpe ratios on value assets,  explains  the poor
explaining power of the CAPM, and captures the value premium.

                                   7
Effect of Macroeconomic Factors

The question of how value and growth stock investment strategies are affected by
macroeconomic factors has  also  been  brought up. Bekaert et al. (2009). found that the
risk taking is partly dependent on monetary policy.  During periods of low interest
environment, the ‘Search for yield’ leads to more risk-taking from the institutional
investor.

Earlier replication of the original paper

Athanassakos (2009)  replicated and prolonged the methodology of Fama and French in
his  paper  Value versus Growth Stock Returns and the Value Premium: The Canadian
Experience 1985–2005. His work provides further evidence for Fama and French’s
conclusions about the value premium using Canadian data with the time-period of 1985-
2005, sorting  the portfolios on price-to-earnings (P/E) and price-to-book value (P/BV).
His findings about the value premium are also sustained during times of economic
recessions and recoveries, as well as bull and bear markets.

                                   8
III.  Hypotheses and research design

Since we are replicating an earlier research, the aim of our research is to empirically test
if their results still hold, that is, if value strategies outperform growth strategies,  roughly
20 years later and with more countries in the dataset. Due to the extensive research that
has been carried out on the subject, the hypothesis of this research is that the results will
support the original findings.

The greater empirical contribution lies in our second hypothesis, surrounding whether
or not the findings of Fama and French (1998) are affected by the cyclicality of markets.
Our hypothesis is based on  the fact  that during times of confusion in the financial
markets, investors tend to get more risk averse and therefore look for safer investments,
such as  stocks  with lower valuations. Our hypothesis on the second research question is
therefore that portfolios formed on value stocks outperform portfolios formed on growth
stocks in times of turmoil in the financial markets.

The research will be designed after how Fama and French completed their design in
both the replication and the prolonging part (time-period of replication; 1975-1995,
prolonging; 1995-2019). That is, by forming portfolios of stocks in the specific country
of our research after  four different valuation ratios: book-to-market (B/M); earnings-
price (E/P); cash earnings to price (CE/P); and dividend yield (D/P). The value
portfolios (High) contain firms in the top 30% of a certain ratio, such as B/M, and the
growth portfolios (Low) contain firms in the bottom 30%. Firms are included if data is
found for  one  variable. The market return (Mkt) for the dataset is the  weighted average
of the returns for the markets.

We start by taking out the most relevant characteristics of the country portfolios,  such as
number of firms per country, country weights and average book-to-market. We then
create value-weighted portfolios (market, B/M high, B/M low, B/M high minus low,
E/P high, EP high minus low, CE/P high, CE/P low, CE/P high minus low, D/P high,
D/P  low, D/P high minus low) out of the weights from the MSCI index and World Bank
database.  We run a  test on  the  annual value-weight dollar return in excess of  the  1-
month  treasury  bill rate  and compare  the results of market portfolios. Thereafter  we

                                   9
isolate  the portfolios to see if there is any difference between the countries.
Subsequently, we test the ability of two asset pricing models, the international CAPM
and the two-factor ICAPM to see and compare how well they  can explain the return. We
thereafter test whether or not there are correlations  between countries, both the markets
themselves and B/M high minus low.  Finally, we use the value-weighted average
portfolios formed earlier to test and compare how value versus growth portfolios
perform during markets of turmoil, by using the top and bottom 10th percentile of the
weighted market average dataset based on monthly returns.

Data

The portfolio dataset is mostly collected from Kenneth French’s website, apart from the
US data which is aggregated from the CRSP/Compustat merged database.  Kenneth
French’s raw  data are from Morgan Stanley Capital International for 1975 to 2006 and
from Bloomberg for 2007 to present.  The country portfolios (except US) are first
cleaned in Excel to be imported into STATA where all countries are merged into one
dataset for the analysis. The US data is directly imported into STATA, cleaned from
extreme outliers (0,1th percentiles) and formed into portfolios on the different valuation
ratios. The dataset is later on completed with the 1-month treasury bill rate (which is
collected from the WRDS database) and then used for  the  excess return calculations  of
all countries. The market return from S&P 500 from year 1975-2019 is also collected
from WRDS database. The US  file is then merged  together with the other countries to
be able to do the analysis. During the process, we discovered that some of the US
companies  are  not part of the S&P 500 index and therefore both the value and growth
US portfolio returns outperform the US index used. Since US portfolios and market
return play a big role in the weighted average (48.8% and 51.5%), the average market
return is somewhat offset to the portfolio returns.

The countries used in the first time-period are the United States (US), Japan (JP), Great
Britain (UK), France (FR), Germany (DE), Italy (IT), the Netherlands (NL) Belgium
(BE), Switzerland (CH), Sweden (SE), Australia (AS), Hong Kong (HK), and
Singapore (SG). Countries used for the second time-period are the above as well as the
prolonging of the Nordic Countries; Norway (NO), Finland (FI) and Denmark (DK).

                                  10
IV.  Results

                           Table I
        Some Characteristics of the Country Samples 1975-1995
Panel A shows number of firms for each country in the portfolios in the years of 1975,
1980, 1985, 1990 and 1995, and the average number of firms for all years in that specific
country. Panel B shows the value weight average of B/M for the portfolios, averaged
across years. Panel C shows the MSCI country weights used to form the global portfolios
later on. The countries used in this research are the United States (US), Japan (JP), Great
Britain (UK), France (FR), Germany (DE), Italy (IT), the Netherlands (NL) Belgium
(BE), Switzerland (CH), Sweden (SE), Australia (AS), Hong Kong (HK), and Singapore
(SG).

                                  11
                         Table II
        Some Characteristics of the Country Samples 1995-2019
Panel A shows the number of firms for each country in the portfolios at the beginning of
1995, 2000, 2005, 2010, 2015 and 2019 and the average number of firms for all years.
Panel B shows the value-weight average of B/M for the portfolios, averaged across years.
Panel C shows the country weights used to form the global portfolios later on.  The
countries used in this research are the United States (US), Japan (JP), Great Britain (UK),
France (FR), Germany (DE), Italy (IT), the Netherlands (NL) Belgium (BE), Switzerland
(CH), Sweden (SE), Australia (AS), Hong Kong (HK), Singapore (SG) as well as the
prolonging of the Nordic Countries; Norway (NO), Finland (FI) and Denmark (DK).

As we compare the characteristics for the two different time-periods, the most obvious
difference is the average number of countries used per Country. Between 2005 and
2010,  all countries but the US, multiply their  number of firms. The reason behind this is
that the raw data  are from Morgan Stanley Capital International for 1975 to 2006 and
from Bloomberg for 2007 to present. The value-weighted average B/M is on average a
bit lower during the latter time period.

The country weights differ a bit as well, mostly due to the fact  that they are calculated
based on  different data. For the time period of 1975-1995, MSCI world index is used as
a proxy for weights, whereas  the World Bank database of market capitalization of listed
domestic companies is used  for  1995-2019.

                                  12
                                   Table III

            Annual Dollar Returns for Global Market, Value, and Growth
                                Portfolios: 1975–2019

            Value and growth portfolios are formed based on B/M, E/P, C/P, and D/P. We denote
             value (high) and growth (low) portfolios by a leading H or L; the difference between them
             is H  -  L. Market is the global market portfolio. Mean is the average annual return of a
             portfolio. Std. is the standard deviation of the returns. Countries are weighted based on
            the MSCI index for the years of 1975-1995 and  based on  the World Bank database of
            market capitalization of listed domestic companies  for the years of 1995-2019.

           Market   HB/M    LB/M    H-LB/M    HE/P     LE/P    H-LE/P   HC/P    LC/P    H-LC/P   HD/P   LD/P   H-LD/P

                              Panel A: Annual Value-Weight dollar return in excess of 1 month T-bill rate 1975-1995

   Mean       7.80    14.02     10.96       3.06      13.58     11.01      2.57      13.49    10.54     2.95     13.81   11.00     2.81
   Std.       13.26    15.06     15.19       4.24      15.61     15.21      2.47      15.98    15.09     4.36     15.37   15.49     4.28
Sharpe ratio            0.26      0.20       0.66      0.25      0.20      0.70      0.25     0.20     0.71     0.26    0.20     0.63
 (monthly)

                              Panel B: Annual Value-Weight dollar return in excess of 1 month T-bill rate 1995-2019

   Mean       5.48     9.16     8.32       0.84      9.22      7.26      1.97      9.23     7.47     1.76     9.47    7.48     2.00
   Std.       17.71    19.90     17.40       5.02      18.81     4.07      5.25      18.95    18.18     4.08     18.57   18.37     4.69
Sharpe ratio            0.20      0.20       0.19      0.21      0.17      0.33      0.21     0.17     0.29     0.22    0.17     0.28
 (monthly)

             The data confirms the findings of Chan et al. (1991), Fama and French (1992, 1996,
             1997), and Lakoniskok et al. (1994), providing evidence  of a value premium in returns
             of value portfolios. Table III shows that from 1975 to 1995, the average returns of
             global value portfolios are 2.55 percent to 4.88 percent greater than the average returns
             of global growth portfolios. It also shows that average returns of global value portfolios
             are 5.69 percent to 6.22 percent greater than the average returns of global market
              portfolios.

             The prevalence of a value premium in returns of value portfolios is also consistent with
             the global portfolio data from  1995 to 2019. Panel B shows that the average returns of
             global value portfolios in that time period are 4.58 percent to 5.65 percent greater than

                                             13
the average returns of global growth portfolios. They are also 3.68 percent to 3.99
percent greater than the  average returns of global market portfolios.

For the time period 1975-1995, the Sharpe ratios for the value portfolios range from
0.25 to 0.26 depending on which financial ratios they are sorted on.  The Sharpe ratios
for the growth portfolios are all 0.2, regardless of what ratios they are sorted on. From
1995 to 2019, the Sharpe ratios range from 0.2 to 0.22 for the value portfolios. They
range from 0.17 to 0.2 for the growth portfolios. As it stands,  these ratios  indicate
further evidence of the value premium as there is excess return per unit of volatility  for
the value stocks compared to the growth stocks.  The data also suggests that the value
premium has been pervasive since the original time period.

                                  14
                        Table IV
Annual Dollar Returns in Excess of U.S. T-Bill Rate for Market, Value,
                and Growth Portfolios: 1975–1995
Value and growth portfolios are formed on B/M, E/P, CE/P, and D/P as described in Table
II. We denote value (high) and growth (low) portfolios by a leading H or L; the difference
between them is H  -  L. The first row for each country is the average annual return. The
second is the standard deviation of the annual returns (in parentheses) or the t-statistic
testing whether H  -  L is different from zero [in brackets].

Table IV lends additional support to the idea of a value premium on returns of value
portfolios. It is also evidence of the fact that not only does a value premium exist on
average internationally, but also in numerous countries when you examine them in
isolation. As it shows, portfolios formed on B/M and C/P have positive value premiums
in each of the countries except two: Italy and the Netherlands, respectively. Portfolios
formed on E/P and D/P have positive value premiums in each of the countries except
only one: Italy and Singapore, respectively.

                                  15
                        Table V
Annual Dollar Returns in Excess of U.S. T-Bill Rate for Market, Value,
                and Growth Portfolios: 1995–2019
Value and growth portfolios are formed on B/M, E/P, CE/P, and D/P as described in Table
II. We denote value (high) and growth (low) portfolios by a leading H or L; the difference
between them is H  -  L. The first row for each country is the average annual return. The
second is the standard deviation of the annual returns (in parentheses) or the t-statistic
testing whether H  -  L is different from zero [in brackets].

Table V provides evidence that the value premium has persisted since it was originally
proven to exist by Fama and French. The returns and standard deviations of the
portfolios in Table V  are similar in magnitude to those in Table IV.

                                  16
On the other hand, whereas nearly all of the value portfolios in the previous time period
had positive value premiums, Table V shows that it has diminished over the period of
1995 through 2019. When portfolios are formed based on B/M, only nine out of sixteen
countries have positive value premiums. However, when portfolios are formed based on
E/P, C/P and D/P, the results tell a different story. When portfolios are formed based on
E/P, C/P and D/P, there are  fourteen, thirteen, and fifteen countries, respectively, with
positive value premiums.

                       Risk Factors

Fama and French test the ability of two asset pricing models, the international CAPM
and the two-factor ICAPM (or APT), to capture the value premium by comparing the
expected returns those models predict with the average returns of global market, value
and growth portfolios, as well as the average returns of market, value and growth
portfolios of individual countries. They carry out these tests by using a method wherein
they assume that the various capital markets around the world are integrated and
wherein investors do not differentiate between differences in purchasing power parity.

The CAPM
In order to test the applicability of the CAPM, we replicate the  methodology of Fama
and French, and run both a CAPM univariate regression and a two-factor regression. If
the CAPM is the relevant model, the global market portfolio should be mean-variance
efficient, meaning its expected return should be completely explained by its regression
slope relative to the dollar value return, and the intercepts should be statistically
indistinguishable from zero. Should  they  not, the CAPM is insufficient in explaining the
average returns of the global market portfolio.

                                  17
                       Table VI
CAPM and Two-Factor Regressions that Use Monthly Excess Returns
    on the Global Market Portfolio (M − F) and the Global Book-to-
 Market Value-Growth Return (H − LB/M) to Explain Monthly Excess
             Returns on Country Portfolios: 1975–2019
All returns are monthly.  M is the global market return, F is the 1-month US T-bill rate,
and R is the global value-weighted portfolio return. The method of estimation is ordinary
least squares. In the CAPM regression, a is alpha, b is beta, t(a) is the T-test for whether
                           !                !
a is differentiated from zero. 𝑅  is the adjusted 𝑅  and s(e) is the residual standard errors.
The two-factor regression follows the same pattern, where c is second factor (H-LB/M)
beta.

Table VI suggests that the International CAPM does not explain the average returns of
our global market portfolio.  The table  shows that the portfolios with high financial
ratios, meaning the value portfolios, have alpha values of at least 0.46 above zero. The
portfolios with low financial ratios, the growth portfolios, have alpha values of at least
0.22 above zero. Both of these values are greater than 3.4 standard errors from zero,

                                  18
meaning they are statistically distinguishable from zero, and thus the replication
confirms what Fama and French proved: that the CAPM cannot explain the average
returns of value and growth portfolios in the time period 1975 to 1995. Our results
deviate from the findings of Fama and French in that the intercepts of our growth
portfolios are positive, whereas theirs were negative. This is in line with the data in
Table  III, which shows that not only do our global value portfolios outperform the
market; our global growth portfolios outperform it as well.  This phenomenon can also
be observed in Table IV, which shows that the growth portfolios of several individual
countries outperform the market portfolio. In addition to the intercepts being
inexplicable by the CAPM, the model would also require that the global value portfolios
have steep and positive slopes in order to explain the high average returns. On the
contrary, the slopes range from 1.00 to 1.02. Neither do the global growth portfolios
line up with the predictions of the CAPM;  according to the model,  the slope  of the
security market line (SML)  should be positive for all  portfolios  bearing more risk  than
the risk-free rate.  Since the slope for the growth portfolios  are  steeper  than the value
portfolios, this implicates a higher risk premium for the growth portfolios. As for the
time period 1995-2019, the resulting alpha values are still inconsistent with the model.
The CAPM test provides results of alpha values of the global value portfolios that are at
least 0.30 greater than 0. Their slopes range from 0.95 to 1.03. The global growth
portfolios also have alpha values that are at least 0.16 greater than zero. These slopes
range from 0.95 to 1.01.

                                  19
                        Table VII
 Correlations of Excess Returns on Country Market Portfolios, M − F,
  and of Country Book-to-Market Value-Growth Returns, H − LB/M:
                          1975–1995
All returns are monthly. H  -  LB/M is the difference between the  returns on a country’s
high and low book-to-market portfolios, as described in Table II.  The countries used in
this research are the United States (US), Japan (JP), Great Britain (UK), France (FR),
Germany (DE), Italy (IT), the Netherlands (NL) Belgium (BE), Switzerland (CH),
Sweden (SE), Australia (AS), Hong Kong (HK), Singapore (SG).

                                  20
Although the ICAPM does not demand that the returns of portfolios of individual
countries are correlated, testing whether or not there are covariances between the returns
still serves the purpose of explaining the existence of financial distress risk. As such, we
use the following formula and divide the variances of the excess returns and the book-
to-market value-growth returns into two parts, country return variances and  covariances
between the returns of countries:

                                    '
            𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑅!"#$%")  =  ) 𝑤& 𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑅&) + ) ) 𝑤&𝑤(  𝐶𝑜𝑣  (𝑅&, 𝑅()
                                        &                       &   ()&

The data in Table VI shows that variances in the return of individual countries are
insufficient in explaining the variances of the global market return, M-F, and the spread
in global value-growth return, H-LB/M. Rather, these variances are dependent on
international correlations as well. The correlations of the excess market return of all
thirteen countries are positive, with an average of 0.47. Furthermore, the correlations of
60 out of 78 value-growth returns are positive, although the average is only 0.09.

The  significance  for explaining the distress risk of assets, lies in the fact that the
significantly lower average correlation between value-growth returns does not cause a
low volatility in the returns. The standard deviation of the book-to-market value-growth
return, 6.99, is about 50 percent of the standard deviation of the global market return,
13.26, despite the low correlation.

                                  21
                        Table VIII
 Correlations of Excess Returns on Country  Market Portfolios, M − F,
  and of Country Book-to-Market Value-Growth Returns, H − LB/M:
                          1995–2019
All returns are monthly. H  -  LB/M is the difference between the returns on a country’s
high and low book-to-market portfolios, as described in Table II.  The countries used in
this research are the United States (US), Japan (JP), Great Britain (UK), France (FR),
Germany (DE), Italy (IT), the Netherlands (NL) Belgium (BE), Switzerland (CH),
Sweden (SE), Australia (AS), Hong Kong (HK), Singapore (SG) as well as the prolonging
of the Nordic Countries; Norway (NO), Finland (FI) and Denmark (DK).

                                  22
These results confirm that the previous findings are not unique to the time period 1975-
1995 but have continued. From 1995 to 2019, the variances in the returns of individual
countries are still dependent on the international correlations. The correlations of the
excess market  return  of all thirteen countries are still positive, with an average of 0.47
once again. The correlations of 62 out of 136 value-growth returns are positive, with an
average of 0.2. Thus, the percentage of positive correlations has decreased while the
average value has increased, from 0.09.  Finally, the standard deviation of the book-to-
market value-growth return, 3.90, has diminished in relation to  the standard deviation of
the global market return, 17.78.

                                  23
                        Table IX

    Annual Dollar Returns for Global Market, Value, and Growth
           Portfolios: 1975–2019 in Markets of Turmoil

We form portfolios based on sorted values of the ratios;  B/M, E/P, CE/P, and D/P. Value
portfolios (indicated with a leading H, for high) include firms whose ratio is among the
highest 30 percent for a given country. Growth portfolios (indicated with a leading L, for
low) include firms in the bottom 30 percent. H-L is the difference between the high and
low returns. Market is the weighted average market portfolio return. The global portfolios
include the thirteen countries in panel A and B,  and  the additional three  countries  are
added  in panel C and D. Our  definition of times of market turmoil is the  top  and bottom
10th percentiles  in the value weighted average market return. The data is based on
monthly observations and presented as yearly return.

Years positive turmoil  occurred  (panel A) is:  1975,  1976,  1978,  1980-1984,  1986,  1989-
1993. Years where negative turmoil occurred (panel B) is: 1975, 1976, 1978-1982, 1984,
1986, 1987,  1989-1994. Years where positive turmoil  occurred  (panel C) is:  1996-2004,
2009, 2010, 2013. Years where negative turmoil occurred (panel D) is: 1996-1998, 2000-
2002,  2008-2012,  2015,  2018.

                                  24
The data provides evidence of a value premium in returns of value portfolios,
confirming the results of earlier tests for  times of turmoil as well. The table above
shows that during times of positive turmoil in the market, value portfolios beat the
growth portfolios in all cases but one, in both time periods. The value portfolios also
beat the market average in all cases but  one, while the growth portfolios underperform
the market in in four out  of eight cases.

During times of negative turmoil in the market, value portfolios once again beat the
growth portfolios in seven out of eight cases. The market portfolio is only beaten once
in the later time period, while it is beaten by all portfolios in  the earlier time period.
When looking at monthly Sharpe ratio, it is hard to conclude anything;  some high
portfolios beat low and vice versa. The reason behind this is the fact that  these months
are not in a time-series manner, but the lowest and the highest moments of market
return.

                                  25
V.  Discussion

The purpose of this paper was to further test for the existence of a value premium on
value stocks by prolonging  the original time period until 2019 and carrying out a test on
three additional countries: Denmark, Norway and Finland. Putting the data together for
comparison, it is clear that value portfolios still tend to perform better than growth
portfolios.  Portfolios formed on B/M in 1975-1995 have positive value premiums in
each of the countries except two.  Compared to 1995-2019,  portfolios  formed on B/M
have positive value premiums in  nine out of sixteen countries.  Numerous questions
arise.  Is this partly explained by the Dot-com bubble in 1995-2000 where  many IT-
related growth companies gained tremendously? Does the Lehman Brothers crash have
something to do with it? Or,  is it perhaps the fact that the value premium made it a
crowded trade and therefore it lost its advantage?  The fact that value portfolios are more
volatile in many scenarios might insist on  the latter scenario, since it is one of the
biggest  traits  of crowded trades.

If the markets are efficient, how come the value premium still persists? Why has it not
been arbitraged away? When portfolios are formed based on the other three ratios used
in this paper, E/P, C/P and D/P, the results tell a different story. When portfolios are
formed based  on E/P, C/P and D/P, there are fourteen, thirteen, and fifteen countries,
respectively, out of a total of sixteen countries with positive value premiums. If it is
because of higher volatility,  and therefore risk,  in the value portfolios compared to the
growth ones, the efficiency of the market still holds. This notion is supported by Table
II and III, which show that the assets in the  value portfolios have higher volatility  than
the growth ones. However, we also ran univariate and bivariate regressions  in order to
test for a potential causal correlation between risk and return. Both tests supported a
value premium. We can also conclude  from these tests that the value premium is
unexplainable by the ICAPM, as well as a two-factor version of the ICAPM, seeing  as
the alpha and beta values are statistically inconsistent with the ones predicted by the
models. Furthermore, our tests for covariances of returns across countries showed that
global market and financial distress risks derive in some measure from these
covariances.

                                  26
The results of the final facet of our research, regarding the performance of the portfolios
in times of turbulence in  the market, are also conclusive regarding the persistence of the
value premium and the performance of value and growth investment strategies. The
evidence shows value portfolios consistently outperform growth portfolios  even during
negative turmoil in the  market, in both time periods. The same is true for periods of
positive turmoil in the market; value portfolios beat the growth portfolios in all cases
but one, in both time periods. The value premium is still prevalent. Is it possibly more
so than in times  of calm markets?  According to our results,  that seems to be the case
seeing as growth portfolios performed significantly worse in times of both positive and
negative turmoil.

As it stands, our empirical evidence supports the argument that there are other factors
than risk that explain the value premium. However, in order to fully grasp the causes for
the value premium, this issue must be studied from a number of different  angles.

Limitations

As stated in the data section, there is something of a discrepancy when it comes to the
stocks used forming the portfolios and the index used as market index in the US  data
series.  We contacted Kenneth French and corresponded with him about the possibility
of accessing existing data on US portfolios, but he had not had the time to complete
them. Due to time constraints,  we  concluded that the solution used in this paper would
be the optimal  one.  Since the US has a large part of the value-weighted index, this
discrepancy  affects the  average portfolios and  market.  Nevertheless, the results show
that our data still provides the evidence we aimed to find.

Another limitation occurred when  calculating the weights for the second time period.
We used the World Bank database of market capitalization of listed domestic
companies.  However, some  Nordic countries did not have data for  a few  years. Instead,
we  assumed  that those countries grew at the same  rate as the  Nordic country we had
data for.

                                  27
Another factor is that  the results  could be  affected by outliers wherein the premium  is
driven only by a small number of value stocks with very large positive returns.
Conversely, the growth portfolios could have been impacted by a small number of
stocks with very large negative returns.  The portfolio samples for the  countries other
than  the US are  from MSCI  and  Bloomberg,  which  cover mostly large  international
assets.  A more complete sample would have counteracted the  size effect of firms.

Furthermore, as discussed  previously, the findings in this paper contribute to the
ongoing debate  whether or not the excess return is driven by taking on risk.  De Bondt
and Thaler  (1985, 1987) argue that extreme losers outperform the market over the
subsequent several years. This could affect our portfolios widely; companies in the
value portfolios could all be on the verge of bankruptcy, and therefore have a low book-
to-market valuation  —  and much higher risk.  The larger problem is that this dispute
combines more than the risk  debate, which is empirically hard to differentiate, find
proxies for and therefore also test.

With that said,  a good start for an  improvement  on our methodology could be achieved
by using a more  complete sample,  which  would have counteracted the size effect of
firms.  To be able to isolate the  risk  effect  more accurately  and  put an end to  the  debate
regarding  whether or not the excess return is driven by taking on  additional  risk,  is
another  topic for further research.

                                  28
VI.  Conclusions

The goal for most of the stock market participants, both individuals and professionals,  is
to find  strategies  to  beat the benchmarks and furthermore create a premium in returns.
In times of market  turmoil, such as the times we are experiencing now with the Covid-
19 pandemic, to stay rational to an investing strategy could be a difficult  task.

Looking back at our two research questions;
    1.   To replicate  Fama and French’s  research and prolong it to 2019 with a greater
        number of countries, in order to examine if their findings still hold, and
    2.   To extend their research and examine whether or not their findings are affected
        by the short-term market turmoil.

What we can conclude from  our  research is that it remains relevant to choose value
strategies since they, on average, still outperform the market as well as growth
strategies. During volatile times, the  value strategies are still clearly the better
alternative. If it is  based on the fact that people get more risk-averse during times of
turmoil is hard to say. The short answers  to  our initial  research questions are therefore:
1.)  The  findings still hold, with a greater number of countries and  throughout 1975-
2019;  and  2.) The value premium persists in short-term market turmoil.

                                  29
References

Athanassakos, G. 2009,  Value versus growth stock returns and the value premium: The
    Canadian experience 1985–2005, Wiley Online Library.

Banz, R.W. 1981, "The  relationship between return and market value of common stocks",
     Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 3-18.

Bekaert, G., Engstrom, E. & Xing, Y. 2009,  Risk, uncertainty, and  asset prices, Elsevier.

Black, F., Jensen, M.C. & Scholes, M. 1972,  "The capital asset pricing model: Some
     empirical tests",  Studies in the theory of capital markets,  vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 79-121.

Blume, M.E. & Friend, I. 1973, "A new look at the capital asset pricing model",  The journal
     of finance,  vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 19-34.

Bourguignon, F. & De Jong, M. 2003,  Value versus growth, Institutional Investor Journals
     Umbrella.

Bondt, Werner F. M. De & Thaler, R. 1985, "Does the Stock Market Overreact?", Journal of
     Finance,  vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 793.

Chan, L.K.C. 1991, "Fundamentals and stock returns in Japan",  The journal of finance,  vol.
     46, no. 5, pp. 1739-1764.

Cox, J.C. & Ross, S.A. 1976, "The valuation of options for alternative stochastic
     processes",  Journal of Financial Economics,  vol. 3, no. 1-2, pp. 145-166.

Douglas,  G.W. 1968, "Risk in the equity markets: an empirical appraisal of market
      efficiency.",

Dreman, D.N. 1977,  Psychology and the stock market: Investment strategy beyond random
    walk, Amacom.

Eugene F. Fama & Kenneth R. French 1992, "The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
     Returns",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 427-465.

Fama, E.F. & French, K.R. 1998, "Value versus growth: The international evidence", The
     journal of finance,  vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1975-1999.

Fama, E.F. & French, K.R. 1993, "Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
     bonds",  Journal of  finance,

Fama, E.F. & MacBeth, J.D. 1973, "Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests", Journal
     of political economy,  vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 607-636.

                                  30
Graham, B. & Dodd, D. 2003,  Security Analysis: The Classic 1934 Edition,  McGraw Hill.

Hansen, L.P. & Richard, S.F. 1987, "The Role of Conditioning Information in Deducing
     Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing  Models",  Econometrica,  vol.
     55,  no. 3, pp. 587.

Haugen, R.A. 1995,  The new finance: the case against efficient markets,  Prentice Hall.

Rouwenberg, R., & Salomons, R. M. (2003).  “Value investing in emerging markets: local
    macroeconomic risk and extrapolation.”  Groningen: University of Groningen, SOM
     research school.

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A. & Vishny, R.W. 1994, "Contrarian investment, extrapolation,
     and risk",  The journal of finance,  vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1541-1578.

Lettau, M. & Wachter, J.A. 2007, "Why is long-horizon equity less risky? A duration-based
     explanation of the value premium",  The Journal of Finance,  vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 55-92.

Lintner, J. 1965, "Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversification",  The journal
     of finance,  vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 587-615.

Markowitz, H. 1959,  Portfolio selection: Efficient diversification of investments,  John Wiley
    New York.

Merton, R.C. 1973, "An intertemporal capital asset pricing model",  Econometrica: Journal
     of the Econometric Society,  pp. 867-887.

Sharpe, W.F. 1964, "Capital asset prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Conditions
     of  Risk",  Journal of Finance,  vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 425-442.

                                  31