COMPARING APPLES AND
APPLES

THE IMPACT OF OPERATIONAL CHANGES ON OPERATIONAL
PERFORMANCE POST LBO

ANDREAS JOHANSSON

SEBASTIAN HJERPEBO

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Comparing Apples and Apples: The Impact of Operational Changes on Operational
Performance Post LBO

Abstract:

   This paper aims to determine whether operational changes in pursuit of increased
    efficiency, are the mechanisms through which PE firms increase target firm performance,
   post leverage buyouts. This is done using a dataset of 56 Swedish firms which have been
   targets of leveraged buyouts. Their accounting data between the years 1998 and 2017 is
   examined, and the statistical method of mediation analysis is then applied. Although our
   findings suggested that increases in average personnel cost might be a partial mediator of
   LBOs on EBITDA, our findings did not support the notion that operational changes in
   pursuit of increased efficiency, is the method through which PE firms increase
   performance of their targets.

Keywords:

   Private equity, Leverage buyouts, Operational performance, Operational changes,
   Swedish private equity market

Authors:

   Andreas Johansson (23951)
   Sebastian Hjerpebo (23946)

Tutor:

   Anastasia Girshina, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Andreas Johansson and Sebastian Hjerpebo, 2020

Acknowledgements:

   We would like to thank Assistant Professor Anastasia Girshina for her highly valuable
   input and dedication throughout the thesis writing process. Furthermore, we would like
   to extend special gratitude to our families for supporting us during the time we wrote this
   thesis, times which due to the Covid-19 pandemic undoubtedly were extraordinary.
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

1. Introduction
1.1 Introduction of the Thesis

The private equity industry has for a long time played a crucial role in facilitating the growth
of companies, by allowing access to capital, thus bridging the gap between venture capital
and public markets. One important tool at the disposal of private equity (PE) firms is the
leveraged buyout (LBO), wherein the PE firm uses a significant amount of debt to finance
the acquisition of the target firm. With a low equity to debt ratio, the PE firm can achieve a
higher return on equity (ROE), making LBOs attractive for PE firms. In Sweden in recent
years, although the number of firms acquired through LBOs have remained relatively
constant, there has been a substantial spike in the total value of these LBOs. Comparing 2013
to 2018, the total value invested in LBOs increased from SEK 5.30 billion to SEK 23.99
billion (SVCA, 2019), a more than 3.5-fold increase. The fact that private equity is a major
force in the Swedish economic landscape, becomes even more apparent when one learns
that Sweden has Europe’s sixth highest level of private equity investments as a percentage of
GDP (SVCA, 2019).

       With these facts in mind, it should come as no surprise that the impact LBOs have
on the operating performance and value of the target firm has been a topic of discussion for
a long time. By now, there is both a well documented and widely accepted view within the
research community, that LBOs have a positive impact on target firm’s operating
performance (Kaplan; 1989b; Berg & Gottschalg, 2003; Bergström et al., 2007).

       Our paper aims to further expand on this research, by using a slightly different
statistical approach than most existing literature does. While most existing literature
compares data from firms who have been targets of LBOs, with a control group of firms,
our data consist of only LBO firms. We include accounting data from pre LBO, during the
holding period, and post exit, thus comparing the same set of firms under different ownership,
or comparing apples and apples if you will.

       By using this method, we hope to isolate the treatment effect of LBOs on target
firms, i.e. PE firms making operational changes like decreasing the number of employees,
from the selection effect, i.e. PE firms “picking winners” - choosing firms which anyway
would have outperformed its competitors. After all, which firms are chosen for LBOs is not
a stochastic variable. PE firm partners are not compensated handsomely for randomly
picking targets. Instead one would expect them, through thorough due diligence and innate
ability, to be able to identify firms who will perform better than peers, or who at the time of
the acquisition are undervalued. Private equity investors are more sophisticated than the
average investor and their ability to predict which the best performing firms will be, should
thus be higher. Suggestions have been made that private equity investors simply pick superior
companies and thus merely shift value from one stakeholder to the next, rather than
increasing value (Tykvová & Borell, 2012).

                                   2
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

        It is only by isolating the treatment effect, one can make statements about the value
a PE firm generates through an LBO. Otherwise, it could be the case that the increase in
operational performance post LBOs, which is so well documented in the existing literature,
has nothing to do with any operational changes that the PE firms implement, but rather
comes from their ability to predict operational performance improvements.

       We have chosen recent LBOs in Sweden for a few reasons. Firstly, as previously
outlined, Sweden is a country in which private equity is of major importance in the economic
landscape, and the effects and outcomes of LBOs will thus have major societal implications.
If empirical evidence supports positive operational impact on target firms from LBOs, it
should for instance from a public policy standpoint be of interest to incentivize a more
beneficial investment climate. One way of doing this could for instance be through more
favorable taxation systems, which could increase LBO activity at large, but also make
international investors more willing to allocate their equity to the Swedish market (SVCA,
2017).

        Moreover, Sweden is an interesting case to study since the strong labour laws in place,
and the historically strong unions, might pose significant difficulties for PE firms when it
comes to implementing operational changes pertaining to employees and wages. The issue
of the existing literature not separating the treatment effect from the selection effect, hence
becomes more compelling in a Swedish setting, where it is interesting to examine whether
the treatment effect is significant despite restrictions posed by labor laws and unions.

1.2 Private Equity Overview

Private equity is an alternative investment form which usually consists of direct investments
in private firms. Instead of investing in the stock exchange, private or institutional investors
choose to allocate their capital to a fund established by the private equity firm. The typical
structure of a fund is such that the majority of the raised capital is contributed by private
investors, while a minority is invested by the management of the private equity fund. The
private investors are called Limited Partners (LP), with limited liability of the PE fund’s
actions and obligations. Hence, they often have a limited to non-existent influence over the
PE fund’s investment decisions. The decision-making is executed by the management of the
PE firm, the General Partner (GP). They are compensated with a management fee for
managing the fund. Since the LPs rarely have any decision-making power when it comes to
which investment opportunities to pursue, instead, the PE firm will in almost all cases
establish a required internal rate of return (IRR) towards the limited partners.

       When it comes to corporate governance, a common practice is that the PE firm
establishes a “deal team” for each acquisition. This is a select group of managers and
employees who are responsible for that specific deal, following up the target firm’s
performance. The acquiring PE firm usually attains one or multiple board seats in its target,
and it is usually people from the deal team of that deal, which populate those seats. Through

                                   3
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

its board positions, the PE firm can influence the operations of the firm by appointing
managers and by the overall decision-making on a strategic level. For questions decided by
shareholders rather than the board, the PE firm will exercise its control through its voting
rights. When voting time arrives, the entire PE firm, or the investment comitte in a larger
PE form, will discuss how to vote and reach a consensus.

        Even though most PE firms set a required rate of return, the characteristics of the
investments and strategies can differ significantly between different PE firms. Some common
types of LBOs are management buyouts (MBOs), where the management of the target firm
take part in the acquisition, and public buyouts, where the PE firm acquires listed companies
from the stock exchange. The deals can be of enormous monetary amounts, like EQT’s
acquisition of SUSE Linux for USD 2.5bn (EQT, 2018). Deals can also be acquisitions of
distressed assets on the edge of bankruptcy, like when Thomas Cook Group Plc divested
“Vinggruppen”, their Nordic business, to Altor, Strawberry group (Petter Stordalen) and
TDR Capital, following their bankruptcy (Thomas Reuters, 2019).

        Although the types of investments and structures may differ, a commonality is that
generally, PE firms use a significant amount of debt to finance the investments, hence the
name leveraged buyout. By using a higher ratio of debt, the PE firm receives “cheaper”
financing, since the cost of equity is often higher than the cost of debt. Financing a larger
fraction of the deal through debt, i.e. increasing leverage, will also of course increase the
return on equity, something which without a doubt is interesting for investors looking to
maximize returns.

       A common way deals are structured, is that the PE firm will establish a holding
company as an intermediary between them and the target firm, and the debt financing of the
deal is kept on this holding company’s balance sheet. The acquired firm will then typically
send cash flows up to the holding company, which could be looked at as de facto amortizing
the debt. Hence, PE firms will often look for profitable targets with strong cash flow. The
cash flow generation is an important attribute as this gives greater comfort to the PE firm,
that it can sustain a higher level of debt without the risk of experiencing financial distress.
This is of course an additional incentive for the PE firm to identify target firms which will
perform well regardless of the actions of the acquirer. Such incentives make this analysis
extra interesting, as it aims to isolate the treatment effect, by comparing only target firms
with themselves.

       PE firms are often portrayed as somewhat predatory with aggressive cost cutting
strategies affecting the employees and the overall company culture. The prejudice is that PE
firms come in to restructure, fire employees and take other cost-cutting actions to maximize
their own returns. With this paper, we aim to analyze whether this is a fair portrayal, by
examining to what extent LBOs are followed by operational changes in search of increased
efficiency. If this is the case, we then want to determine to what extent these operational
changes actually lead to increased firm performance, both in the short term, during the
holding period, and in the medium term, post exit.

                                   4
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

        This paper will proceed as follows; Section 2 discusses the existing literature of
relevance, Section 3 presents the data and our empirical methodology, Section 4 shows our
results and analysis of said results, and finally Section 5 concludes the paper.

                                   5
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

2. Literature Review
2.1 Operational Efficiencies as a Source of Value

Steven Kaplan (1989b) examined the effects of management buyouts, a type of LBO where
the buyers are the firm’s managers, as early as 1989. Although dating back several decades
now, this paper has been highly consequential as it in many ways laid the foundation for the
future research on this topic, and still holds a lot of relevance today. The data in Kaplan
(1989b) consists of 76 management buyouts completed between the years 1980 and 1986, in
the US. Kaplan (1989b) is one of few papers where the dataset consists of only LBO target
firms. His methodology consists of collecting accounting data for these firms, two years and
one year before the LBO, as well as one year, two years and three years after the LBO.

       By using this methodology, Kaplan (1989b) is able to compare the change in
operational performance before and after the LBO, by looking at metrics like operating
income capital expenditures, and net (operating) cash flow. Kaplan (1989b) looks at these
metrics in three different ways, as levels, as a fraction of total assets, and as a fraction of
annual sales. Kaplan (1989b)’s findings show that the sample companies experience an
increase in both operating income and net cash flow, as well as a decrease in capital
expenditures. These findings hold true both when looking at the changes in the metrics net
of industry changes, and also when looking at the metrics as ratios of total assets and annual
sales.

       Kaplan (1989b) looks at several factors which could lead to the improvements in
these operational performance metrics, but when it comes to improved operational
efficiencies, he looks specifically at change in the number of employees. Contrary to the
notion that a large number of employees suffer lay-offs post buyouts, Kaplan (1989b) finds
no evidence that there is a decrease in the number of employees, neither in absolute terms,
nor compared to each firm’s industry median change in employment. Thus, he could not
conclude that the increase in operational performance had its explanation by efficiencies
realized from lay-offs. Kaplan (1989b) did not have access to wage data, and was thus unable
to test for wage reductions as a variable impacting the operational performance of the firm.

        Although this paper still is of significant importance, since the study was conducted
more than three decades ago, it is highly relevant to examine whether these findings would
hold true today as well. It is also interesting to question whether the results are true in a
general sense regardless of geographical location, or whether looking at LBOs in a different
country might change the outcome.

       Bergström et al. (2007) studies the operating impact of buyouts in Sweden
specifically. To do this, they looked at a sample containing all private equity sponsored exits
between 1998 and the first half of 2006, with a deal value exceeding USD 5 million. To each
LBO firm, a peer group was assigned consisting of the 20 largest (by sales) Swedish
companies within the same industry as the LBO firm. The statistical significance of any
changes in operational performance was then tested with a J1-statistica, comparing the LBO

                                   6
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

firm with its assigned peer group. Their findings suggest that there is a positive operational
performance effect from the LBO process.

       They define operating performance as three specific metrics which they look at,
EBITDA margin, return on invested capital and compounded annual growth in operating
turnover. To explain the positive impact LBOs have on operational performance, defined as
these three metrics, they outline two specific hypotheses which would be characterized as
increased operational efficiencies - that the buyouts have been followed by a decrease in
wages, and that they have been followed by a reduction of the labour force. By running a
regression with change in EBITDA margin pre compared to post LBO as the dependent
variable, they find that both a decrease in wages and a decrease in labour force would have a
positive impact in the EBITDA margin. However, only the impact of the decrease in wages
is significant on a 5% level. Perhaps more importantly to note however, is that they much
like Kaplan (1989b), could find no significant relation between LBOs and a decrease in the
labour force, nor could they find a relation with decrease in wages. This would suggest that
although decreasing wages would increase operational performance, the explanation for why
firms perform better post LBO is to be found elsewhere.

2.2 Taxes as a Source of Value

One aspect of value creation through LBOs which has been hypothesized about, is the tax
effect the buyout has for the target firm, and the impact this has on firm value. This is
something Kaplan (1989a) examines in detail. He does this by examining the same set of 76
management buyout target firms as in Kaplan (1989b). Kaplan (1989a) describes two major
sources of tax benefits which could arise from LBOs. Firstly, increased levels of debt from
the buyout would generate substantial interest deductions, which in turn would result in tax
benefits. Secondly, higher depreciation deductions resulting from increasing the tax basis of
the assets of the firm, would also yield tax benefits.

         Kaplan (1989a) finds empirical support for the hypothesis that tax benefits are an
important source of value creation in buyouts. Kaplan (1989a)’s findings show that the actual
debt repayment schedules which can be observed, are consistent with high levels of debt.
Furthermore, the data shows that a typical firm in the sample pays very low levels of federal
tax in the first and second year post LBO, before typically paying slightly higher taxes in the
third year.

2.3 Reduced Agency Costs as a Source of Value

Something which often occurs after LBOs, is that the leverage of the target firm is increased.
Bergström et al. (2007) hypothesize that increasing leverage will positively impact operational
performance, by way of reducing the agency costs. They argue that the increased levels of
debt payments associated with the higher leverage, will decrease the cash flows at disposal.

                                   7
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

This will in turn limit behavior which does not maximize value, like waste of free cash flows.
They also argue that the higher leverage will increase the risk of bankruptcy, thus forcing the
management of the firm to optimize their investment decisions and reduce their perquisites.
However, they note that because of this, in some cases risk-averse managers might favour
investments which reduce the risk of bankruptcy at the expense of firm value. Despite this
caveat, Bergström et al. (2007) still stick to their hypothesis that increased leverage will
increase operational performance.

        Interestingly enough, although regressing EBITDA margin on leverage produces
the expected sign, that increased leverage leads to increases in EBITDA margin, the result is
not significant on the 5% level. There is thus no support in the data that increased leverage
would improve operational performance, through the reduction of agency costs.

                                   8
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

3. Data and Methodology
3.1 Identifying LBO firms

To obtain our sample of LBO firms, we start by retrieving a list of the 20 largest PE firms
from Mergermarket, based on total volume of deals with Swedish firms, between the years
1998 and 2015 (see Table A in Appendix). To clarify, the PE firm doesn’t have to be based
in Sweden to be included in our sample. However, only deals with a Swedish target firm are
included. One could potentially make the case that including only the largest PE firms would
cause a bias in our sample, as their larger size might be the result of them being relatively
better at increasing target firms’ operational performance, thus being able to attract a larger
volume of deals. We must however, limit our scope somehow, and these 20 PE firms account
for 49% of all LBOs performed, while a majority of the excluded PE firms only performed
one exit during the period. An even more important point, is that since we must limit our
scope in some way, it makes sense to include the largest PE firms and exclude the smallest
ones. Looking at the PE industry from a societal perspective, it is of course most interesting
to look at the actors who account for most of the activity. We believe this makes our analysis
more meaningful than if we had made a random selection of PE firms, since these PE firms
will in all likelihood continue being active players in the industry. A PE firm which only
performed one LBO during these almost two decades, will probably continue being less
active, meaning the effects of the actions of such a PE firm will have less implications.

       Our timespan of 1998 to 2015 is chosen because the earliest available accounting
data is from the year 1998, and thus any events prior to 1998 wouldn’t be interesting for our
analysis. There is also no need to include years after 2015, because divestments made after
2015 are not included in our data for reasons explained later in this section.

       Once the “league table”, of top 20 PE firms has been defined, we obtain the PE
firms’ portfolio firms (LBO firms) that have been divested (the PE firm has made an exit)
between the years 2008 and 2015. A divestment is defined as the PE firm realizing its
investment in the company (the LBO firm). This is usually achieved by selling its stake to a
trade buyer or another financial buyer, or by floating the company on the stock exchange
(IPO). The above information is gathered from the database Mergermarket, and
complemented when necessary by examining press releases from the acquisitions and
divestments.

        The reason we choose the timespan of 2008-2015 for the divestments, is because this
gives us a sufficient number of exits to have enough LBO firms for our analysis. As we are
interested in comparing performance before, during and after the PE firm is the majority
owner, this timespan also allows us to collect accounting data for these three different
periods, for the LBO firms in our sample. In addition to needing to have been divested
between 2008 and 2015, to be included in our dataset as an LBO firm, the following three
criteria need to be met; (1) there is obtainable information regarding, not only the exit date,
but also the acquisition date of the target firm, (2) the PE firm acquired the majority of the

                                   9
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

shares (>50%) of the target firm, and (3) the target firm remained an independent firm during
and after the holding period, and was not part of any mergers.

       We include the first criterion to be able to define three different periods, pre LBO,
holding period, and post exit. These three different periods form the basis of our
comparison. The second criterion is included since we are interested in the operational
changes the PE firm can implement. If the PE firm is the majority shareholder, it has
significantly more ability to exercise control and implement changes, in comparison to if it
had been a minority shareholder. Cases where the PE firm is the majority shareholder are
thus the most interesting to focus on. We do note that although we have data on the
ownership of the firm, we do not have data of the voting rights. Because there can be
different classes of shares, where classes can have more than one vote per share, the
ownership a PE firm has in the firm it has acquired, doesn’t necessarily have to be the same
as the share of voting rights it has. However, since we set the bar at >50% ownership, all PE
firms who meet this criterion will have at least 50% share of voting rights as well, as every
share will be associated with at least one voting right. We might thus be including PE firms
which have a significantly higher share of voting rights compared to ownership stake in the
acquired firm, but never lower, and we will as such never by mistake include a target firm in
which the PE firm does not have a controlling majority. We include the third criterion
because we want to examine any changes in performance resulting from changes in the
operations of the target firm, and not from changes in scope which would follow from a
merger.

        A total of 56 LBO firms met these criteria, and these firms consequently define the
scope of our analysis (see Table B in Appendix). Something which our data does not include,
are the companies which have suffered from bankruptcies while being owned by PE firms,
and thus were never divested and therefore not available in the data from Mergermarket.
This could cause a potential survivorship bias. As our analysis includes the years of the great
recession, this potential bias is important to keep in mind when conducting the analysis of
our results.

3.2 Collecting Accounting Data

Once the list of LBO firms has been established, the next step is to obtain each firm’s
accounting data. We start by using the database Retriever, where we can search by company
name, and obtain each firm’s corporate identity number. Something to note is the frequent
use of group structures in Swedish businesses, which could potentially make our analysis
more difficult. We handle this by defining the main operating entity as the LBO firm and the
basis for our analysis, in cases where there is a group structure. The main operating entity
within the group is identified by looking at sales and number of employees, and the corporate
identity number for this entity is collected.

                                  10
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

         Once each firm’s corporate identity number has been obtained, we then turn to
Serrano, a database published by the Swedish House of Finance, with legal and financial
information of Swedish firms. The data is based on financial statement data from the Swedish
Companies Registration Office (Bolagsverket), where most Swedish companies are required
to submit an audited financial statement. From Serrano we then obtain accounting data for
the 56 firms within our scopes, between the years 1998 and 2017 (the latest financial year
available). We do this by filtering in Serrano on the corporate identity number corresponding
to each company on our list of 56 firms.

3.3 Methodology

In Section 4.1 of the Analysis, we give an overview of the data at hand, presenting some
summary statistics and visualizing some of the data, in order to help the reader understand
our sample set. Our methodology is after this split into three different parts, where we in
Section 4.2 examine whether there is a link between LBOs and the operational performance
of the target firm. In Section 4.3, we look at whether there is a link between LBOs and
operational changes being implemented. Exactly which metrics and variables we use to define
operational performance and changes is explained below. Finally, we are of course interested
in examining to what extent any operational changes can explain increased operational
performance, which is what we look at in Section 4.4. This will be done by way of mediation
analysis, which is a method of explaining the process or mechanism by which one variable
affects another. In our case, we hypothesize that there is a causal link between LBOs and
operational performance, and we want to check whether operational changes implemented
by the PE firm is the mechanism by which this happens.

         In order to make credible claims about PE firms adding value to its target firms,
and the causality of this, there needs to be a link in each of these three steps. Firstly, LBOs
have to be linked with an improvement in operational performance for the target firm,
otherwise it is of course difficult to claim that PE ownership adds value. Secondly, if there is
no link between LBOs and operational changes, then whatever potential performance
improvements are found, must have another explanation. This could for instance be the PE
firm being able to predict the improved performance and picking that firm as a target. Finally,
the mediation analysis must show that the operational changes are the mechanisms through
which performance is improved.

        3.3.1 The Impact of LBOs on Operational Performance

Starting out with the first part of the analysin, we begin by defining two dummy variables,
ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑝𝑒𝑟 and 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡_𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡, to distinguish the ownership status of the firm at any given
year. As there are three different categories of interest here, pre LBO, the holding period,
and post exit, we define two variables so that our model is not saturated. Wet set

                                  11
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑝𝑒𝑟 = 1 if the accounting data is from a year in which the LBO firm was under
ownership of the PE firm, i.e. after the LBO but before the exit, and 0 otherwise. Similarly,
we put 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡_𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡 = 1 if the accounting data is from a year after the exit took place, and 0
otherwise. If the acquisition is made between January 1st and June 30th, we count that year
towards ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑝𝑒𝑟, whereas if it is made between July 1st and December 31st, we do not
count it. The same logic applies for the exit. The below illustration visualizes the timeline
with the three different periods of ownership we have defined.

Figure 1. Timeline of Three Different Periods of Ownership

To determine whether LBOs have an impact on operational performance, we need a specific
definition of operational performance to measure. In general, we are interested in key
performance indicators which give insights into the efficiency of the organisation. The first
key performance indicator we look at to make judgements on the operational performance
is EBITDA. This is a relevant metric to examine, as it encapsulates many aspects of value
creation. Both improvements in top-line sales, for example from growth and expansion into
new markets, and improvements in operational efficiency, for instance optimizing the
personnel costs, will impact EBITDA. Furthermore, since the EBITDA multiple (Enterprise
Value/EBITDA) is frequently used in the private equity industry to value firms, it will be in
the interest of each PE firm to implement operational changes to add value, which ultimately
increase EBITDA. If EBITDA increases and the multiple is kept constant, the enterprise
value will increase, giving higher returns to the PE firm when exit occurs.

        Secondly, we look at the EBITDA margin. This is a relevant metric to look at, since
it is the EBITDA-to-sales ratio, and increasing this ratio means the firm is able to keep a
larger portion of its sales as profit. In other words, it is more efficient. Finally, we look at
return on invested capital (ROIC) to determine operational performance. In layman's terms,
this metric measures how much a firm gets back for every dollar invested in its business, or
how efficiently it uses what it has. It is a similar metric to return on assets, but does not take
into account assets which have nothing to do with the operations, and is as such more
relevant when making inferences about operational performance.

       To see whether LBOs have a positive impact on operational performance, we define
the following three fixed effect regressions:

                                  12
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

                         𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃     𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (1)

                     𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴̃   _𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (2)

                           𝑅𝑂𝐼̃   𝐶𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (3)

Note that no control variables have been included. Instead we opt for using a fixed effects
(FE) model, something we are able to do since we have panel data, which is denoted by the
accents on each of the variables. We thus do away with the issue of all firms having different
characteristics across time, many of which are difficult to control for, which will impact our
performance variables. With our FE model, we only compare differences within firms, and
variables differing across firms becomes a non-issue. The drawback of this is of course that
there is less variation in our data, as we are only making comparisons from year to year within
each firm, meaning the statistical power is lower. On the other hand, by using fixed effects,
we avoid making the somewhat strong assumption that not a single one of the multitude of
differences across firms are correlated with which type of ownership the firm is under.
Furthermore, the interpretation of the coefficients do not change in the fixed effects case
compared to in a pooled cross sectional one. In both cases, the coefficients show the average
difference in performance (EBITDA, EBITDA margin and ROIC), during the holding
period and post exit period respectively, compared to the pre LBO period.

             Something which is relevant for our analysis, is whether any LBOs were
secondary buyouts (SBOs), wherein the acquirer and seller both are PE firms, and the seller
previously has acquired the firm it is selling through an LBO. If the LBO in our dataset is a
secondary buyout, and it is true that LBOs are followed by operational improvements, then
these operational improvements will have been realized during the first LBO and there would
be less room for improvement during the secondary buyout. With this in mind, ideally we
would want to include a control variable for SBO. With the fixed effects model we have
opted for, this is however not possible. Since we are only running the regression based on
differences within firms, and not across firms, there would be no variation in a dummy
variable for SBO, since it would not differ across years for the same firm. Each LBO is either
an SBO or not, independent of what year it is. In our dataset, 8 out of 56 LBOs, or roughly
14% are secondary buyouts. This relatively small fraction, means that not including a dummy
variable for SBOs, will have a limited effect on the outcomes of our regressions. Nonetheless,
it is important to note that by excluding this variable, we might be ever so slightly
underestimating the effects of LBOs on our dependent variables, which we keep in mind for
our subsequent analysis.

       If we expect PE firms to implement operational changes which improve
performance, these changes would be implemented during the holding period, and

                                  13
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

operational performance would be improved throughout the holding period. Post exit, the
operational changes will have already been implemented and operational performance will
have already been improved, if these effects are permanent. If these assumptions are true,
we would expect: 𝛿0 > 0 and 𝛿1 > 0 for each of the three regressions above. In other words,
the performance of each of these metrics during the holding period and the post exit period,
is higher than during the period prior to the LBO. We define our first hypothesis as;

H1: Target firms experience improvements in operational performance post LBOs.

        3.3.2 The Impact of LBOs on Operational Changes

For the next part of our analysis, we examine whether LBOs are typically followed by
operational changes. As previously described, if there aren’t any operational changes, then
any operational performance improvements we might find, must come from another source.

        Operational changes are of course difficult to define and quantify. Improvements to
things like processes, supply chains and decision-making would of course impact the
performance of the firm, but these changes will not show up in our accounting data. Studying
these changes and their effects would regardless be quite interesting, but would be better
suited for a qualitative study rather than a quantitative one like this. Instead we’ve chosen to
focus on employees and personnel costs and personnel cost per employee, as they are
undoubtedly an integral part of the operations of the firm. We are interested in operational
changes which would lead to efficiencies. For the variables we are examining this would
mean reductions, i.e. decreases in the number of employees, personnel costs and personnel
cost per employee. Increases in these metrics, although certainly operational changes, could
not be considered realizing efficiencies. Thus, we do not consider them operational efficiency
changes.

        Firstly, we look at the number of employees, 𝑒𝑚𝑝. Here we would want to include
sales as a control variable. As sales increase, we would expect the number of employees to
increase as well, as a result of the size of the firm growing. It is logical to control for this
increase, as it would not be part of a concerted effort from the PE firm to realize efficiencies
by optimizing the number of employees. Secondly, we look at personnel costs, 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠_𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡.
We choose this metric rather than wages, as we believe it is a much more interesting one to
look at. Any measures to optimize personnel costs which are not by simply lowering wages,
for instance restructuring so that social security costs are minimized for any given level of
wage, will not be picked up if we examined wages. An example of this would be to hire
relatively more people under the age of 26. This would decrease personnel costs for any
given wage level, as they prior to 2016 cost about half in social security expenses. Ignoring
such potential restructuring would mean we are missing ways of achieving increased
operational efficiency should we only look at wages. By the same logic as previously with the
number of employees, here we will also want to control for sales. Thirdly, we look at the
personnel cost per employee, 𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠_𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡. The two first metrics are interesting as they

                                  14
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

are on firm level, and we are also studying the operational performance on firm level.
However, it could very well be the case that both the number of employees and personnel
costs increase post LBO, but the number of employees increase by much more. If this is the
case then it could very reasonably be argued that the firm has increased efficiency, and thus
we want to include this metric in our analysis as well. Since this variable represents a ratio,
we no longer need to control for sales. We define the following fixed effect regressions:

                    𝑒𝑚̃   𝑝𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (4)

                 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃ _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (5)

                      𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃    _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 = 𝛾0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛾1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃  _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (6)

To further clarify, any statistically significant result where 𝛾0 ≠ 0 and 𝛾1 ≠ 0 would
constitute operational changes. This means that if the number of employees (keeping sales
constant), total personnel costs (keeping sales constant), or personnel costs per employee
either increase or decreases during the holding period, this would count as an operational
change. However, as previously explained, we hypothesize that PE firms will implement
changes in search of realizing efficiencies, thus decreasing these metrics. If we expect PE
firms to implement operational changes to increase efficiency, we would expect: 𝛾0 < 0 and
𝛾1 < 0 for each of the three regressions above, i.e. the number of employees and the
personnel cost are lower post LBO and post exit compared to pre LBO, keeping sales
constant, and the personnel cost per employee is lower post LBO and post exit compared to
pre LBO. We call such an operational change an operational efficiency change, and from this
we define our second hypothesis as;

H2: Target firms experience operational efficiency changes post LBOs.

        3.3.3 The Impact of Operational Changes on Operational Performance

In the final part of our analysis, we want to examine whether improvements in operational
performance can be explained by operational changes. To address this question, we will be
conducting mediation analysis. If we in Section 4.2 establish a relationship between LBOs and
operational performance, we now want to check whether this relationship is due to any
intermediary variables. We examine the number of employees, the personnel costs and the
personnel cost per employee to see whether these function as the mechanisms through which
LBOs affect operational performance.

                                  15
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

              To do this, we define a set of fixed effect regressions, where we as dependent
variables have our operational performance metrics, EBITDA, EBITDA margin and ROIC
respectively. As independent variables we include both the dummy variables for holding
period and post exit period, as well as the variables for operational changes, making sure to
include only one variable for operational change per regression. The reason we are careful
not to include multiple operational efficiency variables in the same regression, is that this
would be over controlling. If we for instance included both the number of employees and
personnel costs as independent variables, the coefficient for number of employees would be
interpreted as the change in the dependent variable keeping personnel costs constant. This
of course would make no sense, as one of the main ways reducing the number of employees
would impact operational performance would be through a reduction in personnel costs.
However, we will for the same reason as in the previous section still want to include sales as
a control variable when looking at the number of employees and personnel costs. We thus
define the following three fixed effect regressions with EBITDA as the dependent variable;

         𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃     𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑒𝑚̃   𝑝𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (7)

      𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃     𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃ _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (8)

           𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃     𝐴𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃    _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (9)

The following three regressions are defined with EBITDA margin as the dependent variable:

       𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃ 𝐴_𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛̃   𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑟  + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠̃ 𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡  + 𝛽1𝑒𝑚̃   𝑝𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (10)
                                                        𝑖𝑡                   𝑖𝑡

      𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃ 𝐴_𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃  _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃ _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (11)

      𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷̃ 𝐴_𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃    _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (12)

Finally, these three fixed effect regressions are defined with ROIC as the dependent variable:

                                  16
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

          𝑅𝑂𝐼̃   𝐶𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑒𝑚̃   𝑝𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (13)

       𝑅𝑂𝐼̃   𝐶𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃ _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒̃    𝑠𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (14)

            𝑅𝑂𝐼̃   𝐶𝑖𝑡 = 𝛿0ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔̃    _𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿1𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡̃ _𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽1𝑎𝑣𝑔𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑠̃    _𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢̃ 𝑖𝑡 (15)

We note that although nine regressions have been defined, it might very well be the case that
when we arrive at Section 4.4, not all regression will be run. This is because we only run the
regressions where the variable for operational changes had a statistically significant link with
LBOs. In layman’s terms, if we for instance find that there is no change in the personnel cost
per employee following an LBO, then it would of course not make sense to check whether
change in personnel cost per employee is the mechanism through which LBOs impact
operational performance. The mediation analysis is visualized below.

Figure 2. Mediation Analysis Visualized, Operational Changes as
Mediators

When defining our third hypothesis, we will be very specific when it comes to the exact
formulation. We are specifically interested in examining if we can explain improvements in
operational performance. We will thus only include the operational performance variables
which experience a statistically significant increase in the analysis described in Section 3.3.1.
As mediators we include the variables for operational changes. Although we have
hypothesized that these variables will decrease during the holding period and post exit period,
in this section we choose to include any operational changes, regardless if they are increases
or decreases, to check whether they are mechanisms for increased performance. In other
words, we will examine operational changes, and not just operational efficiency changes. We
thus define the following third hypothesis;

H3: Operational changes are the mechanisms through which improvements in operational performance occur.

                                  17
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

         3.3.4 Non-Random Timing of LBOs as a Factor in our Analysis

Although we are solving any potential issues of the non random sampling of LBO firms
compared to other firms, by only including LBO firms in our sample, there is another
potential issue which must be addressed; the fact that the timing of the exit also is not a
random event. A PE firm will want to optimize the timing of the entry and exit, buying at a
low valuation and selling when performance is as high as possible to maximize the sale value.
One could thus imagine a case where firm performance during the holding period increases
due to completely exogenous factors and variables, and the PE firm seized this opportunity
to make an exit. In such cases, there would be no causality between LBOs and increased
performance, but the data would show a link between the two.

        So what does this mean for our analysis? First of all, it is important to note that no
inferences will be made about the causal link between LBOs and operational performance,
solely based on the results in Section 4.2. Due to this timing issue, any potential link will be
evidence of just that, a link, and not a causal link.

        For the continuation of the analysis, the non-randomness of the timing does not
pose an issue. As all PE firms have controlling majority of the firms in our sample, any
operational changes will ultimately be due to direct or indirect decision-making from them.
Although one could possibly imagine exogenous factors like swings in the market, which
would force PE firms to implement operational changes, for instance austerity measures like
lay-offs, these changes are unlikely to be strongly correlated with the timing of entry or exit.
PE firms will be interested in optimizing timing in terms of performance, but it is a
reasonable assumption that the number of employees or personnel costs for a given level of
sales, or personnel cost per employee, will not be significant factors taken into account when
deciding when to buy or sell.

       One could however imagine a potential exogenous shock, which is correlated with
performance, operational changes and the timing of exit. A market crash for instance, might
lead to worse performance, force the PE firm to make operational changes like letting people
go, and might lead the PE firm to seek divestment opportunities. Although this might
certainly seem like an issue for our analysis, here we need to keep in mind that we are
including sales as a control variable. We are looking at the number of employees and
personnel costs for a given level of sales. Any shock like a market crash will affect sales as
well, so this is taken into account. If for instance sales decrease but the number of employees
decrease relatively more, then this would still be an organization having become more
efficient and we would like to analyze this.

        The takeaway is thus, that for the totality of the analysis, the non-randomness of the
timing is not an issue. As long as the analysis is holistic, taking into account Sections 4.2, 4.3
and 4.4 together, and no inferences about causality are made using only parts of the results,
the foundation which this analysis rests on maintains solid.

                                  18
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

4. Empirical Results and Analysis

To assess our hypotheses regarding LBOs, we present and analyze the empirical findings on
the results of Swedish buyouts with accounting data from the period 1998-2017. Section 4.1
presents some summary statistics to contextualize our analysis and provide insights into the
characteristics of the firms which we base our analysis on. Section 4.2 shows our empirical
findings on the effects of LBOs on the operational metrics EBITDA, EBITDA-to-sales
(EBITDA-margin), and Return on Invested Capital (ROIC), all of which have been further
described in the previous section. Section 4.3 presents our empirical findings on the effects of
LBOs on the metrics we have chosen to show operational changes in search of efficiency,
i.e. the number of employees, personnel costs and personnel cost per employee. Section 4.4
presents our empirical findings on whether improvements in operational performance can
be explained by operational changes, by means of mediation analysis.

4.1 Summary Statistics

Table 3. Descriptive statistics for all firms, 1998-2017

Table 3 shows an overview of the accounting data of the LBO firms in our sample, showing
central characteristic metrics. Our sample firms have mean sales of SEK 754m. The average
firm in our sample meets the European Union’s definition of a large firm, where sales need
to be above EUR 50m and the number of employees need to be above 250. The mean level
of sales and number of employees for our firms are SEK 754m and 418 employees
respectively, which falls comfortably above the EU's thresholds. Given that we are analyzing
companies acquired by PE firms, this is not an unexpected result. PE firms often acquire
mid-sized to large companies, which have grown to a decent size with good profitability.

        The profit metrics shown in Table 3 are also not particularly surprising. For PE firms,
profitability is of significant importance in the acquisition discussions, the reason for which
have already been described in Section 1.2. Our sample of firms have a mean EBITDA of
SEK 56m, a mean EBITDA margin of 11.5%, and a mean ROIC of 29.8%. In most
industries, a firm with these numbers would be considered a well-performing and profitable
business, although the average performance differs significantly across industries.

                                  19
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

Figure 4. Distribution of LBO Entries and Exits, 2002-2015

nentry=56, nexit=56

Moving onward to Figure 4, we can clearly see that the majority of entries, i.e. the target firm
being acquired by the PE firm, occurred between 2006 and 2008. This could be explained by
the prevailing bull market during that time, where business boomed across the board with
banks not hesitating to lend out money to private customers, and definitely not to the private
equity market. The general optimism of the financial markets at the time would not only
allow access to debt to be plentiful for PE firms, but there would also be a willingness by the
PE firms to be as invested as possible in the market in fear of missing out on the high returns
the bull market would allow. This would mean they perform more LBOs. During the chaotic
years following the Great Recession, the number of firms acquired dropped significantly.
This is also to be expected, as access to debt was much more limited, and the uncertainty
would lead PE firms to act in a more risk averse manner, being more cautious about making
investments.

                                  20
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

Figure 5. Distribution of Length of Holding Period by Number of Firms

n=56, mean=5 years & 7.0 months, median=5 years & 2.5 months

In Figure 5, we see that the average holding period in our sample is approximately 5 years,
ranging between 2 years as the shortest holding periods and 11 years as the longest ones. It
is important to note that the dummy variables we have created for the different ownership
periods, will include different years across firms, since the entry and exit will occur at
different times. The different dummy variables will also include different numbers of years,
not only because the entries and exits will occur at different times, but also since the length
of the holding period differs across firms. This is something which the above figure
illustrates.

                                  21
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

4.2 The Impact of LBOs on Operational Performance

Table 6. Fixed Effects Regressions - Operational Performance

Table 6 shows the effect of LBOs on the three variables chosen as metrics for operational
performance, EBITDA, EBITDA margin and ROIC. Starting with EBITDA, we see the
result we expected, based on the existing literature. The effects of LBOs on EBITDA, both
during the holding period and post exit, is positive. The coefficients can be interpreted in the
following manner; for the target of an LBO, the EBITDA is on average SEK 38.7m higher
during a year in which the firm is under PE ownership, compared to a year before the LBO.
Similarly, the EBITDA is on average SEK 55.6m higher during a year post exit, compared
to a year before the LBO. Both of these results are statistically significant at the 1% level.

       A potential explanation for the difference in EBITDA being larger post exit
compared to during the holding period, is that the performance improvements might occur
gradually throughout the holding period, while the improvements will have already happened
when the exit occurs. The coefficient will then quite naturally be lower for the holding period
variable, as here we are including years towards the end of the period when improvements
will have been large, but also years in the very beginning of the holding period, where
improvements will be lower. What we thus observe, is a positive effect on EBITDA which
starts to be realized during the holding period, and which is permanent as it is observable
post exit as well.

       Moving on to EBITDA margin, we see that this metric improves during the holding
period and post exit period, compared to the pre LBO period. The increase during the
holding period is statistically significant on the 5% level, and the increase during the post exit
period is significant on the 10% level. We can interpret the coefficient for the holding period
in the following way; for the target of an LBO, the EBITDA margin is on average 3.7%
higher during a year in which the firm is under PE ownership, compared to a year before the
LBO. Similarly, the EBITDA margin is on average 3.3% higher during a year post exit,
compared to a year before the LBO.

                                  22
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

       As previously explained in Section 3.3.4, we are making no inferences about any
causality between LBOs and the performance increasing yet, due to the non-random timing
of the entries and exits. Instead, we are at this stage merely checking whether the
performance increases or not, and for which variables they do. Later, in Section 4.4, we will
try to see if we can find the mechanism through which LBOs increase performance, and only
at that stage would we potentially be able to make inferences about causality.

       We finally turn to ROIC, where we in accordance with our expectations see an
increase during the holding period and post exit period compared to the pre LBO period,
although these results are not statistically significant. Because of this, we can’t make any
definitive statements about whether the ROIC is higher during PE ownership and post exit
compared to pre LBO.

       A possible explanation for the increase in ROIC not being significant might for
instance might be differing strategies across PE firms. Although most PE firms are probably
interested in maximizing ROIC in their targets, some might also be interested in seeking
additional investment opportunities thus increasing the capital base. This would of course
increase the denominator in the ROIC metric, muddying the waters for our analysis, and
potentially explain the absence of statistical significance.

        Even though not all of the results were statistically significant, a majority of them
were, and we did not see any coefficients with the opposite sign of what we expected. We
can thus make an overall assessment of the results in Table 6 which leads us to make the
conclusion that hypothesis 1 is accepted, target firms do experience improvements in operational
performance post LBOs.

                                  23
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

4.3 The Impact of LBOs on Operational Changes

Table 7. Fixed Effects Regression - Operational Changes

Table 7 shows the effect of LBOs on the three variables chosen as metrics for operational
change, the number of employees, personnel costs and personnel costs per employee, with
the inclusion of a control variable for sales in each of the first two regressions. The data
shows that the number of employees are fewer both during the holding period and the post
exit period, compared to pre LBO, for any given level of sales. These results are however
not statistically significant, and as such, no real conclusions can be made from these results.
The data would also suggest that the total personnel cost decreases during the holding period
compared to pre LBO, but increases post exit compared to pre LBO. Once again however,
the results aren’t statistically significant and as such, we won’t make inferences based on these
results.

             Looking at the personnel cost per employee however, here we do find some
statistically significant results. During the holding period the average personnel cost per
employee increased by about SEK 111,800, and post exit by about SEK 196,500, compared
to pre LBO. These results are both statistically significant on the 1% level.

             Our hypothesis from Section 3.3.3, stated that we expected a decrease in
personnel cost per employee, but here we see the opposite. In other words, our sample firms
invest more in their employees on a per employee level after being acquired by a PE firm
and after said PE firm divests, compared to before the acquisition.

               Given these results, that many were statistically insignificant, and that the ones
that were statistically significant although showing evidence of operational changes, didn’t

                                  24
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

show evidence of operational efficiency changes, we reject the second hypothesis that target
firms experience operational efficiency changes post LBOs.

4.4 Mediation Analysis

Now the time has arrived for us to conclude our mediation analysis. In Section 3.3.3, nine
different regressions were defined, but as we explained in that section, all nine of these
regressions wouldn’t necessarily be run once we had arrived here. Firstly, we would only
include as dependent variables the metrics from Section 4.2 which increased during the
holding period and/or the post exit period. Since the metric ROIC didn’t show a statistically
significant increase, we will exclude this variable from the analysis in this section, including
only EBITDA and EBITDA margin as dependent variables.

              Furthermore, when examining potential mediators, the same logic applies. As
neither the number of employees nor personnel costs changed in a statistically significant
way during the holding period or post exit period, there is no point in examining whether
these function as mediators. Personnel cost per employee however, did see a statistically
significant change during the holding period and post exit period. This variable saw an
increase, rather than a decrease which we had hypothesized, which made us reject our second
hypothesis. Nonetheless, as explained in Section 3.3.3, regardless of whether the operational
change variables would increase or decrease, we would include them in the mediation analysis
in this section. As such, we will now examine if, and to what extent, the increase in personnel
cost per employee functions as a mechanism through which LBOs impact EBITDA and
EBITDA margin.

Table 8. Mediation Analysis - Personnel Cost per Employee as Mediator

                                  25
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

In order to facilitate easy comparison, we have included columns 1 and 3, in Table 8, which
are the same as columns 1 and 2 respectively in Table 6. In columns 2 and 4, we have added
personnel cost per employee to each of the regressions as an independent variable. Looking
at the coefficient for personnel cost per employee in column 2, we see that an increase in
personnel cost per employee is associated with a statistically significant increase in EBITDA
on the 5% level. Comparing columns 1 and 2, we see that the coefficients for holding period
and post exit period are still positive and statistically significant, but they have decreased in
column 2 compared to column 1.

        So how do we interpret these results? Well, the fact that the coefficient for personnel
cost per employee is positive and statistically significant, while the coefficients for holding
period and post exit period simultaneously decrease when introducing this new variable,
means that some of the effect of LBOs on EBITDA can be explained by personnel cost per
employee. However, since we still in column 2 have statistically significant positive
coefficients for the dummy variables, there are still other ways in which LBOs are associated
with higher EBITDA, which can’t be explained by higher average personnel costs. This could
for instance be other changes implemented by the PE firm, like improved process or changes
in strategy, just to mention a couple of the myriad of changes that could be explanations. It
could also represent a non-causal link, like the timing effect described in Section 3.3.4. We can
however conclude that for average personnel cost as a mediator for LBOs on EBITDA, we
have partial mediation.

       Moving on to the columns 3 and 4, we see that an increase in personnel cost per
employee is associated with an increase in EBITDA margin, but these results aren’t
statistically significant. We do see that the coefficients for the dummy variables decrease both
in significance and as values, hinting towards the fact that personnel cost per employee works
as a partial mediator for LBOs on EBITDA margin as well. However, since the coefficient
for personnel cost per employee isn’t statistically significant on any level, we will have to call
these results inconclusive, as to whether average personnel cost works as a mediator for
LBOs on EBITDA margin.

        Going back to the results in column 2, how could we explain average personnel costs
being a partial mediator for LBOs on EBITDA? One way of looking at it is that PE firms
during the holding period invest more on a per employee basis in the staff, and this leads to
increased performance. Higher wages would of course lead to increased satisfaction among
employees, which in turn could lead to increased productivity. Another possible explanation
is that the PE firms leverage their extensive network in hiring processes, to increase
competence among staff. Hiring high competence would naturally lead to higher wages, but
would also reasonably lead to increased performance. Why else would firms seek high
competence, if not to increase firm performance?

       These results don’t necessarily need to represent a causal relation however. The
causality could very well be the opposite. It could be the case that compensation is heavily
tied to firm performance, through bonus programs and other incentive systems, and as

                                  26
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

performance increases so does average personnel cost. Since the results in Section 4.3 were
the opposite of what had been hypothesized, the subsequent analysis was not what was first
intended, since we primarily wanted to examine whether changes in pursuit of efficiency, i.e.
decreases in our metrics, could explain increased operational performance. As such,
examining whether the relation between increases in average personnel costs and increased
operational performance represents a causal one, is an excellent topic for an extension to this
paper.

        Let’s conclude by looking at what the results in Table 8 mean in terms of our third
hypothesis. Since the results from column 4 were inconclusive, we shouldn’t accept our
hypothesis. However, since we did find that the variable for average personnel costs works
as a partial mediator for LBOs on EBITDA specifically, it would be somewhat misleading
to completely reject the hypothesis. Thus, we partially accept the hypothesis operational changes
are the mechanisms through which improvements in operational performance occur, with the very
important notes that it is true for the variables personnel cost per employee and EBITDA
specifically, the mediation is partial, and that this does not necessarily represent a causal
relationship.

                                  27
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

5. Conclusion
5.1 Conclusion and Implications

The purpose of this study has been to analyze the effect a private equity firm has on the
acquired firm’s operational performance, through its implemented operational changes post
LBO. Our sample consisted of 56 LBO firms that were divested during the years 2008-2015
by one of the 20 largest private equity firms. The PE firms were ranked based on their
activity on the Swedish market (see firms in Table B in Appendix).

        The applied methodology was divided into three steps. The first step was to examine
whether the LBOs were linked with improvements in operational performance for the target
firm. The data showed that all three operational performance metrics we chose to examine
increased during both the holding period and the post exit compared to the pre LBO period.
However, only EBITDA and EBITDA margin showed statistically significant increases while
ROIC did not. Of important note is that we at this stage made no inferences about causality
between LBOs and operational performance, the purpose of this stage was merely to
establish a link between the two, to facilitate the subsequent mediation analysis.

       Secondly, we looked at whether LBOs can be linked with the implementation of
operational changes, by looking at the metrics number of employees, personnel costs and
personnel cost per employee. No statistically significant change in number of employees or
personnel costs could be seen, but we did see a statistically significant change in the average
personnel cost. However, this change was in the form of an increase, and not a decrease as
had been hypothesized.

       Finally, we concluded with a mediation analysis, where we found that increases in
personnel cost per employee worked as a partial mediator through which LBOs impacted
the operational performance metric EBITDA. We did however very importantly note, for
reasons explained in Section 4.4 that this does not necessarily represent a causal relationship.

       We started off this paper by noting that the positive impact LBOs have on firm
performance is both well documented and widely accepted among researchers. We could not
in this paper conclude that these improvements are the result of operational changes
implemented by the PE firm in search of increased efficiency. As such, the possibilities for
further research on this topic in order to better understand how PE firms bring about
operational improvements in their target firms, are almost endless. Below we list some
suggestions for such extensions.

                                  28
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

5.2 Further research

Using a methodology not having been applied in mainstream research since Kaplan (1989a,
1989b), exclusively including LBO firms in our analysis, we may have opened a window of
research which has been shut for some 30 plus years. The same methodology can be used to
examine other potential mechanisms through which PE firms affect target firm performance.
We looked exclusively at the operations, but financial engineering is another possible topic.
One could examine whether changing leverage is a way in which PE firms usually impact
performance, both in the direct effects leverage has on cash flows, but also the indirect
effects on things like agency costs.

       As discussed in the paper, secondary buyouts may have resulted in an
underestimation of our results as initial buyouts may have a larger effect on the operational
performance than in cases where other PE firms already have had controlling interest in the
LBO firm. A topic of further research could be to examine possible discrepancies in effects
of different types of buyouts, including both initial and secondary buyouts. Other types of
buyouts could also be included in the analysis, for example buyouts taking listed companies
private, or management buyouts.

       Applying a qualitative rather than a quantitative methodology would also be
interesting, analyzing the LBOs effect on non-monetary and non-accounting metrics, such
as the company’s business culture, the education levels of employees, and company
strategies. Changes in internal processes, changes in decision-making, supply chain
optimization and talent acquisition are all other potential ways through which PE firms could
seek to enhance performance, all being well suited for a qualitative analysis. In conclusion,
the possibilities to extend upon this research topic are vast, and only the imagination set the
limits.

                                  29
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

References

Berg, A., and O. Gottschalg, 2005, Understanding Value Generation in Buyouts, Working
paper, IDEAS Working Paper Series from RePEc.

Bergström, C., Grubb, M. and Jonsson, S., 2007, The Operating impact of buyouts in

Sweden: A study of value creation, Journal of Private Equity, December 2007, Vol.11(1),
pp.22-39.

EQT Group, 2018-07-02, EQT to acquire leading open source software provider SUSE,
EQT AB, https://www.eqtgroup.com/news/Press-Releases/2018/eqt-to-acquire-leading-
open-source-software-provider-suse/ [2020-04-25]

Kaplan, S, 1989a, The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value,
Journal of Financial Economics, 1989, Vol.24(2), pp.217-254.

Kaplan, S, 1989b, Campeau’s acquisition of Federated – value destroyed or value added,

Journal of Financial Economics, 1989, Vol.25(2), pp.191-212.

Thomson Reuters, 2019-10-30, Trio of buyers rescues Thomas Cook’s Nordic business,
Thomson Reuters Corporation, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-thomas-cook-grp-
nordics/trio-of-buyers-rescues-thomas-cooks-nordic-business-idUSKBN1X914J [2020-04-
25]

Copenhagen Economics, 2019, 2018 Swedish Private Equity Activity, Swedish Private
Equity & Venture Capital Association.

SCVA, 2017, Swedish Private Equity Market - A footprint analysis, Swedish Private Equity
& Venture Capital Association.

Tykvová, T. and Borell, M., 2012, Do private equity owners increase risk of financial

distress and bankruptcy?, Journal of Corporate Finance, 2012, Vol.18(1), pp.138-150.

                                  30
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

Appendix
Table A - List of PE firms

 Rank PE firm Value (EUR m) Number of deals
 1 EQT Partners AB 22 232 68
 2 Accent Equity Partners AB 1 879 65
 3 CapMan Plc 2 588 62
 4 Nordic Capital 11 969 61
 5 3i Group Plc 8 322 60
 6 Ratos AB 10 813 58
 7 Segulah Advisor AB 1 517 57
 8 Litorina Capital Advisors AB 570 50
 9 Priveq Investment 1 134 41
 10 Procuritas AB 489 40
 11 IK Investment Partners Limited 6 140 31
 12 Triton Partners 5 747 31
 13 FSN Capital Partners AS 262 31
 14 Altor Equity Partners AB 2 531 26
 15 Polaris Private Equity 558 25
 16 Valedo Partners 297 25
 17 Verdane Capital Advisors AS 431 20
 18 Nordstjernan AB 255 17
 19 Nalka Invest AB 171 17
 20 Bridgepoint Advisers Limited 2 387 16

Note: The 20 largest PE firms based on volume of Swedish firm buyouts between the years 1998-2015.

                                  31
           Johanssson & Hjerpebo (2020) – Comparing Apples and Apples

Table B - List of LBO firms

LBO firm Investment Year Seller at entry PE firm Buy type Exit Year Buyer at exit
AB Annas Pepparkakor 2005 Private investors Accent Equity Partners AB IBO 2008 Lotus Bakeries NV
Actic Group AB 2007 Founders FSN Capital Partners AS IBO 2012 IK Investment Partners Limited
AddPro AB 2005 Founders Polaris Private Equity IBO 2014 Perusa Partners II L.P.
Akerstroems Bjoerbo AB 2008 BrainHeart Capital Verdane Capital Advisors AS IBO 2015 Allgon AB
Alimak Group AB 2006 3i Group Triton Partners SBO 2015 IPO Investors
                                                    Smedvig Capital & private
Almondy Group Holding AB 2008                  Segulah Advisor AB IBO 2015 Givesco Bakery A/S
                                  investor
Alo AB 2002 Balticgruppen 3i Group Plc IBO 2011 Altor Fund III Limited
Ambea AB 2005 Private investors 3i Group Plc SBO 2010 Triton Partners
Anticimex AB 2005 Nordic Capital Ratos AB SBO 2012 EQT Partners AB
Apotek Hjartat AB 2009 Apoteket Altor Equity Partners AB IBO 2014 ICA Gruppen AB
Aspen AB 2007 Founders Valedo Partners IBO 2010 CapMan Buyout IX Fund
Atos Medical AB 2005 Fisher Scientific Nordic Capital IBO 2011 EQT VI Fund
Attendo AB 2006 Bridgepoint Advisers IK Investment Partners Limited SBO 2015 IPO Investors
Autotube AB 2011 Specma Hydraulic Accent Equity Partners AB IBO 2014 AKWEL
Balco Group AB 2003 Founders 3i Group Plc IBO 2010 Segulah IV, L.P.
Bravida Holding AB 2006 Telenor Triton Partners IBO 2012 Bain Capital, LP.
Bulten AB 2004 Private investors Nordic Capital IBO 2011 IPO Investors
BYGGmax AB 2005 Private investors Altor Equity Partners AB IBO 2013 Undisclosed bidder
Cederroth International AB 2008 Alberto-Culver CapMan Plc IBO 2015 Orkla ASA
Dustin Group AB 2006 Private investors Altor Equity Partners AB IBO 2015 IPO Investors
Eltel AB 2007 Telia 3i Group Plc SBO 2015 IPO Investors
Emotron AB 2007 Siem Capital Polaris Private Equity IBO 2011 CG Power and Industrial Solutions Limited
EPiServer AB 2010 Amameus Capital Partners IK Investment Partners Limited SBO 2014 Accel-KKR LLC
Eton Fashion AB 2012 Founders Litorina Capital Advisors AB IBO 2015 EQT VII Fund
Etraveli AB 2010 Norvestor Equity Segulah Advisor AB SBO 2015 ProSiebenSat.1 Media SE
Exotic Snacks AB 2007 Founders Segulah Advisor AB IBO 2011 Credelity Capital AB
Fiskarhedenvillan AB 2007 Private investors Polaris Private Equity IBO 2012 Litorina IV L.P.
                                                                                                                                                      Christian Dyvig (Private Investor);Michael Hauge
Fristads Kansas Group 2005 Axcel IK Investment Partners Limited SBO 2015
                                                                                                                                                        Sorensen (Private Investor)
Frosunda Omsorg AB 2007 Praktikertjänst Polaris Private Equity IBO 2010 Hg
Grycksbo Paper AB 2006 Stora Enso Accent Equity Partners AB IBO 2009 Arctic Paper SA
Hooks Hastsport AB 2011 Founders Accent Equity Partners AB IBO 2014 Alipes AB
Inflight Service Europe AB 2005 Founders CapMan Plc IBO 2009 Triton Partners
INR Nordic AB 2007 Founders Accent Equity Partners AB IBO 2010 CapMan Buyout IX Fund
Inwido AB 2004 Triton Ratos AB SBO 2014 IPO Investors
Isaberg Rapid AB 2006 Industrivärlden Segulah Advisor AB IBO 2009 Esselte AB
Joy Shop AB 2006 Founders Segulah Advisor AB IBO 2009 Joy Shop (MBO vehicle)
KGH Customs Services AB 2007 Private investors Procuritas AB IBO 2013 Bridgepoint Development Capital Limited
Lundhags Skomakarna AB 2007 Five seasons EQT Partners AB IBO 2012 Swix Sport AS
Max Matthiessen AB 2009 Government of Sweden Altor Equity Partners AB IBO 2014 Willis Towers Watson Public Limited Company
Menigo Foodservice AB 2006 ICA Gruppen Nordic Capital IBO 2010 Brakes Group
Metallfabriken Ljunghall AB 2003 Private investors CapMan Plc IBO 2014 Gnutti Carlo SpA
NEA Gruppen AB 2006 Investment Latour Segulah Advisor AB IBO 2010 Royal Imtech N.V.
Nefab AB 2007 Nordgren/Phil family Nordic Capital IBO 2014 Nordgren/Pihl family
Nils Hansson Logistics AB 2005 Private investors Nordstjernan AB IBO 2011 PostNord AB
OneMed AB 2006 Tamro CapMan Plc IBO 2010 3i Group Plc
Osby Glas AB 2012 Private investors Procuritas AB IBO 2015 Beijerinvest AB
PAX Electro Products AB 2005 Private investors Litorina Capital Advisors AB IBO 2013 Volution Group Plc
                                                          Stiftelsen för Teknisk Hjälp åt
Permobil AB 2005                  Nordic Capital IBO 2013 Investor AB
                                Handikappade
Piab AB 2006 Tell family Altor Equity Partners AB IBO 2015 EQT Partners AB
                                                      Praktikertjänst & Nacka
Proxima AB Nacka Narsjukhus 2007                  CapMan Plc IBO 2011 Aleris AB
                                Läkarkonsortium
San Sac AB 2008 Founder Priveq Investment IBO 2014 Accent Equity 2012 L.P.
Scan Coin AB 2010 Ovin family Segulah Advisor AB IBO 2015 Suzo-Happ Group, Inc.
Skanska Byggvaror AB 2012 Founder Polaris Private Equity IBO 2015 BYGGmax AB
                                                Fortum, Equinor, E.ON &
Swedegas AB 2009                  EQT Partners AB IBO 2015 Enagas S.A.;Fluxys SA
                                Orsted
Tactel AB 2009 Private investors FSN Capital Partners AS IBO 2015 Panasonic Avionics Corporation
Troax Group AB 2010 Gunnebo Group Accent Equity Partners AB IBO 2013 FSN Capital Partners AS

Note: List of LBO firms that have had an exit from above PE firms between the years 2008-2015 and
meet the criteria described in Section 3.1.

                                  32