ARE ACQUIRERS WILLING TO
PAY MORE FOR STRONG ESG
PERFORMANCE?

A STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL
AND GOVERNANCE PERFORMANCE ON EUROPEAN M&A
PREMIUMS AND ON ITS RELATIVE IMPORTANCE FOR TWO
ACQUIRER TYPES

NADINE KRANCK

SOFIE LEHTIMÄKI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance?

Abstract:
We examine whether environmental, social and governance (ESG) performance impacts
European companies’ deal premiums in 171 control bids during the past 10 years (2010-2019).
Our sample consists of bids where an acquirer is seeking a majority stake of a public target
firm for a transaction value exceeding USD 100 million. We test if ESG factors impact bid
premiums by conducting a regression on the premium offered and the target firm’s Refinitiv
ESG score (range 0-100). Our findings reveal that the highest ESG overall score is associated
with a 25.4 percentage point higher bid premium. We analyze each dimension of ESG
separately and find that all factors are significant and positively associated with the bid
premium, even after controlling for year, country and industry effects. In addition, we examine
the differences in willingness to pay between two acquirer types and find that financial buyers
on average pay less for firms with strong ESG performance in comparison to strategic buyers.
This leads to the finding that ESG characteristics matter more to strategic buyers.

Keywords:

   Mergers and Acquisitions, Takeover premium, ESG, CSR, Sustainability

Authors:

   Nadine Kranck (24011)
   Sofie Lehtimäki (23996)

Tutors:

   Håkan Thorsell, Visiting Researcher, Department of Accounting

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgments:

  We would like to thank Håkan Thorsell for his guidance and the Swedish House of
Finance for allowing us to use their databases.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Nadine Kranck and Sofie Lehtimäki, 2020
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

1. Introduction and Background
Mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”) impose significant financial and reputational risks for an
acquiring company. Numerous transactions in the past have failed due to material
environmental, social and governance (“ESG”) related issues overlooked during the due
diligence phase (Bain & Company, Inc., 2020). To reduce this risk, acquirers can integrate ESG
factors into their analysis when conducting due diligence on a target company. ESG
performance refers to a company’s overall performance, having considered all key issues that
can affect the company’s operations (PRI, 2018). A related concept is Corporate Social
Responsibility (“CSR”), companies’ voluntary integration of social and environmental aspects
into their business model and into stakeholder interactions (Cheng et al., 2014). We
acknowledge that academia has used different terms in the past when referring to the same
broader idea of sustainability in the business context, hence, in this paper we use the terms CSR
and ESG performance interchangeably.

Lack of responsible practices or weak ESG performance in a target company should be a
critical concern to most M&A acquirers because it can at worst lead to increased costs, issues
in integration or to the cancellation of the deal. From our sample of European takeover bids
that took place between 2010 and 2019, we were able to identify several cases where ESG
factors could have played an important role in the outcome of the transaction. A case in point
is the merger between Portugal Telecom (the target) and Brazil’s Oi (the acquirer) in 2014
where, post-bid announcement, news about misleading and inaccurate disclosures regarding
the target’s investments surfaced. Portugal Telecom had invested, without full board
                                                                                                                 1
consultation, EUR 897 million in short-term commercial paper issued by a company
controlled by the firm’s major shareholder. The investments were done after the target’s assets
were valued by the acquirer. Because of these investments, Portugal Telecom failed to disclose
the nature and amount of credit risk it was exposed to while in an active merger process. (U.S.
                                                                                                                 2
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2016). That this type of “self-dealing” transaction
(Johnson et al., 2000) could take place within the company without it surfacing could be a sign
of the target’s weak governance or even weak corporate culture.

To reduce the risk of a transaction failing, as in the case of Portugal Telecom, acquirers should
closely assess a target company’s ESG performance and CSR practices, as they could be
associated with lower reputational risk and less information asymmetry (Cui et al., 2018) in
merger negotiations. Moreover, some papers have suggested that CSR engagement represents
a source of strategic assets that can improve a company’s long-term competitiveness vis à vis
competitors (Qiao and Wu, 2019). By acquiring a target with strong ESG performance (“high-
ESG target”), the acquirer may be able to leverage the target’s CSR-knowledge and practices
and integrate them into their own business (Wickert et al., 2017). Target’s ESG performance
would, therefore, command a premium since it could ultimately improve the acquirer’s long-
term financial performance. However, the direction of the relationship between CSR and
financial performance is not clear. CSR engagement could, for example, be undertaken by a
high-quality target with financial slack that wishes to signal their quality to the acquirer through
their CSR spending (Lys et al., 2015) in order to find a buyer for their business. In this case the
potential M&A premium would reflect the target’s financial strength and not ESG
performance.

1
 Grupo Espírito Santo
2
 A self-dealing transaction is a type of “tunneling" activity, whereby controlling shareholders influence the
company to make related party transactions or receive excessive compensations (Johnson et al. 2000).

                                        3
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

The integration of ESG factors in the assessment of the target company can be problematic.
Lack of standardization in sustainability-related disclosures and the multitude of data providers
may complicate comparisons across companies. However, with the upcoming European Union
                                            3
(“EU”) Taxonomy classification system  and the recent EU regulations on sustainability-
related disclosures in the financial services sector (European Commission, 2020), it is likely
that the integration of ESG factors in mergers and acquisitions, both in deal valuation and in
overall risk assessment, will increase. Furthermore, in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic
and the implications thereof for companies’ human capital and overall operations, we expect
that the management of ESG issues will become a greater priority for investors globally.

We hypothesize that target’s ESG performance could represent an intangible asset if this
performance generates long-term strategic benefits to the acquirer. In this case, target’s ESG
performance should be positively associated with the bid premium. The main purpose of this
paper is to examine whether acquirers value target’s ESG performance in M&A transactions
and are willing to pay a premium for it. We define target’s ESG performance as ESG scores
                                                        4
(range 0-100) from the data provider Refinitiv . The four scores analyzed are the ESG Overall,
Environmental, Social and Governance scores. ESG Overall reflects a company’s performance
in each of the three ESG dimensions, accounting for industry relevance and country differences
(Refinitiv Ltd, 2020). We test whether target’s ESG performance is positively associated with
its bid premium by running an ordinary least squares (“OLS”) regression on the premiums
offered in 171 transactions during 2009-2019, where a European public company was targeted
by an acquirer seeking a majority stake. The findings from this first regression may have
implications for both target companies wanting to create shareholder value and for buyers
looking to sell their portfolio companies for profit.

In addition, we want to test whether two types of acquirers value target’s ESG performance
differently. Hence, we compare premiums offered by strategic buyers, acquirers that
consolidate target companies into their own business and financial buyers, investors looking to
create value by acquiring and selling companies (Gorbenko and Malenko, 2014). This analysis
allows us to establish which type of acquirer values target’s ESG performance relatively more.
We hypothesize that financial buyers’ value ESG factors relatively less compared to strategic
buyers, that may achieve efficiency gains or synergies through the acquisition of a high-ESG
target. The findings from the second regression can have implications for potential target
companies looking to be acquired and to the extent that they should engage in ESG practices.

Our hypotheses are formulated as the following:
 H1: Target’s ESG Performance is Positively Associated with the Bid Premium

 H2: Financial Buyers Pay Less for Targets with Strong ESG Performance in Comparison
 to Strategic Buyers
We find that all four ESG factors are significant and positively associated with bid premiums.
Out of the four factors, the target firm’s ESG Overall and Social scores have the largest impact

3
 “The Taxonomy Regulation (TR) (…) sets out the framework and environmental objectives for the Taxonomy,
as well as new legal obligations for financial market participants, large companies, the EU and Member States.
(…) The TR will be supplemented by delegated acts which contain detailed technical screening criteria for
determining when an economic activity can be considered sustainable, and hence can be considered Taxonomy-
aligned.” (European Commission, 2020, p.3).
4
  Refinitiv is the former Financial and Risk business of Thomson Reuters and Refinitiv’s ESG scores are a
continuation and replacement of the Thomson Reuters ASSET4 database (Refinitiv Ltd, 2020).

                                        4
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

on bid premiums. The results show that the highest ESG Overall score is associated with an
increase of 25.36 percentage points in the premiums offered in 171 European control bids over
the period of 2010 to 2019. This finding suggests that ESG performance is perceived as a source
of long-term strategic assets by acquirers, in line with the resource-based view of CSR.
Furthermore, after examining the differences in premiums offered by strategic and financial
buyers, we find that financial buyers, on average, pay less for firms with strong ESG
performance in comparison to strategic buyers. This leads to the finding that ESG
characteristics matter more to strategic buyers, which could be linked to strategic buyers’
efficiency gains in line with the synergy hypothesis.
1.1 Contribution
This study answers to the call by several researchers to explore how the different dimensions
of target’s ESG performance affect the acquirer’s decision on bid price (see: Gomes and
Marsat, 2018; Qiao and Wu, 2019). To our knowledge, most research in the field focuses either
on transactions globally (Gomes and Marsat, 2018) or on a single country, such as Israel (Chen
and Gavious, 2015). European transactions have not been analyzed separately. Considering the
implications of the upcoming EU taxonomy and recent regulations on ESG disclosures,
analyzing precedent transactions in the region could allow future research to make more
meaningful comparisons once the assessment framework and disclosure standardization are
fully in place. Moreover, we add a new layer to the analysis by looking at the four ESG factors’
importance to two different acquirer types, strategic and financial buyers in the post-financial
crisis era. This approach contributes to existing literature and is something that, to the best of
our knowledge, has not been analyzed before.
1.2 Delimitation
Our study analyzes how the four factors of ESG; Overall, Environmental, Social and
Governance performance, impact control bid premiums in the context of M&A transactions
with European targets during 2010-2019 and aims to complement and extend the paper by
Gomes and Marsat (2018). We use more recent data and instead of looking at global
transactions, limit the research to Europe, where previous research on ESG factors’ impact in
the M&A context is scarce. Moreover, we only look at control bids for public target companies
with a transaction value exceeding USD 100 million.

2. Related Literature
2.1 ESG Factors in Mergers and Acquisitions
Researchers from academia and asset management have analyzed the relationship between the
ESG profile of companies and their financial risk and performance with varying and
inconclusive results. The lack of consensus likely stems from differences in underlying ESG
data, applied methodologies and variations in the measurement of variables (Alshehhi et al.,
2018). However, a content analysis of 132 papers from top-tier journals finds that 78% of
publications report a positive relationship between corporate sustainability and financial
performance (Alshehhi et al., 2018), highlighting the significance of sustainability practices to
corporations.

Existing literature mainly focuses on the impact of sustainability in M&A transactions from
the acquirer’s perspective. Earlier research has found that the stock market rewards acquirers
for making socially and environmentally responsible investments (Qiao and Wu, 2019).
Moreover, Deng et al. (2013) find that mergers by high-CSR acquirers have a higher

                                        5
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

probability of success and a shorter time to completion. Furthermore, Wickert et al. (2017)
identify a recent trend that some large multinational companies acquire high-CSR targets as a
way of integrating CSR-related knowledge and practices into their own business. However, the
authors note that the acquisition of a high-CSR target may sometimes be more symbolic. Li et
al. (2020) find that strategic investments into green sectors or activities, even called “green
M&A”, can allow companies with high emissions to attain more access to resources, as well
as, lesser financing constraints and tax liabilities. The authors suggest this effect could
represent a regain of organizational and regulatory legitimacy.

In the field of mergers and acquisitions, some papers point towards no relationship between
ESG performance and deal valuation. Chen and Gavious (2015) find that acquirers in M&A
transactions are unaffected by the target firm’s CSR rating after analyzing 134 Israeli M&A
transactions. Other papers, however, find a positive association. Gomes and Marsat (2018) find
that CSR is indeed valued by acquirers in M&A transactions and is positively associated with
bid premiums for a sample of 588 global M&A transactions over the 2003-2014 period. Qiao
and Wu (2019) make a similar finding – through examining 252 cross-border acquisitions
between 1991 and 2016 they find that acquirers are more likely to pay a higher acquisition
premium when acquiring a socially responsible target firm. The authors ascertain that the effect
is weakened as institutional distance, cultural distance and the number of related acquisitions
increase.
2.2 Strategic and Financial Buyers
Following Gorbenko and Malenko (2014), we define strategic buyers as companies in a type
of business related to that of the target firm, such as competitors, suppliers or customers,
typically looking for long-term acquisition opportunities that can provide operational synergies
with their own business. Financial buyers are investors looking to generate high cash flows by
acquiring undervalued targets, reorganizing them and selling them after the holding period.
Most financial buyers operate as private equity (“PE”) firms.

Traditionally, research papers have focused on ulterior motives, such as synergies and
managerial empire building, as explaining the overpayments by strategic buyers relative to
private equity acquirers. However, the difference in what public firms or strategic buyers are
willing to pay for targets can also be linked to efficiency motives (Svetina, 2012).

Some researchers have, nonetheless, found an insignificant or nonexistent difference in
premiums between the two acquirer types. For example, Fidrmuc et al. (2012) find that the
takeover premium paid by financial buyers versus strategic buyers is not significantly different.
Financial buyers have, however, been shown to win M&A auctions (Gorbenko and Malenko,
2014).

Moreover, several researchers have shown that strategic and financial buyers engage in
transactions with different target and deal characteristics (see for example Fidrmuc et al., 2012;
Svetina, 2012; Gorbenko and Malenko, 2014) leading to a potential selection bias in
comparisons. Fidrmuc et al. (2012) show that private equity buyers tend to pursue targets with
relatively high tangible assets, low market-to-book ratios and low research and development
expenses, while strategic buyers pursue targets with growth prospects and high levels of
intangible assets. Gorbenko and Malenko (2014) find that financial buyers tend to acquire
targets with relatively higher recent cash flows than strategic buyers and pursue
underperforming target firms with value generation potential through a reorganization.

                                        6
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

3. Theoretical Framework
3.1 Purpose of CSR and ESG

3.1.1 Positive Views on CSR
There are several competing perspectives on corporate responsibility and sustainability. On the
positive side of the spectrum, the resource-based view sees CSR as an intangible strategic asset
that can give a company a sustained competitive advantage over competitors. The advantage
could come in the form of improved financial performance, allowed by a more positive
reputation. Strong ESG performance could also make the company attract top talent. In
addition, an acquirer targeting a high-ESG company can more easily secure acquisition
financing and better financing terms (Qiao and Wu, 2019). We therefore hypothesize that
companies acquiring high-ESG targets should be able to see an improved post-acquisition
financial performance.

Porter and Kramer (2011) introduced the concept of creating shared value (“CSV”), arguing
that a firm’s ethical behavior and its profits do not need to be mutually exclusive since their
competitiveness and the surrounding society are inter-reliant. Similar to the CSV concept, the
stakeholder-based view states that a company that is more engaged with all their stakeholders
is better supported for their operations and this increase in support should lead to improved
financial performance (Godfrey et al., 2009; Deng et al., 2013). In the event of negative
company news, a company that has strong engagement with stakeholders could receive less
severe negative reactions, thanks to the “goodwill” that CSR produces (Godfrey et al., 2009).
We therefore expect that acquisitions of high-ESG target companies should be better supported
by all stakeholders and should have a higher probability of success. The institutional theory
proposes that a high-ESG company has more legitimacy and a better reputation in the eyes of
their stakeholders (Qiao and Wu, 2019). We predict that this should lead to less asymmetric
information between the acquirer and the target. Finally, the signaling hypothesis of CSR
suggests that CSR expenditures are a signal of a company’s financial prospects (Lys et al.,
2015). It is possible that a financially strong target undertakes CSR expenditures in order to
signal their “quality” to potential acquirers.

3.1.2 A Negative View on CSR
The most widespread negative argument against CSR engagement or ESG performance was
put forward by Friedman (1970) who stated that the core of a company’s purpose should simply
be to create value for shareholders – firms should focus on what they are good at and serve
their own self-interest, leading to an efficient allocation of resources and creation of wealth in
society. This argument is linked to the shareholder expense view that sees CSR as a cost that
is ultimately carried by the shareholders and predicts that CSR results in a competitive
disadvantage (Deng et al., 2013). According to this view, CSR should be linked with a decrease
in the post-acquisition operating performance of the acquirer and the takeover should be less
supported by shareholders.

                                        7
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

3.2 Takeover Premiums

3.2.1 General Theories of Takeover Premiums
Several theories (see e.g. Roll, 1986; Schwert, 1996) have been suggested when trying to
explain the emergence of premiums in the context of mergers and acquisitions. A significant
number of papers suggest synergies as the key driver of the price differential between target
company’s market price and the bid price offered by the acquirer. Synergies refer to the
expected net benefit that the acquirer and the target can extract after combination. Synergies
can for example be operational, in the form of cost savings, and financial, in the form of
increased debt capacity. According to the synergy hypothesis, a bidder chooses a price and is
willing to pay a premium over target’s market value up to the level of expected net benefits
from the business combination (Walkling and Edmister, 1985).

Another theory that is often linked to M&A premiums is the agency cost theory that highlights
the inherent conflict of interest between the acquirer management and the company’s
shareholders. Agency cost theory has been suggested to lead to overpayments for the target by
the acquirer (Schwert, 1996) and to acquirers taking on value-destroying acquisitions as a way
of “empire building” for increased power and prestige (Jensen, 1986). Moreover, sometimes
irrational behavior can explain premiums. The hubris hypothesis theorizes that the acquirer
management is overconfident in their ability to correctly value the target firm (see Roll, 1986)
and ends up paying too much. A connected theory, the winner’s curse, can also be applied to
explain a bid contest where the winner is the bidder with the highest bid and has likely
overvalued the target company the most, hence the high bid premium (Varaiya and Ferris,
1987). Furthermore, bargaining power by both the target and the acquirer has been suggested
to drive up bid prices and premiums. For example, an acquirer with a significant toehold in the
target company pre-bid announcement can be able to bargain a lower price (Walkling and
Edmister, 1985).

3.2.2 Premium Measurement
Several studies explore the reasons for why M&A premiums appear and the ways to measure
them. Schwert (1996) finds support for the markup pricing hypothesis, which implies an
increase in the final bid price because of the runup in target firm’s share price prior to the
                                                        nd
announcement. His findings show that around the 42  trading day prior to bid announcement,
target’s cumulative average abnormal returns start to increase. Therefore, we measure the
                                                                                                                 5
premium by dividing the bid price, as reported in Securities Data Company (“SDC”) Platinum
database, by target’s prevailing share price 42 trading days prior to the deal announcement. We
expect this measure to be less confounded by potential leakage of information, in line with
Schwert’s (1996) findings. Other papers have also used 42 days to calculate the offer premiums
(see for example Betton et al., 2014; Dionne et al., 2015).
3.2.3 Control Bids
A control premium occurs when an acquirer pays more for a controlling stake in a target firm
than the target firm’s market value prior to the deal announcement. A control premium, by
definition, should equal the total value of the benefits that the acquirer can enjoy from holding
a controlling stake. Control means that the owner can make decisions on important company
matters because of its significant ownership stake and attached voting rights (Nenova, 2003).

5
 SDC is a major database for global M&A transactions and widely used in research in finance.

                                        8
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Hence, we focus on control bids, bids where the acquirer owns less than 50% of the target
company and is seeking to acquire at least 50% of target shares, this definition follows Betton
et al. (2014). Furthermore, if the acquirer is already a controlling shareholder in the target firm,
they may not have the same incentives to accept or reject a bid as other non-controlling
shareholders (Ayers et al., 2003), hence we exclude transactions where the acquirer already
owns 50% of the shares.

4. Data
4.1 Data Retrieval
We look at completed and uncompleted European M&A transactions over the period 2010-
2019. The M&A data is taken from SDC. Target firm financials and ESG scores were taken
from Refinitiv. Refinitiv is the former Financial and Risk business of Thomson Reuters and
Refinitiv’s ESG scores are a continuation and replacement of the Thomson Reuters ASSET4
database, that has been widely used in finance research.

Criteria:
    - Target Region: Europe
    - Deal size: Exceeding USD 100 million
    - Target has public status
    - Percent of shares acquirer is seeking to purchase in the transaction at least 50% (control
        bids) and owned before the transaction less than 50%
   - Excluded: financial firms, following standard practice
    - Deal form: Merger, Acquisition of majority stake, Acquisition of remaining interest
           o Deal is not a mandatory tender offer, corporate reorganization, debt
                restructuring or spinoff
   - Target and Acquirer need to be identifiable
    - No subsequent bids of a given bid contest (as defined below)
    - Payment consideration not contingent on an underlying asset price (such as the price of
       a commodity)

We only look at control bids on public targets since publicly traded firms disclose the bid
premium offered by the acquirer. The deal size should exceed USD 100 million. We select this
size group because Refinitiv (2020) mentions that companies with large market capitalizations
tend to attract more media attention, potentially leading to biases when compared with smaller
firms. Furthermore, the acquirer firm must be identifiable to be included in our sample. We
look at both cash and stock-financed transactions. The bid must specify the terms of the
proposal clearly enough so that the premium of the bid price relative to target’s share price 42
trading days prior to bid announcement can be easily calculated, i.e. any bid price that is
contingent on some uncertain, underlying asset price (such as a commodity derivative) will be
removed from the sample. Stock-financed transactions’ implied offers per share are valued
based on the acquirer’s share price in the last trading day prior to the announcement of the
terms.

To measure ESG performance, we use Refinitiv’s ESG database for the scores. We use “ESG
Overall scores”, that are calculated based on verifiable reported data in the public domain and
provide a more comprehensive evaluation of a company’s overall sustainability efforts
(Refinitiv Ltd, 2020). In Refinitiv’s methodology, the scores are based on relative performance
within the firm’s sector for the environmental and social dimensions and within the firm’s

                                        9
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

country of incorporation for the governance dimension. For each industry, key ESG issues are
identified and materiality is defined as category weights. Companies are assessed based on
their exposure to these issues and how well they manage them (Refinitiv Ltd, 2020). Moreover,
we look at the three different dimensions of ESG; Environmental, Social and Governance
scores, separately. For detailed descriptions of the scoring methodology, please see Appendix
1 and 2.

We download a list of M&A transactions in Europe and focus on countries belonging to the
European Economic Area (“EEA”) including United Kingdom and Switzerland. Our initial
sample consists of 1,006 transactions. We remove two transactions that did not meet the criteria
of being control bids and 75 transactions for which SDC did not have information on bid offers,
leaving us with 929 transactions. Furthermore, we filter by deal form and only include mergers,
acquisitions of majority interests and acquisitions of remaining interests, as control bids are
typically categorized under these deal forms in the SDC database (889 remaining transactions).
We follow standard practice and exclude targets that are financial firms from our sample and
thereafter have 707 remaining transactions.

Subsequently, we pair target firms with Refinitiv’s ESG data and remove the firms for which
no such data is available, yielding a sample of 220 deals with ESG scores. Each ESG score is
taken from the previous fiscal year-end prior to the acquisition announcement date. We include
both completed and uncompleted deals in our sample. We then manually check each of the 220
transactions with basis in first-hand sources such as companies’ press releases and stock market
announcements, where we particularly look for announcement dates, offers per share and
percentages of shares sought in the transaction. Thereafter, we exclude all mandatory tender
offers because they can increase takeover costs and reduce competition for a target company
(Rossi and Volpin, 2004), potentially leading to biased estimates of premiums. Also, corporate
reorganizations, debt restructuring transactions and spinoffs are excluded since these do not
meet the definition of a typical control bid. A total of 14 transactions are excluded in this step.

Because of the small sample size, we do not want to include several bids for the same target
firm from the same bid contest, as this could skew the results. Thus, we choose to only look at
the first transaction (by looking at the date announced as reported in the SDC database) for a
given target company if there are no bids for the same target in the preceding 6 months. All
subsequent control bids (20 transactions or bids in our sample) for the same target within 6
months of a previous bid are viewed as being part of the same “bid contest” and thus removed.
We define a bid’s length as the time between the announcement and either the completion or
withdrawal date of the bid. This is consistent with the definition of an initial offer by Betton et
al. (2014). However, for simplicity, we use the bid prices as reported by SDC and we
acknowledge that they may not always be the first bid price by a given bidder but rather their
final bid in that given contest.

Moreover, transactions for which stock-price or financial data is not available (7 transactions)
are removed. We identified 6 companies for which the share price data in Eikon’s data base
was incorrect due to events such as stock splits, so these transactions were removed. Finally,
one transaction is removed since the acquirer is undisclosed and, thus, the acquirer type
(strategic or financial buyer) cannot be determined and one transaction where part of the offer
price is contingent on a commodity derivative and, hence, uncertain. Our final sample consists
of 171 transactions. The full data retrieval process is included in Appendix 3.

                                        10
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

The final distribution of our sample is provided in tables 1, 2 and 3. 38.6% (66 of 171) of the
bids in our sample took place between 2010 and 2014 and 61.4% (105 of 171) of the bids
between 2015 and 2019. Increased M&A activity in recent years represents general industry
trends (Bain & Company Inc., 2020). We also suggest that the number of ESG-rated companies
in Europe has increased in the most recent period. We could identify a trend suggesting this
from analyzing the underlying ESG data for all rated European companies in Refinitiv’s
database.

 Table 1
 Sample Distribution by Year
            Number      Proportion     Avg.     Avg. ESG       Avg.        Avg.         Avg.
            of Deals       of Deals    Premium     Overall     Environmental    Social      Governance
                            (%)         (%)        Score         Score        Score         Score
 2010 15 8.77 36.42 37.12 35.79 39.36 36.78
 2011 14 8.19 42.59 45.11 39.87 45.15 48.76
 2012 11 6.43 34.76 48.27 49.37 49.28 45.70
 2013 9 5.26 45.44 43.94 40.69 46.18 44.03
 2014 17 9.94 30.18 49.38 46.08 49.41 52.66
 2015 19 11.11 41.54 49.58 44.84 56.02 44.20
 2016 17 9.94 42.49 51.02 51.63 57.94 43.50
 2017 22 12.87 27.92 49.34 45.50 50.07 51.15
 2018 19 11.11 32.84 53.38 43.31 55.54 56.98
 2019 28 16.37 34.43 51.00 41.34 54.18 54.38
 Total 171 100.00 36.86 47.81 43.84 50.31 47.81
 The table presents summary statistics of the final sample of deals by year, average premium paid and the average
 ESG scores, where year refers to the year the deal was announced. The ESG Overall score, takes into account the
 Environmental, Social and Governance ESG dimensions. The scores can according to the ESG Refinitiv database
 vary between 0-100 and are collected at the previous fiscal year-end prior to the acquisition.

From Table 2 can be concluded that most of targets are UK-based (53.8%). Furthermore, the
country that yields the highest average premiums in our sample is Portugal (56.7%), while the
highest average ESG scores are also found in Portugal on the Overall and Social factors.
However, the high numbers related to Portugal could be driven by outliers. The country with
the highest average Environmental score is Spain (82.65), while Belgium yields the highest
average Governance score (63.07). Table 3 shows that 64.3% of the targets operate in either
the manufacturing or service industry. The highest average premium is found in the
transportations and communications industry, while the utilities industry yields the highest
average scores across all ESG factors.

                                        11
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

 Table 2
 Sample Distribution by Target Country
               Number    Proportion     Avg.     Avg. ESG       Avg.        Avg.       Avg.
                of Deals     of Deals    Premium     Overall     Environmental    Social    Governance
                              (%)         (%)        Score         Score        Score       Score
 Austria 1 0.58 5.00 25.00 0.00 38.67 27.00
 Belgium 3 1.75 12.65 46.27 31.91 43.95 63.07
 Cyprus 2 1.17 31.82 20.00 20.35 11.74 31.33
 Denmark 2 1.17 24.13 50.90 45.64 53.09 56.24
 Finland 5 2.92 44.80 51.63 38.83 58.63 53.20
 France 11 6.43 16.47 62.38 59.43 62.62 61.53
 Germany 13 7.60 34.89 50.20 41.96 51.51 53.08
 Ireland 8 4.68 42.57 50.41 43.05 55.27 51.22
 Italy 3 1.75 30.74 37.44 14.42 39.25 56.23
 Luxembourg 1 0.58 43.93 29.86 15.53 32.43 50.85
 Netherlands 11 6.43 48.67 51.27 49.23 51.10 55.04
 Norway 2 1.17 -6.12 45.23 34.38 45.49 53.31
 Poland 1 0.58 16.39 52.83 56.10 44.91 57.55
 Portugal 2 1.17 56.68 73.19 77.02 85.60 46.35
 Spain 2 1.17 6.74 69.74 82.65 77.54 45.46
 Sweden 3 1.75 39.79 56.56 58.87 59.98 47.49
 Switzerland 9 5.26 46.80 49.96 46.67 56.30 43.61
 UK 92 53.80 37.70 45.91 42.29 48.71 45.49
 Total 171 100 29.65 48.26 42.13 50.93 49.89
 The table presents summary statistics of the final sample of deals by target country, average premium paid and
 average ESG scores. The ESG Overall score takes into account the Environmental, Social and Governance ESG
 dimensions. The scores can according to the ESG Refinitiv database vary between 0-100 and are collected at the
 previous fiscal year-end prior to the acquisition.

 Table 3
 Sample Distribution by Target Industry (2-Digit SIC Codes)
 SIC-      Number   Proportion      Avg.      Avg. ESG        Avg.         Avg.        Avg.
 Code      of Deals    of Deals      Premium      Overall     Environmental     Social     Governance
                         (%)          (%)         Score          Score         Score        Score
 10-17 17 9.94 32.28 44.70 40.44 48.15 45-03
 20-39 69 40.35 40.11 51.32 47.14 53.54 52.04
 40-48 23 13.45 44.76 50.29 47.40 52.01 50.99
 49 4 2.34 22.41 62.00 63.96 64.49 55.53
 50-59 17 9.94 29.08 44.44 37.91 49.64 42.69
 70-89 41 23.98 30.27 43.85 37.86 46.44 44.33
 Total 171 100.00 33.15 49.43 45.79 52.38 48.43
 The table presents summary statistics by target industry with basis in SIC-codes taken from the SDC Platinum
 database (each is defined below), average premiums paid for each industry and the average ESG scores for all
 industries. ESG Overall scores takes into account Environmental, Social and Governance ESG dimensions. The
 scores can according to the ESG Refinitiv database vary between 0-100, the scores are collected at the previous
 fiscal year-end prior to the acquisition.
 Industry Description of SIC Codes:
 10-17: Mineral industries and construction
 20-39: Manufacturing
 40-48: Transportation and communications
 49: Utilities
 50-59: Wholesale and retail trade
 70-89: Service Industries

                                        12
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

4.2 Control Variables
In order to control for other determinants of bid premiums we make limitations to our sample
and construct variables to account for target, acquirer and deal characteristics. We refer to the
financial variables at previous fiscal year-end prior to the announcement and the financial
numbers are denoted in US dollars unless otherwise stated. See Appendix 4 for further
information and expected impact of the control variables in the regression.

There are several factors known to impact bid premiums and we cannot account for all of them,
but we follow Gomes and Marsat (2018) in our selection of control variables that control for
target, acquirer and deal characteristics. However, we make a minor modification in the
selection of variables in comparison to their study by leaving out the Shareholder Protection
factor from our control variables because it was only found significant when specifically
looking at cross-border transactions. Furthermore, using a sample of 528 European M&A
transactions over the period 2000-2010, De La Bruslerie (2013, p.2106) concludes that
“transactions develop in a homogenous regulatory context in the European Union countries;
consequently, the external and institutional determinants weigh less.” Moreover, we believe
the potential effects of the Shareholder Protection factor will be controlled for using country
fixed effects as well as through the Governance factor, which Gomes and Marsat (2018) did
not include in their study. The Governance ESG score accounts for country-specific differences
because “governance practices are more consistent within countries” (Refinitiv Ltd, 2020).
4.2.1 Target Characteristics
Size

We define Size as the natural logarithm of market value of equity in thousands of USD, taken
at the end of the most recent fiscal year. Acquiring a controlling stake in a large, listed company
requires more capital, so there should be less competition for such stakes and presumably the
liquidity should be lower. Past research (see for example Comment and Schwert, 1995;
Schwert, 2000; Betton et al., 2014) identifies a highly significant negative effect of target size
on the deal premium and suggests that the higher integration costs associated with larger targets
could explain some of that effect. A reverse effect is found in other papers when a ratio of
target size to acquirer size is employed (Dionne et al. 2015). We expect Size to have a negative
association with bid premiums.

Market to Book Ratio
We calculate the Market to Book ratio (“MTB”) as market capitalization divided by net assets
(total assets subtracted by total liabilities), taken at the end of the most recent fiscal year. MTB
is expressed as a percentage. The MTB ratio is a proxy for target’s growth prospects and could
be positively associated with premiums if the acquirer can benefit from these new investment
opportunities (Dionne et al., 2015). However, Comment and Schwert (1995) suggest that
companies with low MTB ratios could also be undervalued by the market. Undervalued targets
may attract some acquirers if they are a possible source of synergies when managed by the new
acquirer. The authors find a negative effect of MTB on deal premiums. We expect MTB to
have an ambiguous effect on bid premiums.

Leverage
We define leverage as total debt divided by total assets, taken at the end of the most recent
fiscal year. The number is expressed as a percentage. Dionne et al. (2015) find a negative but

                                        13
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

not statistically significant coefficient for target debt. The authors state that targets with high
debt levels are less attractive and should therefore justify a lower premium. Target’s leverage
can also affect the acquirer’s ability to finance the acquisition. On the other hand, leverage
could also reflect monitoring activities undertaken by the target’s creditors (De La Bruslerie,
2013). However, Ayers et al. (2003) find a positive and significant coefficient for target
leverage. We expect Leverage to have an ambiguous effect on bid premiums.

Growth
We define Growth as the average growth in sales during the last three fiscal years prior to
announcement. If a company does not have sales numbers for one of those three fiscal years,
the average growth is calculated for the years that have reported numbers. Growth is expressed
as a percentage. The effect of target’s past sales growth on the deal premium could be
ambiguous. Poorly managed firms with financial restrictions may have an inferior position in
takeover negotiations, which could lead to a lower premium. On the other hand, a poorly
managed firm where the acquirer can realize gains from, for instance, changing the
management, could motivate a higher premium (Dionne et al., 2015). We expect Growth to
have an ambiguous effect on bid premiums.

Runup
We define Runup as the logarithm of the ratio of the share price of the target on the day before
the announcement to the share price 42 trading days prior to the announcement date. Runup is
expressed as a percentage. Schwert (1996) identifies the markup price and shows that around
       nd
the 42  trading day prior to a bid announcement, target firm’s cumulative average abnormal
returns start to rise. These 42 trading days prior to bid announcement are viewed as the runup
period. The average runup in target firm’s share price is about half of the premium paid in
successful takeovers while the other half is the increase in the price post-bid announcement
(“markup”). Betton et al. (2014) report that the 42-day runup is positive and significant on the
1% level on deal premiums. We expect Runup to have a positive association with bid
premiums.

Liquidity
We define Liquidity as current assets divided by current liabilities, taken at the end of the most
recent fiscal year. The number is expressed as a percentage. Target’s liquidity has been shown
to have a positive association with bid premiums. Ayers et al. (2003) find a positive but not
significant coefficient for target’s liquidity and state that this is in line with earlier research by
e.g. Comment and Schwert (1995) and Schwert (2000). We expect Liquidity to have a positive
association with bid premiums.

Research and Development
We define Research and Development (“R&D”) as research and development expenditures
divided by total assets, taken at the end of the most recent fiscal year. The number is expressed
as a percentage. R&D is a valuable intangible asset, as Laamanen (2007) shows that target’s
R&D investment-to-market ratios and R&D growth rate have a significant, positive coefficient
on deal premiums. Even so, target firms with high R&D investments carry the risk of
mispricing and of losing a competitive advantage, for example because of financial constraints
forcing the target firm to discontinue an R&D project (Lin and Wang, 2016). We expect R&D
to have a positive association with bid premiums.

                                        14
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Return on Equity
We define Return on Equity (“ROE”) as net income before extra items divided by common
shareholder’s equity, taken at the end of the most recent fiscal year. The number is expressed
as a percentage. Profitability measures target’s overall performance and can even be used to
assess the quality and effectiveness of target’s management in creating shareholder value (see
for example Varaiya, 1987). Conforming to the synergy hypothesis, an undermanaged firm can
be a source of synergies if it is better led under the acquirer’s management, resulting in a
negative association with bid premiums. Profitability is, on the other hand, also a measure of
target’s profit and cash flow generation ability, so the association could be positive (see for
example Ayers et al., 2003). We expect ROE to have an ambiguous effect on bid premiums.

Capital Expenditures
We define Capital Expenditures (“Capex”) as capital expenditures divided by total assets, taken
at the end of the most recent fiscal year. Gomes and Marsat (2018) mention that capital
expenditures could affect potential takeover synergies such as cost-reduction synergies through
optimization of production capacity. The authors find a negative coefficient for capital
expenditures. On the other hand, capital expenditures decrease the amount of free cash flows
generated by the target firm so the coefficient could be negative if the acquirer is a financial
buyer with a preference for companies with high recent cash flows (Gorbenko and Malenko,
2014) and better debt repayment capability. We expect Capex to have an ambiguous effect on
bid premiums.
4.2.2 Acquirer and Deal Characteristics
Blockholder
We add a dummy variable called Blockholder that is equal to one if the acquirer holds more
than 5% of the shares in the target firm prior to the deal announcement. The pre-acquisition
ownership in target is calculated as the difference between the percentage of shares acquired
in the transaction and the percentage of shares owned after the transaction by the acquirer, as
reported by SDC. Because of reduced information asymmetry, blockholders are expected to
offer lower premiums than buyers without significant pre-bid ownership (“toeholds”) in the
target firm. Dionne et al. (2015) find that premiums paid by uninformed buyers, buyers without
toeholds, are about twice as high as those by informed buyers and the difference is highly
significant. Moreover, acquiring firm’s toehold in the target firm has been linked to increased
bargaining power and lower premiums, shown by Walkling and Edmister (1985). We expect
Blockholder to have a negative association with bid premiums.

Hostile Transaction
We add a dummy variable called Hostile that is equal to one if SDC defines the transaction as
hostile. Hostile transactions have been shown to drive up acquisition bids. A transaction that is
perceived as threatening to some of the target shareholders is referred to as a hostile transaction,
whereas a friendly transaction is perceived to benefit both the target and the acquirer (Schwert
2000), for instance through synergies. Schwert (2000) finds evidence that hostile takeovers
may be used as a bargaining strategy by both the acquirer and the target to improve their
position in negotiations. The acquirer may be able to get target shareholders to pressurize the
management by announcing their intentions publicly and the target may be able to attract more
bidders by announcing the hostile offer, likely driving up the premium. We expect Hostile to
have a positive association with bid premiums.

                                        15
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Cash
We add a dummy variable called Cash that is equal to one if the transaction is fully paid in
cash. We define “fully paid in cash” as the percentage of cash, as reported by SDC, being over
97% if the payment method of the transaction consists of cash and/or dividends. Ayers et al.
(2003) find that cash offers are associated with higher premiums than stock offers and suggest
that shareholders demand a higher premium as compensation for having to pay immediate
capital gains taxes that could have otherwise been deferred if the payment method was all-
stock. Moreover, the positive relationship between full cash payment and deal premiums has
been shown in a sample of European transactions by De La Bruslerie (2013). The author links
this to the contractual approach of M&A terms, meaning that the payment method and the deal
premium are jointly set and agreed on. Contrary to the above-mentioned papers, Betton et al.
(2014) report a negative, though not significant, coefficient for Cash on offer premiums. We
expect Cash to have a positive association with bid premiums.

Competing Bidders
We add a dummy variable called Competing that is equal to one if there were competing
bidders for a specific target, as reported by SDC. Early research (e.g. Comment, Schwert 1995;
Walkling and Edmister, 1985) finds a positive association between the existence of competing
bidders and deal premiums and the returns to target shareholders. Work by Roll (1986) provides
a hubris hypothesis, implying that bidders in bid contests act irrationally and want to win no
matter the price. Another related explanation to increased premiums in bid contests is the
winner’s curse theory, that the bidder who bids the highest tends to win (Varaiya, Ferris 1987).
We expect Competing to have a positive association with bid premiums.

Crossborder Transaction
We add a dummy variable called Crossborder that is equal to one if SDC has defined the
transaction as cross-border, meaning that the target and acquirer are from different nations.
Asymmetric information may affect premiums cross-border transactions because of the
difficulty of valuing a foreign target and assessing its intangible assets across the borders.
Cross-border transactions can, however, also be a source of synergies (Lim et al., 2016). The
acquirer may be able to reap potential cost advantages in the target country or to gain access to
new markets, therefore motivating a premium. Moreover, the level of corporate governance
and shareholder protection in the acquirer and target country have been shown to impact deal
premiums. Bid premiums can be higher in target countries with strong shareholder protection
as the acquirers have to compensate for target shareholders who may get weaker protection and
corporate governance post-transaction (Rossi and Volpin, 2004). We expect Crossborder to
have a positive association with bid premiums.

Horizontal Transaction
We add a dummy variable called Horizontal that is equal to one if the acquirer and target have
the same primary SIC codes, as reported by SDC, meaning that they operate in the same
industry. By operating in the same industry, the target and acquirer could reap potential
operational synergies, which could motivate the higher premium (Walkling and Edmister,
1985). However, De La Bruslerie (2013) finds that industry relatedness does not have a
significant impact on deal premiums. We expect Horizontal to have a positive association with
bid premiums.

                                        16
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Financial Buyer
For the second regression we add the variable Financial Buyer “FB”, which is a dummy equal
to one when the acquirer is a financial buyer. We use SDC’s data item “Buyside Financial
Sponsor Activity” to determine this. Moreover, the combined FB and ESG variable “FB x
ESG” is added to the regression, indicating the incremental effect of the ESG score on financial
buyers. Gorbenko and Malenko (2014) find that financial buyers on average pay less for targets
than strategic acquirers. This could be linked to the synergy hypothesis, that strategic acquirers
pay more for targets when they can extract synergies (Walkling and Edmister, 1985). However,
Fidrmuc et al. (2012) do not find a significant difference in the takeover premium paid by
financial buyers versus strategic buyers. We therefore examine whether the type of acquirer,
strategic or financial, is associated with bid premiums. Furthermore, Gorbenko and Malenko
(2014) find that financial buyers target companies that are different from those targeted by
strategic acquirers. Therefore, we will investigate to which acquirer type the target’s ESG
performance matters more. We expect FB to have an ambiguous effect on bid premiums.
4.3 Data Validation
Since Refinitiv’s data is not based on consensus numbers, their assessment of companies’ ESG
performance can be subjective and involve human error. To validate our Refinitiv ESG ratings
we use two methods. Firstly, we download CSR ratings for our sample from CSRHub, a third-
party data provider that aggregates CSR and ESG data from socially responsible investing
research firms, indices, publications, “best of” and “worst of” lists, non-governmental
organizations, crowd sources and government agencies and creates consensus ratings for over
17,000 companies (CSRHub). The individual consensus ratings and percentile rankings that
CSRHub calculates for each company are compared to the whole company universe in
CSRHub’s database. Because the individual company ratings aren’t compared to industry or
country-peers, but instead to CSRHub’s company universe, they aren’t fully comparable to
Refinitiv’s percentile scores that benchmark each company against their industry- and country-
peers. Refinitiv’s scoring methodology could yield less biased comparisons across companies
since country and industry effects have been shown to affect companies ESG scores (Deng et
al., 2013).

We match the target companies from our final sample with ratings from CSRHub. Out of the
171 control bids 141 transactions could be paired with CSRHub’s Overall CSR ratings. Ratings
were taken for each target company from the most recent calendar-year before the deal
announcement. The correlation between Refinitiv’s ESG Overall scores and CSRHub’s
Overall CSR ratings for our sample is around 60% and the difference can most likely be
explained by the difference in the benchmarking method. See Appendix 5 for further
comparison of the two data providers.

Secondly, we take a random sample of 5 firms from our dataset and investigate the sources of
the ESG data from Refinitiv. Refinitiv allows you to look at all the data entries and investigate
that the numbers reported in their database match the numbers reported by the companies. The
sampled ESG data entries in Refinitiv’s database for the 5 firms matched the numbers reported
by the companies in their annual reports.
4.4 Limitations
Our sample includes several limitations. Firstly, we limit the analysis to control bids on public
targets in order to measure the M&A premiums and only look at deals valued at over USD 100
million. Furthermore, our sample is not balanced in terms of industries, countries nor acquirer

                                        17
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

types. In fact, 40.4% of our sample consists of manufacturing companies, shown in table 3 and
53.8% of the target firms are UK-based, as depicted in Table 2. In addition, only 35 of the 171
control bids in our sample were made by financial buyers. Our sample could also suffer from
sample selection bias, for example due to a lack of ESG data, like other research in the field
(see Gomes and Marsat, 2018; Qiao et al., 2019). Secondly, an obvious limitation since we are
looking at control bids is that the bid offers include a so-called control premium (Nenova, 2003)
that cannot be estimated with any generally acceptable model, which in turn, makes the
explanation of the variance in deal premiums more difficult. Thirdly, we consider the ESG
Overall, Environmental, Social and Governance scores as single composite indicators, however
they each cover many aspects that have differential impacts on bid premiums. Also, we are
only analyzing the target firm’s ESG score and not the acquirer’s. Finally, our underlying ESG
data includes inherent biases that cannot be overcome before ESG disclosures in filings are
standardized, allowing for more consistent assessment of companies’ ESG performance. The
lack of standardization complicates objective analysis since the rating agencies rely on survey
and disclosure data from companies.

5. Hypotheses and Method
5.1 Hypotheses
We have decided on hypotheses that provide us with two different perspectives on the potential
importance of ESG performance for bid premiums. Firstly, we test whether a target’s ESG
performance is positively associated with the bid premium. Secondly, we want to explore
whether two types of acquirers value target’s ESG performance differently. We compare
premiums offered by strategic and financial buyers in order to establish which type of acquirer
values target’s ESG performance more. Through the hypotheses we can assess the extent to
which target characteristics, such as ESG performance, acquirer characteristics and deal
characteristics impact the premiums offered in European M&A transactions.

The first hypothesis we want to explore is whether there is a positive relationship between a
target’s ESG score and the bid premium offered by the acquirer. In this field, research suggests
opposing results; Chen and Gavious (2015) find no relationship between deal valuations and
target’s sustainability, while Gomes and Marsat (2018) find a positive relationship between
M&A premiums and CSR performance. This yields our first hypothesis:

H1: Target’s ESG Performance is Positively Associated with the Bid Premium

Having explored whether ESG scores impact bid premiums, we furthermore want to study
whether there is a discrepancy between how different acquirer types value ESG. Gorbenko
and Malenko (2014) find that strategic buyers on average pay a higher premium for targets
than financial buyers. We wish to add another layer to their analysis and study whether the
ESG factor plays a role in determining how different acquirers value targets. Specifically, we
wish to examine whether financial buyers, such as private equity investors, are willing to pay
less for firms with strong ESG performance versus strategic buyers. This yields our second
hypothesis:

H2: Financial Buyers Pay Less for Targets with Strong ESG Performance in Comparison
to Strategic Buyers

                                        18
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

5.2 Method
The two hypotheses are tested through ordinary least squares (“OLS”) regressions. For an
OLS regression to be relevant for research, according to the Gauss-Markov Theorem, the data
must fulfill all of the following five assumptions: 1) linearity between dependent and
independent variables – established using the Ramsey Reset Test, 2) no multicollinearity –
using a variance inflation factor (“VIF”) test, 3) residuals need to be normally distributed –
through the Jarque-Bera test, 4) independence or lack of autocorrelation in residuals –
through the Breusch-Godfrey test, and lastly 5) homoscedasticity in residuals – established
through the Breusch-Pagan test. Through the tests mentioned, we find the following:
    1. Linearity: The Ramsey Reset test shows no linearity between the dependent and
         independent variables.
    2. Multicollinearity: A VIF-test has been conducted to check for multicollinearity, which
        showed no multicollinearity in the data.
    3. Normally Distributed Residuals: The Jarque-Bera test shows that the residuals are not
        normally distributed.
    4. Autocorrelation: Through the Breusch-Goodfrey test, we find that the residuals are
        autocorrelated.
    5. Homoscedasticity: The Breusch-Pagan test shows that the data is heteroscedastic.

Please find results of the statistical tests in Appendix 6. Due to the outcome of the tests, not all
five criteria are fulfilled for the OLS regression to be relevant for our analysis. This means that
there is a risk of extreme values in our data set, which could have a significant impact on the
results. The results could be biased and therefore not allow for meaningful interpretation. In
order to reduce the impact of biased values, robust standard errors will be used for all
regressions, making the models more conservative and reliable.

Given that we have a relatively small sample of 171 observations, we consider that outliers
may affect our results. We account for the potential outliers by winsorizing the top and
bottom 1% of the observations, in order to decrease the impact of extreme values on the
sample. Moreover, potential unobserved heterogeneity will be addressed by taking year,
country and industry fixed effects into account in all regressions. We follow Deng et al.
(2013) in including industry fixed effects. The relevance of industry fixed effects in M&A
transactions is due to mergers often clustering by industry, and consequently, CSR is affected
by the specific industry cluster. Significant differences between low-CSR and high-CSR
industry clusters were found, which need to be accounted for in the regressions when
analyzing ESG’s impact in the M&A context (Deng et al., 2013). The same is likely to be
true for year and country fixed effects, as their effects in previous research have been positive
and significant in describing premiums (Gomes and Marsat, 2018).

Lastly, two-stage least-squares (“2SLS”) regressions are applied on the main regression.
Firstly, with ESG Overall as the endogenous variable and, secondly, with ESG Overall and the
combined FB x ESG variable as endogenous variables, to further address any potential
endogeneity-issues, following Gomes and Marsat (2018).

                                        19
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

6. Results
6.1 Hypotheses

Hypothesis 1: Target’s ESG Performance is Positively Associated with the Bid Premium

Table 4 shows the summary statistics. The average bid premium is 36.14% with a standard
deviation of 26.83%, this is consistent with previous research and in line with the findings of
Gomes and Marsat (2018). The ESG Overall score, comprised of the underlying factors
Environmental, Social and Governance, has an average of 48.30 on a scale of 0-100 with a
standard deviation of 19.72%, slightly lower than the results yielded by the authors.

Of the four ESG factors, Social has the highest mean and median at 50.96 and 51.58. In Table
4 four significant outliers are observed by looking at the maximum value of Leverage, the
minimum value of ROE and the minimum and maximum values of MTB. The extreme values
related to the Leverage and ROE variables are results of the outliers having negative book
values of equity due to negative retained earnings, yielding exceptionally low ROE and high
                     6
Leverage numbers.  The minimum value of MTB has a negative book value of equity and,

6
 Transactions 1223 (Britvic) and 912 (Kabel Deutschland)

                                        20
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

                                                                                      7
therefore, greater liabilities than assets, making the ratio significantly negative.  Conversely,
the maximum MTB outlier has a low book value of equity and could be a result of
               8
overvaluation. To account for these extreme values, we winsorize 1% of the observations.

To assess the marginal impact of ESG on premiums, we run the following regression:

       𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐸𝑆𝐺𝑖 + 𝛽2𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽3𝑀𝑇𝐵𝑖 + 𝛽4𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽5𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖 + 𝛽6𝑅𝑢𝑛𝑢𝑝𝑖
                + 𝛽7𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽8𝑅&𝐷𝑖 + 𝛽9𝑅𝑂𝐸𝑖 + 𝛽10𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥𝑖
                 + 𝛽11𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽12𝐻𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽13𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ𝑖 + 𝛽14𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖
                + 𝛽15𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽16𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖 + 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠 + 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠
                + 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖
                                                                                              (1)

Table 5 shows the results of the regression. Our study finds that the ESG Overall variable is
positively associated with bid premiums on the 5% level and that the highest ESG Overall
score is associated with an increase in premiums offered by 25.36 percentage points.

In order to better understand the link between ESG performance and bid premiums, we study
the different dimensions of ESG to explore whether differences can be found in the different
dimensions’ impact on bid premiums. We therefore run the same regression with the different
ESG dimensions to get a comprehensive view of ESG’s marginal impact on premiums. Our
research shows that the Social ESG variable is significant on the 5% level, and the
Environmental and Governance variables on the 10% level. This is in line with previous
research; however, it differs from the findings of Gomes and Marsat (2018), who concluded
that Overall, Environmental and Social variables were each significant at the 1% level. The
differing results can be due to our relatively small sample size.

Given that our sample mainly consists of cross-border deals, it is evident that the Social factor
is of greatest importance of the underlying dimensions. Qiao and Wu (2019) show that target’s
CSR is positively associated and significant with deal premiums for a sample of 252 cross-
border transactions and that an acquirer is more likely to pay a higher premium when the
cultural and institutional difference is smaller. Gomes and Marsat (2018) found that the positive
incremental impact of social performance was significant for cross-border transactions.
Considering that around 3/4 of our European sample consists of cross-border transactions, our
results seem reasonable and in line with the authors. The remaining control variables are also
to a great extent in line with both papers.

As all the ESG dimensions are significant and have a positive association with the dependent
variable premium, this leads us to the conclusion that our first hypothesis is supported.

7
 Transaction 1137 (Actelion)
8
 Transaction 1160 (De La Rue Plc.)

                                        21
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

 Table 5
 ESG and Bid Premiums
                       Overall (1) Environmental (2) Social (3) Governance (4)
 ESG 0.2536** 0.1350* 0.2324** 0.1877*
 Size -0.0470* -0.0397 -0.0490* -0.0383
 MTB 0.0008 0.0009 0.0007 0.0009
 Leverage 0.2089 0.2178 0.2274 0.1785
 Growth -0.0050 -0.0057 -0.0065 -0.0042
 Runup 1.0010*** 1.0128*** 1.0205*** 0.9749***
 Liquidity 0.0161 0.0151 0.0191 0.0153
 R&D 0.8236* 0.8345* 0.8217* 0.7086
 ROE 0.0285*** 0.0276*** 0.0311*** 0.0250**
 Capex 0.0834 -0.0390 0.0726 0.0563
 Blockholder -0.2266*** -0.2292*** -0.2180*** -0.2262***
 Hostile 0.0530 0.0664 0.0481 0.0588
 Cash 0.0596 0.0515 0.0534 0.0595
 Competing 0.0087 0.0140 0.0138 0.0062
 Crossborder 0.0139 0.0229 0.0123 0.0226
 Horizontal 0.0275 0.0234 0.0280 0.0184
 Intercept 0.8178* 0.7992 0.7962 0.7481
 Year effects yes yes yes yes
 Country effects yes yes yes yes
 Industry effects yes yes yes yes
 Observations 171 171 171 171
 Prob > F 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
 Adjusted R-squared 0.3387 0.3245 0.3441 0.3319
 The table presents estimation effects of ESG on acquisition bid premiums. *, **, and *** refer to significance
 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence levels, respectively.

                                        22
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Hypothesis 2: Financial Buyers Pay Less for Targets with Strong ESG Performance in
Comparison to Strategic Buyers

In the second hypothesis we compare two acquirer types and their potential impact on
premiums offered in relation to ESG scores. We differentiate between financial buyers (“FB”)
and strategic buyers (“SB”), in order to investigate the hypothesis that financial buyers pay less
for targets with strong ESG performance than strategic buyers.

We conduct a summary on ESG scores depending on acquirer type (financial buyers or
strategic buyers) as depicted in Table 6. From Table 6 it is evident that FB on average acquire
firms with slightly lower ESG scores – which can be seen from a lower mean (44.22) with a
standard deviation of 20.73% in comparison to that of SB (49.34) with a standard deviation of
19.19%. Comparing the medians, it is even more evident that strategic buyers pursue target
firms with higher ESG scores as the median is 51.19 in comparison to financial buyers with a
median of 44.10.

Table 7 shows the acquirer summary statistics, where several differences in characteristics are
noticeable. On average strategic buyers offer a higher premium (37.66%) in comparison to
financial buyers (29.96%). Of the four ESG factors, the biggest difference is noticed in the
Environmental variable, with strategic buyers on average pursuing targets with a 7-percentage
point higher score. Moreover, the size of the target is slightly larger when acquired by a
strategic buyer than a financial buyer.

                                        23
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Having shown that strategic buyers on average both pursue firms with higher ESG scores as
well as offer higher premiums for firms in comparison to financial buyers, it is crucial for the
second hypothesis to further investigate whether there is a positive association between the two
– whether strategic buyers are willing to pay a higher premium for higher ESG-rated firms in
comparison to financial buyers. Therefore, we run the second regression, with Premium as our
dependent variable, with the same independent variables as in hypothesis 1. However, in this
regression we investigate whether the acquirer type affects the bid premium, and therefore add
the dummy variable “FB”, that is equal to 1 if the acquirer is a financial buyer and 0 if it is a
strategic buyer. Moreover, we add the combined ESG and FB variable “FB x ESG” in order to
capture any incremental impact of ESG performance for financial buyers.

We run the following second regression:

  𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝐹𝐵𝑖 + 𝛽2𝐸𝑆𝐺𝑖 + 𝛽3(𝐹𝐵 𝑥 𝐸𝑆𝐺)𝑖 + 𝛽4𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽5𝑀𝑇𝐵𝑖 + 𝛽6𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖
                  + 𝛽7𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑖 + 𝛽8𝑅𝑢𝑛𝑢𝑝𝑖 + 𝛽9𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽10𝑅&𝐷𝑖 + 𝛽11𝑅𝑂𝐸𝑖 + 𝛽12𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥𝑖
                   + 𝛽13𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽14𝐻𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽15𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ𝑖 + 𝛽16𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖
                  + 𝛽17𝐶𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽18𝐻𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑧𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑖 + 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠 + 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠
                  + 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑠 + 𝜀𝑖
                                                                                              (2)

Table 8 shows the results of the regression. What can be determined is that neither the FB
variable nor the combined FB x ESG variable are significant in the model, except in the
Governance score regression, where the interaction term between Governance ESG and FB is
significant at the 10% level.

                                        24
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

 Table 8
 Acquirer Type and Bid Premiums
                        Overall (1) Environmental (2) Social (3) Governance (4)
 FB 0.0507 -0.0463 0.0006 0.1088
 ESG 0.3128** 0.1398 0.2542** 0.2693**
 FB x ESG -0.2493 -0.0568 -0.1340 -0.3705*
 Size -0.0473* -0.0387 -0.0486* -0.0339
 MTB 0.0009 0.0009 0.0007 0.0010
 Leverage 0.2155 0.2264 0.2368* 0.1801
 Growth -0.0058 -0.0064 -0.0073 -0.0044
 Runup 0.9853*** 1.0008*** 1.0124*** 0.9335***
 Liquidity 0.0130 0.0116 0.0167 0.0126
 R&D 0.7428* 0.8196* 0.7731* 0.5049
 ROE 0.0272*** 0.0274*** 0.0304*** 0.0224**
 Capex 0.1009 0.0135 0.0842 0.0163
 Blockholder -0.2211*** -0.2228*** -0.2133*** -0.2250***
 Hostile 0.0315 0.0516 0.0305 0.0320
 Cash 0.0732 0.0640 0.0638 0.0818
 Competing 0.0173 0.0204 0.0235 0.0096
 Crossborder 0.0141 0.0170 0.0115 0.0152
 Horizontal 0.0134 0.0126 0.0161 -0.0027
 Intercept 0.7940 0.7755 0.7686 0.6771
 Year effects yes yes yes yes
 Country effects yes yes yes yes
 Industry effects yes yes yes yes
 Observations 171 171 171 171
 Prob > F 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
 Adjusted R-squared 0.3425 0.3237 0.3436 0.3468
 The table shows the estimation effects of acquirer type on bid premiums. *, **, and *** refer to significance at
 the 10%, 5% and 1% confidence levels, respectively. FB refers to the dummy variable “Financial Buyer”, while
 FB x ESG refers to the combined effect of the dummy FB and the ESG score for each dimension – Overall,
 Environmental, Social and Governance.

However, the FB x ESG variable has a negative effect on premiums in all regressions,
suggesting that if the acquirer is a financial buyer, there is likely a negative relationship
between the two. Our results can be interpreted as premiums decreasing by 24.93 percentage
points when the acquirer is a financial buyer and seeing to the highest possible ESG Overall
score. This leads us to the conclusion that the second hypothesis is supported – financial
buyers on average pay less for firms with strong ESG performance in comparison to strategic
buyers.
6.2 Addressing Potential Endogeneity
Since past literature fails to reach a consensus on the direction of the relationship between ESG
performance and financial performance (Alshehhi et al., 2018), we realize that our explanatory
variable, ESG Overall, may be endogenous and the OLS estimate a biased estimate of the
causal effect of ESG performance (Soytas et al., 2019). Endogeneity means that a variable
(ESG Overall) is correlated with other variables in the model or with the error term and could
be a result of unobservable omitted variable bias (Deng et al., 2013). It could be the case that
companies that are highly attractive command a premium because they are financially strong,

                                        25
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

allowing them to invest more in ESG practices and disclosures. There is also a possibility that
the ESG performance of a certain firm is impacted by other aspects outside of the firm, such
as the ESG performance of firms operating within the same industry or country (Gomes and
Marsat, 2018). When analyzing the results of the regressions, we need to make sure that our
outcomes are not results of reverse causality, which would imply endogeneity in our ESG
variable (Cheng et al., 2014).

To control that the ESG measure is not a proxy for other unobserved factors, we estimate
instrumental variable (“IV”) regressions and run a two stage least squares (“2SLS”) on the
regressions, in line with Gomes and Marsat (2018). While OLS estimates are derived from all
of the natural variation in a variable across the sample, IV estimates are only derived from the
variation attributable to the instrument. Instrumental variables yield consistent parameter
estimates, meaning that they converge to the population parameters as sample size is increased,
whereas OLS estimates aren’t consistent when sample size grows if there is endogeneity in the
given variable (Angrist and Krueger, 2001).

According to the key assumptions relating to an instrumental variable regression, we need to
select an instrumental variable that determines the assumed endogenous independent variable
(ESG Overall) but only affects the dependent variable (Premium) through its effect on the
independent variable (also known as the exclusion restriction). Furthermore, the IV should
have a strong relationship with the endogenous variable. We henceforth assume that ESG
Overall is the endogenous variable. For the second model we use two endogenous variables,
ESG Overall and FB x ESG, as they are both tied to the ESG Overall variable. Gomes and
Marsat (2018) state that “a firm’s CSR performance is impacted by the CSR performance of
other firms within the same industry-country pair, and by the CSR performance of other firms
in the same country over time.” Therefore, we follow Cheng et al. (2014) and Gomes and
Marsat (2018) when selecting the two instrumental variables; country-year mean of ESG scores
and country-industry mean of ESG scores, computed using the entire Refinitiv ESG database.

To assess whether the chosen IV:s are sufficient, we run a first-stage regression on ESG
Overall, the IV:s and all the control variables and conclude that both IV:s are significant and
positively associated with the endogenous variable. This result proposes that the instruments
explain any potential differences in ESG Overall. Moreover, we have controlled that the
correlation between the instruments and ESG Overall is sufficient, as well as performed tests
on the strength of the two instruments used. This was done through an IV regression on our
dependent variable with ESG Overall as the endogenous variable. The first-stage regression
gives us F-statistics on both instruments that are larger than 10, implying that the instruments
are valid estimators of ESG Overall and that the IV regression is likely to yield robust results.

The second-stage results of our 2SLS tests are shown in Table 9 for the first and second
hypotheses or models. What can be concluded from model 1 is that ESG Overall is positively
associated with premiums, which was also the case when previously running the regression
with ESG Overall as an exogenous variable.

                                        26
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

 Table 9
 ESG and Bid Premiums using 2SLS
                              Model 1 Model 2
                              Second Stage                    Second Stage
                                Overall                   Overall & FB x ESG
 ESG 0.9019 0.8975
 FB - -0.0065
 FB x ESG - -0.0498
 Size -0.0889* -0.0877
 MTB 0.0013 0.0013
 Leverage 0.2347* 0.2383*
 Growth 0.0013 0.0009
 Runup 0.9850*** 0.9798***
 Liquidity 0.0141 0.0127
 R&D 1.0830* 1.0613
 ROE 0.0301* 0.0306
 Capex 0.5395 0.5346
 Blockholder -0.2399*** -0.2373***
 Hostile 0.0058 -0.0008
 Cash 0.1034 0.1081
 Competing -0.0304 -0.0267
 Crossborder -0.0336 -0.0346
 Horizontal 0.0543 0.0485
 Year effects yes yes
 Country effects yes yes
 Industry effects yes yes
 Intercept 1.1026** 1.0860*
 Observations 171 171
 Prob > chi2 0.0000 0.0000
 R-squared 0.3893 0.3999
 The table presents estimation effects of ESG on bid premiums, with the use of instrumental variables and two-
 stage least-square (2SLS) regression for both models. Only the second-stage results are reported. *, **, and ***
 refer to significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence levels, respectively.

In model two, the second stage of the regression shows that ESG Overall is positively
associated with premiums while the interaction term between ESG and FB is negatively
associated with premiums, which was also concluded in our second hypothesis. Given that our
results are in line with the original regressions, albeit at lower significance levels, this would
lead us to the conclusion that our results do not suffer from endogeneity. Although, it is worth
mentioning that our IV regressions yield higher effects of ESG on Premiums, suggesting that
the explanatory power of our OLS tests is lower than expected and that the ESG Overall score
in fact yields a higher positive association with Premiums (Soytas et al., 2019). This implies
that our first hypothesis is even more strongly supported than previously concluded, ESG
performance and premiums are positively associated even after addressing endogeneity.

However, Angrist and Krueger (2001) point out that IV estimates are not unbiased and give
the most reliable results when working with large samples. An unbiased estimator’s sampling

                                        27
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

distribution would be centered around the parameter, no matter the size of the sample.
Considering our sample is rather small, consisting of only 171 transactions, the IV estimates
generated by the 2SLS regressions may be biased. Finally, the amount of bias in IV estimates
also depends on how well the key assumptions are met and we cannot control for how well we
meet the exclusion restriction.
6.3 Robustness Tests
For robustness purposes, we follow Gomes and Marsat (2018) and conduct additional tests
using only cash-deals and only completed deals, in order to assess whether our results can be
concluded as robust.

In our paper we consider deals that are both cash-only and stock financed. Our sample consists
of 96 transactions that are cash-only, accounting for 56.14% of the total sample. When running
the regressions on the first hypothesis with cash-only financed deals, we find that ESG is
positively associated with premiums in all regressions, indicating that no conclusions need
altering under this specification. Only the Environmental dimension is, however, significant
under the altered specifications, which could suggest that particularly in cash-only deals ESG
factors are not as important when explaining the premium offered. When running the cash-only
regression on the second hypothesis, all ESG dimensions are positive, while the interaction
term FB x ESG variable is negative, implying that our finding in the original second hypothesis
is supported – financial buyers offer a lower premium for strong ESG performance in
comparison to strategic buyers.

The second robustness test is conducted using only completed deals, as our final sample
includes both successful and unsuccessful deals. 118 observations are completed deals, i.e.
69% of the total sample. The results remain virtually the same as in the original regressions,
with some minor modifications, as some variables become more significant (Hostile and
Competing), while others lose significance (Blockholder) under the altered specifications.
Even though the ESG variables cannot be concluded as significant when only looking at
completed deals, they are all positively associated with premiums. In the second hypothesis,
the interaction term between ESG and FB remains negative under the altered conditions. Thus,
we reason that no conclusions need altering and that our results are robust.
6.4 Interpretation
From our analysis we find that all four ESG variables are positively associated and significant
in explaining bid premiums for our sample of control bids for European targets over the time
period 2010-2019. The finding that ESG factors have a positive association with premiums is
in line with Gomes and Marsat (2018), although our ESG variables are at lower significance
levels compared to their regression. Our finding is also more or less in line with Qiao and Wu
(2019) who find that the CSR variable was positively associated with premiums, and significant
at the 10% level. Their positive association was however very low, ranging from 0.001 to 0.005
in their different models. The differences between their findings and ours could be explained
by the different samples and data sources used, as they used KLD (today owned by MSCI) and
we used Refinitiv. Also, they could be explained by the different focal time periods, as they
examined a time period of 1993-2015. Referring to the discussions in the introduction section
of this paper, we suggest that the quality and magnitude of ESG data was inferior in the years
preceding 2010’s to the most recent period and that this could have impacted their results
negatively.

                                        28
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Looking at the control variables, we find that Growth is negative in our study, while Gomes
and Marsat (2018) find a positive coefficient. A possible reason for this is that companies in
our sample might be poorly managed and acquirers could be attracted to them as they could
realize gains through acquiring these companies (Dionne et al., 2015). Runup is exceptionally
high in our results in comparison to the study by Gomes and Marsat (2018), but at the same
significance levels. R&D is in our sample significant and high, while they find the coefficients
to be negative, a possible reason for this discrepancy in results might be that acquirers in our
sample value intangible assets more in comparison to the sample of Gomes and Marsat (2018).
Our sample may for example consist of relatively more strategic buyers who prefer targets with
high intangible assets (Fidrmuc et al., 2012).

Furthermore, a large difference between the two studies can be found in the Capex variable
that is positive in our sample, while negative in Gomes and Marsat’s (2018) study. A possible
explanation for this is the fact that most of the companies in our sample operate within
manufacturing and are likely to have high capital expenditures in new machineries or the like.
Therefore, it is likely that Capex yields a higher coefficient in our sample than in Gomes and
Marsat’s (2018), as their distribution of industries was more balanced and skewed towards the
service industry. Finally, the remaining control variables are in line with Gomes and Marsat
(2018), although some at lower significance levels. When comparing our regressions with
Gomes and Marsat (2018), we yield higher adjusted R-squared values with each of the
regressions using ESG Overall, Social, Environmental and Governance factors. The adjusted
R-squared values suggest that our sample is better described by the variables than their sample.
It could, however, also be the result of our sample being more homogenous, given our
limitations considering region, deal value and deal form.

The fact that ESG performance is positively valued in control bids by acquirers in our sample
can be explained by several prevailing theories in finance. That acquirers offer a higher
premium for high-ESG targets supports the resource-based view that CSR engagement or
strong ESG performance is a source of competitive advantages, allowing the acquirer to
improve their corporate image and reputation, attract future talent, as well as, secure more
external financing (Qiao et al., 2019). Acquirers could also target high-CSR companies in order
to increase the likelihood of the acquisition being successful and the post-acquisition
integration process being smoother as high-ESG companies’ stakeholders tend to be more
supportive of the company’s operations and the interests of such stakeholders tend to align
better together (Deng et al., 2013). This interpretation conforms to the stakeholder view of
CSR. Furthermore, strong ESG performance being linked to higher bid premiums could reflect
target’s lower reputational risk for an acquirer, in line with the institutional theory. A
contrasting explanation is that strong ESG performance of a target could be a sign of its
financial strength as the companies with additional cash may be incentivized to invest in ESG
initiatives in order to signal their quality to potential acquirers (Lys et al., 2015). In this case
the target’s financial strength and prospects would be valued by acquirers understanding the
signal, and not the target’s ESG performance.

Out of the three ESG dimensions, the coefficient of the Social factor is the most significant (at
the 5% level) in explaining bid premiums. There are several possible explanations for this.
Firstly, the social dimension of a target firm’s ESG performance could be viewed as a proxy
for the firm’s culture and its compatibility with the acquirer’s culture could make the pre- and
post-acquisition process smoother and increase integration (Deng et al., 2013). Secondly,
Gomes and Marsat (2018) find that the incremental impact of the social dimension is only
significant for cross-border transactions and suggest that cultural and regulatory differences

                                        29
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

can make the valuation of target’s assets and the relationship management with foreign
stakeholders more difficult. Considering that 134 of the 171 transactions in our sample are
cross-border, although most of them within Europe, our results seem to support their
suggestions.

The results of the second hypothesis, that financial buyers are willing to pay less for targets
with strong ESG performance in comparison to strategic buyers, seem to align with the findings
of Gorbenko and Malenko (2014). Firstly, we show that financial buyers, on average, are
willing to pay less for targets. This finding supports the synergy hypothesis, that strategic
acquirers can extract benefits from a high-ESG target, for example in the form of better
stakeholder engagement and, hence, increased financial performance. Financial buyers would
not be able to extract such synergies from target’s ESG performance and would therefore assign
a lower bid price. Furthermore, Gorbenko and Malenko (2014) find that the valuations of
financial buyers are negatively associated with the intangibles of the target. Our results
conform with their finding if ESG performance is perceived as an intangible asset, since the
incremental impact of ESG on financial buyers is negative.

As a concluding remark, we suggest caution in interpreting the results because the firms in our
final sample differ from the firms that we omitted from our original dataset from SDC because
they lacked data on ESG performance or on some of the other variables. In fact, the median
enterprise value, as reported by SDC, for the firms in our final sample is around USD 3.9 billion
and value of total assets USD 3.2 billion. The comparable numbers for the omitted observations
are only around USD 0.6 billion and USD 0.6 billion. This could be a sign of wealthier firms
having the resources to invest in ESG initiatives, whereas, smaller firms without such resources
are omitted from the sample. When taking this potential bias into account, our findings appear
to support the signaling theory of CSR engagement.

7. Conclusion
The results of our analysis show that acquirers value target firms’ ESG performance and that
there is a positive association between ESG performance and bid premiums. Our findings are
robust after controlling for country, year and industry fixed effects and after controlling for the
endogenous relationship between the ESG Overall score and bid premiums. In addition, we
find that target’s ESG Overall and Social factors are the most significant, a possible explanation
being that our sample mostly consists of cross-border deals, for which social factors such as
human capital and stakeholder networks have been shown to be important. Furthermore, we
find that different acquirer types value ESG differently, as financial buyers, on average, are
willing to pay less for targets with strong ESG performance.

Our findings can be applied in many contexts. Firstly, one implication of our results for the
shareholders of listed European companies is the potential upside that they can gain in a public
takeover situation. Our study suggests that target companies can create significant wealth for
shareholders through improved ESG performance by, for instance, investing more in
sustainability initiatives and increasing their disclosures. This value creation could be increased
by as much as 25.36 percentage points for shareholders in a potential public takeover.
Secondly, smaller companies looking to be acquired may even benefit from the positive link
between ESG performance and bid premiums. By becoming more sustainable, they could
become more attractive targets and thereby increase the probability of being acquired for a
premium. Thirdly, the findings suggest that companies who efficiently integrate
environmental, social and governance aspects into their operations are valued higher by

                                        30
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

acquirers in M&A transactions. Financial buyers may benefit from this observation by
improving their portfolio companies’ ESG performance during the holding period and, thereby,
realize higher valuation multiples at exit.

Given the relevance of ESG factors in mergers and acquisitions, as highlighted by the empirical
evidence, as well as the upcoming EU taxonomy, we suggest that companies’ environmental,
social and governance performance will play an even more important role in Europe, going
forward. Future research on the area could further analyze the subcomponents of each ESG
dimension and how they impact deal valuations across different industries. Moreover, the
impact of the acquirer’s ESG performance on bid premiums and on target’s willingness to
accept the bid could be an area of future research.

                                        31
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

8. References
8.1 Articles and Academic Papers
Alshehhi, A., Nobanee, H. and Khare, N. (2018), "The Impact of Sustainability Practices on
      Corporate Financial Performance: Literature Trends and Future Research Potential",
     Sustainability, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 494.
Angrist, J.D. and Krueger, A.B. (2001), "Instrumental Variables and the Search for
     Identification: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments", The Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 69-85.
Ayers, B.C., Lefanowicz, C.E. and Robinson, J.R. (2003), "Shareholder Taxes in Acquisition
     Premiums: The Effect of Capital Gains Taxation", Journal of Finance, Vol. 58, No. 6,
     pp. 2783-2801.
Betton, S., Eckbo, B.E., Thompson, R. and Thorburn, K.S. (2014), "Merger Negotiations
     with Stock Market Feedback", Journal of Finance, Vol. 69, No. 4, pp. 1705-1745.
Chen, E. and Gavious, I. (2015), "Does CSR have different value implications for different
     shareholders?", Finance Research Letters, Vol. 14, pp. 29-35.
Cheng, B., Ioannou, I. and Serafeim, G. (2014), "Corporate social responsibility and access to
     finance", Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 1-23.
Comment, R. and Schwert, G.W. (1995), "Poison or placebo? Evidence on the deterrence and
    wealth effects of modern antitakeover measures", Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
     39, No. 1, pp. 3-43.
Cui, J. and Na, H. (2018), "Does Corporate Social Responsibility Affect Information
     Asymmetry?", Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 148, No. 3, pp. 549-572.
De La Bruslerie, H. (2013), "Crossing takeover premiums and mix of payment: An empirical
     test of contractual setting in M&A transactions", Journal of Banking & Finance, Vol. 37,
     No. 6, pp. 2106-2123.
Deng, X., Kang, J. and Low, B.S. (2013), "Corporate social responsibility and stakeholder
     value maximization: Evidence from mergers", Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
     110, No. 1, pp. 87-109.
Dionne, G., La Haye, M. and Bergerès, A. (2015), "Does asymmetric information affect the
    premium in mergers and acquisitions?", Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
     canadienne d'économique, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 819-852.
Fidrmuc, J.P., Roosenboom, P., Paap, R. and Teunissen, T. (2012), "One size does not fit all:
     Selling firms to private equity versus strategic acquirers", Journal of Corporate
     Finance, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 828-848.
Friedman, M. (1970), The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. The New
    York Times Magazine.
Godfrey, P.C., Merrill, C.B. and Hansen, J.M. (2009), "The relationship between corporate
     social responsibility and shareholder value: an empirical test of the risk management
     hypothesis", Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 425-445.

                                        32
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Gomes, M. and Marsat, S. (2018), "Does CSR impact premiums in M&A transactions?",
     Finance Research Letters, Vol. 26, pp. 71-80.
Gorbenko, A. and Malenko, A. (2014), "Strategic and Financial Bidders in Takeover
     Auctions", Journal of Finance, Vol. 69, No. 6, pp. 2513-2555.
Jensen, M.C. (1986), "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers",
     The American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 2, pp. 323-329.
Johnson, S., La Porta, R. and Shleifer, A. (2000), "Tunneling", The American Economic
     Review, Vol. 90, No. 2, pp. 22-27.
Laamanen, T. (2007), "On the role of acquisition premium in acquisition research", Strategic
     Management Journal, Vol. 28, No. 13, pp. 1359-1369.
Li, B., Xu, L., Mciver, R., Wu, Q. and Pan, A. (2020), "Green M&A, legitimacy and risk‐
     taking: evidence from China’s heavy polluters", Accounting & Finance, Vol. 60, No. 1,
     pp. 97-127.
Lim, J., Makhija, A.K. and Shenkar, O. (2016), "The asymmetric relationship between
     national cultural distance and target premiums in cross-border M&A", Journal of
     Corporate Finance, Vol. 41, pp. 542-571.
Lin, J. and Wang, Y.(. (2016), "The R&D Premium and Takeover Risk", Accounting
     Review, Vol. 91, No. 3, pp. 955-971.
Lys, T., Naughton, J.P. and Wang, C. (2015), "Signaling through corporate accountability
     reporting", Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 60, No. 1, pp. 56-72.
Nenova, T. (2003), "The value of corporate voting rights and control: A cross-country
     analysis", Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 68, No. 3, pp. 325-351.
Porter, M.E. and Kramer, M.R. (2011), "Creating shared value: How to reinvent capitalism
    and unleash a wave of innovation and growth", Harvard Business Review, Vol. 89, No.
     11, pp. 62-77.
Qiao, L. and Wu, J. (2019), "Pay for being responsible: The effect of Target Firm's corporate
     social responsibility on cross-border acquisition premiums", Sustainability
     (Switzerland), Vol. 11, No. 5. doi:10.3390/su11051291
Roll, R. (1986), "The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers", The Journal of
     Business, Vol. 59, No. 2, pp. 197.
Rossi, S. and Volpin, P.F. (2004), "Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions",
     Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 74, No. 2, pp. 277-304.
Schwert, G.W. (2000), "Hostility in Takeovers: In the Eyes of the Beholder?", Journal of
     Finance, Vol. 55, No. 6, pp. 2599-2640.
Schwert, G.W. (1996), "Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions", Journal of Financial
     Economics, Vol. 41, No. 2, pp. 153-192.
Soytas, M.A., Denizel, M. and Durak Usar, D. (2019), "Addressing endogeneity in the causal
     relationship between sustainability and financial performance", International Journal of
     Production Economics, Vol. 210, pp. 56-71.

                                        33
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Svetina, M. (2012), "Managerial Motives in Mergers: Propensity Score Matching Approach",
     Managerial and Decision Economics, Vol. 33, No. 7-8, pp. 537-547.
Varaiya, N.P. and Ferris, K.R. (1987), "Overpaying in Corporate Takeovers: The Winner's
     Curse", Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 43, No. 3, pp. 64-70.
Varaiya, N., Kerin, R.A. and Weeks, D. (1987), "The relationship between growth,
     profitability, and firm value", Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 8, No. 5, pp. 487-
    497.
Walkling, R.A. and Edmister, R.O. (1985), "Determinants of Tender Offer Premiums",
    Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 27-37.
Wickert, C., Vaccaro, A. and Cornelissen, J. (2017), "“Buying” Corporate Social
     Responsibility: Organisational Identity Orientation as a Determinant of Practice
     Adoption", Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 142, No. 3, pp. 497-514.
8.2 Websites
CSRHub.com, (2020). CSRHub’s Official Website. [Online]. Available at:
    https://www.csrhub.com/ (Accessed 10 May 2020)
NAICS.com, (2020). NAICS & SIC Crosswalks. [Online]. Available at:
     https://www.naics.com/naics-to-sic-sic-to-naics-crosswalks/ (Accessed 7 May 2020)
UNPRI.com, (2018). What is ESG Integration?. [Online]. Available at:
     https://www.unpri.org/investor-tools/what-is-esg-integration/3052.article (Accessed 13
    May 2020).
8.3 Electronic Reports
Bain & Company, Inc., (2020). Global Private Equity Report 2020. [Online]. Available at:
    https://www.bain.com/globalassets/noindex/2020/bain_report_private_equity_report_20
    20.pdf (Accessed 12 May 2020)
European Commission, (2020). Taxonomy: Final report of the Technical Expert Group on
     Sustainable Finance. [Online]. Available at:
     https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_finance/d
     ocuments/200309-sustainable-finance-teg-final-report-taxonomy_en.pdf. [Online].
    (Accessed 12 May 2020)
Refinitiv Ltd., (2020) Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Scores From Refinitiv.
     [Online]. Available at:
     https://www.refinitiv.com/content/dam/marketing/en_us/documents/methodology/esg-
     scores-methodology.pdf (Accessed 27 April 2020)
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission., (2016). Administrative proceeding File No. 3-
    17534. September. [Online]. Available at:
    https://www.sec.gov/litigation/admin/2016/34-78824.pdf (Accessed 7 May 2020)

                                        34
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

9. Appendix
Appendix 1: Rating Methodology of Refinitiv ESG Ratings
Refinitiv’s ESG scores are calculated for approximately 9,000 companies globally and for
around 1,000 companies the scores exist all the way from fiscal year 2002. Over 450 company-
level ESG metrics are calculated by Refinitiv, out of which, 186 of the most comparable and
material per industry field are used in the company’s assessment and scoring. These metrics
are grouped into 10 category scores for each company for the following categories: Resource
use, Emissions, Innovation, Workforce, Human rights, Community, Product responsibility,
Management, Shareholders and CSR strategy.

The 10 categories fall under the three dimensions of ESG – the Environmental, Social and
Governance pillars but each category score is weighted differently, depending on the
importance of the category for the industry in question. In other words, the pillar scores are
relative sums of the different weighted category scores. These 10 category weights for each
industry are updated and calculated dynamically in Refinitiv’s database. The ESG scores are
calculated based on relative performance within the company’s sector (TRBC industry group)
for the Environmental and Social pillars and within the firm’s country of incorporation for the
Governance pillar. Refinitiv uses a percentile rank scoring methodology i.e. the data provider
is not rating the companies and determining what “good” performance is, instead, the data
determines each company’s relative performance.

Environmental: Resource use, Emissions, Innovation

Social: Workforce, Human rights, Community, Product responsibility

Governance: Management, Shareholders and CSR strategy

The final overall ESG score aggregates the 10 category scores and varies between 0 and 100.
If the company scores between 0 and 25, it is in the bottom quartile of its peer group and if it
scores between 75 and 100, it is in the top quartile of its peer group.

The database is updated on a continuous basis according to corporate reporting and, for
instance, when new companies are added. The data for the existing companies is refreshed
every week, meaning the relative ESG scores are recalculated. Scores will however be marked
as “definitive” for all historical years, except for the 5 most recent years, and these are not
refreshed.

(Refinitiv Ltd, 2020)

                                        35
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Appendix 2: Description of Refinitiv ESG Categories (taken from Refinitiv)
 Pillar score Category Score Definition
 Environmental     Resource Use Score The Resource Use Score reflects a company’s
 Score                                     performance and capacity to reduce the use
                                                 of materials, energy or water, and to find
                                               more eco-efficient solutions by improving
                                          supply
                                        chain management
                   Emissions Reduction    The Emission Reduction Score measures a
                   Score                  company’s commitment and effectiveness
                                            towards reducing environmental emissions in
                                               the production and operational processes.
                    Innovation Score The Innovation Score reflects a company’s
                                              capacity to reduce the environmental costs
                                               and burdens for its customers, thereby
                                             creating new market opportunities through
                                           new environmental technologies and
                                               processes or eco-designed products.
 Social             Workforce Score The Workforce Score measures a company’s
 Score                                      effectiveness towards job satisfaction, a
                                             healthy and safe workplace, maintaining
                                               diversity and equal opportunities and
                                              development opportunities for its workforce.
                   Human Rights Score The Human Rights Score measures a
                                             company’s effectiveness towards respecting
                                            the fundamental human rights conventions.
                   Community Score The Community Score measures the
                                         company’s commitment towards being a
                                               good citizen, protecting public health and
                                                respecting business ethics.
                    Product Responsibility  The Product Responsibility Score reflects a
                    Score                  company’s capacity to produce quality goods
                                               and services integrating the customer’s health
                                                and safety, integrity and data privacy
 Governance       Management Score The Management Score measures a
 Score                                    company’s commitment and effectiveness
                                              towards following best practice corporate
                                              governance principles.
                    Shareholders Score The Shareholders Score measures a
                                            company’s effectiveness towards equal
                                                 treatment of shareholders and the use of anti-
                                             takeover devices
                   CSR Strategy Score The CSR Strategy Score reflects a company’s
                                                practices to communicate that it integrates the
                                               economic (financial), social and
                                                environmental dimensions into its day-to-day
                                                decision-making processes.

                                        36
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Appendix 3: Data Retrieval Process

Data Retrieval:
1. Initially 3,544 transactions downloaded from SDC out of which 1,006 transactions are
    considered the starting sample of European transactions
      o Europe defined as the following: European Economic Area + UK + Switzerland
       o After excluding transactions that either do not meet our criteria under “4. Data” or
           are missing bid prices on SDC: 929 transactions remaining
2. Filter by deal form and keep the following forms; Acq. majority interest, Acq. remaining
    interest and Merger. 889 transactions remaining
3. Filter by target industry sector, remove financial firms. 707 transactions remaining
      o Excluded:
                - Commercial Banks
                  - Credit Institutions
                 - Insurance
                 - Investment & Commodity Firms
                 - Real Estate, Mortgage Bankers & Brokers
4. Download Refinitiv ESG scores for the target companies: 220 transactions out of 707
   with ESG scores
5. Manual review of all 220 transactions (see explanation below)
6. Remove mandatory tender offers, corporate reorganizations, debt restructuring
    transactions and spinoffs since they do not meet our definition of control bids (14
    transactions): 206 transactions remaining
7. We leave the first transaction (by looking at the date announced as reported in the SDC
    database) for a given target company if there are no bids for the same target in the
    preceding 6 months. All subsequent control bids for the same target within 6 months of a
    previous bid are viewed as being part of the same “bid contest” and thus removed (20
    transactions). 186 transactions remaining
8. We remove transactions for which we have no share-price data (13 transactions). We also
    remove transactions that lack data on any of the variables in the regression (listwise
    exclusion) - one transaction (deal number 696) with an undisclosed acquirer and unknown
   acquirer industry is eliminated because it does not meet our criterion of being identifiable.
    We also remove transactions where part of the offer per share is contingent on a
    commodity derivative since this complicates the calculation of a premium (transaction
   number 1013 is removed).
9. The final sample consists of 171 transactions

The last step in our data retrieval was a manual review of the final sample of transactions
using press releases and other official company or regulatory documents. We checked for the
accuracy of the following items:

    - RIC tickers
    - Target and Acquirer names
    - Bid prices
    - Announcement Dates
    - Industry and Acquirer Type – whether Strategic or Financial acquirer
    - Deal synopsis – whether the transaction is a traditional merger or acquisition and not
        any of the above-mentioned excluded transaction types (e.g. spinoff)

                                        37
      Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

     Appendix 4: Description of Variables

Variable Definition Data source Expected   Found    Significant
                                                                          sign       sign
Premium              bid price per share/share price on       SDC and
(Dependent variable)       trading day -42 prior to                   Reuters
                        announcement                     Fundamentals
                                                                 (“RF”) via
                                                           Eikon
ESG                                                    Refinitiv
   I. Overall                                                             + + Yes
                                                                                                               (<0.05)
  II. Environmental + + H1: Yes
                                                                                                     (<0.1) / H2: No
 III. Social + + Yes
                                                                                                            (<0.05)
 IV. Governance + + Yes
                                                                                                                (<0.1)
Size ln (market value of equity at               RF - - Yes (in H1 and
                         previous fiscal-year end)                                                     H2 reg with
                                                                                                 Overall and
                                                                                                               Social)
Market to Book market value of equity/net book          RF +/- + No
                          value
Leverage total debt/total assets RF +/- + No (Yes in H2
                                                                                                                         reg with Social)
Growth average sales growth in past 3 years RF +/- - No
Runup ln (share price on trading day -1          RF + + Yes
                          prior to announcement/share price
                           on trading day -42)
Liquidity current assets/current liabilities RF + + No
Research and            R&D expenditures/total assets RF + + Yes (except in
Development                                                                                 H1 & H2 reg
                                                                                                         with
                                                                                                    Governance)
Return on Equity net income/common equity RF +/- + Yes
Capital Expenditures capital expenditures/total assets RF +/- +/- No
Blockholder dummy=1 if acquirer held >5% of        SDC - - Yes
                            target shares prior to announcement
Hostile Transaction dummy=1 if bid reported as             SDC + + No
                         “Hostile” by SDC
Cash dummy=1 if the transaction             SDC + + No
                             consideration is fully in cash
Competing Bidder dummy=1 if SDC reports that there       SDC + + No
                          were competing bidders
Cross-Border           dummy=1 if acquirer and target          SDC + + Yes
Transaction              from different nations
Horizontal Transaction dummy=1 if acquirer and target          SDC + + No
                           have different SIC codes
Financial Buyer Dummy=1 if acquirer is defined as        SDC +/- +/- No
                            financial buyer
H1 refers to the first hypothesis and H2 to the second hypothesis.

                                             38
  Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

                                                                     13
  Appendix 5: Comparison of Refinitiv and CSRHub

Data provider Refinitiv CSRHub

Sources • Company sources: Annual reports,       • Third-party sources: Investing research
                        company websites                            firms, indexes, publications, “best
                   • Non-governmental organizations, stock        of”/”worst of” lists, non-governmental
                        exchange filings, CSR reports, Media          organizations, crowd sources, government
                        sources                                     agencies

Data base size • ~9,000 companies with scores           • ~9,000 companies with full scores, ~19,000
                  • Global                                    companies with partial scores and
                  • Scores since 2002                      • Global
                                                            • Scores since 2008
Validity • Allows for investigation of underlying    • Allows for investigation of underlying data
                         data points and sources                        points and sources
Process and     • Collection of data points, standardizing    • Collection of data points from third-party
Methodology      the data across companies into measures     sources
                      (e.g. “TR.AnalyticCo2”)                • Grouping data points from the several
                  • Relative percentile ranking applied at         sources into 12 subcategories (e.g. “Energy
                       measure level                               & Climate Change”) or special issues (e.g.
                   • Measures are grouped into 10 categories       “testing on animals”)
                        (e.g. “Emission Category”), relative      • Normalizing the data by analyzing eventual
                        percentile ranking applied at category         variations and adjusting for potential biases
                       level                                   • Weighting each data source based on the
                   • Category weights based on e.g.               data’s credibility and quality, as estimated
                                   14
                       materiality  applied to each category         by CSRHub
                       score and ESG, Environmental (E),       • Producing consensus scores for each
                         Social (S) and Governance (G) scores          subcategory that are then aggregated into 4
                         are sums of the weighted category             category scores
                         scores                                                       15
                                                           • “Average user”  weights applied to each
                   • E and S score and Controversies score         category score and Overall CSR rating is
                       calculated through benchmarking within       the sum of weighted category scores
                       industry and G score within country,      • Scores are removed for companies if there
                     ESG Combined score calculated by          isn’t enough data
                      discounting ESG score for controversies   • Platform allows for benchmarking against
                   • Scoring: percentile rank scores 0-100         the entire CSRHub company database
                       (%) and letter grades D- to A+           • Scoring: scores 0-100 scale and percentile
                                                                         rank scores 0-100 (%)
Database        • Database updates in line with corporate   • Scores are reviewed monthly (human
updates              reporting                                  review) for any potential problems that
                   • Data is refreshed weekly and scores           have been missed or for outliers
                            recalculated for the latest 5 fiscal years
                         with changes to the database (e.g. when
                      new companies, controversy events and
                       company restatements added)
Scores and      • Main scores: ESG, ESG Controversies,    • Main scores: CSR Rating, CSR Ranking (%)
categories           ESG Combined                         • 4 category scores; Employee, Environment,
                    • 3 pillar scores; Environmental, Social,         Community, Governance
                      Governance                           • 12 subcategories
                  • 10 categories

  13
     All information aggregated from the two data providers’ websites and public reports. For links to the
  websites, see section “8. References”.
  14
      Materiality represents a theme’s relative importance to an individual industry group (Refinitiv, 2020).
  15
     The category weights represent weights by an average user of platform and have been calculated by CSRHub
  by studying their users’ profile settings (CSRHub.com).

                                          39
Are Acquirers Willing to Pay More for Strong ESG Performance? Kranck & Lehtimäki

Appendix 6: Summary of Statistical Tests

1. The results of the Ramsey Reset test shows whether there is linearity in the model. Given
    that our test statistic is 0.9952, we cannot reject the hypothesis of no omitted variables,
    which implies that we might have omitted variables in our dataset. This indicates that it is
    unlikely that linearity between the dependent and independent variables can be established.

2. Results of the variance-inflation factor (VIF) test shows that all variables are well below
    the cut-off level of 10. The highest (Size) has a VIF of 1.68, the lowest (Growth) at 1.04
    and a mean VIF for all variables of 1.24, which implies that our dataset does not suffer
   from multicollinearity.

3. The Jarque Bera test of normally distributed residuals is performed through a skewness-
    kurtosis test, where the chi-squared test statistic is 0.0000, which implies that we can reject
    the null-hypothesis of normality in residuals at all significance levels. This gives us the
    result that residuals are not normally distributed.

4. Breusch-Godfrey test shows us whether there is likely to be autocorrelation in the dataset.
    With a chi-squared test statistic of 0.0000, we can reject the null hypothesis at all levels,
    which means we cannot show that there is no serial correlation in the data. This means that
    the data is likely to suffer from autocorrelation.

5. Finally, the Breusch-Pagan test is performed to measure potential heteroskedasticity in
    residuals. We find that with a chi-squared statistic of 0.0110, the null hypothesis of constant
    variance (homoskedasticity) can be rejected at the 5% significance level. This means that
    the data is likely to be heteroskedastic.

                                        40