BANKS’ INTEREST RATE RISK
EXPOSURE  UNDER LOW
RATES

TRACING EXPOSURE FROM BALANCE SHEET POSITIONS

LINNÉA EKBERG

DENISE TAYLI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Banks’ Interest Rate Risk Exposure Under Low Rates: Tracing Exposure from
Balance Sheet Positions

Abstract:

Has  the risk exposure of  banks changed  in response to low interest rates?  We  construct
simple factor portfolios using the  fair values of positions held by  the U.S. banking sector
in order to trace the interest rate exposure of individual positions on banks’ balance sheets
between 2001-2019. We find that  the  U.S.  banking sector  is  more exposed to  interest rate
risk in the years after the financial crisis, a period characterised by low interest rates. The
increased exposure can  be  observed  across the majority of positions on the balance sheet.
In particular, we  distinguish  trends of  more long-term maturity  contracts  and more high-
risk loans.  We also find that the U.S. banking sector holds more assets and liabilities
across the entire balance sheet, which contributes to increased exposure.

Keywords:

   Banks,  Interest rate  exposure,  Low interest rates,  Risk-taking

Authors:

   Linnéa Ekberg  (24167)
   Denise Tayli  (24148)

Tutors:

   Adrien  d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien  d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Linnéa Ekberg and Denise Tayli, 2020

                                   1
1   Introduction
Banks  are  a central part of a functioning financial system. As proven by the  financial
crisis of 2008, states are prepared to go to great lengths in order to prevent the banking
sector from collapsing. The crisis led to new regulations, such as Basel III  and the Dodd-
Frank Act, with the purpose of improving bank risk management. However, Sarin and
Summers (2016) find  no evidence to support that banks would be safer today than before
the crisis. On the contrary, they suggest that the opposite is true. The nature and  business
model of banks make them exposed to macroeconomic risks, such as interest rate risk and
credit risk.  In order to ensure the financial stability of the banking sector, it is important
to understand how banks would be affected by changes in these macroeconomic factors.

Interest rates have been lowered since the crisis, at times to near zero levels. This raises
the question of how the risk exposure of banks changes as rate levels nears the zero lower
bound (ZLB), the point at which the capacity of monetary policy is limited. Bailey and
Matyáš (2019) find that the bank stock sensitivity to the interest rate risk factor has
changed since the crisis and explain this by an increased sensitivity to the slope of the
yield curve. They hypothesize that increased sensitivity indicates an inability of banks to,
under   low   rates,   hedge   against   the   interest   rate   risk   resulting   from   maturity
transformation. At the same time, a large section of the literature suggests that the lower
interest rates that have prevailed since the crisis could incentivise increased risk-taking
(Maddaloni and Peydró, 2011; Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2013; Adrian et al., 2014;
Bologna, 2018). Increased risk-taking, combined with the inability to hedge, could pose
a challenge to the banking  sector.

Why are bank stock returns more sensitive to interest rate risk after the financial crisis of
2008? Many bank positions derive their return from maturity transformation and are thus
commonly believed to be subject to interest rate risk. Changes in  this  factor will change
the value of the position and consequently the value of the bank itself. We therefore
propose to extend the study by Bailey and Matyáš (2019) by analysing from  which
positions  on the balance sheet that the interest rate risk  exposure  originates.

To consider  only  the accounting measures provided  by banks may prove insufficient in
evaluating the exposure to macroeconomic risk. As pointed out by Begenau et al. (2015),
a bank that holds many high-quality positions may be less exposed  than a bank that holds
few low-quality positions. Instead, we apply their proposed method of using simple factor
portfolios to evaluate the effect of risk exposures on fixed income positions. We first
construct an interest  rate risk factor and a credit  risk factor. We then compute exposure
coefficients by regressing instrument-returns on these factors. Finally, we construct factor
portfolios by applying our exposure coefficients to bank positions.

The interest  rate risk factor is the return on a  5-year  zero coupon swap.  Swaps are
considered safe bonds since they are  collateralised  which means that  the return, and
consequently our interest  rate risk factor,  depend  only  on  changes in the yield curve. Our

                                   2
credit  risk factor is computed by isolating the credit risk  of  a BBB bond. We do so by
regressing the return of the BBB bond on our interest rate risk factor. Since the regression
shows how much of the BBB bond return that can be explained by the safe interest  rate
risk factor, the remaining value is explained by the risk premium. In other words, our
credit  risk factor is the residual from regressing the return of a BBB bond on the interest
rate risk factor.

Next, we recursively regress the returns of various instruments on our risk factors. We
use instruments of different maturities and qualities in order to capture the different
instruments held by banks. Each regression results in a beta coefficient that measures the
exposure of the instrument to the risk factor. In other words, a one-unit change in the risk
factor will change the instrument's return by the value of beta.

Finally, we multiply the fair value of positions held by banks with the corresponding risk
exposure coefficient. For example, the reported fair value of treasuries with a maturity of
one year is multiplied with the beta coefficient obtained when regressing treasuries with
maturity of one year on our risk factors. The result is a simple factor portfolio that will,
over the next quarter, react to  interest  rate risk and credit risk in the same  way  as the
position held by the bank.

Since we want to capture  how risk exposures affect the value of positions, we need
instruments to be expressed in terms of fair values. For treasuries and  mortgage-backed
securities (MBS), banks report fair values. Loans, other borrowed money and deposits
are reported in face value and therefore need to be converted into fair values before the
factor portfolios can be constructed.  Fair values  are  computed by  discounting all future
payment streams.  Adjustments also need to be made to trading assets and liabilities, even
though banks report fair values of these. The possibility of offsetting positions means that
banks may not be exposed to the full extent suggested by the reported fair value.  Instead,
we compute fair values as the present value of the bid-ask spread plus the net gains from
trading on own account.

We find that  banks’ exposure to interest rate risk has increased since the beginning of our
sample.  The contribution of each position to aggregate interest rate risk exposure has
changed since the crisis; whereas the exposure of derivatives caused a sharp increase in
exposure in the years leading up to the crisis, derivatives play a less important role in
following years. In contrast, all other positions are more exposed after than before the
crisis.

By considering individual positions, we try to explain why each position is more exposed
to interest rate risk by examining the risk factor and the maturity and quality distributions.
We find that banks hold more contracts of longer maturities as well as, in the case of
loans,  of lower quality. Banks also hold higher fair values across the entire balance sheet.
We find that increased exposure contributes to higher typical gains  or losses  in response

                                   3
to changes in the interest rate factor post-crisis. This indicates increased sensitivity to
changes in the yield curve.

This paper is structured in the following way. Section 2 discusses  related  literature.
Section 3 outlines data processing and methodology for constructing factor portfolios.
Section 4  presents the results. Finally, in  Section  5  we conclude our study and propose
potential areas for future research.

2   Related literature
The purpose of this  paper is to  understand banks’  increased exposure to interest rate risk
after the financial crisis,  as found by Bailey and Matyáš  (2019)  by  regressing bank stock
return on the interest  rate risk factor.  It is common in the literature to measure banks’
exposure to macroeconomic risk factors by considering bank performance, such as bank
stock returns (Flannery and James, 1984; English et al., 2018) or the income gap (English,
2002; Gomez et al., 2020). Alternatively, Meiselman et al. (2020) apply the argument  of
high risk, high return to use high profits as an indicator of high systematic risk, whereas
Sarin and Summers (2016) examine volatility as a sign of risk-taking.

Rather than using a performance measure, we measure exposure to risk by considering
the  banks’ assets and liabilities. We are thus able to trace how the exposure of different
positions held by banks reacts to changes in the interest rate, and to pin down possible
causes of the increased sensitivity to the slope of the yield curve.   We analyse  the
positions  held  by  banks  by  constructing  simple  factor  portfolios,  following  the
methodology of Begenau et al. (2015). By replicating this paper, we do not only obtain
factor portfolios used to analyse the exposure of fixed income positions to interest  rate
risk, we also aim at confirming the validity of their findings. Furthermore, their study
contains data up to 2014. We extend  the sample period to include data up to the final
quarter of 2019. In doing so, our sample contains more data from after the 2008 recession
and we are  consequently better equipped to trace the long-term evolution of banks’ risk
exposure  since the financial crisis.

In order to understand banks’ increased sensitivity to the yield curve since the crisis, we
have to consider the low-rate environment that has prevailed since. There is a long
tradition of analysing banks’ behaviour in response to changes in the interest rate as a
way of measuring the transmission of monetary policy (Bernanke and Blinder, 1992;
Drechsler, 2017).  The existence of a risk-taking or risk premium channel has  also  been
examined, under which changes in the interest rate can not only be used to influence the
amount of loans, but also the quality of them.

Drechsler et al. (2014) find that banks hold  liquid assets as buffers in order to prevent
costly fire sales in the event of a funding shock. Lower rates imply cheaper liquidity
premia, which allow a larger buffer to be kept and consequently more risk-taking. Another

                                   4
section of the literature finds that low rates increase risk-taking by negatively affecting
bank profitability. Firstly, banks are forced to lower loan rates due to competition or
contractual repricing but are hesitant to lower deposit rates, which leads to reduced net
interest margins (NIM). Secondly, a flatter yield curve negatively affects the return from
banks’ maturity transformation (Borio et al., 2015; Busch  and Memmel, 2015; Claessens
et al., 2018). Reduced profitability could incentivise banks to increase risk-taking by
lowering lending standards or by increasing the maturity mismatch in their maturity
transformation (Maddaloni and Peydró, 2011; Dell’Ariccia  and Marquez, 2013; Adrian
et al., 2014; Bologna, 2018). By tracing the changes in the composition of banks’ balance
sheets, we are able to  analyse  how  and why  the exposure of individual positions have
changed since the crisis. For example, we can map the  quality of loans held and their
contribution to interest  rate risk exposure, and from this infer whether banks are more
willing to take risk since the crisis.

Our contribution to the literature consists of two main parts. Firstly, we confirm the
validity  of the findings of Begenau  et al. (2015) by replicating their study, something
which is of high demand in the field of finance today. Secondly, we are able to trace the
historical evolution of risk exposure of individual positions on the banks’ balance sheets,
and thus analyse whether the banking sector is more exposed to interest rate risk under
the low-rate environment since the financial crisis of 2008.

3   Data and empirical strategy
3.1 Data sources

We retrieve data from four sources: FFIEC, the Chicago Fed, WRDS and ICE. A closer
description of how data from each source is used, as well as a  discussion of their
limitations, follow below.

3.2  Bank data

Our sample covers all domestic top-tier bank holding companies (BHCs) in the U.S.
between  2001:Q1  and  2019:Q4. We  therefore eliminate all BHCs that is owned by
another BHC and all BHCs that have a foreign parent.  We  infer that BHCs  with  an
RSSD9348 variable  of  zero  are  top holders.  This variable  identifies  the top holder in the
organization  hierarchy.  When identifying BHCs, we also include financial holding
companies (FHD), which is a type of bank holding company. By  including  these two
entity types, we exclude foreign  intermediate  holding  companies (IHCs). This is an
attempt to as closely as possible recreate the sample used by Begenau et al. (2015). We
further decide to follow their example of excluding Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley
from our sample since they have only been classified as BHCs since the crisis.

                                   5
BHC data is collected from the FR Y-9C report, retrieved from the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, which provides quarterly data for all domestic holding companies on a
consolidated basis. The report has been updated on multiple occasions during our sample
period, with updates such as new codes for variables as well as the addition and
transformation of variables. We trace these changes by comparing historical reports. By
                                                                                                1
doing so,  we produce a list of relevant variables for each quarter of our sample.

One limitation of the FR Y-9C report  is that it does not require banks to report maturity
distributions for all their assets and liabilities. Maturity distributions are central to our
analysis since we expect the length of the contract to influence its sensitivity to changes
in the  interest rate. For the sake of our analysis, the FR Y-9C report only provides
sufficient information regarding maturity distribution for trading assets and liabilities. In
order to circumvent this issue, we use complementary data from the FFIEC 031 and 041
reports for commercial banks, retrieved from the FFIEC Central Data Repository’s Public
Data Distribution website. For each quarter of our sample, we aggregate the relevant
maturity variables for all commercial banks that belong to the same BHC,  using variable
RSSD9348 in the FFIEC 031 and 041 reports to identify the top holder. Because structural
information is not included in the commercial bank data from the FFIEC, we use the Bank
Regulatory database on WRDS to access variable RSSD9348 for each commercial bank.
We then compute maturity distributions expressed as percentages of the total value of an
instrument (e.g. treasuries), which are applied to the total instrument value of the BHC in
the FR Y-9C report. A few of our BHCs do not have commercial banks. For these, we
use the average position maturity distribution for that quarter.

Ideally, the aggregated  position  value of the commercial banks would equal the  position
value of their BHC. This would allow us to use the maturity distributions of the
commercial banks as perfect substitutes for the BHC data and thus proceed with the
analysis without applying the maturity distribution to the BHC. This method is used by
Begenau et al.  (2015).  However, we observe deltas when comparing aggregated
commercial bank data to BHC data. Proceeding with commercial bank data would
therefore result in a reduction in the value of BHC assets and liabilities. We therefore
consider our best option to be to use  the average maturity distribution of all commercial
banks belonging to the same BHC at a particular date as an estimation of the actual
maturity distribution of  that  BHC at that date.

Finally, the FFIEC  makes a distinction between banks with domestic and foreign offices
and banks with domestic offices only. Banks with  domestic and foreign offices file the
FFIEC 031 report while banks with domestic offices only file the FFIEC 041 report.
When selecting variables from the FFIEC data files, we sum the variables that are denoted
with  the  different  series  in  the  two  reports.  For  these  variables,  RCFD  denotes

1
 Appendix B lists the variables we used from the FR-Y-9C and FFIEC 031 and 041 forms.

                                   6
consolidated foreign and domestic data (FFIEC 031) and RCON denotes domestic data
(FFIEC 041).

3.3  Returns and risk exposure by instrument

We consider two risk factors. The first one is the interest rate risk factor, computed as the
return of a safe bond. We use the ICE BofA 5 Year US Dollar Tradeable Zero Coupon
Swap Index, collected from ICE, for the safe zero coupon bond return.  Our second risk
factor is the credit risk factor, computed as the residual when regressing  the return of a
risky bond on the safe interest rate risk factor. This allows us to isolate the credit risk. We
use the ICE BofA  3-5  Year  BBB US Corporate Index, also collected from ICE, for the
higher risk bond return.

We want our instruments to cover the  different pay-off structures, credit qualities  and
maturities of bank positions.  We therefore collect returns for treasuries, bonds (AAA  to
CCC  and below), swaps and  MBS  for all quarters in our sample from ICE  in order to
estimate risk exposure by instrument. For every category, Bank of America Merrill Lynch
provides return indices for various maturities. We use these returns and our factors to
recursively run exposure regressions using

                         "           #$%  #$%      &'  &'      !
                      𝑅! =  𝛼!  +  𝛽!   𝑅"   +  𝛽!  𝑅"  +  𝑢"   (1)

          "
where  𝑅!  is the return of instrument  𝑖, such as the return of a short term AAA rated
          #$%                                 &'
security.  𝑅"   is the interest  rate risk factor and  𝑅"   is the credit  risk factor. The betas are
the  factor exposure  coefficients and show how much the return of instrument  𝑖  moves
with a change in the return of the risk factor.  This allows us to compute factor portfolios
for banks by multiplying  bank  positions with our risk exposure coefficients. The residual
in (1) captures the part of the return of instrument  𝑖  that cannot be explained by our two
risk factors. A possible extension would be to include more macroeconomic risk factors
or risk factors specific to an instrument  in the regression.

In order to understand  why recursive regressions are used, it is useful to recall that the
risk factors in (1) originate from bond returns. Because there will exist some co-
movement between the return of instrument  𝑖  and the bond returns used for risk factors,
we can use historical co-movements to predict how much the return of instrument  𝑖  will
move over the next quarter as the risk factor moves. We further expect the level of co-
movement between bond returns in (1) to vary for each quarter. Since we want to capture
the expectations for the next quarter that was prevailing during each period in our sample,
we run regressions using data up to that point in time.

                                   7
Positions with maturities shorter than one quarter are treated as riskless. Therefore, we do
not apply our risk exposure coefficients on these positions. Among banks’ balance sheet
positions, these include cash, Fed funds and repo positions,  and short deposits, which all
have typical maturities below one quarter. Furthermore, we treat all non-interesting
bearing deposits as short deposits.

The result from the exposure regressions in (1),  using quarterly returns from the full
period 1997:Q1 and 2019:Q4, can be seen in Table 1. Columns 1 and 2  show  which
instrument is being considered. Columns 3 and 4 report the mean and  standard deviation
per quarter.  Longer maturities typically mean higher returns and more volatility.
Comparison between instruments shows that lower quality instruments, such as CCC and
lower rated bonds, have higher returns and are more volatile than highly rated bonds.

Column 5 and 6 relate to the interest  rate factor. We observe that highly rated bonds have
a positive exposure to the interest  rate factor. This means that the bond returns co-move
positively with the interest  rate factor  and thus  co-move  negatively with the level of the
yield curve. This makes intuitive sense: bond prices rise when the yield curve falls, which
results in higher returns.  Equivalently, positions with a positive exposure to the interest
rate risk factor decrease in value when yields rise. For low quality bonds we observe the
opposite; they are less exposed to the interest  rate factor. Finally,  longer maturities result
in more  interest rate risk exposures for all instruments but CCC and below, where we
observe an increasingly  negative exposure.

Column 7 and 8 relate to the credit risk factor. Highly rated bonds show only limited
exposure to the credit-risk factor. Most coefficients are not significant. Low quality
bonds, on the other hand, are  highly  exposed to the credit-risk factor, with significant
coefficients. When credit spreads widen, a holder of a position with positive exposure to
the credit risk factor loses money as  risky bond prices fall.

                                                                               (
In column 9, we see that the factors capture variation in returns well, with most 𝑅 s above
70%. Finally, column 10  shows  that a factor model with only the interest  rate factor can
explain returns for highly rated bonds.

                                   8
Table 1. Exposure Regressions
                         mean   vol
                                             #$%           &'            (     (
                                 (in %)  (in %)   𝛽      t-stat   𝛽     t-stat    𝑅     𝑅#$%
   Treasuries       short      0.79    0.93   0.29   14.13   0.02   0.75   0.69   0.69
                   medium   1.29    2.56   0.93   40.55  -0.04  -1.25   0.95   0.95
                   long      1.57    3.65   1.24   20.53  -0.08  -1.09   0.83   0.82

   Swap           short      0.88    1.15   0.38   17.13   0.02   0.67   0.77   0.77
                  medium   1.31    2.68   1.00   >100   0.00   -0.41   1.00   1.00
                   long      2.25    7.35   2.47   20.98  -0.55  -3.66   0.84   0.81

   AAA           short      0.95    1.05   0.30   12.35   0.15   4.92   0.66   0.57
                  medium   1.48    2.56   0.83   17.73   0.23   3.83   0.79   0.75
                   long      1.77    4.07   1.24   13.36  -0.18  -1.49   0.67   0.66

   BBB           short      1.16    1.47   0.03   1.75   0.67   30.70   0.91   0.00
                  medium   1.64    2.85   0.16   6.27   1.31   41.37   0.95   0.02
                   long      1.95    3.22   0.41   7.96   1.31   19.83   0.84   0.12

   CCC and lower  short      2.14    6.90   -0.81   -3.97   1.94   7.47   0.45   0.10
                   medium   2.05    9.05   -1.47  -8.50   3.28   14.87   0.77   0.19
                   long      4.37   21.80   -2.35   -2.99   3.56   3.61   0.21   0.09

   MBS           short      0.98    0.86   0.23   10.18   0.11   3.93   0.57   0.50
                  medium   1.14    1.22   0.41   20.36   0.10   3.84   0.83   0.80
                   long      1.14    1.30   0.44   20.74   0.11   3.96   0.83   0.80

Note:  The sample is quarterly  data from 1997:Q1  to 2019:Q4. Columns 1 and 2 refer to
the instrument being considered. For treasuries, AAA rated bonds, BBB rated bonds and
CCC and lower rated bonds, “short” maturities refer to 1-3 years, “medium” maturities
to 5-7 years and “long” maturities to 10-15 years. For swaps, 2 years, 5 years and 15 years
are used. For MBS, 0-3 years, 3-5 years and 15 years are used. Column 3 and 4 are the
mean and standard deviation per quarter. Columns 5-9 show the results from exposure
                                    (
regressions. Column 10  shows the  𝑅  from regressions on only the interest  rate factor.

3.4  Rates

The fair value of an instrument is defined as the present value of all future payment
streams. The computation of fair values therefore requires interest rates, both to compute
interest  payments and to discount payment streams. For each BHC, we estimate different
interest rates for different instruments. This allows us to capture different terms offered

                                   9
by different banks. Apart from swap and loan rates, the methods discussed below all use
data from the FR Y-9C report.

Loans

We infer loan rates by using  the fact that a loan can be considered a portfolio of zero
coupon bonds:  the amortisations and interest  rate payments of a loan occur at regular
intervals and are of equal sizes, and each payment stream can therefore be replicated by
the principal payment  of a zero coupon bond. It is therefore possible to use the rates  of
securities to compute the fair value of loans.

We apply the risk weights provided in schedule HC-R on the aggregate face value held
by a bank in order to divide the position into  different credit rating categories. Based on
the risk weights, we categorise the loans as follows: risk weight of 0% to treasuries, risk
weight of 20% to AAA, risk weight of 50% to A, and risk weight of 100% or more to
BBB. The rate used for a loan of a particular quality and maturity is then approximated
as the yield curve for that quality. The yield curve data is collected from ICE.

Other borrowed money and deposits

The annual interest rate  on deposits and other borrowed money are estimated as the
quotient of the interest income and the total value of the corresponding liability. For
example, the annual deposit rate is computed as interest income on deposits divided by
total interest-bearing  deposits. Because the banks report values in year-to-date, we  find
the annual rate of year  t  by looking at the report of Q4 for year  t. The annual rate is then
divided by four to find the quarterly rate.

Our method implies the simplifying assumption that  banks do not use different rates for
different maturities. In the real world, we would expect rates to vary along this parameter.
Taking maturities  into account when computing rates would therefore give a more
accurate output.

Swap rates

Historical data  on swap rates are used to calculate payment streams of derivatives. Data
on bid and ask prices as well as bid-ask spread is collected from ICE, using the swap rate
for the 3-month LIBOR rate. In order to match the maturities of derivatives in call reports,
we  retrieve  data  on  one-year, three-year and five-year maturities.

                                  10
Finally, we use  the  3-month LIBOR from ICE, in combination with net gains on
derivatives, to infer trading direction. Because the 3-month LIBOR reports Q1 as 1 April
rather than 31 March, as is the case with other data used, the dates are transformed by
subtracting one day.

3.5  Securities

Banks report securities in fair values, which means that our risk exposure coefficients can
be directly applied once the data has been categorised.  We  split  securities into treasuries,
MBS and other securities. We  begin by applying the relevant maturity distributions from
commercial banks to BHC data, as described  in  Section 3.2. For each of our instruments,
we obtain maturities of less than three months, three to twelve months, one to three years,
five to fifteen  years, and more than fifteen years.

Other securities include all variables  other  than  treasuries (including government
obligations) and MBS. Since we do not have maturity distributions for other securities,
we use those of MBS as an approximation. Similarly, the risk exposure coefficients for
MBS is used as an estimate for other securities.  As with loans, it would be possible to
further break down securities into different risk classes using schedule HC-B and HC-R.
For example, it would be possible to use schedule HC-B to make a distinction between
agency MBS and other MBS and schedule HC-R  to infer the risk distribution of other
securities.

                                  11
Figure 1.  Fair values of security and loan holdings  of aggregate U.S. banking sector by
risk class

Note:  Fair value held between 2001:Q1  and  2019:Q4, expressed in USD trillion. Fair
value maturity distributions are available in appendix A.1. Left panel: Securities. As
mentioned in  Section 3.5, it would be  possible to split other securities into different risk
categories. Right panel: Loans. The categories represent the risk weights allocated from
schedule HC-R. Fair value is computed by discounting all future payments streams of
amortisations and interest rate payments.

The left panel in Figure 1 shows the fair value of securities held from 2001 to 2019. The
total amount held has more than doubled since the beginning of the sample. We observe
an increase between 2001-2005, followed by a flat period until the crisis. The post-crisis
years are characterised by a sharp increase in the fair value held, that after a dip in around
2013 begins to climb again.  As for individual  positions, MBS have seen the largest
growth. Whereas the level of short-term MBS has been relatively constant at a low level,
both medium- and long-term contracts increases until 2013, after which the former begins
to decline. The fair value of long-term MBS, however, increases  even more after 2013.
The fair value of treasuries has also increased, despite a period of reduced values leading
up to the crisis. This increase  is  fairly proportionate across all maturities (appendix A.1.).

The  fair values of securities held is comparable to the result of Begenau et al. (2015).
They show a similar trend of growth that peaks around 2013, followed by a drop just
before the end of their sample. However, their results do not show the stagnation of
growth in the years before the crisis, but rather displays constant growth, to a large extent

                                  12
driven by the increase in long maturities. Finally, we observe that the fair values reported
by Begenau et al. (2015) are higher: they show a peak in 2013 of almost  USD 4 trillion,
whereas ours is closer to USD 3 trillion.

3.6  Loans

Maturity distributions are computed using commercial bank data and then applied to BHC
data as described  in  Section 3.2.  Loans are reported in face value, which needs to be
converted into fair value before the risk exposure coefficients can be applied. The fair
value will differ from the face value if the interest rate, used for both interest rate
payments and discounting, has changed since issuance. We therefore need to infer the
issuance of new loans in order to compute all interest payments and amortisations
associated with that loan.

Inferring the issuance of new loans

We assume that the full face value observed in the first period of our sample was issued
in that period.  This follows the assumption made by Begenau et al. (2015). They justify
this by claiming that “the results are not particularly sensitive to initial conditions since
                                                                                                 2
many loans are short term and outstanding loans grow exponentially over time”.

With this assumption, we have new loans = face value  in  the first quarter. Next, we
calculate the remaining value at period  t  as the sum of new loans from period 1 to  t  -  1,
minus the cumulative sum of all amortisations. We assume equal amortisations, which
will  depend on the maturity of the loan. For example, a six months loan issued at period
t  will be amortised by half its value in period  t  +  1  and by the remaining half in period
t  +  2. Equivalently, a two-year loan will be amortised by 1/8th of its value  each period
for two years.

Finally, new loans are computed as the difference between the reported face value and
the remaining value. The sign of new loans indicates the direction, such that a positive
value implies issuance of new loans, and a negative value implies the termination of loans.

In some instances, we observe a period of face values equal to zero between periods of
non-zero face values. This is interpreted as the bank selling all loans in period  t  -  1  to
achieve  a face value of zero in period  t. As  a result, the bank will not receive any future
amortisations or interest payments associated with the sold loans, and the fair value will
thus be zero until new loans are issued and the reported face value deviates from zero.

2
  Begenau  et al. (2015), p. 29

                                  13
Computing fair value

By running the iteration above, we find information on new loans issued as well as
amortisation streams. We assume that new loans are issued at a fixed rate of the interest
rate prevailing on that day. We further assume that the interest rate payment of date  t
depends on the remaining value of the loan at date  t  after amortisation. This implies that
the interest rate payment at the date of the final amortisation will be zero. One implication
of this simplifying assumption is that no interest will be paid on loans with a maturity of
three months, since these loans will be fully amortised by the first period. This will have
limited effect on our analysis since we, like Begenau et al. (2015), treat all instruments
with maturities of three months or less as short-term assets or liabilities that can be
converted to cash. As such, they are considered risk-less and are not subject to  our
analysis (see  Section  3.3).

The fair value held on date  t  is found by discounting the future interest rate payments and
amortisations on all loans  outstanding  on this date,  using the interest rate of date  t. The
loans issued  on date  t  will still have  all future payment streams left, whereas older loans
will have fewer payment streams left due to previous interest  rate  payments and
amortisations.

The right panel in Figure 1 shows the aggregate fair value of loans held by the U.S.
banking sector between 2001-2019. The total value held has been increasing throughout
the sample period, to a large extent driven by the increase in BBB rated loans, which  is
also by far the largest risk category held. An increase can also be seen in the fair value of
A rated loans, which after keeping a relatively constant level began to grow in 2015. 2015
also marks a decline in safer loans held; the fair value of AAA loans had been growing
since the start of the sample whereas treasuries saw a short period of increase between
2011-2015. The majority of loans held are of short maturity, a category which  has  been
growing at a relatively constant rate since 2001. The values  of medium-  and long-term
loans  are  constant until the crisis, after which they increase  slightly. This trend is
particularly noticeable for the latter  (appendix A.1.). The trend shown in Figure 1 is
almost identical to that found by Begenau et al. (2015), both in terms of shape and values.

3.7  Deposits and other borrowed money

The maturity distributions of deposits and other borrowed money are approximated using
the method in  Section  3.2. BHCs report both deposits and other borrowed money in face
value, which we convert into fair values using a method similar to that of loans in Section
3.6. We assume that neither deposits nor other borrowed money are amortised but rather
repaid as a full principal at the end of the maturity, following the method used by Begenau
et al. (2015). The computation of fair values will thus consist of the discounting of a
stream of  interest payments followed by a principal.

                                  14
Risk factor portfolios are constructed by multiplying the fair values with the treasury
exposure coefficients. A safe bond is chosen because neither deposits nor other borrowed
money are exposed to the risk of default. Unlike loans, for example, the bank would not
lose future payments streams if the other party defaults. The bank is, however, exposed
to interest rate risk; the interest payments that the bank is obliged to pay depend on the
interest rate. Following this logic, the risk factor portfolios for deposits and other
borrowed money only reflect different maturities.

3.8  Trading assets and liabilities

For trading assets and liabilities, all relevant data is provided in the FR Y-9C report.
Banks report gross notional amounts on interest rate, foreign exchange, equity derivative
and commodity and other contracts, as well as credit derivatives. For the sake of our
analysis, we consider only interest rate contracts, for which we also access gross positive
and negative fair values. These variables are reported both for derivatives held for trading
and held for purposes other than trading. In measuring the exposure of trading assets and
liabilities to interest  rate  risk, we look only at those held for trading. Derivatives held for
purposes other than trading are considered other assets or liabilities, depending on the
sign of the  position.  Following the method  of Begenau et al. (2015), we treat all interest
rate derivatives as swaps in order to simplify computations.

Schedule HC-R provides information on maturity distributions for notional amounts of
derivative contracts. Maturities are available for less than  one year, one to five years, and
over five years. The report further specifies whether the contract is over-the-counter or
centrally cleared. Our analysis sums these as one type of derivative. Because the maturity
distribution does not make the distinction  between derivatives held for trading and held
for other purposes, we compute each maturity as a percentage which is then applied to
the amount held for trading. This approximation assumes that banks’ decision on which
maturities to hold does not depend on  whether the derivatives is held for trading or other
purposes.

Even though banks report the fair value  of derivatives, the possibility of offsetting
positions prevents us from directly applying our risk exposure coefficients. If a bank were
to hold  exclusively offsetting positions, and thus be a pure intermediary, they would be
committed to in one position  pay the fixed and receive the floating rate, and in the other
position pay the floating and receive the fixed rate. This means that the bank is not
exposed to changes in these rates, and it would therefore be misleading to estimate risk
exposure from the  bank’s total notional values.

Even as a pure intermediary, the bank can have positive fair values. In practice, the bank
does not set a textbook swap rate such as to achieve an initial fair value of zero, but instead
earns money by adjusting the rate by  integrating the bid-ask spread. For the purpose of

                                  15
our analysis, we incorporate the same adjustment as used by Begenau et al. (2015), and
thus assume that the bank sets a swap rate of  𝑠  =  𝑠̅  −  𝜑𝑧, where  𝑠̅  is the textbook swap
rate that sets fair value to zero,  𝜑  is the direction of the trade (1 for pay-fixed,  -1 for pay-
floating) , and  𝑧  is half the bid-ask spread. This assumption is motivated  by the fact that
banks typically  sets the swap rate on a pay-fixed swap lower than the rate that sets fair
value to zero, whereas the rate on pay-floating swaps tends to be higher.

Because we assume that the bank makes these adjustments by incorporating  half the bid-
ask spread, a pure  intermediary with a total notional of  USD  1 would only have payment
streams equal to half the spread (𝑧). The fair value can then be found by considering at
which price the bank could sell its positions, that is, the bid price  that  buyers are willing
to pay. Consequently, the fair value of derivatives held by a pure intermediary depends
only on the present value of bid-ask spread.

The bank  can  also trade on own account. It  will  then  hold non-offsetting positions and
not be  a pure intermediary. In order to deal with this, we consider the fair value to be the
sum of the present value of the bid-ask spread  and the net gains from trading on own
account:

                     ) )  )   (+)         /,)      1/,)
           𝐹𝑉"  =  ∑ ) 𝑁" 𝑧"  ∑+  -. 𝑃   + ∑/  ,) 𝑁6   𝜙𝐹"8𝑠     , 𝑚;    (2)
                                               "                "            "

Because of assumptions made when computing the fair value of trading on own account
(see below), we will not follow the method previously used when computing fair values
for each maturity. Instead, the fair value of each quarter t will be computed by accounting
for all maturities.

Computing Rent

When computing rent, we use information on bid-ask spreads and gross notionals.  We
first infer new swaps bought or sold on each date by using the same method as for loans,
deposits and other borrowed money (see  Section 3.6). It is necessary to separate new
swaps from total notionals in order to determine the value of  the  bid-ask spread held by
the bank at each date.

We proceed  by  computing  the average bid-ask spread at each date, weighted by total
notionals (𝑧). Consider a swap with a maturity of six months. The new swap issued at
t  =  1  will remain as a notional for two quarters. Total notionals at  t  =  1  will consist  only
of the new  swap(t=1),  whereas total notionals at  t  =  2  will be the sum of new swap(t=1)  and
new swap(t=2). Each of these new swaps will be associated with half the bid-ask spread of
t  =  1  and  t  =  2, respectively. Furthermore, the overall effect of the bid-ask spread of a

                                  16
particular date on the bank will depend on the size of the notional of that date. We
therefore weigh the spreads  for the maturity of six months  accordingly:

           2)          2)                2)                  2)
             𝑧"   =  𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑"1. ×  (𝑁𝑒𝑤  𝑠𝑤𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑡"1. ÷  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑛𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑠"  )
                    2)               2)                 2)
               +  𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑"   ×  (𝑁𝑒𝑤  𝑠𝑤𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑡"   ÷  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑛𝑜𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑠"  )      (3)

By multiplying the average bid-ask spread of a maturity with the total notionals  of that
maturity held, we obtain the total value of spreads held by the bank. We find the fair value
of this position by multiplying with the bid price. This process is repeated for all
maturities. Finally, we sum the  fair value of all maturities.

Computing net gains from trading on own account

In order to compute the second part of the fair value, we make further simplifying
assumptions. Like Begenau et al. (2015), we assume that the maturity distributions of
notionals and the locked in mid-market rates  are independent of the direction of the
position, and that the net gain at the average maturity is a suitable approximation of the
average gain. These assumptions allow us to rewrite the second part of (2):

                       345     6.    61.
                        𝐹𝑉"    ≈  8𝑁" −  𝑁"  ;𝐹"(𝑠M" , 𝑚NNNN")     (4)

Begenau et al. (2015) further proves that the assumptions made allow, given a sufficiently
small bid-ask spread, gross fair value to be written as:

                               𝐺𝑉"  ≈  𝑁6"𝐹"(𝑠M" , 𝑚NNNN")     (5)

Rearranging (5), we can express fair value as gross fair value divided by vintage
notionals. We substitute this expression into (4). We also rewrite the expression for net
notionals invested in pay fixed swaps as the difference between total gross fair value and
the fair value of rent. This gives the gross fair value earned from trading on own account.
In order to transform this expression into net values, we multiply with direction of the
trade:

                                  17
                                             675"  89!
                            𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛(𝐹𝑉"  −  𝐹𝑉"    )          (6)
                                                  $!"#

Since the direction of trade is not reported by banks, this needs to be inferred. To do so,
we use information on cumulative gains and interest rate history.

We depart from the method by Begenau et al. (2015) in inferring the direction of trade
because we are unable to replicate their method. We find the direction of trade by looking
at  how  changes in the LIBOR  3-month  rate impact  the reported gross positive and gross
negative fair values. Changes in the interest rate will affect the value of both pay-fixed
and pay-floating positions, but in opposite directions. For example, a  decline  in the
interest rate will reduce the value of the pay-fixed position and thus contribute to the
bank’s reported gross fair negative value, and simultaneously increase the value of the
pay-floating position which will contribute to the gross positive value. Because these
effects will be of equal size for  any offsetting positions, they will cancel out. Therefore,
we compute the net effect by subtracting gross negative fair value from gross positive fair
value. The resulting value indicates whether the bank’s  overall  position is predominantly
positive or negative.

Once again, we utilise the assumption that all positions are new in period 1.  Consider a
gross positive fair value (a) and a gross negative fair value (b) observed in quarter 2.
These values will be the result of the new positions locked in at quarter 1 and the change
of the interest rate from quarter 1 to 2. New positions entered  in period 2 will not affect
the fair value, since they are locked in at the current rate.

Because (a) and (b) react to the same change in interest rate, but (a) has a positive gross
fair value whereas (b) has a negative, we know that they must be opposite positions. By
computing the difference between (a) and (b), we can thus  infer  which position the bank
predominantly entered into in the first period. For example, imagine that we observe a net
positive fair value in quarter 2. We also observe that the interest rate has risen since
quarter 1. This indicates that the bank at quarter 1 locked in more pay-fixed than pay-
floating positions  and is in our analysis considered to  have pursued a pay-fixed strategy
in quarter 1.

As we move to period 3, the gross  fair values observed will depend on changes in the
interest rate relative to rates locked in for positions in period 1 and 2. However, our logic
of observing overall positions still apply. If, for example, we know that a pay-fixed
position was taken in quarter 1 and we observe a falling rate between quarter 2 and 3, we
know that the effect of our vintage position would be negative. If we then observe that (a)
is larger than (b) in quarter 3, we can deduce that positions were taken in period 2 as to
provide  enough positive effect on fair value has to outweigh the negative effect of our
vintage position from quarter 1. We would therefore infer that the bank entered more pay-
floating than pay-fixed positions in quarter 2.

                                  18
   Figure 2.  Inferred direction of trade for derivative contracts

Note:  The direction of trade taken by banks between 2001:Q1 and  2019:Q4. The y-axis
measures the number of banks pursuing a pay-floating or pay-fixed contract at a particular
date. The  red  line represents pay-floating contracts and the  grey  line represents pay-fixed
contracts.

Figure 2 shows the result of the inferred direction of trade. The y-axis measures the
number of banks pursuing a pay-floating or pay-fixed contract at a particular date. The
red  line represents pay-floating contracts and the  grey  line represents pay-fixed contracts.
Overall, the trend is highly volatile, contradicting Begenau et al.’s (2015) assumption that
the direction of trade taken by banks exhibit a  degree  of persistence.

The fact that we do  not use the method of Begenau et al. (2015) when inferring direction
of trade could lead to different aggregate risk exposures. The direction will determine
whether the exposure of a particular date and BHC will be added to or subtracted from
the total, since pay-fixed is denoted as positive whereas pay-floating is negative in (6).
This could affect the  comparability of the two results.

4 Results

4.1 Risk exposure over time

By following the method outlined in Section 3, we derive the historical evolution of the
interest rate in the U.S. banking sector between 2001 and 2019. As shown in Figure 3,
exposure to interest rate risk increases  sharply in the years leading up to the financial
crisis of 2008. This peak is mainly driven by the exposure of derivatives, whose sharp
increase is found also by Begenau et al. (2015).

                                  19
Figure 3.  Interest rate risk exposure of aggregate U.S. banking sector by position

Note:  Aggregate interest rate risk for the U.S. banking sector,  Q1:2001-Q4:2019. Each
colour represents the total exposure of an instrument on the balance sheet, computed by
multiplying the interest rate risk factor with the fair value of the instrument.

The shape of Figure 3 is comparable to that presented by Begenau et al. (2015). The main
difference is that our values are higher; they show a peak of just over USD 4 trillion
during the 2008 crisis, whereas ours is  just over  USD 6 trillion. This difference could be
the result of different samples. Although both studies aim at including only top-tier
domestic  BHCs not owned by a foreign parent, we found it necessary to make
assumptions in our attempt to replicate their sample of BHCs (see Section 3.2). It is
therefore possible that our sample contains banks not considered by Begenau et al. (2015)
because of  our decision to include FHDs. However, we also find that our fair value of
loans is similar to theirs, whereas we find lower fair values for securities (Figure 1). Based
on this, we would expect our sample to result in similar or lower exposures. Alternatively,
our sample contains banks with balance sheet compositions that result in similar fair
values for  some positions, while leading to higher values for others.

Another possible reason for the different values obtained could lie in the computation of
fair values for derivatives, where we depart from their method. Because we compute
direction of trade  differently, the notation of pay-fixed positions as positive values and
pay-floating as negative is likely to lead to different aggregated values (see Section 3.8).
Although largely similar in shape, the difference in values means that our results may be

                                  20
better suited for considering general trends rather than absolute levels. This will be the
foundation of our analysis. Finally, our data shows a sharp decline from previously high
levels in the exposure of derivatives in 2001:Q1 which is not found in their  study.

Even though our sample contains only a few years before 2008, we can observe that
exposure did not fall back to pre-crisis levels after the crisis.  An increased exposure is in
line with the findings of Bailey and Matyáš (2019): banks are more sensitive to interest
rate risk since the financial crisis. They theorise that banks were able to hedge the interest
rate risk associated with maturity transformation before the crisis,  similar to  research by
Drechsler et al. (2018), whereas they are unable to  do so after the crisis due to the low-
rate environment. Indeed, by considering the  breakdown  of aggregate interest risk
exposure  by position  in Figure 3,  we observe that all  positions  but derivatives carry more
risk since the crisis. However, to attribute this increase only to banks’ inability to hedge
against interest rate risk misses the interesting aspects of changed willingness to take risk
since the crisis.

In fact, the increased risk exposure observed also resonates with research that finds  that
lower rates incentivise increased risk-taking (Dell’Ariccia and Marquez, 2013; Adrian et
al., 2014; Drechsler et al., 2014; Bologna, 2018), commonly motivated by a reduction of
profitability (Borio et al., 2015; Busch and Memmel, 2015; Claessens et al., 2018). This
could be traced to the composition of the balance sheet, where trends of longer maturities
and reduced qualities could signal increased risk-taking. The following section examines
possible causes of the change in risk exposure over the sample period for individual
positions by considering changes in (1) the risk factor exposures, (2) the maturity
distribution, and (3) quality of positions held.

4.1.1 Treasuries

The interest rate risk exposure of treasuries has been somewhat volatile with a  general
trend of growth. We observe a decline in the exposure between 2005 and 2008, after
which a significant increase can be seen (Figure 4). The interest rate  risk exposure
coefficient for treasuries has been relatively constant over time (appendix A.2.). The
exception is the coefficient for the maturity of over 15 years, where we observe an
increase after the crisis. This means that each dollar held in contracts of maturities of over
15 years will contribute more to the overall exposure after the crisis. Approximately one
third of treasuries held by the banking sector is classified as long-term, a fraction that has
been constant throughout the sample period (appendix A.1.). Based on these observations,
we conclude that some of the increased exposure could come from the change in the  15-
year  maturity risk exposure coefficient.

Even though we find that banks hold an approximately equal division of fair values
derived from short-, medium-, and long-term contracts throughout the sample period,

                                  21
Figure 4 shows that the majority of the exposure can be attributed to contracts of long
maturities. This example illustrates the effect that the length of a contract has on interest
rate risk exposure: longer contracts imply more risk. This becomes particularly evident
when considering that although one third of the fair value held by banks is derived from
short maturity contracts, the exposure of this category can hardly be seen in  Figure 4.
Finally, we expect the fact that banks have increased their overall holding of treasuries to
affect the exposure (Figure 1). As the fair value held increases, the bank is more exposed
to the interest rate risk factors (unless the beta coefficient is negative, see Section 3.3).

4.1.2 MBS

The interest rate risk exposure of MBS has  been increasing at a constant rate since the
beginning of our sample (Figure 4). Unlike treasuries, 2008 does not mark a noticeable
shift in exposure.  On the other hand, appendix A.1. shows a shift in the maturity
distribution of banks around 2012 towards  holding a higher amount of fair value derived
from long-term contracts. This is mirrored in the interest rate risk exposure of MBS.

                                  22
Figure 4.  Interest rate risk exposure of aggregate U.S. banking sector by position

Note:  Interest rate risk exposure by instrument and maturity, expressed in USD trillion.
Top left panel: Treasuries. Top right panel: MBS. Middle left panel: Other borrowed
money. Middle right panel: Deposits. Bottom left panel: Loans.

                                  23
4.1.3 Other borrowed money

The interest rate risk exposure of other borrowed money increases  sharply from 2001 to
2007. Following a decline, it once again increases to reach a slightly higher peak in 2012-
2013. The exposure has since been  declining but  remains high. As discussed in  Section
3.7, the exposure of other borrowed money is computed using the risk factors for
treasuries. Given that other borrowed money only has maturity buckets of less than one
year, one to  three years and more than three years, the coefficient  of the longest maturity
that is applied is the 3-5 treasuries  coefficient. Since we observe that the coefficients of
lower maturities have been relatively stable, we infer that little of the increased  exposure
is derived from changes in the risk coefficients. Instead,  we trace some of the increased
exposure to the increase in long-term contracts between 2001-2007 (appendix A.1.). As
with treasuries and MBS, long maturities are once again the main source  of interest rate
risk exposure. Finally, we observe that banks have increased their holdings of total other
borrowed money across all maturities. This increases risk exposure following the
reasoning in 4.1.1.

4.1.4 Deposits

Unlike other borrowed money, deposits  exhibit  a clear increase of interest rate risk
exposure after the financial crisis. Exposure increases  temporarily in the years leading up
to the crisis but drops  as the crisis hit. It has since been growing, with a sudden peak just
before the end of our sample (Figure 4). Neither the dip during the crisis nor the peak in
the late 2010s can be seen in the fair values held (appendix A.1.). Since deposits and other
borrowed money have the same maturity buckets and coefficients, we do not expect
changes in the risk exposure to be caused by changes in the risk coefficients.

Instead, we trace the dip to the maturity distribution of deposits held. In the years leading
up to the crisis, banks gradually increase their holdings of all maturities, including long-
and medium-term contracts. When the exposure drops, we simultaneously observe that
banks reduce long-  and medium-contracts while increasing short-term contracts. The
positive relationship between exposure and the length of contracts held could therefore
explain the drop.

After the crisis, banks increase their holding of all maturities. Although this include short-
term contracts,  Figure 4 shows that this category only contributes marginally to the
increased exposure since the crisis. The increase is rather caused by long-  and medium-
maturities, consistent with the  discussion in 4.1.1.

                                  24
4.1.5 Loans

The interest rate risk exposure of loans has been increasing since the beginning of our
sample, despite a sharp  drop during the crisis (Figure 4). The temporary decline can be
explained by the drop in the risk exposure coefficients for both AAA and BBB rated
bonds. Although the effect is larger for  long maturities, this can be seen for contracts of
all lengths (appendix A.2.). The coefficients have been relatively stable after the crisis.
For longer maturities of AAA quality, we first observe a sharp increase after the crisis to
a level higher than  the pre-crisis value, after which they continue to grow at a slow rate.
A similar trend can be seen for long maturities for the BBB quality, whereas the exposure
of medium maturities  has  fallen below the pre-crisis level.

Figure 4 shows that most of the  exposure by maturity comes from long-term contracts,
while appendix A.3 shows that the majority of risk exposure by quality comes from risky
loans. When considering the composition of the balance sheet, we can see that banks’
quality distribution is dominated by risky loans (Figure 1), whereas the maturity
distribution is  dominated by short-term contracts (appendix A.1.). The contribution of
risky loans to the risk exposure is expected to be even larger after 2015, when banks
reduce safe loans and increase  risky loans. Indeed, appendix A.3. shows that this is the
case. As with the positions discussed above, banks have been increasing their holdings of
total fair value of loans across all maturities. The implications of increased fair values are
discussed in  4.1.1.

Loans  further illustrate  how accounting measures can be misrepresentative of risk
exposures. In  Figure 1, we observe that loans  have a  fair value of around USD 7 trillion
towards the end of our sample,  while  the fair value of  securities  is  USD 3 trillion. Despite
the fact that the fair value of loans is more than twice as large, loans have the same interest
rate exposure as treasuries and MBS combined.

4.2  Findings

The analysis of interest rate risk exposure by instrument reveals a number of interesting
trends. First, only a few examples of changes in the risk factor can be observed. The most
notable changes  can be seen in the risk factors for treasuries, AAA and BBB rated bonds,
where the exposure of longer maturities increases after the crisis.  This means that the
majority of the instruments are expected to derive little of their increased sensitivity to
interest rate risk from the risk factor.

It therefore seems that most of the increase in exposure of banks to interest rate risk cannot
be attributed to changes in the risk factors. Instead, we trace the increased exposure to
more risky loans, the maturity  of contracts, and an increase in total assets and liabilities.
We find that banks have added risk to their assets by holding more risky loans, in line
with research that finds that low interest rates can incentivise increased risk-taking

                                  25
(Dell’Ariccia and  Marquez, 2013; Adrian et al., 2014). The presence of more risky loans
could indicate reduced lending standards, as found by Maddaloni and Peydró (2011). It
also resonates with the negative relationship between interest rates and the probability of
successful loan applications found by Jiménes et al. (2012).

Risk can also be added by holding more contracts of longer maturities, a trend which  can
be observed across all instruments. We can also observe that the U.S. banking sector holds
larger amounts across the entire balance sheet. This contributes to interest rate risk
exposure, since exposure is computed in such a way that a higher fair value almost always
leads to higher exposure.

Figure 5.  Typical gain or loss U.S. banking sector

Note:  Typical gains or losses of the U.S. banking sector in response to a standard
deviation realisation of the interest rate risk factor, expressed in USD  billion.

As mentioned, changes in the interest rate factor will change the value of a banks’ position
and thus the value of the bank itself. Using this logic, we construct Figure 5, which shows
the typical gains or losses of the U.S. banking sector in response to a standard deviation
realisation of the interest  rate risk factor. It is derived from our position exposures and  the
recursively estimated interest rate factor volatilities, which has been relatively stable over
our sample period (appendix A.4.). The  constant levels of the factor  volatilities  explain
why  the shape of Figure 5  is similar to  that of  Figure 3.  The fact that we observe higher
typical gains and losses after the 2008  supports the notion that banks are indeed more
sensitive to changes in  the interest rate factor post-crisis.

                                  26
5 Conclusions

By expressing banks’ balance sheets in terms of simple factor portfolios, we  show  a
number of interesting trends of how banks’ exposure to interest rate risk has changed
since 2001. We find that the  banking sector as a whole is more sensitive to interest rate
risk in the aftermath of the financial crisis. We are able to trace this change to individual
positions and the factors that the exposure of these positions depends  on. We find that
little of this shift can be explained by differences in our risk factor exposures  since they
are relatively stable over time. The increase can in part be linked to the growth of the U.S.
banking sector, but we also find that shifs in the  maturity and quality compositions of
banks’ positions can explain some of the increased exposure.

There are  multiple ways in which future research could extend our  study. First,  the
accuracy  of the study could be improved by a  more detailed categorisation of  securities
into different risk categories.  Furthermore, there are  positions on the banks’ balance
sheets that are not included in our study. Including these would improve the results. Using
instruments  that  better  reflects  their corresponding balance sheet position would also
serve to make our results more accurate. Finally, successful replication of the computation
of  the fair value  of  interest rate derivatives  used by Begenau et al. (2015) would  improve
comparability between the two  studies.

Second,  our  analysis focuses  on the banking sector as a whole. It would be interesting to
examine  the cross-section of banks, which could  reveal heterogeneity in banks’ risk
exposure. For example, does the exposures of banks with a larger maturity mismatch
differ from those with a smaller mismatch?  Are high deposit banks more exposed than
low deposit banks? This has, to the best of our knowledge, not been studied using the
method of Begenau et al. (2015).

                                  27
References

Adrian, Tobias, and Nellie Liang, 2014, Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and
Financial Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 690
September.  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2495074.

Bailey, Michael and Josef Matyáš, 2019, What Drives Bank Stock Returns? An Analysis
Using Factor Models, Handelshögskolan i Stockholm, 2019.

Begenau, Juliane,  Monika  Piazzesi,  and Martin Schneider, 2015, Banks’ Risk Exposure,
NBER Working  Paper No. 21334.  https://doi.org/10.3386/w21334.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder, 1992, The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels
of Monetary Transmission, American Economic Review 82(4), 901-921.

Bologna, Pierluigi, 2018, Banks’ Maturity Transformation: Risk, Reward, and Policy,
IMF  Working Paper No. 18/45.  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3285227.

Borio, Claudio E.V.,  Leonardo  Gambacorta, and Boris Hofmann, 2015, The Influence
of Monetary Policy on Bank Profitability, BIS Working Paper  No. 514.
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2668188.

Busch, Ramona and Christoph Memmel, 2015, Banks' net interest margin and the level
of interest rates, Discussion Papers 16/2015, Deutsche Bundesbank, Research Centre.
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2797040.

Claessens, Stijn,  Nicholas  Coleman, and Michael Donnelly, 2018,  “Low-For-Long”
interest rates and banks’ interest margins and profitability: Cross-country evidence,
Journal of Financial Intermediation 35, 1-16.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2017.05.004.

Dell’Ariccia,  Giovanni, and Robert Marquez, 2013, Interest Rates and the Bank Risk-
Taking Channel, Annual Review of Financial Economics 5, 123-141.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-financial-110112-121021.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2014, A Model  of Monetary
Policy and Risk Premia, NBER Working Paper No. 20141.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w20141.

Drechsler, Itamar,  Alexi  Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2017, The Deposit Channel of
Monetary Policy, NBER Working Paper No. 22152.  https://doi.org/10.3386/w22152.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi  Savov, and Philipp Schnabl, 2018, Banking on Deposits:
Maturity Transformation Without Interest Rate Risk, NBER Working Paper  No. 24582.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w24582.

English, William B., 2002, Interest rate risk and bank net interest margins, BIS
Quarterly Review, December, 67-82.

                                  28
English, William B., Skander J. Van den Heuvel, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2018, Interest Rate
Risk  and  Bank  Equity  Valuations,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  98,  80-97.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2018.04.010.

Flannery, Mark, and Christopher M. James, 1984, The Effect of Interest Rate Changes
on the Common Stock Returns of Financial Institutions, Journal of Finance 39(4), 1141-
1153.

Gomez, Matthieu,  Augustin  Landier,  David  Sraer,  and David Thesmar, 2020, Banks’
Exposure to Interest Rate Risk and The Transmission of Monetary Policy, Working paper.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2220360.

Jiménez, Gabriel,  Steven  Ongena,  José-Luis  Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2012, Credit
Supply and Monetary Policy: Identifying the Bank Balance-Sheet Channel with Loan
Applications,      American      Economic      Review      102(5),      2301-2326.
http://doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.5.2301.

Maddaloni, Angela, and José-Luis Peydró, 2011, Bank Risk taking, Securitization,
Supervision, and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro-area and the US Lending
Standards, Review of Financial Studies 24(6),  2121-2165.
http://hdl.handle.net/10.1093/rfs/hhr015

Meiselman, Ben S.,  Stefan  Nagel,  and Amiyatosh Purnanandam, 2020, Judging Banks’
Risk by the Profits They Report, Working Paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3169730.

Sarin, Natasha,  and  Lawrence H. Summers, 2016, Have big banks gotten safer?
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 57–127.  https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/09/2_sarinsummers.pdf

                                  29
Appendix

A. Additional figures

Figure  A.1.  Position fair value holdings of aggregate U.S. banking sector by maturity

Note:  Fair  value of positions on the balance sheet,  aggregated for  the U.S. banking sector
and  expressed in USD trillions.  Green shows  short maturities, blue shows medium
maturities and grey shows long maturities.

                                  30
Figure A.2.  Time variation in interest rate risk exposure by instrument

Note:  The lines represent different maturities and darker lines imply longer maturities.
For treasuries, AAA and BBB, we use maturities of 1-3, 3-5, 5-7, 7-10, 10-15 and 15+
years. For swaps, we use 2, 5, 10 and 15 years. Finally, for MBS, we use 0-3, 3-5, 5-7, 7-
10, 10-15 and 15 years.

                                  31
Figure A.3. Interest rate risk exposure for securities and loans holdings of aggregate U.S.
banking sector by  risk class

Note:  Interest rate exposure  aggregated  for the U.S. banking sector, expressed in USD
trillion.  Left panel: Interest rate exposure for securities.  Blue shows other securities,  grey
shows MBS and green shows treasuries. Right panel: Interest rate exposure for loans  by
credit quality. Grey represents BBB  rated loans,  red shows A  rated loans, orange shows
AAA  rated loans  and green shows  loans with  treasury quality.

Figure A.4.  Volatility interest rate risk factor

Note:  Recursively estimated volatility of  the  interest  rate factor.

                                  32
Appendix B.  Variables used  to form consistent time series data

This appendix shows what variables we use to form  consistent time series in our data.

Commercial bank level data  (FFIEC 031 and 041)

Treasury (RCFD/RCON):

2001:03-2019:12:  A549, A550, A551, A552, A553, A554

MBS (RCFD/RCON):

2001:03-2019:12:  A555,  A556,  A557,  A558,  A559,  A560,  A561,  A562

Loans and leases (RCON):

2001:03-2019:12:  A564,  A565,  A566,  A567,  A568,  A569,  A570,  A571,  A572,  A573,
A574,  A575,  A247

Time deposits (RCON):

2001:03-2016:12: A579, A580, A581, A582,  A584, A585, A586, A587

2017:03-2019:12:  HK07,  HK08,  HK09,  HK10,  HK12,  HK13,  HK14,  HK15

Other borrowed money (RCFD/RCON):

2001:03-2006:09:  F055,  F056,  F057,  F058,  F060,  F061,  F062,  F063

2006:09-2019:12:  2651,  B565,  B566,  B571,  B567,  B568

Bank holding company  level data  (FR Y-9C)

Treasuries:

2001:03-2018:03:  BHCK0213,  BHCK1290,  BHCK1295,  BHCK8497,  BHCK1287,
BHCK1293,  BHCK1298,  BHCK8499

2018:06-2019:12:  BHCK0213,  BHCKHT51,  BHCK8497,  BHCK1287,  BHCKHT53,
BHCK8499

                                  33
MBS:

2001:03-2009:03: BHCK1699, BHCK1705, BHCK1710, BHCK1715, BHCK1719,
BHCK1734, BHCK1702, BHCK1707, BHCK1713, BHCK1717, BHCK1732,
BHCK1736

2009:06-2010:12: BHCKG301, BHCKG305, BHCKG309, BHCKG313, BHCKG317,
BHCKG321, BHCKG303, BHCKG307, BHCKG311, BHCKG315, BHCKG319,
BHCKG323, BHCKG325, BHCKG329, BHCKG327, BHCKG331

2011:03-2019:12: BHCKG301, BHCKG305, BHCKG309, BHCKG313, BHCKG317,
BHCKG321, BHCKG303, BHCKG307, BHCKG311, BHCKG315, BHCKG319,
BHCKG323, BHCKK143, BHCKK147, BHCKK151, BHCKK155, BHCKK145,
BHCKK149, BHCKK153, BHCKK157

Other securities:

2001:03-2017:12: BHCK1771, BHCK1773

2018:03-2019:12: BHCKJA22, BHCK1771, BHCK1773

Loans:

2001:03-2019:12: BHCK5369, BHCKB528

Risk weights loans:

2001:03-2014:12:  BHC05369,  BHC0B528,  BHC25369,  BHC2B528,  BHC55369,
BHC5B528,  BHC95369,  BHC9B528

2015:03-2016:12:  BHCKH173,  BHCKH174,  BHCKS425,  BHCKS433,  BHCKH178,
BHCKH179,  BHCKS451,  BHCKS459,  BHCKS415,  BHCKH175,  BHCKS426,
BHCKS434,  BHCKS441,  BHCKH180,  BHCKS452,  BHCKS460,  BHCKS416,
BHCKH176,  BHCKS427,  BHCKS435,  BHCKS442,  BHCKH181,  BHCKS453,
BHCKS461,  BHCKS417,  BHCKH177,  BHCKS428,  BHCKS436,  BHCKS443,
BHCKH182,  BHCKS454,  BHCKS462,  BHCKS421,  BHCKS429,  BHCKS437,
BHCKS447,  BHCKS455,  BHCKS463

2017:03-2019:12:  BHCKH173,  BHCKH174,  BHCKS425,  BHCKS433,  BHCKH178,
BHCKH179,  BHCKS451,  BHCKS459,  BHCKHJ78,  BHCKHJ80,  BHCKHJ82,
BHCKHJ84,  BHCKHJ79,  BHCKHJ81,  BHCKHJ83,  BHCKHJ85,  BHCKS415,
BHCKH175,  BHCKS426,  BHCKS434,  BHCKS441,  BHCKH180,  BHCKS452,
BHCKS460,  BHCKS416,  BHCKH176,  BHCKS427,  BHCKS435,  BHCKS442,

                                  34
BHCKH181,  BHCKS453,  BHCKS461,  BHCKS417,  BHCKH177,  BHCKS428,
BHCKS436,  BHCKS443,  BHCKH182,  BHCKS454,  BHCKS462,  BHCKS421,
BHCKS429,  BHCKS437,  BHCKS447,  BHCKS455,  BHCKS463

Interest-bearing deposits:

2001:03-2019:12: BHDM6636, BHFN6636

Interest on deposits:

2001:03-2016:12:  BHCKA517,  BHCKA518,  BHCK6761,  BHCK4172

2017:03-2019:12:  BHCKHK03,  BHCKHK04,  BHCK6761,  BHCK4172

Other borrowed money (including total trading liabilities):

2001:03-2019:12: BHCK3190, BHCK3548, BHCK4185

Interest-rate derivatives:

2001:03-2014:12: BHCKA126, BHCK8733, BHCK8737,  BHCK3809,  BHCK8766,
BHCK8767

2015:03-2019:12: BHCKA126, BHCK8733, BHCK8737,  BHCKS582,  BHCKS583,
BHCKS584,  BHCKS603,  BHCKS604,  BHCKS605

                                  35